DIRECTIONS FOR Weak distempered. CHRISTIANS, TO Grow up to a confirmed State
OF GRACE. With MOTIVES opening the lamentable Effects of their Weaknesses and
Distempers.

The FIRST PART.

Published also to further that REPENTANCE, which WARS, and PLAGVES, and
FLAMES, and CHVRCH-CONVULSIONS, have so long and loudly Preached to ENGLAND.

By Richard Baxter.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simmons, at the Three Crowns over against Holborn
Conduit, 1669.

To my Dearly Beloved, the Church of Christ at Kederminster in Worcestershire.
I Suppose you do not only remember, that ten Years ago I Preached these
Sermons to you; but also what Schisms, what revilings of the Ministers of
Christ, what Heresies of Ranters, Seekers, and others; what cruelties against
one another, and what remorsless overturnings of Government; and worst of all,
what bold appeals to God himself, as if he were the approver of all this, did
give you and me extraordinary occasions of such thoughts and lamentations as
are here expressed! But though the great mercy of God did preserve your selves
from these transgressions, and made it your los to behold them with daily
complaints and sorrows; yet I must not so flatter you as to say, that the
ordinary weaknesses of Christians are not at all among you. The things which I
specially loved in you, I will freely praise, which were [A special measure of
humility, a plain simplicity in Religion, a freedom from the common Errors, a
readiness to receive the Truth, a Catholic temper, without addictedness to any
Sect; a freedom from Schism, and separating ways; and a unity and unanimity
in Religion; a hatred and disowning of the Usurpations and perturbations, and
Rebellions against the Civil Government; and an open bearing of your testimony
in all these cases; together with seriousness in Religion, and sober,
righteous, charitable and godly conversations:] But yet with all this, which is
truly amiable, I know you have your frailties and imperfections. The weaker
sort of Christians (either in knowledge, or in holiness) are the greater number
in the best Congregation that I ever yet knew. (To say nothing of the unsound)
And what may be your Case these eight years since I have been separated from
your presence, I cannot tell, (though, through the mercy of God, I hear not of
your declining.) It is our sin which has parted us asunder, Let us lay the
blame upon our selves! I have now done expecting my ancient comforts in
laboring among you any more: For these six years time, in which I thought my
greater experience, had made me more capable, of serving my Master better than
before, his Wisdom and Justice, have caused me to spend in grievous silence:
And now my decays and disability of body are so much increased, that if I had
leave, I have not strength, nor can ever reasonably expect it; Therefore once
more I am glad to speak to you as I may, and shall be thankful if Authority
will permit these Instructions to come to your view, that the weak may have
some more counsel and assistance: And if any shall miscarry, and disgrace
Religion, there may remain on Record one more testimony, what Doctrine it was
that you were taught. The Lord be your Teacher, and your strength, and save you
from your selves, and from this present evil World, and preserve you to his
heavenly Kingdom, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

October. 31. 1668. Your Servant, R. B.

THE PREFACE.
Readers,
THat you may neither mis-understand this Book nor me, I owe you this
pre-advertisement, That it was Preached in a Lecture at Kederminster in
Worcestershire about seven or eight years ago (1658): That the sad experience
of the distempers of weak wellmeaning people (though not in that place) yet in
those times (especially of those who ran after the most gross deceivers,
distracted the Churches, reviled, afflicted, and busily attempted to pull down
the Pastors, and actually pulled down the higher Powers, whom God forbad them
to resist,) was the chief occasion of the Preaching of these Sermons: And that
the special reasons for my publishing them now, are these that follow. 1.
Because I perceive not that yet people are sufficiently humbled for those
miscarriages, or have yet well found out their sins, which by many and sore
Judgments have found them out. 2. Because I perceive that it is too ordinary to
speak to Weak Christians only by way of comfort, and too rare to show them the
evil of their distempers; and that the very terms are used as if they imported
nothing, but what is to be loved, or tenderly gainsayed: And most that hear
themselves called [ Weak Christians] do take it for a word of honouring-pity,
and feel in it no humbling matter of reproof: As if the comfort of being a
Living man, did nullify the trouble and pain of Infancy, of a Lethargy, a
Leprosy, a Fever, Gout or Stone. The scandals which have dishonored Religion
in this Age, do tell us that it is not all a Preachers work, to convince and
convert the Infidels and Profane ones, but that much of it lies in detecting
Hypocrisies, and humbling the weak, and healing their distempers, and saving
and raising them from their Falls. The thoughts of the Case of such Christians
as these, did tempt Augustine once to doubt whether there were not a Purgatory;
It seemed so hard to him to believe, either that men who in the rest of their
lives were godly and honest, should go to Hell; or that men so guilty of
particular crimes and scandals, (of which their ignorance and error kept them
from repenting) could go strait to Heaven. And no doubt but it was the heinous
sins and great distempers, of men professing Godliness, which caused humane
reason to invent and entertain this doctrine of Purgeing-pains: But when God
has cast men into many Purgatories, and yet they repent not, I fear it
threateneth worse than Purgatory. 3. Moreover I remembered the request of that
Learned, Pious, Peaceable, A. B. Usher, which I mentioned in the Preface to my
Call to the Unconverted; According to which I had before Published. 1. That
Call. 2. Directions against miscarrying in the work of Conversion. 3. And this
I intended for the Third Part, when I began it; but was hindered from bringing
it to the purposed perfection (The Fourth Part, being Directions for Peace of
Conscience, being extant long before.) 4. But that which since urged me to this
publication was, that the last Sermon which I Preached publicly, was at
Black-Fryars, on this Text, Col. 2.6, 7. and presently after, there came forth
a Book called Farewell-Sermons, among which this of mine was one. Who did it,
or to what end I know not, nor does it concern me to enquire. But I took it as
an injury, both as it was done without my knowledge and against my will, and to
the offense of my Superiors; and because it was taken by the Notary so
imperfectly, that much of it was nonsense: Especially when some Foreigners
that lived in Poland, Hungary, and Helvetia, were earnest to buy this with the
rest of my Writings, I perceived how far the injury was like to go, both
against me and many others of my Brethren. Therefore finding since, among the
relicts of my scattered Papers, this imperfect piece which I had before written
on that Text, I was desirous to publish it, as for the benefit of weak
Christians, so to right my self, and to cashier that Farewell Sermon.

If the Reader will but peruse these Directions impartially, and read them as
he does the Prescripts of his Physicians, which are not written merely to be
read, but must be daily practiced, whatever it cost him, as he loves his life;
then I make no doubt, notwithstanding the weakness of the composure, but it may
further the cure of his spiritual weaknesses and distempers, and of the
consequent troubles and losses of others and himself. I hope I shall not meet
with many, besides malignant hypocrites, who will be so impenitent and peevish,
as to fly in the face of the Reprover and Directer, and say that I open the
nakedness of many servants of Christ, to the reproach and dishonor of
Religion. I have told you from the Word of God, that it is Gods way, and must
be ours, to lay the just dishonor upon the sinner, that it may not fall upon
Religion and on God: And that the defending or excusing odious sins, in
tenderness of the persons who committed them, is the surest and worse way to
bring dishonor (first or last) both upon Religion and on them. A Noah, a Lot,
a David, a Solomon, a Peter, etc. shall be dishonored by God in holy Record to
all ages, that God may not be more dishonored by them! And the truly penitent
are willing that it should be so; and account their honor a very cheap
Sacrifice, to offer up to the honor of Religion which they have wronged. And
till you come to this, you come short of true Repentance. He that defends his
open sin, (unless he could deny the fact) does as bad as say [God likes it;
Christ bid me do it; the Scripture is for it, or not against it: Religion
taught it me, or does not forbid it me; The godly allow it, and will do the
like]. And what can be said more Blasphemously against God, or more injuriously
against Religion, the Scriptures, and the Saints? But he that confesses his
sin, does as good as say [Lay all the blame on me who do deserve it; and not on
God, on Christ, on Scripture, on Religion, or on the Servants of God: For I
learned it not from any of them, nor was encouraged to it by them; None are
greater enemies to it than they; If I had hearkened to them, I had done
otherwise.] It is one of the chief reasons why Repentance is so necessary,
because it justifies God and godliness.

And alas, it is too late to talk of concealing those weaknesses and crimes of
Christians, which are so visible before all the World! which have had such
public effects upon Churches, Kingdoms, and States* which have kept almost all
the Christian Churches, in a torn and bleeding woeful state, for so many hundred
years, to this present day. Which have separated the Churches of the East and
West, and defiled both: And have drawn so much blood in Christian Countries:
And keep us yet like distracted persons, gazing strangely at our nearest
friends, and running away by peevish separation, from our Brethren with whom we
must live in Heaven; and mistakingly using those as enemies, with whom (if we
are Christians as we profess) we are united in the same Head, and by the same
Spirit, which is a Spirit of Love. In a word, when our faults are so
conspicuous as to harden the Infidels, Heathens and ungodly, and to hinder the
Conversion of the World; and when they sound so loud in the mouths of our
common reproaching enemies; and when they have contracted so much malignity as
to refuse a cure, by such Wars, Divisions, Church-desolations, Plagues and
Flames as we have seen; It is then too late to say to the Preachers of
Repentance [Be silent, lest you open the nakedness of Christians, and disgrace
Religion and the Church.] We must not be silent, lest we disgrace Religion and
the Church, to save the credit of the sinners.

Whoever reads the holy Scriptures, and ever understood the Christian Faith,
must needs know that nothing in all the World, is so much against every one of
our errors and mis-doings: It is only for want of more Religion, that any
Professors of Religion do miscarry: Nothing but the Doctrine of Christianity
and Godliness, did at first destroy the reign of their sin; and nothing else
can subdue the rest, and finish the Cure. It is no disgrace to Life that so
many men's lives are burdensome with sickness, which the dead are not troubled
with. Nor is it any disgrace to Learning, that Scholars (for want of more
Learning) have troubled the World with their contentious Disputes: Nor is it
any disgrace to reason, that men's different Reasons (for want of more Reason)
does set the World together by the ears. We can never magnify you enough as
you are Christians and Godly; unless we should ascribe more to you than your
bounteous Lord has given you, who has made you little lower than Angels, and
crowned you with glory and honor, Psalm. 8.5, 6. But your sins are so much the
more odious, as they are brought so near the holy presence; and as they are
aggravated by greater mercies and professions: And God is so far from being
reconciled, or reconcilable to any one of them, that though he see not such
iniquity in Jacob, as is in Heathens and the ungodly, (because it is not in
them to be seen) yet he sees more aggravated iniquity in such sins as you do
commit, in many respects, than in the Heathens. And (that which is our common
trouble is, that) you hurt not your selves alone by your iniquities; Families
are hurt by them; Neighbors are hurt by them; Churches are distracted by them;
Kingdoms are afflicted by them; and thousands of blind sinners are hardened and
everlastingly undone by them. The ignorant Husband faith, I will never follow
Sermons nor Scriptures, nor be so Religious, while I see my Wife that makes so
much ado with Religion, to be as peevish, and discontented, and foul-tongued,
and unkind, and contemptuous, and disobedient, as those that have no Religion]
The Master that is profane says, I like not your Religion, when that servant
which most Professes Religion in my house, is as lazy, and negligent, and as
surly and saucy, and as ready to dishonor me, and answer again, and as proud
of his little knowledge, as those that have no Religion at all]. The like I
might say of all other Relations. All the dishonor that this casts upon
Grace is, that you have too little of it; and it is so weak in you, that its
Victory over your flesh and passions is lamentably imperfect. A servant hearing
a high commendation of a Gentleman, (that he was of extraordinary wisdom and
godliness, and bounty, and patience, and affability, and what not) did think
with himself, How happy a man were I, if I could but dwell in this man's house!
which at last he procured, but ere long went away. His friend meeting him,
asked him how he came so quickly to forsake his happiness? Did not his Master
prove as was reported? He answered, Yes, and better than report could make him,
or I could ever have believed! But though my Master was so good, my Mistress was
so unreasonable, and clamorous, and cruel, that she would beat us, and pull us
by the hair, and throw scalding water upon us; and there was no living with
her]. So Faith I hope is the Master in your hearts: And that is as good as can
be well believed. But the Flesh is Mistress, which should be but a servant: And
that makes such troublesome work with some of you, that some quiet natured
Infidels, are less vexatious companions than you. Nay, and I wonder if you can
be very confident of your own sincerity, as long as such fleshly vices, and
headstrong passions, do keep up the power of a Mistress in you? I wonder if you
do not fear, lest (as a woman said, I will call my Husband Lord with Sarah, if
I may have my will fulfilled, so) Grace and Faith should have no more than the
Regent Titles, while your flesh has so much of its will fulfilled. I know too
many cheat themselves into comfort with the false opinion, that because they
have a party in them that striveth against their sins, it is a certain sign
that they have the Spirit and are sanctified, though the flesh even in the main
does get the Victory: And I know that many have sincerity indeed, who yet have
many a foil by boisterous passions, and fleshly inclinations: But I am sure
till you know which party is predominant, and truly bears the governing sway,
you can never know whether you are sincere. As once a servant when his Master
and Mistress were fighting, answered one at the door, who desired to speak with
the Master of the house; [You must stay till I see who gets the better before I
can tell you who is Master of the house]. So truly I fear the conflict is so
hard with many Christians, between the Spirit and the Flesh, and holds so
long in a doubtful state, and sense and passion, and unbelief and pride, and
worldliness, and selfishness prevail so much, that they may stay themselves a
great while before they can be well resolved which is Master. For (to prosecute
my similitude) in Innocent man, spiritual Reason was absolutely Master, and
Fleshly sense was an obsequious Servant, (though yet it had an appetite which
needed Government and restraint). In Wicked men, the Fleshly sense and appetite
is Master (and Reason is a Servant (Though Reason and the motions of the Spirit
may make some resistance). In Strong Christians, Spiritual Reason is Master,
and the Fleshly sense and appetite is a Servant; but a boisterous and
rebellious Servant, tamed according to the degrees of Grace and spiritual
Victory: Like a Horse that is broken and well ridden, but often needs the spur,
and often the Reins. So that a Paul may cry out, O wretched man, etc. In a weak
Christian the Spirit is Master, but the Flesh is Mistress, and is not kept in
the servitude which it was made for, as it ought: And therefore his life is
blemished with scandals, and his Soul with many foul corruptions; He is a
trouble to himself and others: The good which he does, is done with much
reluctance and weakness; and the evil which he forbeareth, is oftentimes very
hardly forborne: His Flesh has so much power left, that he is usually uncertain
of his own sincerity; and yet too patient both with his sin and his
uncertainty: And he is many times a greater troubler of the Church, than many
moderate unbelievers. The Hypocrite, or all-most-Christian, has the Flesh for
his Master (as other wicked men); but Reason and the commoner Grace of the
Spirit, may be as Mistress with him: And may have so much power and respect,
above a state of utter servitude, as may delude him into a confident conceit,
that Grace has the Victory, and that he is truly spiritual: When yet the
Supremacy is exercised by the Flesh. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear:
To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the Tree of Life -- He shall not
be hurt of the second death -- He shall eat of the hidden Manna -- He shall
have power over the Nations. I will give him the Morning Star -- I will confess
him before my Father and the Angels -- He shall be a Pillar in the Temple of
God, and go out no more. I will grant to him to sit with me in my Throne --
Rev. 2.7, 11, 17, 26, 28. and 3.5, 12, 21.

1665.
THE CONTENTS.
THe Text opened. What it is to Receive Christ. The nature of Justifying Faith
in its three essential acts. How to know that we have received Christ. What it
is to walk in him. What to be Rooted, to be grounded and built up, etc.

The Doctrine, of the necessity of weak Christians seeking stability,
Confirmation and increase of Grace. What Confirmation is, in the Understanding,
Will, Affections, and in the Life.

Twenty Motives to convince weak Christians of the great need of growth and
Confirmation.

A Lamentation for the Weaknesses of Christians: in their Knowledge, in their
Practice, in public Worship, in inward Grace, in outward obedience, about
known Duties, Confession, Reproof, etc. their uncharitableness, backbiting,
pride, etc.

Ten more Considerations to convince them that it is not trifling, but Great
things which God requires at their hands.

Twenty Directions for Confirmation and increase of Grace.

DIRECTIONS TO THE CONVERTED, For their establishment, growth, and perseverance.
Col. 2.6, 7. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye
in him, rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the Faith, as ye have
been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.


AS Ministers are called in Gods Word the Fathers of those that are converted
by their Ministry, 1 Cor. 4.14 15. so are they likened thus far to the Mothers,
that they travail as in birth of their peoples Souls till Christ be formed in
them: Gal. 4.19. And as Christ says, John 16.21. [ A Woman when she is in
travail, has sorrow because her hour is come; but as soon as she is delivered
of the Child, she remembers no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born
into the World.] So while we are seeking and hoping for your Conversion, and
are as in travail of you till you are born again; not only our labor, but much
more our fears of you, and cares for you, and compassion of you in your danger
and misery, does make the time seem very long to us; and O what happy men
should we think our selves, if all or the most of our people were converted!
And when we see but now and then one come home, we remember no more the anguish
of our fears and sorrows, nor think all our labor ill bestowed, for joy that a
Christian is newborn unto Christ. But yet for all the Mothers joy, her work,
and care, and sorrow is not at an end as soon as she is delivered: Many a foul
hand, and many a troublesome hour, and many a waking night, she must have with
the child whose bath she so rejoiced in; and after that, many a year of care
and labor to bring it up, and provide for it in the World; and in her old age
when she expects from her children the love, and honor, and thanks, and
comfort that was due to her as a Mother, and for all her labor and care and
pains, perhaps one child will prove kind, and of another she must take it well
that he is not very unkind, and a third perhaps may break her heart: And yet
she must still be a Mother to them all. And so it befalls us; when we have
greatly rejoiced at the real or seeming Conversion of now and then one of our
hearers, our work with them is not at an end, nor may we lay aside our care and
labor for them. We have for some years (usually) the Nurses work to do; and
many a troublesome day and night, the weakness, the uncleanness, the peevish
childish exceptions, the querulous and quarrelsom disposition of our beloved
Converts, will put us to: And after all that, when they begin to go on their
own legs, and think themselves sufficient for themselves without our help, many
a fall and hurt they may catch, and many fallings out may they have with one
another, to the great trouble of themselves and us: And when they are grown up
to strength of parts and gifts, some that seemed sincere may turn Prodigals or
Apostates, and some fall a quarrelling about the inheritance, and make most
woeful divisions in Christ's Family; and some perhaps despise us that have thus
spent our days and strength, in Studies, and Prayers, and fears, and cares and
labors for their Salvation: yea perhaps be ready to spit in our faces, and
reproach our persons, yea and our very Office and Calling it self, as the
experience of these times of ours, seconding the experience of all ages of the
Church before us, does alas too evidently and openly testify. And yet some will
be faithful and constant and thankful to Christ and us. And that all might be
so (for Christ's sake, and for their own) must still be our care and desires,
and endeavors. In these several cases we find blessed Paul with his children
in his Epistles; sometime rejoicing with them in their stedfastness; sometime
defending himself and his Ministry against their unkind and childish
wranglings; as with the Corinthians you may find him: sometime he is put (but
seldom) to a severe correction of the obstinate, delivering them up to Satan,
for a warning to the rest: sometime he is fain to watch with them, as in their
sickness, when they are infected with some dangerous error or other disease;
and is brought even to make great question of their lives, lest he has
labored for them in vain, and themselves have run in vain, and lest they be
fallen from Grace, and Christ should profit them nothing; receiving himself no
better requital of all his labors, from them that once would have pulled out
their eyes for him, than to be taken for their enemy because he tells them the
truth, and the more he loves them, the less to be loved of them; as you may
read in Gal. 1.6, 7. and 3.1, 3, 4. and 4.11, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20. and 5.2, 4,
7. But with the most we find him, as one that is yet between hope and fear of
them, directing and exhorting them to spiritual stedfastness, and growth, and
perseverance to the end: and this is the work which we here find him upon with
the Colossians in this Text: which contains, 1. A supposition of a work (the
great work) already done, viz. that [ They have received Christ Jesus the
Lord]. 2. An inference of further duty, and exhortation thereto; which in sum
is their confirmation and progress The parts of this duty are expressed in
several Metaphors. The first is taken from a Tree or other plant, and is called
our [ Rooting in Christ]. After the Receiving of Christ, there is a further
Rootedness in him to be sought. The second is taken from a building, and is
called, a [ being built up in him] as a house is upon the Foundation. All the
work is not done when the chief corner stone and Foundation is laid. The third
part is taken from those Pillars and stronger parts of the building, which are
firm upon the Foundation, and its called, a being [ stablished or confirmed in
the faith]. And having made mention of Faith, lest they should hearken to
innovations and the conceits of men under pretense of Faith, he adds [ as ye
have been taught,] to show them what Faith or Religion it is that they must be
established in; even that which by the Apostles they had been taught. And
lastly, he expresses the measure that they should aim at, and one special way
in which their Faith should be exercised [ abounding therein with
thanksgiving.] The matter is not great, whether we take the Relative to refer
to Christ, and read it with the vulgar Latin [ abounding in him with
thanksgiving]: Or as the Aethiopick [abound with thanksgiving to him]: Or
whether we take it as relating to thanksgiving it self, as the Arabic
Translator, and some Greek Copies have it [ abounding in thanksgiving] or [
abounding in such thanksgiving]: Or as the ordinary Greek Copies, and the
Syriack Translator, referring it to Faith [abounding in it (that is, in that
Faith) with thanksgiving]. For in the upshot it comes to the same [ to abound
in Christ, and to abound in Faith in Christ, and to abound in a believing
thanksgiving to Christ]. And all this is comprehended in one foregoing general
of [ walking in Christ]; the whole life of a Christian being divided into these
two parts. Receiving Christ, and walking in him. Here are these several terms
therefore briefly to be opened. 1. What is meant by [ Receiving Christ Jesus
the Lord]. 2. What is meant by walking in him. 3. What by being Rooted in him.
4. What by being built up in him. 5. What by being confirmed or stablished in
the Faith. 6. What by this directive limitation [ as ye have been taught]. 7.
What by abounding therein with thanksgiving. And for the first, you must
observe the act and the object. The act is [ Receiving]: the object is [ Christ
Jesus the Lord]. To Receive Christ is not only (as some Annotators mistake it)
to Receive his Doctrine], though its certain that his Doctrine must be
received, and that the rest is employed in this. But when the understanding
receives the Gospel by Assent, the Will also Accepts or Receives Christ as
he is offered, by Consent: and both these together are the Receiving of Christ;
that is, the true justifying Faith of Gods Elect. It is not therefore a
Physical passive Reception, as Wood receives the Fire, and as our Souls
receive the Graces of the Spirit; but it is a Moral Reception, or Reputative,
which is Active and Metaphorical. This will be better understood when the
object is considered; which is [ Christ Jesus the Lord]. To receive Christ as
Christ, or the Anointed Messiah, and as the Savior and our Lord, is to believe
that he is such, and to consent that he be such to us, and to trust in him, and
resign our selves to him as such. The Relation we do indeed Receive by a proper
passive Reception; I mean our Relation of being the Redeemed, Members,
Subjects, Disciples of this Christ. But the person of Christ we only Receive by
such an active, moral, reputative Reception, as a Servant by consent Receives a
Master, a Patient by Consent receives a Physician; a Wife by consent receives a
Husband; and a Scholar or Pupil by Consent receives a Teacher or Tutor; or the
Subjects by Consent receive a Sovereign. So that it is the same thing that is
called [ Receiving Jesus the Lord] and [ believing in him], as it is expounded
Joh. 1.12. There are three great observable acts of Faith essential to it; the
first is, Assent to the truth of the Gospel: the second is, Consent or
Acceptance of Christ and Life as the offered good: the third is Affiance in
Christ for the accomplishing of the ends of his Office. Now the word Faith does
most properly express the first act and the last; and the word [ Receiving]
does most properly express the middlemost: but which ever term is used, when it
is Justifying Faith that is spoken of, all three are intended or included: By
what has been said, you may discern whether you have Received Christ or not:
For your Faith may be known by these acts which are its parts. 1. If you
sincerely believe the Gospel to be true; which must be with a belief so strong
at least, as that you are resolved to venture your happiness upon this belief,
and let go all for the hope that is set before you. 2. If an offered Christ in
his Relation as a full and perfect Savior be heartily welcome to you. If you
consent to the Gospel offer, and are but truly willing to be his, and that he
be yours in that Relation. Faith is not only called a Receiving of Christ, but
is often expressed by this term of [ Willing] him. And therefore the Promise is to
[ Whosoever will], Rev. 22.17. and the wicked are denied a part in Christ,
because they will not have him reign over them, Luke 19.27. or Will not come to
him that they may have life, Joh. 6.40. even because they would none of him,
Psalm. 81.11, 12. which is because they are not true Believers or Disciples of
Christ. 3. If you thus by consent take Christ for your Savior, Teacher and
Lord, it must needs follow that you fiducially rely upon him, or trust him to
accomplish the ends of his Relations: that you trust to him for deliverance,
from the guilt and power and punishment of sin, and for quickening,
strengthening, and preserving Grace, and for everlasting life, that you resign
your selves up to him as his Disciples, to learn of him, with a confidence or
trust that he will infallibly teach you the way to happiness. And that you also
give up your selves to him as his Subjects, with a Trust that he will govern
you in truth and Righteousness, in order to your Salvation, and will defend you
from destroying enemies. This much is of the very Being of Faith, or [ the
Receiving Christ Jesus the Lord]. And these parts are inseparable: he that has
one in truth, has all. Whenever we find in Scripture, the Promise of
Justification or Salvation made to us, if we believe, it is this believing, and
none but this that is intended. It is not only believing in Christ as a
Sacrifice or Priest, that is the Faith which Justifyeth, and believing in him
as a Teacher or Lord, that sanctifyeth: the effects are not thus parcelled out
to several essential parts of this same Faith: but it is this one entire Faith
in all these essential parts that is the undivided condition of all these
benefits; and in that way of a Condition of the free Promise it does procure
them. So much for the meaning of the first words [ Receiving Christ Jesus the
Lord]. I will be briefer about the next. The second is [ walking in him], which
is no more but the living as Christians when once we are become Christians; and
using that Christ to the ends which we received him for, when once we have
received him. Two things are necessary to such as we, that have lost our way:
the first is to get into the right way (and that is to get into Christ who is
the way): the other is to travel on, when we are in it: For it is not enough to
bring us to our Journeyes end, that we have found out the right way. The next
word to be explained is [ rooted]. Which does not intimate that any are really
planted into Christ without any rooting in him at all: but by [ rooted] is
meant [ deeply rooted]. For the Roots increase under ground as well as the Tree
above ground. Rooting has two ends, and both are here employed. The first is
for the Firmness of the Tree, that blustering winds may not overturn it. The
second is for nutriment: that it may receive that nourishment from the earth
which may cause its preservation, growth and fruitfulness. This is the
Rootedness of Christians in Christ, that they may be confirmed in him against
all assaults, and may draw from him that nutriment that is necessary to their
growth and fruit. The next term is [ built up in him]. No house consists of a
bare Foundation. Five things are expressly contained in our being [ built up in
him]: The first is that we are united or conjoined to him, as the building is
on the Foundation. The second is, that we rest wholly on him as our support, as
the building does on the Foundation. The third is, that we are also conjoined
one unto another, and are become one spiritual building in the Lord. The fourth
is, that the Fabric does increase in bigness, as the house does by being built
up: so that it imports our increase in Grace, and the increase of the Church
by us. The fifth is the fitness of the building to its intended ends and use:
Till it be built up, it is not fit for habitation. And till Christians are
built up, God has not that use of them to which he does intend them. The next
term is [ stablished or confirmed in the Faith], which signifies but that
strengthening and fixing of us that may prevent our fall or shaking. And it
compriseth these two things. First that we be soundly bottomed on Christ, who
is our Foundation. And secondly, that we be cemented and firmly joined to each
other. And this comprehends their stability in the doctrine of Faith: And
therefore he adds [ as ye have been taught], to fortify them against
Heresies, which indeed are all but novelties; that so they may know how to try
the Doctrines that afterward should be offered them, and stick fast to that
which the Apostles taught. He next requires them to [ abound therein] to let
them know, that as it is no small matters that they expect by Christ, so they
should not rest in small degrees of Grace or duty; but especially the duty of [
Thanksgiving], which is an Evangelical and celestial duty, and so admirably
beseems a people that have partaked of such admirable Salvation, and is so
suitable to our mercies, and our condition, and Gods just expectation. As it is
Love and Grace whose eternal praise is designed by the Gospel, and are
magnified in the Church by the Redeemers great and blessed work: So it is
returns of Love and Praise and Joy, that should be the most abounding or
overflowing part of all our Christian affections and performances. After this
explication, you may see that the sense of the Text lies plain in this
Proposition.

Doct. [ Those that have savingly Received Christ Jesus the Lord, must be so
far from resting here as if all were done, that they must spend the rest of
their days in walking in him, being Rooted and built up in him, and stablished
in the Faith as the Apostles taught it, and abounding in it, especially with
joyful praises to our Redeemer].

And because that my design is only to Direct young Christians how they may
come to be established and confirmed in Christ, I shall therefore pass over all
other things that the full handling of this Text requires; and shall only give
you 1. A short intimation here what this confirmation and stability is (which
shall be fullyer opened to you in the Directions). 2. And show you the need of
seeking it. And 3. How you may attain it.

1. This Confirmation is the Habitual strength of Grace; distinct from present
actual confirmation by the influence of Grace from God: For though God may in
an instant confirm a weak person against some particular temptation, by his
free assistance, yet that is not it which we have here to speak of, but
Habitual confirmation in a State of Grace: And ordinarily we may expect that
Gods cooperating assisting Grace, should bear some proportion with our
Habitual Grace: Even as in nature he concurreth with the strongest men to do
greater works than he causes the weak to do; and with the wisest men to
understand more than the foolish do: I say but that Ordinarily it is thus.

A Confirmed Christian as contrary to a weak one, 1. Is not to be judged of by
his freedom from all scruples, doubts or fears. 2. Nor by his eminency in men's
esteem or observation. 3. Nor by his strength of Memory. 4. Or freedom of
utterance in Praying, Preaching, or Discourse. 5. Or by his seemly deportment
and courtesy toward others. 6. Nor by his sedate calm and lovely temper, and
freedom from some have and heats which other tempers are more prone to. 7. Nor
by a Man-pleasing or dissembling faculty to bridle the tongue when it would
open the corruption of the mind, and to suppress all words which would make
others know how bad the heart is. There are many endowments laudable and
desirable which will not show so much as sincerity in Grace; and much less a
state of Confirmation and stability.

But Confirmation lies in the great degree of all those Graces which
Constitute a Christian. And the great degree appears in the operations of
them. As 1. When Holiness is as a New-nature in us, and gives us a Promptitude
to holy actions; and makes us free and ready to them, and makes them easy
and familiar to us: Whereas the weak go heavily, and can scarce drive on and
force their minds. 2. When there is a constancy or frequency of holy actions:
which shows the strength and stability of holy inclinations. 3. When they are
powerful to bear down oppositions and temptations, and can get over the
greatest impediments in the way, and make an advantage of all resistance, and
despise the most splendid baits of sin. 4. When it is still getting ground, and
drawing the Soul upward, and nearer to God, its Rest and End. And when the
heart grows more Heavenly and Divine, and stranger to Earth and earthly
things. 5. And when holy and heavenly things are more sweet and delectable to
the Soul, and are sought and used with more Love and pleasure. All these do
show that the Operations of Grace are vigorous and strong; and consequently
that the Habits are so also.

And this confirmation should be found, 1. In the Understanding. 2. In the
Will. 3. In the Affections. 4. In the Life.

1. When the Mind of man has a larger comprehension of the Truths of God, and
the Order and Method and Usefulness of every truth! And a deeper apprehension
of the certainty of them, and of the Goodness of the matter expressed in them!
When Knowledge and Faith come nearest unto sight or intention, and we have the
fullest the truest, and the firmest and most certain apprehension of things
revealed and unseen; when the Nature and the Reasons, and the ends and benefits
of the Christian Religion are all most clearly, orderly, decently, constantly
and powerfully printed on the mind, then is that Mind in a Confirmed state.

2. When the Will is guided by such a confirmed understanding, and is not
bruitishly resolved, he knows not for what or why! When Light has fixed it
in such Resolutions as are past all notable doubtings, deliberations,
waverings, or unwilling backwardness: and a man is in seeking God and his
Salvation, and avoiding known sin, as a natural man is about the questions,
whether he should preserve his Life? and make provision for it? and whether he
should poison, or famish, or torment himself? When the Inclination of the Will
to God and Heaven and Holiness, are likest to its natural Inclination to Good
as Good, and to its own felicity! And its action is so free as to have Least
Indetermination, and to be likest to Natural necessary acts, as those are of
blessed Spirits in Heaven! When the least intimation from God prevails, and
the Will does answer him with readiness, and delight! And when it takes
pleasure to trample upon all opposition; and when all that can be offered to
corrupt the heart, and draw it to sin, and loosen it from God, prevails but
as so much filth and dung would do (Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.), This is a confirmed
state of Will.

3. When the Affections do proceed from such a Will; and are ready to assist,
excite and serve it; and to carry us on in necessary Duties! When the lower
affections of Fear and sorrow do cleanse and restrain and prepare the way, and
the Higher Affections of Love, and Delight adhere to God, and Desire and Hope
do make out after him, and set the Soul on just endeavors: When Fear and Grief
have less to do, and are delivering up the heart still more and more to the
possession of Holy Delight and Love! And when those Affections, which are
rather Profound than very sensible, immediately toward God himself, are
sensible toward his Word, his Servants, his Graces and his ways, and against
all sin; The^ are the Affections, and so the man in a confirmed State.

4. When our selves, our time, and all that we have, are taken to be Gods, and
not our own, and are entirely, and unreservedly resigned to him, and used for
him; When we study our duty, and trust him for our reward: When we live as
those that have much more to do for Heaven than for earth, and with God than
with Man or any Creature: When our Consciences are absolutely subjected to the
Authority and Laws of God; and bow not to Competitors: When we are habitually
disposed as his Servants to be constantly employed in his Works, and make it
our Calling and business in the world; as judging that we have nothing to do on
earth, but with God, or for God: When we keep not up any secret desires and
hopes of a Worldly felicity; nor purvey for the pleasure of the Flesh, under
the cloak of Faith and Piety; but subdue the Flesh as our most dangerous enemy;
and can easily deny its appetite and concupiscence: When we guard all our
senses, and keep our passions, thoughts, and tongues, in obedience to the holy
Law: When we do not inordinately set up our selves in our esteem or desire,
above or against our Neighbor and his welfare; but love him as our selves, and
seek his good, and resist his hurt as heartily as our own, and love the godly
with a love of Complacence, and the ungodly with a love of Benevolence, though
they be our enemies: When we are faithful in all our Relations, and have
judgment to discern our duty, that we run not into extremes; and skill and
readiness and pleasure in performing it, and patience under all our sufferings;
this is the Life of a confirmed Christian (in various degrees, as their
strength is various).

And now I shall proceed to persuade such to value and seek this confirmation,
lest with dull unprepared minds my following Directions should be lost; and
then I shall give you the Directions themselves, which are the part that is
principally intended. And first for the Motives.

1. Consider that your first entrance into Christianity is an engagement to
proceed: your Receiving Christ obliges you to walk and grow up in him. A
fourfold obligation you very Christianity lays upon you, to grow stronger,
and to persevere. 1. The first is, from the very nature of it; even from the
Office of Christ, and the use and ends to which we do receive him. You receive
Christ as a Physician of your diseased Souls; and does not this engage you to
go on to use his Medicines till you are cured? What do men choose a Physician
for, but to heal them? It were but a foolish patient that would say, [ Though
my disease be deadly, yet now I have chosen the best Physician, I have no more
to do; I doubt not of recovery]. You took Christ for a Savior, which engages
you to use his saving means, and submit to his saving works. You took him for
your Teacher and Master; and gave up your selves to be his Disciples: and what
sense was in all this if you did not mean to proceed in learning of him. Its a
silly conceit for any man to think that he is a good Scholar, merely because
he has chosen a good Master or Tutor, without any further learning of him.
When Christ sent out his Apostles, it was for these two works: first to
Disciple Nations, and Baptize them; and then to go on in Teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever he commands them. Matthew. 28, 19, 20. Christ is
the way to the Father: but to what purpose did you come into this way, if you
meant not to travel on in it?

2. Moreover when you became Christians, you entered a solemn Covenant with
Christ; and bound your selves by a vow, to be faithful to him to the death: And
this Vow is upon you: It is better not to Vow, than to Vow and not perform.
Eccles. 5.5. In taking him to be the Captain of your Salvation, and listing
your selves under him, and taking this Oath of fidelity to him, you did engage
your selves to fight as faithful Soldiers, under his conduct and command to
your lives end. And as its a foolish Soldier that thinks that he has no more
to do, but list himself and take Colors, and need not fight; so it is a
foolish and ungodly Covenanter that thinks he has nothing to do but to
Promise; and may be excused from performance because that Promising was enough;
when the Promise was purposely to bind him to perform.

3. Moreover, when you became Christians, you put your selves under the Laws of
Christ: and these Laws require you to go further till you are confirmed; so
that you must go on, or renounce your obedience to Christ.

4. Lastly, when you became Christians, you received such exceeding Mercies, as
do oblige you to go much higher in your affections, and much further in your
obedience to God. A man that is newly snatched as from the jaws of Hell, and
has received the free forgiveness of his sins, and is put into such a state of
blessedness as we are, must needs feel abundance of obligations upon him, to
proceed to stronger resolutions and affections, and not to stop in those low
beginnings. So that if you lay these four things together, you will perceive
that the very purpose of your Receiving Christ was that you might walk in him,
and be confirmed and built up.

2. Consider also, that your Conversion is not sound if you are not heartily
desirous to increase. Grace is not true, if there be not a desire after more;
yea if you desire not perfection it self. An Infant is not born to continue an
Infant, for that were to be a Monster; but to grow up unto Manhood. As the
Kingdom of Christ in the Word is likened by him to a little Leaven, and to a
grain of Mustard Seed, in the beginning, which afterward makes a wonderful
increase; so his Kingdom in the Soul is of the same nature too. If you are
contented with that measure of holiness that you have, you have none at all,
but a shadow and conceit of it. Let those men think of this that stint
themselves in Holiness, and plead for a Moderation in it, as if it were
intemperance or fury to love God or fear him or seek him or obey him, any more
than they do; or as if we were in danger of excess in these: If ever these men
had feelingly, and by experience known what Holiness is, they would never have
been possessed with such conceits as these.

3. Consider, What abundance of labor has been lost, and what hopes have been
frustrate, for want of proceeding to a Rooted Confirmation. I say not that such
were truly sanctified: but I say, they were in a very hopeful way, and went
far, and by going further might have attained to Salvation. The heart of many a
Minister has been glad to see their Hearers humbled, and bewailing sin, and
changing their minds and lives, and becoming forward Professors of Godliness;
when a few years time has turned all this joy into sorrow: and one of our
hopeful seeming Converts does grow cold, and lose his former forwardness:
another falls to desperate sensuality, and turns Drunkard, or Fornicator, or
Gamester; another turns worldling, and drowneth all his seeming zeal in the
love of Riches, and the cares of this life; and another (if not many to one) is
deluded by some deceiver, and infected with some deadly errors, and casts off
duty, and sets himself, like a hired instrument of Hell, to divide the Church,
oppose the Gospel, and reproach and slander and rail at the Ministers and
Professors of it, and to weaken the hands of the Builders, and strengthen the
ungodly, and serve the secret enemies of the truth. Those that once comforted
our hearts in the hopes of their Conversion, do break our hearts by their
Apostasy and subversion, and become greater hindrances to the work of Christ,
and greater Plagues to the Church of God, that those that never professed to be
Religious. Those that were wont to join with us in holy worship, and went up
with us to the house of God as our companions, do afterward despise both
Worshippers and Worship. Whereas if these men had been rooted and confirmed,
you should never have seen them fall into this misery. O how many Prayers, and
Confessions, and Duties do these men lose? How many years have some of them
seemed to be Religious, and after all have proved Apostate miscreants; and the
World, and the Flesh, and Pride and Error swallow up all. See then what need
you have to be rooted, confirmed, and built up in Christ.

4. Consider also, How much of the Work of your Salvation is yet to do, when
you are Converted. You have happily begun; but you have not finished. You have
hit of the right way, but you have your Journey yet to go; you have chosen the
best Commander, and fellow Soldiers: but you have many a Battle yet to fight.
If you are Christians indeed, you know your selves that you have many a
corruption to resist and conquer, and many a temptation yet to overcome, and
many a necessary work to do? And there is a necessity of these after-works as
well as of the first. For these are the use and end of your conversion, that
you may live soberly righteously and godly in this present World, denying
ungodliness and wordly lusts, Tit. 2.11, 12. For we are his workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God has ordained that we should
walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10. And how can Infants go through all these works? Which
of you would desire an Infant or Criple to be your servant? But though God be
in this more merciful than man, yet he may well expect that you should not be
still Infants. What work are you like to make him, in this decrepit and weak
condition? O pitiful blindness! that any man that knows that he has a Soul to
save, should think an Infant-strength proportionable to those works and
difficulties that stand between him and everlasting Life! In the matters of
this Life, you feel the need and worth of strength: you will not think an
Infant fit to Plow or Sow, or Reap or Mow, or Travel or play the Soldier! and
yet will you rest satisfied with an Infant-strength, to do those great and
matchless works, which your Salvation lies on?

5. Moreover, the weak unconfirmed Souls, are usually full of trouble, and live
without that assurance of Gods love, and that spiritual peace and comfort,
which others do possess. One would think no other Argument should be necessary
to make men weary of their spiritual weaknesses and Diseases than the pain and
trouble that always attends them. Its more pain to a sick man to travel a
mile, than to a sound man to go ten. To the lame or feeble, every step has
pain, and all that they do is grievous to them: when far more would be a
recreation to one that is in health. O therefore delight not in your own
languishings! Choose not to live in pain and sorrow! But strive after
Confirmation and growth in Grace; that overgrowing your infirmities you may
overcome your sad complaints and groans, and may be acquainted with the
comfortable life of the Confirmed. O how roundly and cheerfully would you go
through your work! how easy and sweet and profitable would it prove to you, if
once you were strong confirmed Christians! Alas, the Souls of those that are
not confirmed, lie open to every temptation of the malicious enemy of their
peace: and how small a matter will disquiet and unsettle them! every passage in
Scripture which they understand not, and which seems to make against them, will
disturb them. A Minister cannot Preach so plainly or so cautelously, but
somewhat which they understand not will be matter of their disquiet.
Providence will trouble them because they understand them not: Afflictions
will be bitter to the mind as well as the body, and will immoderately perplex
them, because they understand them not, or have not strength to bear them and
improve them. The sweeter mercies of prosperity will much lose their sweetness
for want of holy Wisdom and strength to digest them. And what man would choose
such a weak and languishing state as this, before a confirmed healthful state?
Will you run up and down for Physic when you are sick? and will you no more
regard the health and stability, and spiritual peace and vigor of your souls?

6. Moreover, it is the strong confirmed Christian that has the true use and
benefit of all Gods ordinances: Meat is digested by the healthful stomach; and
its seen upon them; and we use to say, It is not lost: It is sweet to them, and
does them good; and they are strengthened more by it. And so is the confirmed
Christian by Gods Ordinances. But to the weak unconfirmed Soul, how much of the
means of Grace is even as lost? How little sweetness do they find in means? and
how little good can they say they get by them? I deny not but some good they
get, and that they must use them still; for though the sick have little relish
of his meat, yet he cannot long live without it: and though it breed not
strength or health, yet it maintains that languishing life: but this is all,
or almost all. What a sad thing is this to your selves, and unto us! when
Ministers that are as the Nurses of the Church, or Stewards of the Household to
give them all their meat in due season, must see that all that ever they can do
for you, will do no more than keep you alive? Yea, how often are you
quarrelling with your food; and you do not like it? or you cannot get it down,
something still ails it for matter or manner: or else if the Minister displease
you, your feeble stomachs do loath the food, because you like not the Cook that
dresseth it, or because his hands are not so clean as you desire. The full Soul
loatheth an Honeycomb, but to the hungry every bitter thing is sweet, Prove.
27.7. Or if you get it down, you can hardly keep it, but are ready to cast it
up to our faces. And thus a great deal of our labor is lost with you: holy
Doctrine lost, and Sacraments and other Ordinances lost, because you have not
strength to digest them. Labor therefore to be stablished and built up.

7. I beseech you look upon the face of the World, and see whether it have not
need of the strongest helps? Whereas the weak and sick are burdensome to
others, rather than fit to help the distressed. It is a multitude among us, and
abroad in the world, that are ignorant and ungodly and in the depth of misery:
And if there be but a few to help them, those few should not be Babes.
Abundance of this multitude are obstinate in their sin, blind and wilful,
captivated by the Devil, and have sold themselves to do evil: and shall such
miserable Souls as these have none but children or sick folks to help them. I
tell you Sirs, their Diseases prove too hard for the skilfullest Physicians: It
will put the wisest man in England to it, to persuade one obstinate enemy of
godliness, to the hearty love of a holy life; or to cure one old superstitious
person of his self-conceitedness; or one covetous person of his love of the
World; or one old drunkard or glutton of his sensuality. How then will silly
ignorant Christians be able to persuade them? I know it is not the ability of
the Instrument, but the will of God that is the principal cause; but yet God
uses to work by instruments according to their fitness for the work. What a
case is that Hospital in where all are sick, and no healthful persons among
them to help them? Poor weak Christians! you are not able much to help one
another; how much less to help the dead ungodly World? Woe to the World if it
had no better helpers! And woe to your selves if you had not the help of
stronger than your selves (seeing it is Gods way to work by means.) Alas, a
child or sick person is so unfit to labor for the Family, and to work for
others, that they are the burdens of the Family, and must be provided for by
others. They are so unmeet to help others in their weakness, that they must be
carried, or attended and waited on themselves. What a Life is this to be the
burdens of the Church, when you might be the Pillars of the Church? To be so
blind and lame, when you might be eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame.

I speak not this to extenuate Gods mercies to you; nor to undervalue the great
felicity of the Saints, even the poorest and weakest of them. I know that
Christ is tender of the weakest that are sincere, and will not forsake them.
But though you are so far above the dead world, even in the bed of your
groaning and languishing, yet O how far are you below the Confirmed healthful
Christian? You are happy in being alive, but you are unhappy in being so
diseased and weak. You are happy in being of the Family, and fellow-Citizens
with the Saints; But you are unhappy in being so useless and unprofitable and
burdensome: For indeed you live but as the Poor of the Parish; not only on the
Alms of Christ, for so we do all; but on the Alms of your brethrens assistance
and support: And I know that in worldly matters you will rather labor with
your hands, that you may have to give to them that need, than be troublesome to
others, and live upon Charity, Ephesians. 4.28. I know that the time is not yet come
that there shall not be a Beggar in Israel; I mean one that needs not our
continual relief: The poor we shall have always with us; even the poor in
Grace to exercise our Charity; and I know that the strong must bear with their
infirmities, and exercise compassion on them. But yet you should remember the
words of Christ, It is more honorable to give than to receive. And therefore
be persuaded to be stir your selves for spiritual health and strength and
riches, that the multitudes of needy miserable Souls may have some help from
you; and that when they come to your doors, you may not turn them away with so
cold an answer, [ Alas, we have nothing for our selves] Were you but strong
confirmed Christians, what blessings might you be to all about you? What a stay
to the places where you live? Your lips would feed many as a Tree of Life. The
ear that heard you would bless you, and the eye that saw you would bear you
witness, Job 29.11. You would be to poor Souls, as bountiful Rich men are to
their bodies; the support and relief of many that are needy. You would not eat
your morsells alone, nor would you see any perish for lack of clothing, but
the loins of the poor would bless you, Job 31.17, 18, 19, 20. Oh pity the poor
World that needs more than Childrens help, and grow up unto Confirmation. O
pity the poor Church that abounds with weaklings, that's pestered with childish
self conceited quarrellers, and needs more than childrens help; and grow up
to confirmation O pity your selves and live not still in so childish, sickly,
and beggarly a condition, when the way of riches and health is before you: but
up and be doing till you have attained confirmation.

8. Yea this is not all; you do not only deny the Church your assistance, but
most of the troubles and divisions of the Church, are from such unsettled
weaklings as you. In all Ages almost, these have made the Church more work than
the Heathen Persecutors did with Fire and Sword. These Novices, as Paul calls
them, that is; your beginners in Religion, are they that most commonly are
puffed up with Pride, and fall into the condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3.6.
These are they that are easiest deceived by Seducers, as being not able to make
good the truth, nor to confute the plausible reasonings of the adversaries; and
withal, they have not that rooted love to the Truth and ways of God, which
should hold them fast; and they quickly yield like cowardly Soldiers, that are
able to make but small resistance. And as Paul speaks, they are like children
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by the
sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive,
Ephesians. 4.14. If you will still continue children, what better can we expect of
you, but thus to be tossed and carried about. Thus you gratify Satan and
Seducers, when you little think on it: And thus you harden the ungodly in their
way: And thus you grieve the hearts of the godly, and especially of the
Faithful guides of the Flocks. Alas that so many of the children of the Church,
should become the scourges and troublers of the Church; and should set their
teeth so deep in the breasts that were drawn out for their nourishment! If you
were never drawn to do any thing to the reproach of the Church, yet what a
grief must it be to us, to see so many of your selves miscarry? Ah thinks a
poor Minister, What hopes had I once of these Professors; and are they come to
this? O mark Sirs the Apostle's warning, Heb. 13.9. [ Be not carried about with
diverse and strange doctrines]. And his way of prevention is, that the heart be
established with Grace.

9. Consider also that it is a dishonor to Christ, that so many of his Family
should be such weaklings; so mutable and unsettled and unprofitable as you are!
I do not mean that it is any real dishonor to him: for it all the World should
forsake him, they would dishonor themselves and not him, with any competent
Judge: As it would dishonor the beholders more than the Sun, if all the world
should say that it is darkness. But you are guilty of dishonouring him in the
eyes of the misguided world: O what a reproach it is to Godliness that so many
Professors should be so ignorant and imprudent! and so many so giddy and
unconstant! and so many that manifest so little of the glory of their holy
Profession! All the enemies of Christ without the Church, are not capable of
dishonouring him so much as you, that bear his Name and wear his Livery! While
your Graces are weak your corruptions will be strong; and all those corruptions
will be the dishonor of your Profession! Will it not break your hearts to hear
the ungodly pointing at you as you pass by, to say, yonder goes a Covetous
Professor; or yonder goes a proud, or a tippling, or a contentious Professor? If
you have any love to God, and sense of his dishonor, methinks such sayings
should touch you at the heart! While you are weak and unconfirmed, you will
like children, stumble at every stone, and catch many a fall; and yield to
temptations, which the stronger easily resist: and then being scandalous, all
your faults by foolish men will be charged on your Religion. If you do but
speak an ill word of another, or rail, or deceive, or overreach in bargaining,
or fall into any scandalous Opinions or practice, your Religion must bear all
the blame with the World. Ever since I can remember, it has been one of the
principal hindrances of men's Conversion, and strengtheners of the wicked in
their way, that the Godly were accounted a sort of peevish, unpeaceable,
covetous, proud, self-seeking persons: which was a slander as to many, but too
much occasioned by the scandalousness of some: And methinks you should be
afraid of that Woe from Christ [ Woe be to him by whom offense cometh]. If you be
Children, you may have the Woe of sharp castigations; and if you be Hypocrites,
you shall have the Woe of overlasting sufferings. The world can judge no farther
than they see: And when they see Professors of Holiness to be so like to common
men, and in some things worse than many of them, what can you expect but that
they despise Religion, and judge of it by the Professors of it, and say, If this
be their Religion, let them keep it to themselves; we are as well without it as
they are with it. And thus will the holy ways of God be vilified through you.
If you will not excel others in the beauty of your conversations, that in this
glass the World may see the beauty of your Religion, you must expect that they
should take it but for a common thing which brings forth but common fruits,
to their discerning. You should be such that God may boast of, and the Church
may boast of, to the face of the accuser: then would you be an honor to the
Church, when God may say of you as he did of Job, [Hast thou considered my
servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright
man, one that fears God and escheweth evil] Job 1.8. If we could say so of
you to the malignant enemies, [ See what men the godly are, there is none such
among you; men of Holiness, Wisdom, uprightness, sobriety, meekness, patience,
peaceable and harmless, living wholly to God, as strangers on earth, and
Citizens of Heaven], then you would be ornaments to your holy profession. Were
you such Christians as the old Christians were, Act. 4. we might boast of you
then to the reproaching adversaries.

10. Moreover, till you are confirmed and built up, you may too easily be made
the instruments of Satan, to further his designs. The weakness of your
understandings, and the strength of your passions, and especially the interest
that carnal Self has remaining in you, may lay you open to temptations, and
engage you in many a cause of Satan, to take his part against the truth. And
how sad a case is this to any that have felt the love of Christ! Have you been
warmed with his wondrous love, and washed with his blood, and saved by his
matchless mercy? and may it not even break your hearts, to think that after all
this, you should be drawn by Satan to wound your Lord, to abuse his honor, to
resist his cause, to hurt his Church, and to confirm his enemies, and gratify
the Devil! I tell you with shame and grief of heart, that abundance of weak
unsettled Professors, that we hope have upright meanings in the main, have been
more powerful instruments for Satan to do his work by, for the hindering of the
Gospel, the vilifying of the Ministry, the dividing of the Church, and the
hindering of Reformation, than most of the notoriously profane have been! What
excellent hopes had we once in England of the flourishing of piety and happy
union among the Churches and servants of Christ? And who has not only
frustrated these hopes, but almost broke them all to pieces? Have any had more
to do in it than weak unstable Professors of Religiousness. What sad confusions
are most parts of England in at this day, by reason of the breaking of Churches
into Sects and shreds, and the contentions and reproaches of Christians against
Christians, and the odious abuse of holy truth and Ordinances! And who is it
that does this, so much as unstable Professors of Piety! What greater reproach
almost could have befallen us, than for the adversary to stand by, and see men
pulling out each others Throats? and hating and persecuting and reproaching one
another; and that our own hands should pull down the house of God, and tear in
pieces the miserable Churches while men are striving who shall be the Master of
the Reformation? O what a sport is this to the Devil, when he can set his
professed enemies by the ears, and make them fall upon one another? when if he
have any notable work to do against the Church and cause of Christ, he can call
out unstable Christians to do it! If he would have Godliness be scandalized,
who has he to do it but Professors of Godliness? Some of them to give the
scandal, and others to aggravate and divulge it. Would he have a Church
divided? how quickly does he find a bone of contention? and who should do it
but the unstable Members of it? Would he have the truth opposed, and error and
darkness to be promoted? who must do it but Professors of the truth? persuade
some of them that truth is error, and error is truth, and the work will be
done: They will furiously march out against their Master, and think they do him
service while they are fighting against him, and scorning, and shaming, if not
killing his Servants. Would he have public divisions maintained among all the
Churches of the World? It is but possessing the weaker unstable Pastors and
people, with a perverse zeal for mere words and notions, as if the life of the
Church did therein consist; and they will be the Devils instruments at a beck,
and carry it perhaps by the major vote; and all that will not Word it as they,
shall be called Heretics, and the Church shall have new Articles added to
their Faith, under pretense of preserving and expounding the old ones. And thus
when Satan has a work to do, if Heathens and Infidels cannot do it, it is no
more but call out Christians to do it: If Drunkards and malignant enemies
cannot do it, it is but calling out some unstable Professors of Godliness to do
it, and possessing the more injudicious part of the Pastors with some carnal
ends, or blind consuming zeal.

O Christians! in the Name of God, as you would avoid these devilish
employments, labor for confirming strengthening Grace; and rest not in your
childish weakness and instability. If you are delivered from Satan, and have
truly renounced him, and tasted the great Salvation of Christ, methinks you
should even tremble to consider what a thing it would be, if after all this,
you should prove through your weakness, so serviceable to the Devil, and so
injurious to your dearest Lord! what! must those abuse him whom he has
Redeemed from damnation? Must those hands be employed to demolish his Kingdom,
that were washed by him, and should have built it up? As if you were like
Judas, that even now has his hand with his Master in the dish, and presently
lifts it up against him!

11. Moreover, while you are weaklings and unconfirmed, you will exceedingly
encourage the ungodly in their false hopes, by being so like them as you are.
When they see that you excel them so little, and in many things are as bad or
worse than they, it strongly persuades them that their state is as good as
yours, and that they may be saved as well as others, seeing the difference
seems to be so small. They know that Heaven and Hell are much unlike, and
vastly distant; and therefore they will hardly believe that they must be thrust
into Hell, when men that seem so little to differ from them must go to Heaven.
You would not believe how it hardens them in their sin when they see
Professors do as bad! and how it setleth them in presumption and impenitency to
perceive your faults! When a Minister has labored to make the sins of the
ungodly odious to him, and to break his heart with the terrors of the Lord, O
how it quieteth him, and heals all again, to see the like sins, or others as
bad, in the Professors of Religion! If these, says he, may be saved, for all
such and such sins, what cause have I to fear! O wretched unprofitable
scandalous Professors! when we have studied and Preached for men's Conversion
many a year, you go and undo all that we have done, by the scandal or levity or
imprudence of an hour! When we have almost persuaded men to be Christians, you
unperswade them, and turn them back again, and do more harm by the weakness and
scandal of your lives, than many of us can do good by life and Doctrine: When
we have brought sinners even to the door of life, you prove their enemies, and
take them out of our hands again, and bring them back to their old captivity.
Does it not pierce your very hearts to think on it, that ever one soul, much
more so many, should be shut out of glory, and burn in everlasting misery, and
you should have a hand in it? Consider of this, and methinks you should desire
confirming Grace.

12. And methinks it should be very grievous to you, to be so like to the
ungodly your selves, and that Satan should still have so much interest in you.
Holiness is Gods Image; and does it not grieve you that you are so little like
him! By his Graces he keeps possession of you: and does it not grieve you that
God has no more possession of you; but that Satan and sin should so defraud
him of his own! Will he condescend to dwell in so low a worm, so often defiled
with the dung of his iniquities; and does it not wound you to think that even
there he should be so straightened, and thrust into corners, by a hellish enemy,
as if that simple habitation were too much for him, and that dirty dwelling
were too good for him I and as if you grudged him so much of the leavings of
Satan, that had taken up the beginning of your days in sin!

Your corruption is the very image of the Devil, and does it not affright you
to think that you should be so like him! You are charged not to be conformed to
this World, but to be transformed or metamorphosed by the renewing of your
mind, that ye may prove what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of
God, Romans 12.2. And yet will you stop in a state so like to those that perish?
He that has the least measure of saving Grace, is likest to the children of
the Devil of any man in the world that is not one of them. Seek therefore to
increase.

13. And I beseech you consider that your excellency, and the glory and luster
of your Graces, is one of Gods appointed means for the honor of his Son and
Gospel, and Church, and for the Conviction and Conversion of the unbelieving
Word: And therefore if you use not this means, you rob God and the Church of
that which is their due, and deprive sinners of one of the means of their
Salvation. You are commanded to let your light so shine before men, that they
may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven, Matthew.
5.16. Christians be awakened in the name of God to consider what you have to do
with your Graces! you have the living God to please and honor by them! As the
excellency of the work does honor the Workman, so must your Graces and lives
honor God. You have the Souls of the weak to confirm by your lives, and the
Souls of the ungodly to win by your lives. You should all be Preachers, and
even Preach as you go up and down in the World, as a Candle lights which way
ever it goes. As we are sent to save sinners as Ambassadors of Christ, by
public Proclamation of his Will; so are you sent to save them as his Servants
and our helpers, and must Preach by your lives and familiar exhortations, as we
must do by authoritative instruction. A good life is a good Sermon; yea those
may be won by your Sermons, that will not come to ours; or will not obey the
Doctrine which they hear. Even to women that must keep silence in the Church,
does Peter command this way of Preaching, I Pet. 3.1, 2. That if any of them
have Husbands that obey not the Word, they may without the Word be won by the
conversation of the Wives.] Thousands can understand the meaning of a good
life, that cannot understand the meaning of a good Sermon! By this way you may
Preach to men of all Languages, though your tongues had never learnt but one:
For a holy, harmless, humble life, does speak in all the Languages of the World
to men that have eyes to read it: This is the Universal Character and Language,
in which all sorts may perceive you speak the wondrous works of the Holy Ghost:
I charge you therefore Christians, deprive not God of the honor you owe him,
nor the Church, or Souls of wicked men of this excellent powerful help which
you owe them, by continuing in your weakness and unsettled minds, and spotted
lives; but grow up to that measure that may be fit for such a work. As you
durst not silence the Preachers of the Gospel, so do not dare to silence your
selves from Preaching by your holy exemplary lives: And alas, do you think that
feeble, giddy, scandalous Professors are like to do any great matters by their
Lives! Would you wish the poor World to write after such a crooked and bloted
Copy? Will it win men's hearts to a love of Holiness, to talk with a Christian
that can scarce speak a word of sense for his Religion! or to see a Professor
as greedy for a little gain as the veryest worldling that has no other hope!
or to hear them rail, or lie, or slander! Or to see them turn up and down like
a Weathercock according as the Wind of temptation sits! and to follow every
new Opinion that is but put off with a plausible fervency. Do you think that
men are like to be won by such lives as these?

14. Do you consider what great things you must make account to suffer for
Christ? You must forsake all that you have, Luke 14.33. You must not save your
lives if he bid you lose them, Matthew. 16.25. You must suffer with him, if you
will be glorified with him, Romans 8 17. You may be called to confess Christ
before the Kings or Judges of the earth; and then if you deny him he will deny
you, and if you be ashamed of him he will be ashamed of you, (unless you be
brought to a better state) Luke 9.26. Mark 8.38. You may be called to the fiery
trial, and to suffer also the spoiling of your goods, and in a word, the loss
of all. And do you think that you shall not find use for the strongest Graces
then! Have you not need to be confirmed rooted Christians that must expect such
storms! Are Infants meet for such encounters? Have you not seen how many that
seemed strong have been overthrown in a time of trial? And yet will you stop in
a weak estate. Perhaps you will say, We cannot stand by our own strength; and
therefore Christ may uphold the weakest, when the strongest may fall. To which
I answer, Its true: but it is Gods common way to work by means, and to imitate
nature in his works of Grace; and therefore he uses to root and strengthen
those that he will have to stand and conquer; yea, and to arm them as well as
strengthen them, and then to teach them to use their arms, Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 12,
13. Finally my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might:
put on the whole armor of God that ye may be able to stand against the wiles
of the Devil. For we wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but against
Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this
World, against spiritual wickedness in high places: Wherefore take unto you the
whole armor of God, that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and
having done all, to stand.] You must look when you are illuminated, to endure a
great fight of afflictions; to be made a gazing stock both by reproaches and
afflictions, and to be companions of them that are so used: and therefore you
have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, you may receive
the Promise, Heb. 10.32, 33, 36. If you will endure in the time of persecution,
the Word must take deep rooting in your hearts, Matthew. 13.5, 20, 21. and you
must be founded on a Rock, if you look to stand in time of storms, Matthew. 7.24,
25.

In the mean time, it is a fearful thing to see in what a wavering condition
you seem to stand; like a Tree that shakes, as if it were even falling; or like
a cowardly Army that are ready to run before they fight; and like cowardly
Soldiers, you are still looking behind you, and a small matter troubles, and
perplexeth, and staggereth you, as if you were ready to repent of your
repentings. And must God have such servants as these, that upon every rumor or
word or trouble, are wavering and looking back, and ready to forsake him?

15. Consider also, that the same Reasons that moved you at first to be
Christians, should now move you to be confirmed thriving Christians: For they
are of force as well for this as for that. You would not have mist your part in
Christ for all the World (if indeed you have the least degree of Grace). And if
the beginning be good and necessary, the increase is neither bad or needless.
If a little Grace be desirable, sure more is more desirable. If it was then
but a reasonable thing that you should forsake all for Christ and follow him;
it is sure as reasonable that you should follow him to the end, till you reach
that blessedness which was the end for which at first you followed him. What
Christian! have thou found God a hard Master, a barren Wilderness to thee? or
his service an unprofitable thing! say so, and I dare say thou art a bastard
(to use the Apostles phrase, Heb. 12.8.) and not a Christian. Some trial thou
have made of him, What evil have thou found in him! or what wrong has he ever
done thee! that thou should now begin to make a stand, as if thou were in
doubt whether it be best to go further? If ever Christ were needful, he is
needful still? and if ever heaven and holiness were good, they are good still!
and therefore go on till thou have obtained more, and forget not the Reasons
that first persuaded with thee.

16. Nay more than so, you have the addition of much experience, which should
be an exceeding help to quicken your affections. When you first Repented and
came into Christ, you had never had any experience in your selves of his saving
special Grace before; but you came in upon the bare hearing and believing of
it: But now you have tasted that the Lord is gracious! and you have received at
his hands the pardon of sin, the Spirit of adoption, the hope of glory, which
before you had not! You have had many a Prayer answered, and many a deliverance
granted; and will you make a stand when all these experiences do call you
forward? Should not new Motives and helps thus added to the old, be the means
of adding to your zeal and holiness? Surely more wages and encouragement, does
be speak more work and diligence. And therefore see that you increase.

17. And most or many of you have cause to consider how long you have been
already in the Family and School of Christ. If you are but newly entered, I may
well exhort you to increase, but I cannot reprove you for not increasing. But
alas, what a multitude of dwarfs has Christ, that are like Infants at twenty
or forty or threescore years of age. What! be so many years in his School, and
yet be in the lowest Form. [ For when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, you
have need that one teach you again which be the first Principles of the Oracles
of God, and are become such as have need of Milk, and not of strong meat: For
every one that uses milk is unskilful in the word of Righteousness: for he is
a Babe: but strong meat belongs to them that are of full age, that by reason
of use have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil, Heb. 5.12,
13, 14.] O poor weak diseased Christian! have thou been so many years beholding
the face of God by Faith! and yet art thou no more in love with him than at the
first! Have thou been so long making trial of his goodness! and do thou see
it and savor it no more than in the beginning! Have thou been so long under
his cure; and art thou no more healed than the first year or day! Have thou
been hearing and talking of Heaven so long; and yet art thou no more heavenly
nor ready for Heaven! Have thou heard and talked so much against the World and
the Flesh; and yet is the World as high in thee as at first, and the Flesh as
strong as in the beginning of thy Profession! O what a sin and shame is this?
and what a wrong to God and thee?

Yea consider here also what means thou have had, as well as what time! O who
has gone beyond thee for power and plenty and purity of Ordinances? or at
least how few. Surely few parts of all the earth are like to England, for the
showers of Heaven, and the Riches of the precious Ordinances of God. You have
Sermons till you can scarce desire more! And that so plain that men can scarce
tell how to speak plainer: and so earnest, as if the servants of Christ would
take no nay: even almost as if they must perish if you perished. You have as
frequent, as plain and powerful Books. You have the warnings and examples of
the godly about you. And what yet would you have more! And should a people thus
fed be Dwarfs continually? Is ignorance, and dullness, and earthliness, and
selfishness, excusable after all these means? Surely sirs it is but just that
God should expect you all to be Giants! even heavenly, grown, confirmed
Christians: Whatever others do, it should be so with you.

18. And methinks it should somewhat move you to consider, how others have
thriven in less time, and by smaller means by far than you have had! and how
some of your neighbors can yet thrive by the same means that you so little
thrive by. Job that was so magnified by God himself, had not such means as you:
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, had none of them all such means as you! Many
Prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things that you see, and
have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard
them, Matthew. 13.17. Though John Baptist was greater than any of the Prophets,
yet the least of you that are in the Gospel Kingdom, are greater than he, in
respect of means. As the times of the Gospel have far clearer light, and give
out greater measures of Grace; so the true genuine children of the Gospel
should (taking them one with another) be far more confirmed, strong and
heavenly, than those that were under the darker and scanter administrations of
the Promise.

And do you not see and hear how far you are outstript by many of your poor
Neighbors, that are as low in natural parts, and as low in the world, and the
esteem of men as you. How many (in this place I dare boldly speak it) do shine
before you in knowledge, and meekness, and patience, and a blameless upright
life; in fervent prayers, and a heavenly conversation! Men that have had as
much need to look after the World as you! and no longer time to get these
qualifications; and no other means but what you have had, or might have had as
well as they. And now they shine as stars in the Church on earth, while you are
like sparks, if not like clods. I know that God is the free disposer of his
graces; but yet he so seldom fails any (even in degrees) that be not wanting
to themselves, that I may well ask you, why you might not have reached to some
more eminency, as well as these about you, if you had but been as careful and
industrious as they?

19. Consider also, That your holiness is your personal perfection, and that of
the same kind you must have in glory, though not in the same degree. And
therefore if you be not desirous of its increase, it seems your are out of love
with your souls, and with Heaven it self: And when you cease to grow in
Holiness, you cease to go on any further to Salvation. If you would indeed your
selves be perfect and blessed, you must be perfected in this holiness, which
must make you capable of the perfect fruition of the most holy God, and capable
of his perfect love and praise. There is no Heaven without a perfection in
holiness. If therefore you let fall your desires of this, it seems you let fall
your desires of Salvation. Up then and be doing! and grow as men that are
growing up to glory; and if you believe that you are in your progress to
Heaven, being nearer your Salvation than when you first believed, see then that
you make a progress in heavenly mindedness, and that you be riper for Salvation
than when you first believed. How ill does it become men to make any stand in
the way to Heaven? especially when they have been in the way so long, that we
might have expected before this they should have been as it were almost within
sight of it?

20. Consider also that, Little Grace, Little Glory; and the greater measure of
Holiness, the greater measure will you have of Happiness. I know that the glory
of the lowest Saint in Heaven will be exceeding great: but doubtless the
greatest measure is unspeakably most desirable. And as it will not stand with
the truth of Grace for a man to be satisfied with a low degree of Grace, though
he plead the happiness of the lowest Christian, and his own unworthiness of the
least degree: So at least it ill beseems an Heir of glory to desire but the
lowest degree of glory; though he plead the happiness of the lowest Saint in
Heaven, and his own unworthiness of the lowest place. For he that will be so
content with the smallest Glory, as not to have hearty desires of more, is
accordingly content to have in himself the smallest measure of the knowledge and
Love of God, and to be Loved in the smallest measure by him; and to have the
least enjoyment of him; and to bear the smallest part in his praises, and in
pleasing and glorifying him for ever: For all these things are our happiness it
self. And how well this agrees with a gracious frame of mind, I need not any
further tell you.

But because some make question of it, whether the degree of glory will be
answerable to the degree of Holiness, I shall prove it in a few words.

1. It is the very drift of the Parable of the Talents in Matthew. 25. He that
had gotten most by improvement, was made Ruler proportionably over most Cities.
Not he that had been at the greatest bodily labor in Religion, nor every one
that had past the greatest sufferings; but he that had got most holiness to
himself, and honor to God by the improvement of his Talents, and so had
doubled them.

2. The degrees of Holiness hereafter will be diverse, as are the degrees of
Holiness here: for as men sow they will reap; and there is no promise in
Scripture that men that dye with the smallest Holiness shall be made equal to
them that dyed with the greatest Holiness. And that the greatest Holiness
hereafter must have the greatest Happiness, is past denial. For 1. Holiness in
Heaven is an essential part of the felicity it self. It is the perfection of
the Soul. 2. The use of it is for perfect fruition, and perfect exercise of
love and praise; which are the other parts of glory. And God will not give men
powers, capacities and dispositions in Heaven which shall be in vain: as he
gives hungring and thirsting, and Love, so will he give proportionable
satisfaction, and not tantalize his Servants in their blessedness, and leave a
part of Hell in Heaven. 3. And Holiness is pleasing to God in its own nature:
and therefore the greatest holiness will greatlyest please him: and he that
most pleases God, has the greatest Glory. These things are plain.

3. Moreover, we have great reason to conceive of the stare of the glorified,
in some congruency with the rest of the workmanship of God. But in all the rest
there is a difference or imparity: therefore we have reason to think it is so
here. On Earth there are Princes and Subjects in the Commonwealth: and Pastors
and People in the Churches; and several degrees among the people as to gifts
and comforts: Among the Devils there are degrees: and among Angels themselves
there are Principalities and Powers and Thrones and Dominions. And why then
should we imagine that the Heavenly Jerusalem shall not be so too?

4. And Christ plainly intimates that there is a place on his right hand and
his left to give, in that Kingdom, though as the Son of Man he had not the
principal disposal of it (And then the Kingdom must be delivered to the Father,
and God be all and in all; and therefore the Mediator as such have somewhat
less to do, than now.) And when Christ tells us of Lazarus in Abraham's
bosom, and of many from the East and West sitting down with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, he intimates to us, that every place in Heaven is not so high as
Abraham's bosom, nor a sitting with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. So that I take it
as a plain revealed truth that diverse degrees of holiness will have diverse
degrees of Glory hereafter.

The chief Argument to the contrary is fetched from the Parable of the
Laborers, that coming in at several hours, received every one a penny. But
this is much misunderstood: For here is not a word in it contrary to our
Assertion. The Parable only says that [ Glory shall not be proportioned to the
Time; but they that come later shall have never the less for that]. Which is
nothing to our question about the Degrees of Holiness. For many that are first
in Time may be least and last in Holiness; and many that are last in Time, may
in that little time come to be best and greatest in Holiness: and consequently
in Glory. The Parable in Matthew. 25. shows that God will give different degrees
of glory according to the difference in improvement of our Talents: And the
other Parable shows that he will not give out his Glory according to men's Time
and standing in the Church seeing a weaker Christian may be of longer standing,
and a stronger of a later coming in: And what show of discord is there between
these? 2. And yet it is doubt ul in the Judgment of good Expositors, whether the
Parable of the penny do speak of Heaven at all or not: or whether it speak not
only of the Vocation of the Gentiles, and taking them into the Gospel Church in
equality with the Believing Jews: though the Jews being Gods ancient people,
had been longer in the Vineyard, and the Gentiles were called but as at the
eleventh hour, yet God will make the Gentiles equal in the Grace of Vocation,
because in this he has not engaged himself, but may do with his own as he
list: Which ever of these two is the thing intended in the Text, or possibly
both, it is certain that this general is the sum of the Parable [ That the
first may be last, and the last first]: that is, That God will not give men the
greatest reward that were first called: but he never said that he would not
reward them most, that had done him the truest service and were highest in
Holiness.

Object. But the reason is, [ May I not do as I will with my own]. True: but
you must remember what it is a reason of; even of the Cause in question, and
may not by you be extended to other causes without a warrant: You never read
that he equally pardons the Believer and the unbeliever, or saves the
Regenerate and unregenerate, and then gives this reason of it, [ May I not do
as I will with my own]. For this can be no reason for any thing which he has
revealed that he will not do: Prove first that he will do it, and then bring
your reasons why; but not before. So that it extends not to the case of
different Glory upon different degrees of holiness; for this he has revealed
that he will do.

So much (and perhaps too much) to satisfy the doubtful: Now I desire to return
to the dull and languishing Christian, and beseech them to remember what a
difference there will be between one Saint and another in Glory! And O who
would not aspire after the highest measure of Holiness, in hope of a high
degree of Glory? Christian, had thou not infinitely rather Love God with the
greatest Love than with a less? and be beloved again with the greatest of his
Love? I mean, by partaking of the greatest effects of it, and the fullest sense
of his everlasting favor? Remember this, and sure it will persuade thee to
gird up thy loins, and run as for the incorruptible Crown, and press on to the
mark for the price of the high Calling, and not to sit down with weak
beginnings: especially when the way is so sweet as well as the end: and the
greatest Holiness has here also the greatest spiritual reward; and is attended
with the greatest peace and joy (in the ordinary course of Gods dispensations).
And when all the knocks and falls and cries of Christians in this life, proceed
from the childish weakness of their spirits: And almost all the woes and
calamities that attend us, our shames, our pains, our contentions, and
divisions, and the lamentable difficulty, (that seems an impossibility) of
healing them, or preventing more, All is from the corruptions that are the
companions of our weakness: And could we but grow up to a Manhood of
understanding, humility, meekness, self-denial, and the Love of God in Christ,
and of one another, we might then have some hope of the Cure of all. Alas that
men that are so sensible of the difference between a weak body and a strong, a
sick and a sound, a child and a man, an Idiot and a man of wisdom, though all
of them have humane nature; should yet be so little sensible of the great
difference between a weak Christian and a strong, a sick and a sound,
(comparatively sound) a childish, and a manly wise confirmed Christian! Did you
well know the difference, you would show us that you make a greater matter of
it.

And now Christian Reader, I entreat thee soberly to consider of these twenty
Motives, Whether they do not show thee reason enough to move thee to look after
higher things, and not to stay in an infancy of holiness. It is a blessed mercy
I confess that God has given thee a true Conversion, and the smallest measure
of the heavenly life: I do not move thee to undervalue it: Nay I am blaming
thee for undervaluing it: For if thou did not undervalue it, thou would
earnestly desire more. Thou have cause to bless God to all eternity, and to all
eternity thou shall bless him, for making thee a New Creature even a living
Member of his Son: And I know that thy condition is unspeakably better than the
greatest Prince's or Emperor's upon earth, that is void of Holiness. I know
that thou have still ground of exceeding consolation: I am not taking thy
comforts from thee: I know God despises not the day of small things: and that
Christ will not quench the smoking Flax, nor break the bruised Reed, nor cast
off the poorest Infants of his Family, or lose any one of the Lambs of his
Flock. But yet for all this I must tell thee, that there is a great deal of
difference in excellency, and strength, and comfort, and happiness, between one
sanctified person and another: And if thou be so apt to be over-covetous of
worldly riches where God forbids it, and limiteth thy desires, and where
there is no such necessity or excellency to entice thee; why should thou not
cherish that holy Covetousness which God expressly commands thee? 1 Cor.
12.31. [ Covet earnestly the best gifts]. And which he has promised a blessing
to [ Matthew. 5.6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, for they shall be filled]. This is not spoken of them that have
no righteousness, but of them that have it, and fain would have more: For 1.
There is no such Promise made to any that are short of saving Faith. It is not
any common Grace that God makes this Promise to, but a special Grace. And 2. It
is evident that no man can thus hunger and thirst after righteousness without
righteousness: for even this hungring and thirsting is a degree of true
Sanctification. You would not take up with a Cottage or smoaky Cabin if you
could have a Palace; nor with dry Bread if you could lawfully have plenty; nor
with a torn or thredbare Coat, if you can have better; nor with a poor
laborious toilsome life, in disgrace and the reproach of men, if you could have
honor and ease and abundance. And yet will you take up with so poor a stock of
holiness! and so dark a mind, and small a measure of heavenly light! and so
cold a love to God and glory! and so barren and common a kind of life? God has
commanded you, that having food and raiment, you should therewith be content:
but he never commanded you that being once Converted and made an Infant in
Grace, you should therewith be content: So content you must be as not to
murmur; but not so content as not to Desire more.

You can see the difference I doubt not in others, between a little Grace and
more: O that you would but see this for your selves! If you have a froward
Wife, or Husband, or Child, that has a harsh, and passionate nature, and has
so much Grace only as to lament this when they are calmed, and to strive
against it, but not to forbear the often exercise of it; though such a nature
may be pardoned to the penitent, yet it may prove such a thorn in your own
side, and such a smoke or continual dropping in your house, as will make you a
weary of it. I have often known men that had Wives of so much folly and passion
and unruliness of tongue, that yet they hoped had some saving Grace, that made
them even a weary of their lives, and with that they had met with a gentle
nature. And methinks you should know that corruption in your selves is much
more dangerous and hurtful to you than any than can be in Wife or Husband; and
should be much more offensive and wearisom and grievous to you. Its a desperate
sign of a bad heart, that can bear with corruption in themselves, and cannot
bear with it in Wife or Husband, or those that do them wrong by their
corruptions. If weakness of Grace do leave your nearest friends thus liable to
wrong and abuse you, and this trouble you; consider that your own weakness
leaves you liable to far greater and offer offenses against God; and this
should trouble you much more.

Let me give you another instance: If you have a Pastor that is truly godly,
and yet is so weak that he can scarce speak with any understanding or life, the
Message that he should deliver, and withal is undiscreet, and as scandalous as
will stand with Grace; what good is this man like to do for all his Godliness!
At least you will soon see a lamentable difference between such a one and a
judicious, convincing, holy, heavenly, powerful, and unspotted man! O what a
blessing is one to the place! and the other may be a grievous judgment; and you
would be ready to run away from his Ministry. Why Sirs, if there be so great a
difference between Pastor and Pastor, where both have Grace; methinks you
should see what a difference there is also between People and People, even
where all have Grace. For truly poor Ministers find this to their sorrow in
their people, as well as you can find it in them. Some Ministers have a stayed,
confirmed, judicious, humble, meek, self-denying, teachable, peaceable, and
experienced people: and these walk comfortably, and guide them peaceably, and
labor with them cheerfully; and O what beauty and glory is upon such
Assemblies! and what order, and growth and comfort is among them? But alas, how
many Ministers have a flock (even of those that we hope are godly) that grieve
them by their levity, or weary them by their unteachable ignorance or
self-conceitedness, or hinder their labors by errors and quarrels, and
perverse opposition to the truths which they do not understand? So that there
is a great difference between people and people that are godly.

Brethren, it is far from the desire of my heart, to cast any unjust dishonor
upon Saints; much less to dishonor the Graces of God in them! No; I take it
rather for an honor to that immortal spark, that it can live among its enemies
and not be conquered, and in the waters of corruption, and not be quenched. But
yet I must take up a just complaint, that few of us answer the cost of our
Redemption and the provisions of God; or are near such a people as our
receiveings or Professions require we should be. It is one of the most grievous
thoughts that ever came to my heart, to observe how the lives of the greatest
part of Professors do tend to dishonor the power and worth of Grace in the
eyes of the World! and that the ungodly should see that Grace does make no
greater a difference, and do no more upon us than it does! Yea it is a sore
temptation oftentimes to Believers, to see that Grace does no more in the most;
but that so many are still a shame to their Profession.

I must confess that I once thought more highly of Professors as to the measure
of their Grace, than experience now will suffer me to think. Little did I think
that they had been so unstable, so light, so ignorant, so giddy, as to follow
almost any that do but whistle them. What a dreadful sight it is to see, how
quickly the most odious Heresies do infect and destroy even multitudes of them,
and that in a moment, as soon as they appear? the grossest mists of the
bottomless pit are presently admired as the light of God.

If a Church-divider do but arise, how quickly does he get Disciples!

If a Papist have but opportunity, he will lightly catch some as often as he does
cast his net. If he cannot prevail barefaced, it is but putting on the visor of
some other Sect.

Even the odious Heresies of the Quakers themselves, and their railings, which
an honest Pagan would abhor, do presently find entertainment with Professors;
and let the matter or manner be never so senseless, yet is it accepted if it be
but zealously put off. O who would have thought that our people that seemed
godly should be so greedy of the Devils baits as to catch at any thing, yea and
to devour the bare hooks! O who would have thought that so many that seemed
lovers of God, would so readily believe every deceiver that speaks against him,
if he can but do it with a pious pretense.

Yea if Seekers themselves do but cast in their objections, how many of our
people are presently at a loss, and their Faith is muddied, and they are to
seek for a Ministry, and to seek for a Church! and to seek for Ordinances, and
to seek for a Scripture, even for the Gospel it self; and therefore it is like
they are to seek for a Christ, or to seek for a Religion, if not to seek for
God, and for a Heaven.

O sad day! that ever these things should come to pass! and that we are forced
to utter them, having no possibility of concealing them from the World! Were
these men confirmed and stablished in the Faith? Were these men rooted and
built up in Christ? Alas Sirs, if any deceivers come among us, how few of our
people are able to withstand them, and defend the truth of God against them?
but they are caught up by the Devils Faulconers, as the poor Chickens by the
Kite, except those that fly under the wings of a judicious settled Minister.

If an Anabaptist assault their Baptism, how few of them can defend it! And,
silly Souls, when they find themselves non-plus't they suspect not their own
unfurnished understandings, or unexperienced unsettled hearts, but suspect the
truth of God, and suspect their Teachers, be they never so far beyond them in
knowledge and holiness; as if their Teachers had misled them, when ever these
unprofitable Infants are thus stalled.

If a Papist be to plead his cause with them, how few have we that can answer
him?

If an Infidel should oppose the Scripture, or Christ himself, how few among us
are able to defend them, and solidly give proof either of the truth of
Scripture, or of the Faith that they do profess?

And this is not all (though it is a heartbreaking case), but even in their
Practice, alas, what remisness and what corruptions do appear! How few in
secret do keep any constant watch upon their hearts! and fear and abhor the
approach of an evil thought? Nay how few are they that do not leave their fancy
almost common, and ordinarily even feed on covetous, proud, malicious, or
lustful thoughts, and make no great matter of it, but live in it from day to
day! How few do keep up life and constancy in secret Prayer or Meditation! How
few are the Families where the Cause and Worship and Government of Christ is
kept up in life and honor; and where all is not dissolved into a little weary,
disordered, heartless performance?

Look into our Congregations, and judge but by their very looks, and carriage,
and gestures, how many even of those that we think the best, do so much as seem
to be earnest and serious in Prayer or Praise, when the Church is upon that
work! Though it be the highest and noblest part of Worship, and should be done
with all the heart and might, and with a participation of a kind of Angelical
reverence, devotion, and spirituality; and if it were so, we should see it by
some of the signs of reverence and affection: Yet alas, when we think the best
of them should be striving with God, or rapt up in his Praises, they do but
Hear us Pray as they hear us Preach, and think they have done fair to give us
the hearing. They sit on their Seats in Prayer, or use some crooked leaning
gesture, perhaps looking up and down about them, perhaps half asleep; but few
of them with eyes and hands and hearts lift up to Heaven, do behave themselves
as if they believed that they had so nearly to do with God. I know reverent
gestures may easily be counterfeited: but that shows that they are good, when
Hypocrites think them a fit cover for Hypocrisy; for they use not to borrow
credit from evil, but from some good to be a cover to the evil: And it leaves
the neglects of the godly more unexcusable, when they will not go so far herein
as hypocrites themselves, nor by their behavior in a public Ordinance, so
much as seem to be seriously employed with God.

And if we try the Graces, or obedience of Professors, alas, how small shall we
find them in the most? How little are most acquainted with the life of Faith?
How little do they admire the Redeemer and his blessed work? How unacquainted
are they with the daily use and high improvement of a Savior; for access to
God, and supportation, and corroboration of the Soul, and for conveyance of
daily supplies of Grace, and help against our spiritual enemies? How few are
they that can rejoice in tribulation, persecution and bodily distresses,
because of the hopes laid up in Heaven? and that can live upon a Promise, and
comfortably wait on God for the accomplishment? How few that live as men that
are content with God alone, and can cheerfully leave their flesh, and credit,
and worldly estate to his disposal, and be content to want or suffer when he
sees it good for them? What repinings and troubles possess our minds if the
flesh be not provided for, and if God do but cross us in these worldly things;
as if we had made our bargain with him for the flesh, and for this World, and
had not taken him alone for our portion? How few can use prosperity in riches
and health and reputation, with a mortified, weaned, heavenly mind? Nay how few
are there that do not live much to the pleasure of the Flesh, and pamper it as
indulgently under the appearance of temperance and Religion, as others do in
grosser ways? Do but try the godly themselves by plain and faithful reproof of
their corruptions, and see how many of them you will find, that will not excuse
them and take part with the enemy, and be offended with you for your close
reproof. If any of them be overtaken with a scandalous fault, and the Pastors
of the Church shall call them to open Confession, and expression of Repentance,
though you would little think a penitent man should once stick at this, and
refuse to do any thing that he can do, to repair the honor of God and his
Profession, and to save the Souls of others whom he has endangered, yet how
many will you find that will add a wilful obstinacy to their scandal, and will
deliberately refuse so great and clear and necessary a duty: So great is the
interest of Self and Flesh in them, and consequently so little the interest of
Christ, that they will live in impenitency in the eye of the Church, and
venture on the high displeasure of God, come on it what will, and resist the
advice of their best and wisest and most impartial friends, rather than they
will so far deny themselves as to make such a free and faithful confession.
They are many of them so much for holy discipline, that they are ready to fall
out with Church and Ministers, and to be gone to a purer society, because it is
not exercised. But on whom? On others only, and not upon them. When they need
Discipline themselves how impatient are they of it, and how do they abhor it?
and what a stir do they make before they will submit? even more sometimes than
a Drunkard or a Swearer, so small is their Repentance and detestation of their
sin? whereby they show that their zeal for Discipline and Reformation, is much
out of pride, that others may be brought to stoop, or be cast out from them;
and not out of a sincere desire to have the refineing and humbling benefit of
it themselves.

And if any among them be either faulty or reported so to be, who is forwarder
than many Professors of Godliness, to backbite them, and speak of their faults
when they cannot hear, nor answer for themselves, nor receive any benefit by
it; and if another that hates backbiting do but reprove them, they will slander
him also for a defender of men's sin! But when they should go in Christ's way,
and tell men of their faults, and draw them to Repentance, and if they hear
not, take two or three, and speak to them again, how hardly can you draw them
to the performance of this duty? What shifts and frivolous excuses have they
then? Nay, they will reproach the Church or Minister for not casting such out,
or not keeping them from Communion, before they have done, or will be persuaded
to do these duties that must go before.

Alas, how little hearty love is there to Christ in his Members, even in them
that are confident they love the brethren? How few will do or suffer much for
them, or relieve them in their want as suffering with them? How small a matter,
a word, a seeming wrong or disrespect will turn their love into estrangedness
or bitterness? If they be tried by an ill word, or a wrong, how touchy and
froward and impatient do they appear: and it is well if they prove not downright
malicious, or return not reviling for reviling.

Alas, how much pride prevails with many that seem to go far in the way of
Piety? How wise are they in their own conceits? How able to judge of
controversies, and how much wiser than their Teachers, before they can give a
good account of the Catechism, or Fundamental truths? How well do they think of
themselves and their own parts and performances? How ill do they bear
dis-esteem or under valuing? and needs they must be noted for some body in the
world!

How worldly, and close handed and eager of gain, are many that say they
despise the World, and take it for their enemy? If any duty be cross to their
profit or credit with men, how obstinate are they against it? and such interest
has the flesh in them, that they will hardly believe that it is their duty.

How censorious are they of others, especially that differ from them in lesser
things? and how unapt to judge themselves? O how few are the Christians that are
eminent in humility, meekness and self-denial, that are content to be accounted
nothing, so that Christ may be all, and his honor may be secured! that live as
men devoted to God, and honor him with their substance, and freely expend, yea
study for advantages, to improve all their riches and interest to his service!
How few are they that live as in heaven upon earth, with the World under their
feet, and their hearts above with God their happiness! that feel themselves to
live in the workings and warmth of love to God, and make him their delight, and
are content with his approbation whoever disapproveth them! that are still
groaning or reaching and seeking after him, and long to be with him, to be rid
of sin, and see his blessed face, and live in his perfect love and praises?
that love and long for the appearance of Jesus Christ, and can heartily say,
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. How few are they that stand in a day of trial?
If they are tried but with a foul word, if tried but with any thing that
touches their commodity; if tried but with the emptyest reasonings of
deceivers, much more if they be^^yed with the honors and greatness of the
World, how few of them stand in trial, and do not fall and forget themselves,
as if they were not the men that they seemed to be before! What then would they
prove if they were tried by the flames?

Mistake me not in all this sad complaint: as I intend not the dishonor of
Godliness by this, but of ungodliness, (for it is not because men are godly
that they have these faults, but because they are not godly more). So here is
no encouragement to the unsanctifyed to think themselves as good as the more
Religious, because they are charged with so many faults: Nor do I affirm all
these things to be consistent with true Grace that I have here expressed: But
only this, that Professors that seem godly to others are thus too many of them
guilty; and those that have true grace may have any of these faults in a
mortified degree, though not in a reigning predominant measure.

But, methinks Sirs, you should by this time be convinced and sensible, how
much we dishonor God by our infirmities! and what a lamentable case it is,
that the Church should consist of so many infants; and so many should be so
little serviceable to God or the common good, but rather be troublers of all
about them. Alas that we should reach no higher, that yet no greater things
should be attained. O what an honor would you be to your Profession, and what
a blessing to the Church, if you did but answer the cost and pains of God and
man, and answer the high things that you have been acquainted with and profess.
That we could but boast of you as God did of Job, and could say to Satan or any
of his instruments [Here be Christians rooted and stablished in the Faith; try
whether you can shake them or make them stagger, and do your worst.] Here is a
man eminent in meekness and humility, and patience and self-denial; discompose
and disturb his mind if you can? draw him to pride or immoderate passion, or
censoriousness or uncharitableness if you can: Here are a people that are in
unity, and knit together in Faith and Love; of one heart, and one soul, and one
lip: do your worst to divide them or break them into parties, or draw them into
several minds and ways, or exasperate them against each other. Here are a
people established in Mortification, and that have Crucified the Flesh with its
affections and lusts! Do your worst to draw them to intemperance in eating or
drinking or recreations, or any of the delights of the Flesh? or to puff them
up by greatness and prosperity, and make them forget themselves or God. Try
them with Riches, or beauty, or vainglory, or other sensual delights, and see
whether they will turn aside, and be ever the less in communion with God, and
enticed to forget the joy that is set before them, or will not rather despise
your baits, and run away from assuring objects as their greatest dangers! Daunt
them if you can by threatenings! Try them by Persecution, by Fire and Sword, and
see whether they are not past your shaking, even Rooted, Confirmed and built up
in Christ.]

O what a glory would you be to your Profession, if you could attain to this
degree? Could we but truly thus boast of you, we might say our people are
Christians of the right strain. But when we must come about you like men in a
swoon, and can hardly perceive whether you are alive or dead, and can scarce
discern whether you have any Grace or none* what a grief is this to our hearts;
what a perplexity to us in our administrations, not knowing whether comfort or
terror be your due: and what a languishing uncomfortable life is this to your
selves in comparison of what you might attain to?

Rouse up your selves Christians, and look after higher and greater things; and
think it not enough that you are barely alive. It is an exceeding Righteousness
that you must have if you will be saved, even exceeding all that the
unsanctifyed do attain: For [ Except your Righteousness exceed even the
Righteousness of Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5.20.] But it is yet a more exceeding Righteousness,
that you must have if you will be Confirmed, built up, and abound, and would
honor your Profession, and cheerfully, successfully and constantly go on in
the Journey, the race, the warfare that you have begun: You must then exceed
your selves, and exceed all the feeble, unstable, wavering, infant-Christians
that are about you. And to persuade you yet further to look after this, I shall
here annex a few Motives more.

1. Consider Christian, That it is a God of exceeding infinite greatness, and
goodness that thou have to do with, and therefore it is not small and low
matters that are suitable to his service. O if thou had but a glimpse of his
Glory, thou would say that it is not common things that are meet for such a
dreadful Majesty: Had thou but a fuller taste of his Goodness, thy heart
would say, This pittance of Love and Service is unworthy of him. You will not
offer the basest things to a King, much less to the highest King of Kings. [ If
ye offer the blind for Sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the lame and
sick, is it not evil? offer it now to thy Governor: Will he be pleased with
thee or accept thy person, says the Lord of Hosts?] Mal. 1.8. And verse 12,
13, 14. But ye have profaned it (his great name) in that ye say, The Table of
the Lord is polluted, and the fruit thereof, his meat is contemptible: Ye have
said also, What a weariness is it, and ye have snuffed at it says the Lord of
Hosts, and ye brought that which was torn, and the lame and the sick: thus ye
brought an offering: should I accept this of your hand says the Lord! But
cursed be the deceiver, which has in his Flock a Male, and voweth and
Sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a great King says the Lord
of Hosts, and my Name is dreadful among the Heathen.] If you better knew the
Majesty of God, you would knew that the best is too little for him, and
trifling is not tolerable in his service. When Nadab and Abibu ventured with
false fire to his Altar, and he smote them dead, he silenced Aaron with this
reason of his Judgment [ I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and
before all the people will I be glorified,] Lov. 10.1, 2, 3. That is, I will
have nothing common offered to me, but be served with my own holy peculiar
service. When the Bethshemites were smitten dead, 50070 men of them, they found
that God would not be dallyed with, and cried out [ Who is able to stand before
this holy Lord God? 1 Samuel 6.20.

2. Consider also, It was an exceeding great price that was paid for your
Redemption: For you were not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and
Gold from your vain conversation, received by tradition from your Fathers, but
by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. It was an exceeding
great Love that was manifested by God the Father and by Christ in this work of
Redemption; such as even paseth Angels and men to study it and comprehend it, 1
Pet. 1.12. Ephesians. 3.18, 19. And should all this be answered but with triss^ng
from you? Should such a matchless Miracle of Love, be answered with no greater
(...)? especially when you were purposely (...) from all iniquity, that you
might be sanctified (...) a peculiar people, zealous of good works, (...). 14.
It being therefore so great a price that you are bought with, remember that you
are none of your own, but must glorify him that bought you, in body and spirit,
1. Cor. 6.20.

3. Consider also, that it is not a small, but an exceeding glory that is
promised you in the Gospel, and which you live in hope to possess for ever: And
therefore it should be an exceeding Love that you should have to it, and an
exceeding care that you should have of it. Make light of Heaven, and make light
of all. Truly it is an unsuitable unreasonable thing, to have one low thought,
or one careless word, or one cold Prayer or other performance, about such a
matter as eternal glory. Shall such a thing as Heaven be coldly, or carelessly
minded and sought after? Shall the endless fruition of God in glory: be looked
at with sleepy heartless wishes. I tell you Sirs, if you will have such high
hopes, you must have high and strong endeavors! A slow pace becomes not him
that travelleth to such a home as this. If you are resolved for Heaven, behave
your selves accordingly. A gracious, reverent, godly frame of spirit, producing
an acceptable service of God, is fit for them that look to receive the Kingdom
that cannot be moved, Heb. 12.18. The believing thoughts of the end of all our
labors, must needs convince us that we should be steadfast and unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. O heatken thou sleepy
slothful Christian! Does not God call, and Conscience call, Awake, and up be
doing man; for it is for Heaven! Hearken thou negligent, lazy Christian! Do not
God and Conscience call out to thee, O man, make have and mend thy pace, it is
for Heaven! Hearken thou cowardly saint hearted Christian; Do not God and
Conscience call out to thee! Arm man, and see thou stand thy ground; do not
give back, nor look behind thee; but fall on, and fight in the strength of
Christ; for it is for the Crown of endless glory]! O what a heart has that
man, that will not be heartned with such calls as these? Methinks the very name
of God and Heaven should awaken you and make you stir, if there be any stirring
power within you! Remissness in wordly matters has an excuse, for they are but
trifles: but flackness in the matters of Salvation, is made unexcusable by the
greatness of those matters. O let the noble greatness of your Hopes appear in
the Resolvedness, exactness and diligence of your lives.

4. Consider also, that it is not only low and smaller Mercies that you receive
from God; but mercies innumerable, and inestimable and exceeding great. And
therefore it is not cold affections, and dull endeavors, that you should
return to God for all these mercies. Mercy brought you into the World; and
Mercy has nourished you and bred you up; and Mercy has defended and
maintained you, and plentifully provided for you. Your bodies live upon it:
Your Souls were recovered by it: It gave you your being: It rescued you from
misery: It saves you from sin, and Satan, and your Selves: All that you have
at the present, you hold by it: All that you can hope for, for the future must
be from it. It is most sweet in quality: what sweeter to miserable souls than
Mercy? It is exceeding great in quantity! [ The Mercy of the Lord is in the
Heavens, and his faithfulness reaches to the Clouds. His Righteousness is like
the great Mountains; His Judgments are a great deep.] Psalm. 36.5, 6. [ O how
great is his goodness which he has laid up for them that fear him? which he
has for them that trust in him before the sons of men!] Psalm. 31.19. [ His
Mercy is great unto the Heavens, and his truth unto the Clouds,] Psalm. 57.10.
And O what an insensible heart has he that does not understand the voice of
all this wondrous mercy? Doubtless it speaks the plainest language in the
World: commanding great returns from us of Love, and praise, and obedience to
the bountiful bestower of them. With David we must say, [ Blessed be the Lord,
for he has showed me mavelous kindness in a strong City; O Love the Lord all
ye his Saints, for the Lord preserves all the faithful,] Psalm. 31.21, 23. [
Teach me thy way O Lord; I will walk in thy truth: Unite my heart to fear thy
Name. I will praise thee O Lord my God, with all my heart: and I will glorify
thy name for evermore, for great is thy mercy toward me; and thou have
delivered my Soul from the lowest Hell,] Psalm. 86.11, 12, 13. Unspeakable
Mercies must needs be felt in deep impressions, and be so savoury with the
Gracious soul, that methinks it should work us to the highest resolutions:
Unthankfulness is a crime that Heathens did detest: And it is exceeding great
unthankfulness, if we have not exceeding great love and obedience, under such
exceeding great and many mercies as we possess.

5. Consider, that they are exceeding great helps and means, that you possess,
to further your holiness and obedience to God: and therefore your holiness and
obedience should also be exceeding great. You have all the Book of Nature to
instruct you. Every Creature may teach you God, and calls loud upon you to
persuade your hearts yet nearer to him. Every work of disposing Providence is
an instructor and perswader of you. Every leaf and line of Scripture is a guide
or spur to you. You have Ministers able and willing to help you: You have the
help of the Communion of Saints: the help of the examples of the good; and the
warnings of the Judgments of God upon the wicked: the helps of Sermons, the
helps of Sacraments; the helps of Prayer and holy Meditation and Conference;
Mercies to encourage you; Afflictions to excite you. What more would you have?
And yet will you be Infants, and do no more with all your helps? But this I
touched upon before.

6. It is an exceeding great necessity that is upon you: And therefore your
Resolutions should be exceeding high, and your diligence exceeding great. For
all you are Converted, your Salvation lies yet upon your stability and
perseverance, Col. 1.22, 23. [ Christ has reconciled you in the body of his
flesh through death, to present you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in
his sight; if ye continue in the Faith grounded and settled and be not moved
away from the hope of the Gospel which you have heard.] God will not be an
accepter of persons! You must stick to his terms, if you will partake of his
Salvation. He will not make two words with you. He has told you what he
expects of you; and that he will have. Death will not be bribed, nor put by.
Judgment is coming on. There is no shifting out of the hands of God. And under
such pressing necessities as these, what Christians should we be? How stable,
and abundant in Faith and Righteousness.

7. It is a great account that you have to make, and therefore a great
preparation that should be made. When you shall be brought before the living
God, and all your times, and thoughts, and ways, must be called over, and you
see what follows, and are waiting for the final doom, then there will be no
dull thoughts in your hearts; all will be then lively, and quite above this
careless frame. Then even the wicked will have strong desires, [O that we had
taken another course! that we had but prevented this dreadful doom, whatever it
had cost us]! And should not believers now, be awakened to great and careful
preparations, for such a day as this?

8. For trifles here are great endeavors used. To climb up into honor or
riches in the World; to satisfy the flesh; to lay up a treasure on earth, and
labor for the meat that perishes. O what endeavors then should be used, for
the heavenly everlasting treasure?

9. Consider also, How forward and diligent should those men be, that are sure
they can never go too high, nor be too diligent, when they have done their
best? Nay that are certain, that the best do come so abundantly short, that
they must after sit down and lament that they were no better. O there is not
the holiest Saint on earth, but will confess with lamentation, how little his
love to God is in comparison of what it should be? how short all falls below
our duty, below the glorious Majesty of God; below the precious love of Christ;
below the worth of precious Souls; below the weight of endless glory; below the
Mercies that should warm our hearts; below the great necessity that is on us;
and consequently below their own desires. Look therefore after greater things,
while you may attain them.

10. Lastly, Consider what abundance of great engagements are on you, that are
sincere Believers, more than upon others.

1. You are nearlyer related to Christ than any others are. And therefore you
should be more tender of offending him, and more eminent in love and service to
him. You are his houshold-servants; and will you not labor for him and stick
to him? You are his friends; and should a friend abuse him? should not a friend
be faithful? You are his dear adopted children, and his Spouse: and should not
you be faithful to him to the death? Should not all the love and service that
you have be his? Isa. 1.2, 3. Mal. 1.10. Gal. 5.4.

2. You have bound your selves to him by more serious frequent vows and
Covenants than other men have done? How many persons and places and necessities
of yours, can witness against you if you be not firm and forward for the Lord.
As Joshua said to Israel, Josh. 24.27. [ Behold this stone, it shall be a
witness unto you, lest you deny your God.] So I may say, the places where you
have kneeled, and prayed, and promised, will be witnesses against you, if you
be not firm to God: the Churches that you have assembled in, the places you
have walked in, in your solitary Meditations; the persons that have heard your
promises and professions; the World about you that has seen your forwardness,
will all witness against you if you be not firm.

3. It is you that have the life and kernel of mercies; Others have but the
crumbs that fall from your Tables: Others have common mercies, but you have the
great and special mercies that accompany Salvation: All things are yours, and
should not you be Christ's? 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. Of you it is that God is so
exceeding tender, that he charge your enemies not to touch you, and tells
them that touch you, that they touch the Apple of his eye, Zech. 2.8. And
should not you abound in love and holiness? and should you not be as tender of
his favor and his law, and honor, as of the Apple of your eye? Should not he
that touches the Name, and Law, and Honor of God, by profaning them by sin,
be as one that touches the Apple of your eye.

4. You have a spirit and heavenly Life within you, which the rest of the World
are unacquainted with. And can you think it is not something extraordinary that
God must needs expect from you? Will you not walk in the Spirit which is given
you, and mortify the flesh by it? Gal. 5.16, 17, 24. Is there not more expected
from the living than the dead: Surely he that has made you New Creatures, and
made you partakers of the Divine nature, does expect somewhat Divine in your
affections and devotions, and that you be somewhat more than men.

5. Moreover, it is you above others, for whom the Word and Messengers of God
are sent! We must speak to all! but it is you that Gods special eye is upon; it
is your Salvation that he intends to accomplish by us, Luke 4.26, 27. There
were many Widows in the days of Elias, and many Lepers in the days of Ehsha:
but it was but to one of them that the Prophet was sent! We make the ungodly
multitude even rage against us, and Ministers are hated, for magnifying the
Grace of God to you, and declaring his special love to you above others? When
Christ himself had spoken the forecited words, its said in the next Verses 28,
29. that [ All they in the Synagogue when they heard these things, were filled
with wrath, and rose up and thrust him out of the City, and led him to the brow
of the hill whereon their City was built, that they might cast him down
headlong.] This was the entertainment of Christ himself when he did but declare
how few it is that God will save, and for whole sakes he specially sends his
Messengers. And must we incur all this for magnifying you, and will you
dishonor your selves? Is all our study and labor for you, and our lives for
you, and all things for you; and will not you be wholly, and to the utmost of
your strength for God? Are you culled out of all the World for Salvation, and
will you not answer this admirable differencing Grace, by an admirable
difference from those that must perish, and by an admirable excellency in
meekness, humility, selfdenial, and heavenliness, above other men?

6. Moreover, you know more, and have a greater experience to assist you than
others have; and therefore you should excel them accordingly. Others have but
heard of the odiousness of sin, but you have seen and felt it. Others have
heard of Gods displeasure; but you have tasted it to the breaking or bruising
of your hearts! You have been warned at the very quick, as if Christ had spoken
to your very flesh and Bones, [ Go thy way, sin no more, left a worse thing
come unto thee.] And as Ezra said, Chap. 9.13. After all that is come upon us,
should we again break thy Commandments, would thou not be angry with us till
thou had consumed us?] So, if after all your spiritual experiences, after so
many tastes of the bitterness of sin, and groans, and prayers, and cries against
it, you shall yet live as like to the wicked as you dare, and be familiar with
that which has cost you so dear? how do you think that God must take this at
your hands? You have tasted of the sweetness of the Love of Christ, and
wondered at the unspeakable Riches of his Grace? You have tasted the sweetness
of the hopes of Glory, and of the powers of the World to come. You have
perceived the necessity and excellency of holiness, by inward experience! And
if after all this you will draggle on the earth, and live below your own
experiences, contenting your selves with an Infancy of Love, and Life, and
fruitfulness, how much do you then transgress against the Rules of Reason, and
of Equity?

7. Moreover, All the World expects much more from you, than from any others.
God expects more from you; for he has given you more, and means to do more
for you? Must you be in the eternal Joys of Heaven, when all your unsanctified
Neighbors are in torments, and yet will you not more endeavor to excel them?
Is it not unreasonable to expect to be set eternally at so vast a distance from
the ungodly world, even as far as Heaven is from Hell, and yet to be content to
differ here but a little from them in Holiness? The Lord knows that poor
forsaken impenitent sinners will do no better; but rage and be confident till
they are past remedy: He looks for no better from them than to neglect him, and
slight his Son, and Word, and Ways; and to go on in Worldliness and fleshly
living; to be filthy still, and careless, and presumptuous and self-conceited
still. But it is higher matters that he expects from you; and good reason, he
has done more for you, and prepared you for better things! The Ministers of
Christ do look for little better from many of their poor ignorant ungodly
Neighbors, but even to rub out their days in security and self-deceit, and to
be barren after all their labors, if not to hate us for seeking to have saved
them. But it is you that their eyes are most upon; and you that their hearts are
most upon. Their comfort, and the fruit of their lives, lies much in your
hands: says Paul 1 Thessalonians. 3.7, 8, 9. [ Brethren we were comforted over you, in
all our affliction and distress, by your Faith: For now we live, if you stand
fast in the Lord! For what thanks can we render to God again for you, for all
the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God: Night and day Praying
exceedingly, that we might see your face, and might perfect that which is
lacking in your Faith.] You see here, that your Pastors lives are in your
hands: If you stand fast, they live. For the end of life is more then life; and
your Salvation is the end of our lives. If the impenitent world reproach us,
and abuse and persecute us; we suffer it joyfully, as long as our work goes on
with you. But when you are at a stand: When you are barren and scandalous, and
passionate, and dishonor your Profession, and put us in fears left we have
bestowed all our labor on you in vain; this breaks our hearts above any
worldly cross whatsoever. O when the people that we should rejoice and glory in
shall prove unruly, self-conceited, peevish, proud, every one running his own
way, falling into divisions, contentions, or scandals, this is the killing of
the comforts of your Ministers: When the ungodly shall hit us in the teeth with
your scandals or divisions, and say, [ These are the godly people that you
boasted of, see now what is become of them,] this is the smoke to our eyes, and
the gall and Vinegar that is given us by the Adversary: and though still we know
that our reward is with the Lord, yet can we not choose but be wounded for your
sakes, and for the sake of the Cause and Name of God.

Yea the World it self expects more from you than others. When men talk of
great matters, and profess as every Christian does, to look for the greatest
matters of eternity, and to live for no lower things, than everlasting
fellowship with God and Angels, no wonder then if the World do look for
extraordinary matters from you. If you tell them of reaching Heaven, they will
look to see you winged like Angels, and not to creep on earth like worms. If
you say that you are more than men, they look you should show it by doing more
than men can do; even by denying your selves and forgiving injuries, and loving
your enemies, and blessing those that curse you, and contemning this World, and
having your conversation in Heaven. O Sirs, believe it, it is not small or
common things that will satisfy the expectations of God or men, of Ministers,
or of the World themselves, concerning you.

8. Yea moreover, God himself does make his boast of you, and call out the
World to observe your excellency: he sets you up as the light of the World to
be beheld by others. He calls you in his Word, [ his peculiar treasure above
all people, Exodus 19.5. Deuteronomy. 14.3. Psalm. 135.^. a peculiar People, purified,
and zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. He called you [ a chosen Generation, a
Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth
the praises of him that has called you out of darkness into his mavelous
light: ye are as lively stones, built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood,
to offer up spiritual Sacrifice, acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet.
2.5, 9.] You are born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, 1
Pet. 1.23. and are made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints
in light. God has delivered you from the power of darkness, and translated
you, into the Kingdom of his dear Son, in whom you have redemption through his
blood, the remission of sins, Col. 1.12, 13, 14.] The spirit it self bears
witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God: and if children, then
Heirs; Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ, Romans 8.16, 17. [ All things
shall work together for your good: He that spared not his own Son, but gave him
up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things] Verse.
28.32. Nothing but the illuminated Soul can discern the riches of the glory of
Gods inheritance in the Saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his
power to usward who believe, according to the work of his mighty power, Ephesians.
1.18, 19. When we were dead in sins, he has quickened us together with Christ,
and has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus: that in the ages to come he might show the exceeding Riches of
his Grace in his kindness toward us through Jesus Christ. He has brough us
nigh that were far off, so that by one spirit we have access to the Father by
Christ; and are now no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow Citizens of
the Saints, and of the household of God, Ephesians. 2.5, 6, 7, 13, 17, 18, 19. [ We
are members of the body of Christ; we are come to Mount Zion, and unto the City
of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and an innumerable company of
Angels, to the general Assembly and Church of the first born which are written
in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made
perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24.

Brethren, shall the Lord speak all this, and more than this, in the Scripture
of your Glory, and will you not prove your selves glorious; and study to make
good this precious word? Does he say, The righteous is more excellent than his
Neighbor, Prove. 12.26. and will you not study to show your selves more
excellent indeed? Shall all these high things be spoken of you, and will you
live so far below them all? What a heinous wrong is this to God? He sticks not
in boasting of you, to call you his jewels, Mal. 3.17. and tells the world he
will make them one day discern the difference between the Righteous and the
wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not, verse 18.
He tells the World that his coming in Judgment will be to be glorified in his
Saints, and to be admired in them that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. It Is openly
Professed by the Apostle John [We know that we are of God, and the whole World
lies in wicked^^^^, 1 John 5.19. He challenges any to condemn you, or lay any
thing to your charge, professing that it is he that justifies you; casting the
Saints into admiration by his love, [ What shall we say to these things? if God
be for us, who can be against us? Romans 8.31. He challenges Tribulation,
Distress, Persecution, Famine, or Nakedness, Peril or Sword, to separate you if
they can from the Love of God. He challenges Death and Life, Angels,
Principalities and Powers, things present, and things to come, height and depth
or any other Creature, to separate you, if they are able from the love of God
in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.35, 37, 38, 39. Shall the Lord of Heaven thus
make his boast of you to all the World, and will you not make good his
boasting? Yea I must tell you, he will see that it be made good to a word! and
if you be not careful of it your selves, and it be not made good in you, then
you are not the people that God thus boasts of. He tells the greatest
Persecutors to their faces, that the meek, the humble, little ones of his Flock
have their Angels beholding the face of God in Heaven, Matthew. 18.10. and that
at the great and dreadful day of Judgment they shall be set at his right hand
as his Sheep, with a [ Come ye blessed, inherit the Kingdom,] when others are
set at his left hand as Goats, with a [ Go ye cursed into everlasting Fire,]
Matthew. 25. He tells the world, that he that receives a Converted man, that is
become as a little Child, receives Christ himself: and that whoever shall
offend one of these little ones that believe in him, it were better for him
that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were drowned in the depth of
the Sea, Matthew. 18.3, 4, 5, 6. Mark 9.42. Luke 17.2.

O Sirs, must God be thus wonderfully tender of you, and will you not now be
very tender of his interest and your duty? Shall he thus difference you from
all the rest of the world, and will you not study to declare the difference?
The ungodly even gnash the teeth at Ministers, and Scriptures, and Christ
himself, for making such a difference between them and you; and will you not
let them see that it is not without cause? I entreat you, I require you, in the
Name of God, see that you answer these high commendations, and show us that God
has not boasted of you beyond your worth?

9. Consider this as the highest Motive of all? God does not only magnify you
and boast of you; but also he has made you the living Images of his blessed
self, his Son Jesus Christ, his Spirit and his holy Word; and so he has
exposed himself, his Son, his Spirit, and his Word, to be censured by the
World, according to your lives.

The express Image of the Fathers person is the Son, Heb. 1.3. The Son is
declared to the World by the Holy Ghost: The Holy Ghost has endited the Holy
Scriptures, which therefore bear the Image of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. This
holy Word, both Law and Promise is written on your hearts, and put into your
inner parts, by the some spirit, 2 Cor. 3.3. Heb. 8.13. and 10.16. So that as
God has imprinted his holy nature in the Scripture, so has he made this word
the Seal, to imprint again his Image on your hearts. And you know that common
eyes can better discern the Image in the Wax than on the Seal. Though I know
that the hardness of the Wax, or something lying between, or the imperfect
application, may cause an imperfection in the Image on the Wax, when yet the
Image on the Seal is perfect: And therefore the World has no just cause to
censure God, or Christ, or the Spirit, or the Word, to be imperfect because
that you are so: But yet they will do it, and their temptation is great. O
Sirs, how would your Prince take it of you, or how would your poorest friend
take it of you, if you should hang forth a deformed picture of them to the view
of all that shall pass by: and should represent them as blind, or leprous, or
lame, wanting a leg or an arm or an eye? Would they not say that you unworthily
exposed them to scorn? So if you will take on you to be the living Images of
God, of Christ, of the Spirit, and the Word; and yet will be blind, and
worldly, and passionate, and proud, and untruly, and obstinate, or lazy and
negligent, and little differing from those that bear the Image of the Devil;
what do you but Proclaim that the Image of God, and of Satan and the World do
little differ! and that God is thus unrighteous and unholy as you are.

10. Lastly Consider, That the faithful servants of Christ are few; and
therefore if those few dishonor him, and prove not fast to him; what do you
but provoke him to forsake all the World, and make an end of all the Sons of
men. It is but a little flock to whom he will give the Kingdom, Luke 12.32. It
is but a few from whom God expects any great matter: And shall those few
prove deceitful to him? It must be you or none that must honor the Gospel! You
or none that must be exemplary to the World; and shall it be none at all? Shall
all the Workmanship of God abuse him? Shall he have no honor from any
inferior Creature? How can you then expect that he should preserve the World?
For will he be at so much care to keep up a World to dishonor and abuse him?
If the turning of men's hearts prevent it not, he would come and smite the earth
with a Curse, Mal. 4.6. For the Land that bears Thorns and Briars, is
rejected, and is nigh unto Cursing, whose end is to be burned, Heb. 6.7, 8. If
therefore Israel play the Harlot, yet let not Judah sin, Hos. 4.15. If the
Vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, will be blind and sensual and filthy
still; yet let pollution be far from the sanctified. Such were some of you, but
ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye are justified, 1 Cor. 6.11. O let the Lord
be magnified in his Saints: Blot not out his Image: Receive not his impressions
defectively and by the halves. Let the Name of the most holy one be written in
your very foreheads. O that you would be so tender of the honor of the Lord,
and shine forth so brightly in Holiness and Righteousness, that he that runs
might read whose servants you are, and know the Image and Superscription of
God, upon the face of your conversations! that as clearly as light is seen in
and from the Sun, and the power and wisdom and goodness of God, is seen in the
frame of the Creation, and of Scripture: so might the same shine forth in you;
that you might be Holy as God is Holy, 1 Pet. 1.16. and perfect as your
heavenly Father is perfect, Matthew. 5.48. that they that would know God, may see
him in his Saints, where his Image is, or should be so lively and discernable.
And they that cannot read and understand the Scripture, or the works of
Creation or disposingProvidence, may read and understand the holy and heavenly
representations of your lives.

Men are apt to look after Images of the Godhead, because they are carnal and
far from God: O you that are appointed to bear his Image, see that you so
represent him to the eyes of the world as may be to his glory and not to his
dishonor, and take not the Name of God in vain.

It is so desirable for God, and for the Church, and for your own peace and
happiness, that Christians should grow up to a ripeness in Grace, and be
rooted, built up, confirmed, and abound, according to my Text, that it has
drawn out from me all these words of exhortation thereunto: Though one would
think, that to men of such holy Principles and experience it should be more
than needs: But if all will but serve to awaken the weak to a diligent
progress, I shall be glad, and have my end. The great matter that I intended,
when I began this discourse, is yet behind; and that is, the giving you such
Directions as may tend to your Confirmation and perseverance: Which I shall now
proceed to: But I entreat every Reader that has any spark of Grace in his
Soul, that he will resolve to put these Directions in practice, and turn them
not off with a bare perusal, or approbation. Let me reap but thus much fruit of
all my foregoing Exhortations, and I shall not think my labor lost.

XX. DIRECTIONS FOR CONFIRMATION In a state of Grace.
DIRECT. I. Be sure that the Foundation be well laid, both in your Heads and
Hearts; or else you can never attain to Confirmation, nor be savingly built up.
TO this end you must know what the Foundation is, and how it must be soundly
laid. The Foundation has two parts or respects, according to the faculties of
the Soul where it must be laid. The first is the Truth of the Doctrine and
Matter, and the second is the Goodness of it. As True, the Foundation is laid
in our Understandings: as Good, it is laid in the Will. Concerning both these,
we must therefore first consider of the matter of the Foundation, and then of
the Manner how that must be received or laid. And the Foundation is that
matter, or object of our Faith and Hope, and Love, which is Essential to a
Christian; that is, to the Christian saving Faith, hope and love. This has
been always contained in our Baptism, because Baptizing us is making us
visible Christians, or the solemn entrance into the state of Christianity. As
therefore we are Baptized into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
renouncing the Flesh, the World, and the Devil; so the doing of this
unfeignedly, without equivocation, according to the Scripture sense of the
words, is the Essence of Christianity, or the right laying of the Foundation.
So that the Foundation-Principal, or Fundamental Matter, is God, the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost: The Secondary Foundation, or Fundamental Doctrine, is
those Scripture Propositions that express our Faith in God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost. When we name the three persons as the object of the Christian
Faith, we express names of Relation, which contain both the persons, nature,
and Offices, or undertaken works: Without either of which, God were not God,
and Christ were not Christ, and the Holy Ghost were not in the sense of our
Articles of Faith, the Holy Ghost. As we must therefore believe that there is
One only God: So we must believe that God the Father is the First in the holy
Trinity of persons: that the whole Godhead is perfect and infinite in Being,
and Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, (in which all his Attributes are
comprehended; but yet a distinct understanding of them all is not of absolute
necessity to Salvation.) That this God is the Creator, Preserver, and Disposer
of all things, and the Owner and Ruler of Mankind, most just, and merciful:
that as he is the Beginning of all, so he is the Ultimate end, and the Chief
Good of man, which before all things else, must be loved and sought. This is to
be believed concerning the Godhead, and the Father in person. Concerning the
Son, we must moreover believe, that he is the same God with the Father, the
second person in Trinity, in carnate and so become man, by a personal union of
the Godhead and Manhood: That he was without Original or actual sin, having a
sinless nature, and a sinless life; that he fulfilled all Righteousness, and
was put to death as a Sacrifice for our sins, and gave himself a Ransom for
us, and being buried, he rose again from the dead, and afterward ascended into
Heaven, where he is Lord of all, and intercedeth for Believers; that he will
come again and raise the dead, and judge the World, the Righteous to everlasting
Life, and the Wicked to everlasting punishment: that this is the only Redeemer,
the Way, the Truth, and the Life, neither is their access to the Father but by
him, nor Salvation in any other. Concerning the Holy Ghost, we must believe
that he is the same One God, the third person in Trinity, sent by the Father
and the Son to inspire the Prophets and Apostles; and that the Doctrine
inspired and miraculously attested by him is true: that he is the sanctifier of
those that shall be saved, renewing them after the Image of God in Holiness and
Righteousness, giving them true Repentance, Faith, Hope, Love, and sincere
Obedience; causing them to overcome the Flesh, the World and the Devil; thus
gathering a Holy Church on earth to Christ, who have by his Blood the pardon of
all their sins, and shall have everlasting blessedness with God.]

This is the Essence of the Christian Faith as to the Matter of it. As to the
Manner of Receiving it by the understanding, 1. It must be received as Certain
truth of Gods Revelation, upon the credit of his Word, by a lively effectual
belief; pierceing so deep, as is necessary for its prevalency with the Will. 2.
And it must be Entirely received, and not only a part of it: Though all men
have not so exactly formed distinct apprehensions of every member of this
belief, as some have, yet all true Christians have a true apprehension of them.
We feel by daily experience, that with the wisest, some matters are truly
understood by us, which yet are not so distinctly and clearly understood, as to
be ready for an expression. I have often in matters that I am but studying, a
light that gives me a general imperfect but true conception, which I cannot yet
express; but when another has helped me to form my conception, I can quickly
and truly say, that was it that I had an unformed apprehension of before, and
it that I meant, but could not utter; not so much for want of words, as for
want of a full and distinct conception.

2. The Matter of our Christianity to be Received by the Will, is as follows.
As we must consent to all the forementioned truths by the Belief of the
understanding, so the pure Godhead must be Received as the Fountain and our
End: the Father as our Owner, Ruler, and Benefactor, on the title of Creation
and Redemption; and as our everlasting happiness. The Son as our only Savior
by Redemption, bringing us pardon, reconciliation, holiness and glory, and
delivering us from sin and Satan, and the wrath and Curse of God, and from
Hell. The Holy Ghost as our Guide and Sanctifier. All which contains our
Renouncing the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, and carnal Self that is the
point of their Unity and heart of the old Man. This is the Good that must be
embraced, or accepted by the will.

And secondly as to the Manner, of Receiving it, it must be done Unfeignedly,
Resolvedly, unreservedly or absolutely, and habitually, by an inward
Covenanting of the heart, as I have formerly explained it. And this is the
Essence of Christianity; This is true Believing in God, the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost: This is the Foundation, and this is the right laying of it.

And now the thing that I am persuading you to is, to see that this Foundation
be surely laid, in Head and Heart.

And 1. That it may be surely laid in the Head, you must labor, 1. To
understand these Articles. And 2. to see the Evidence of their verity, that you
may firmly believe them. And 3. To Consider of the worth and necessity of the
matter revealed in them, that your Judgments may most highly esteem it. This is
the sure laying the Foundation in the Head.

To these ends you should first learn some Catechism, and be well acquainted
with the Principles of Religion: and also be much in reading or hearing the
holy Scripture, and enquiring of your Teachers, and others that can help you;
and see that you take your work before you, and step not higher till this be
done. And then all other following truths and Duties and promised benefits must
all be so learnt as to be built upon this foundation, and joined to it, as
receiving their life and strength from hence; and never looked upon as separated
from this; nor as more excellent and necessary.

For want of learning well, and believing soundly, these Principles,
Essentials, or Fundamentals of Christianity, some of our people can go no
further, but stand all their days in their ignorance, at a nonplus: Some of
them go on in a blind Profession, deceiving themselves by building upon the
Sand, and hold true Doctrine by a false unsound belief of it: And when the
Floods and storms do beat upon their building, it falls, and great is the fall
thereof. With some of them it falls upon the first assault of any Seducer, that
has interest in them, or advantage on them: and abundance swallow up Errors,
because they never well understood, or Firmly believed Fundamental Truths. With
others of them, the building falls not until death, because they lived not
under any shaking temptations. But it being but a perseverance in an unfound
Profession, will nevertheless be ineffectual to their Salvation.

2. When you have thus laid the Foundation in your understanding, be sure above
all that it be firmly laid in your Heart or Will. Take heed lest you should
prove false and unstedfast in the holy Covenant: and lest you should take in
the Word but into the furnace of the Soul, and not give it depth of earth and
rooting; and lest you should come to Christ but as a servant upon trial, and
make an absolute resignation of your selves to him: Of which I warned you in
the former Directions.

O this is it that makes our people fall so fast in a day of trial: some shrink
in adversity; and some are enticed away by prosperity: Greatness and honor
deceives one, and riches run away with another, and fleshly pleasure poison a
third, and his Conscience, Religion, Salvation and all he Sacrifices to his
belly, and swalloweth it down his throat; and all the Love, and goodness of
God, the Blood of Christ, the workings of the Spirit, the Precepts and Promises
and Threatenings of the Word, and the joy and torments which once they seemed to
believe, all are forgotten, or have lost their force: And all because the
Foundation was not laid well at the first. But because this was the very
business of the former Directions, I will dismiss it now.

DIRECT. II. Think not that all is done when once you are Converted; but
remember that the work of your Christianity then comes in, and must be as long
as the time of your lives.
OF this also I shall say but little, because it is the drift of all the moving
Considerations before-going. I doubt it is the undoing of many to imagine, that
if once they are sanctified, they are so sure in the hands of Christ, that they
have no more care to take, nor no more danger to be afraid of, and at last
think that they have no more to do, as of necessity to Salvation: and thus
prove that indeed they were never sanctified. I confess when a man is truly
Converted, the principal part of his danger is over: he is safe in the love and
care of Christ, and none can take him out of his hands. But this is but part of
the truth: the other part must be taken with it, or we deceive our selves.
There is still a great deal of work before us; and Holiness is still the way to
happiness: and much care and diligence is required at our hands: And it is no
more certain that we shall be saved by Christ, than it is that we shall be kept
in Faith, and love, and holy obedience by him. It is as true that none can
separate us from the Love of God, and from a care to please him, and from a
holy diligence in the work of our Salvation, as that none can take us out of
his hands, and bring us into a state of condemnation. He that is resolved to
bring us to Glory, is as much resolved to bring us to it by perseverance in
Holiness and diligent obedience; for he never decrees one without the other;
and he will never save us by any other way.

Indeed when we are Converted we have escaped many and grievous dangers; but
yet there are many more before us, which we must by care and diligence escape.
We are transl^ted from death to life, but not from earth to heaven. We have the
life of Grace, but yet we are short of the life of Glory. And why have we the
life of Grace but to use it, and to live by it? Why came we into the Vineyard,
but to work? And why came we into the Army of Christ but to fight? Why came we
into the race but to run for the prize? or why turned we into the right way,
but to travel in it? We never did God faithful service, till the day of our
Conversion, and then it is that we begin: And shall we be so sottish as to
think we have done, when we have but begun? Now you begin to live, that before
were dead: Now you begin to awake that were before asleep: And therefore now
you should begin to work that before did nothing, or rather a thousand fold
worse than nothing. Work is the effect of life; it is the dead that lie still
in darkness, and do nothing: If you had rather be alive than dead, you should
rather delight in action than in idleness. It Is now that you set to Sea, and
begin your voyage for the blessed Land; many a storm, and wave, and tempest
must you yet expect. Many a combat with temptations must you undergo: many a
hearty prayer have you yet to pour forth. Many and many a duty to perform, to
God and man. Think not to have done your care and work, till you have done your
lives. Whether you come in at the first hour or at the last, you must work till
night if you will receive your wages. And think not this a grievous doctrine.
It is your privilege, it is your joy, your earthly happiness, that you may be
so employed; that you that till now have lived like swine, or moles, or earthly
vermin, may now take wing and fly to God, and walk in heaven, and talk with
Saints, and be guarded by Angels; is this a life to be accounted grievous! Now
you begin to come to your selves; to understand what you have to do in the
world; to live like men, that you may live like Angels! And therefore now you
should begin accordingly to bestir you. I would not have you retain the same
measure of fear of Gods displeasure, nor the same apprehensions of your misery,
nor the doubts and perplexities of mind, which you were under at your first
conversion; for these were occasioned by the passage in your change, and the
weakness of your grace in that beginning, and your former folly made them
necessary for a time: But I would have you retain your fear of sinning, and be
much more in the love of God, and in his service, than you were at first.
Temptations will haunt you to the last hour of your lives: If therefore you
would not fall by these temptations, you must watch and pray to the last. Give
not over watching till Satan give over tempting, and watching advantages
against you. The promise is still but on condition, that you persevere and
abide in Christ, and continue rooted and steadfast in the faith, and overcome
and be faithful to the death, as you may see in Joh. 15. throughout. Joh. 8.31.
Rev. 2. and 3. Col. 1.22, 23. Work out therefore your salvation with fear and
trembling. Phil. 2.12. If you have begun resolvedly, proceed resolvedly. It Is
the undoing of men's souls to think that all the danger is over, and lose their
apprehensions of it, when they are yet but in the way: when their care and holy
fears abate, their watch goes down: the soul's laid open as a common
wilderness, and made a prey to every lust. And therefore still know, your
work's not done, till your life be done.

DIRECT. III. Be sure that you understand wherein your establishment and growth
consists, that you may not miscarry by seeking somewhat else instead of it:
nor think you have it when you have it not, or that you want it, when you have
it, and so be needlessly disquieted about it.
FOr your assistance in this, I shall further show you wherein your
confirmation and growth consists in its several parts, both as it is
subjected or exercised in your understandings, your wills and affections, and
your conversations.

I. As holiness is in the understanding, it is commonly in Scripture called,
light and knowledge, as comprehending the several parts. And the confirmation
and growth of this must consist in these seven following parts.

1. It is ordinary with new Converted Christians, to see the great essential
truths of the Christian profession, with a great imperfection as to the
evidences that discover them. Either they see but some of the solid evidence,
overlooking much more than they see; or more usually they receive the truth it
self upon some low insufficient evidence at first, and then proceed to a kind
of mixture, taking it upon some evidences that are valid and sufficient, and
joining some that are invalid, with them. But you must grow beyond this infancy
of understanding: when you see greater and sounder evidences for the truth than
you did before; and when you see more of these solid evidences, and leave not
out so many as you did; and when you lay smaller stress upon the smaller
evidences, and none upon those that are invalid and indeed no evidences, then
are your understandings more confirmed in the truth, and this is a principal
part of their growth. So we find the Samaritans of Sychar, Joh. 4.39, 40, 41,
42. [ Many of them believed on him for the saying of the woman, which
testified, He told me all that ever I did. (This was the first faith upon a
weaker evidence) [ And many more believed, because of his own words, and said
unto the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we have heard
him our selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the
world. Here is a notable confirmation and growth, by believing and knowing the
same thing which they believed before; it was before believed on weaker
evidence, and now upon stronger. Thus Nathaniel by Philips persuasion was drawn
to Christ; but when he perceived his omniscience that he knew the heart, and
things that were distant and out of the reach of common knowledge, he is
confirmed, and says, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of
Israel] And yet Christ tells him, that there were far greater evidences yet
to be revealed, which might beget a more confirmed, stronger faith [ Because I
said unto thee, I saw thee under the figtree, believe thou? Thou shall see
greater things than these: verily, verily I say unto you, hereafter ye shall
see heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of
man, Joh. 1.45, 49, 50, 51. There is not one Christian of many thousand, that
at first has a full sight of the solid evidences of the Christian doctrine;
but must grow more and more in discerning those Reasons for the truth which he
believes, which in the beginning he did not well discern. It is not the most
confident belief that is always the strongest confirmed belief; but there must
be sound grounds and evidence to support that confidence, or else the
confidence may soon be shaken; and is not sound even while it seems unshaken.
And here young beginners must be forewarned of a most dangerous snare of the
deceiver; because at first the truth it self is commonly received upon feeble
and defective grounds or evidence. It is the custom of the Devil and his
deceiving instruments, to show the young Christian the weakness of those
grounds, and thence to conclude that his cause is naught: For it is too easy to
persuade such that the cause has no better grounds than they have seen. For
having not seen any better, they can have no particular knowledge of them. And
they are too apt to think over highly of their knowledge; as if there were no
more reasons for the truth than they themselves have reached to, and other men
did see no more than they. And thus poor souls forsake the truth, which they
should be built up and confirmed in; and take that for a reason against the
truth, which is but a proof of their own infirmity. I meet with very few that
turn to any Heresy, or Sect, but this is the cause: They were at first of the
right mind, but not upon sound and well-laid grounds; but held the truth upon
insufficient reasons: And then comes some deceiver, and beats them out of their
former grounds, and so having no better, they let go the truth, and conclude
that they were all this while mistaken. Just as if in my infancy I should know
my own father only by his clothes; and when I grow a little bigger, one should
tell me that I was deceived, this is not my father, and to convince me should
put his clothes upon another, or tell me that another may have such clothes,
and hereupon I should be so foolish as to yield that I was mistaken; and that
this man is not my father. As if the thing were false, because my reasons were
insufficient. Or as if you should ask the right way in your travel, and one
should tell you, that by such and such marks you may know your way: and you
think you have found those marks a mile or two short of the place where they
are: but when you understand that those are not the marks that you were told
of, you turn back again before you come at them, and conclude that you have
mist the way. So is it with these poor deluded souls, that think all
discoveries of their own imperfections, and every confutation of their own
silly arguments, to be a confutation of the truths of God, which they did hold:
when alas, a strong well-grounded Christian, would make nothing of defending
the cause which they give up, against more strong and subtle enemies; or at
least, would hold it fast themselves. Well! this is the first part of your
growth in knowledge, when you can see more or better evidences, for the great
truths of Christianity, than you saw before.

2. Moreover, you must grow to a clearer apprehension of the very same reasons
and evidences of the truth, which you saw before. For when a weak Christian
has the best arguments and grounds in the world, yet he has so dim a sight of
them, that makes them find the slighter entertainment in his affections. The
best reason in the world can work but little on him that has but a little
understanding of it. There are various degrees of knowledge, not only of one
and the same truth, because of the diversity of evidence, but of one and the
same evidence and reason of that truth. I can well remember my self, that I
have many a year had a common argument for some weighty truth, and I have made
use of it, and thought it good, but yet had but little apprehension of the
force of it: and many years after a sudden light has given me (in my studies)
so clear an apprehension of the force of that same argument which I knew so
long, as that it has exceedingly confirmed and satisfied me, more than ever I
was before. I beseech you Christians consider of this weighty truth; it is not
the knowledge of the Truth, that will serve your turns without a true and solid
knowledge of that truth: nor is it the hearing or understanding of the best
grounds and reasons or proofs, in the world, that will serve the turn, unless
you have a deep and solid apprehension of those proofs and reasons. A man that
has the best arguments may forsake the truth, because he has not a good
understanding of those arguments: As a man that has the best weapons in the
world may be killed, for want of strength and skill to use them. I tell you, if
you knew every truth in the Bible, you may grow much in knowledge of the very
same truths which you know. 3. Moreover, a young ungrounded Christian, when he
sees all the fundamental Truths, and sees good evidence and reasons of them,
perhaps may be yet ignorant of the right order and place of every truth: It Is a
rare thing to have young Professors to understand the necessary truths
methodically: And this is a very great defect. For a great part of the
usefulness and excellency of particular truths consists in the respect they
have to one another. This therefore will be a considerable part of your
confirmation and growth in your understandings, to see the body of Christian
doctrine as it were at one view, as the several parts of it are united in one
perfect frame; and to know what aspect one point has upon another; and which
is their due places. There is a great difference between the sight of the
several parts of a clock or watch, as they are disjoynted and scattered about,
and the seeing of them conjoined and in use and motion. To see here a pin, and
there a wheel, and not know how to set them all together, nor ever see them in
their due places, will give but little satisfaction. It is the frame and design
of holy Doctrine that must be known, and every part should be discerned as it
has its particular use to that design, and as it is connected with the other
parts. By this means only can the true nature of Theology, together with the
harmony and perfection of truth, be clearly understood. And every single truth
also, will be much better perceived, by him that sees its place and order,
than by any other. For one truth exceedingly illustrates and leads in another
into our understanding. Nay more than so, your own hearts and lives will not be
well ordered if the method or order of the truths received should be mistaken.
For the truths of God are the very instruments of your sanctification, which is
nothing but their effects upon your understandings and wills, as they are set
home by the holy Ghost. Truths are the seal, and your souls are the wax, and
holiness is the impression made. If you receive but some truths, you will have
but some part of the due impression: Nay indeed, they are so coherent, and make
up the sense by their necessary conjunction, that you cannot receive any one of
them sincerely, without receiving every one that is of the essence of the
Christian belief. And if you receive them disorderly, the image of them on your
souls will be as disorderly; as if your bodily members were monstrously
misplaced. Study therefore to grow in the more methodical knowledge of the same
truths which you have received. And though you are not yet ripe enough to
discern the whole body of Theology in due method, yet see so much as you have
attained to know, in the right order and placing of every part. As in Anatomy,
its hard for the wisest Physician to discern the course of every branch of
veins and arteries, but yet they may easily discern the place and order of the
principal parts, and greater vessels: So it is in Divinity, where no man has a
perfect view of the whole, till he come to the state of perfection with God;
but every true Christian has the knowledge of all the essentials, and may know
the order and places of them all.

4. Another part of your confirmation and growth in understanding, is, In
discerning the same truths more practically than you did before, and perceiving
the usefulness of every truth, for the doing of its work on your hearts and
lives. It was never the will of God that bare speculation should be the end of
his Revelations, or of our belief. Divinity is an Affective practical Science,
therefore must truths be known and believed, that the good may be received, and
a holy change may be made by them on the heart and life. Even the Doctrine of
the Trinity it self is practical, and the fountain of that which is more easily
discerned to be practical. There is not one Article of our faith, but has a
special work to do upon our hearts and lives; and therefore a special fitness
for that work. Now the understandings of young Christians, do discern many
truths, when they see but little of the work to be done by them, and the
special usefulness of those truths to those works. This therefore must be your
daily enquiry, and in this you must grow. As if you come into a workmans shop,
and see a hundred tools about you, it is a small matter to discern the shape
and fashion of them, and what mettle they are made of: But you will further
ask, What is this tool to do, and what is that to do: If ever you will learn
the trade, you must know the use of every tool. So must you, if you will be
skilful Christians, be acquainted with the use of the truths which you have
received; and know that this truth is to do this work, and that truth to do
that work, upon the soul and life. A Husbandman may know as many herbs, and
flowers, and fruits as a Physician, and be able to tell them all by name, and
say this is such an herb, and that is such a one; and to perceive the shape and
beauty of them. But he knows little or nothing that they are good for, unless
to feed his cattle: Whereas the Physician can tell you, that this herb is good
against this disease, and that herb against another disease, and can make use
of those same herbs to save men's lives, which other men tread under foot as
useless. A Country man may see the names that are written on the Apothecaries
boxes, but it is the Physician that knows the medicinal use of the drugs. So,
many men that are unsanctified, may know the outside of holy doctrine, that
little know what use is to be made of it: And the weak Christian knows less of
this than the grown confirmed Christian does. Learn therefore every day more
and more, to know what every truth is good for, that this is for the exercise
and strengthening of such a grace, and this is good against such or such a
disease of the soul. Every leaf in the Bible has a healing virtue in it: They
are the leaves of the Tree of Life. Every sentence is good for something. [ All
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.] Not
a word is without its usefulness.

5. Moreover, you must grow, not only in knowing the usefulness of truths, but
also in knowing how to use them, that you may have the benefit of that worth
that is in them. Many a man knows what use a workmans tools are for, that yet
knows not how himself to use them. And many a one knows the use and virtue of
herbs and drugs, that knows not how to make a medicine of them, and compound
and apply them. There is much skill to be used in knowing the seasons of
application, and the measure, and what is fit for one, and what for another,
that we may make that necessary variation, which diversity of conditions do
require. As it is a work of skill in the Pastors of the Church, to divide the
word of God aright, and speak a word in season to the weary, and give the
children their meat in due season, 2 Timothy 2.15. Isa. 50.4. Mat. 24.45. So is it
also a work of skill, to do this for your selves, to know what Scripture it is
that does concern you: and when and in what measure to apply it, and in what
order and with what advantages or correctives to use it, as may be most for
your own good. You may grow in this skill as long as you live; even in
understanding how to use the same truths which you have long known. O what
excellent Christians should we be, if we had but this holy skill and hearts to
use it. We have the whole armor of God to put on and use; but all the matter
is how to use it. The same sword of the spirit in the hand of a strong and
skilful Christian, may do very much, which in the hand of a young unskilful
Christian, will do very little and next to nothing. A young raw Physician may
know the same medicines as an able experienced Physician does; but the great
difference lies in the skill to use them. This is it that must make you rich in
grace, when you increase in the skilful use of truths.

6. Moreover, your understandings may be much advanced, by knowing the same
truths more experimentally than you did before: I mean such truths as are
capable of experimental knowledge. Experience gives us a far more satisfactory
manner of knowledge, than others have that have no such experience. To know by
hearsay, is like the knowing of a Country in a Map; and to know by experience,
is like the knowing of the same Country by sight. An experienced Navigator, or
Soldier, or Physician, or Governor, has another manner of knowledge than the
most learned can have without experience; even a knowledge that confirms a
man, and makes him confident. Thus may you daily increase in knowledge, about
the same points that you knew long ago. When you have tasted and seen that the
Lord is gracious, (Psalm. 34.8. 1 Pet. 2.3.) you will know him more
experimentally than you did before: when you have tasted the sweetness of the
promise, and of pardon of sin, and peace with God, and the hopes of glory, you
will have a more experimental knowledge of the riches of grace, than you had
before: And when you have lived a while in communion with Christ and the
Saints, and walked a while with God in a heavenly conversation, and maintained
your integrity, and kept your selves unspotted of the world, you will then know
the nature and worth of holiness by a knowledge more experimental and
satisfactory than before. And this is confirmation and growth in knowledge.

7. Moreover, you must labor to grow in a higher estimation of the same truths
which you knew before. And this will be a consequent of the forementioned acts.
A child that finds a jewel may set by it, for the shining beauty; when yet he
may value it many thousand pounds below its worth. You see so much wisdom and
goodness in God, the first hour of your new life, as causes you to prefer him
before the world! and you see so much necessity of a Savior, so much love and
mercy in Jesus Christ, as draws up your hearts to him; and you see so much
certainty and glorious excellency of the life to come, that makes you value it
even more than your lives. But yet there is in all these such an unsearchable
treasure, that you can never value them near their worth; for all that thou
have seen of God, and Christ, and Glory, there is a thousand times more
excellency in them yet to be discerned. For all the beauty thou have seen in
holiness, it is a thousand fold more beautiful than ever thou did apprehend
it: for all the evil thou have seen in sin, it is a thousand fold worse than
ever thou did perceive it to be. So that if you should live a thousand years,
you might still be growing in your estimation of those things which you knew
the first day of your true conversion. For the deeper you dig into this
precious Mine, the greater riches will still appear to you. There is an Ocean
of excellency in one Article of your belief, and you will never find the banks
or bottom, till you come to heaven, and then you will find that it had neither
banks nor bottom.

And thus I have showed you what confirmation and growth is needful for your
understandings, even about the very same truths, which at first you knew. And
now I shall add; 8. You must also labor to understand more truths for number
than at the first you understood, and to reach to as much of the revealed will
of God as you can, and not to stop in the mere essentials. For all divine
revelations are precious, and of great use; and none must be neglected. And the
knowledge of many other truths, is of some necessity to our clear understanding
of the essentials; and also to our holding them fast and practicing them.
Secret things belong to God, but things revealed, to us, and to our children,
Deuteronomy. 29.29.

But here I must give you this further advice. 1. That you proceed in due
order, from the fundamental points to those that lie next them; and do not
overpass the points of next necessity and weight, and go to higher and less
needful matters, before you are ready for them. 2. And also see that you
receive all following truths that are taught you, as flowing from the
foundation, and conjoined with it. Disorderly proceedings have unspeakably
wronged the souls of many thousands, when they are presently upon controversies
and smaller matters, before they understand abundance of more necessary things
that must be first understood. This course does make them lose their labor,
and worse; it deceives the understanding instead of informing it: and
thereupon it perverts the will it self, and turns men to an heretical, proud,
or perverse frame of spirit; and then it must needs mislead their practices,
and cause them like deluded men to be zealous in doing mischief, while they
think they are doing good. In common matters you can see, that you must learn
and do things in their due order, or else you will but make fools of your
selves. Will you go to the top of the stairs or ladder, without beginning at
the lower steps? Will you sow your ground before you manure or plow it? or can
you reap before you sow it? Will you ride your colt before you break him? Will
your rear an house before you frame it? Or will you teach your children Hebrew,
and Greek, and Latin, before they learn English? or to read the hardest books
before they learn the easiest? or can they read before they learn to spell, or
know their letters? No more can you learn the difficult controversies in
divinity (as about the exposition of obscure Prophesies, or doctrinal doubts,)
till you have taken up before you those many great and necessary truths that
lie between. It would make a wise man pity them and be ashamed to hear them,
when young raw self-conceited Professors, will fall into confident expositions
of Daniel, the Revelations, or the Canticles, or such like, or into disputes
about freewill, or predestination, or about the many controversies of the
times, when, alas, they are ignorant of a hundred truths (about the Covenants,
Justification, and the like) which must be known before they can reach the rest!

By this much that I have said already, you may understand, that (though we
should reach as far as we can in knowing all necessary revealed truths) yet the
principal part of your growth in knowledge, when once you are converted,
consists not in knowing more than you knew before, as to the number of
truths, but in knowing better the very same fundamental truths, which you knew
at first. This is the principal thing that I would here teach you. Abundance
are deluded, by not understanding this; you see here you have seven several
things in which you must daily grow in knowledge about the same truths which
you first received. 1. You must see better and sounder reasons and evidences
for the fundamental truths than you saw at first: or more such evidences than
you did then perceive. 2. You must grow to a clearer sight or apprehension of
those same evidences. 3. You must see truths more methodically, all as it were
at one view, and all in their due proportion and place, as the members of a
well composed body; and how they grow together, and what strength one truth
affords to another. 4. You must see every truth more practically than before,
and know what use it is of, for your hearts and lives, and what you must do
with it. 5. You must learn more skill in the using of these truths, when you
know what they are good for; and must be better able to manage them on your
selves and others. 6. You must know more experimentally than you did at first.
7. You must grow into a higher esteem of truths. All this you have to do,
besides your growing in the number of truths. And I must tell you, that as it
was these Essentials of Christianity that were the instrumental causes of your
first Conversion, and were more needful and useful to you then, than ten
thousand others: So it is the very same points that you must always live upon,
and the Confirmation and growth of your Souls in these, will be more useful to
you than the adding of ten thousand more truths which yet you know not: And
therefore take this advice as you love your peace and growth; Neglect not to
know more; but bestow many and many hours in laboring to know Better, the
great truths which you have received, for one hour that you bestow in seeking
to know more Truths which you know not. Believe it, this is the safe and
thriving way. You know already that God is All-sufficient, and infinitely wise,
and good, and powerful: And you know not perhaps the nature of free Will, or of
Gods Decrees of Election and Reprobation, or a hundred the like points. True
knowledge of any of the revealed things of God, is very desirable: But yet, I
must tell you, that you are forty times more defective here in your knowledge
of that of God which you do know, than of the other which you know not: that
is, the want of more Degrees of this necessary knowledge is more dangerous to
your Souls, than the total want of the less necessary knowledge. And the
addition of more Degrees to the more needful parts of knowledge, will strengthen
and enrich you more, than the knowing of less necessary things, which you knew
not before at all. You know Christ Crucified already; but perhaps you know not
certain Controversies about Church Government, or the definitions and
distinctions of many matters in Divinity: It will be a greater growth now to
your knowledge to know a little more of Christ Crucified, whom you know already,
than to know these lesser matters, which you know not yet at all. If you had
already a hundred pound in Gold, and not a penny of Silver, it will more enrich
you to have another purse full of Gold, than a purse full of Silver, Trading in
the richest Commodities, is liker to raise men to great estates, than trading
for matters of a smaller rate. They that go to the Indies for Gold and Pearl,
may be rich if they get but little in quantity: When he may be poor that brings
home Ships laded with the greatest store of poor Commodity. That man that has
a double measure of the knowledge of God in Christ, and the clearest, and
deepest, and most effectual apprehensions of the Riches of Grace and the Glory
to come, and yet never heard of most of the Questions in Scotus, or Ockam or
Aquinas's sums, is far richer in knowledge, and a much wiser man, than he that
has those Controversies at his fingers ends, and yet has but half his
clearness and solidity of the knowledge of God and Christ, of Grace and Glory.
There is enough in some One of the Articles of your Faith, in One of Gods
Attributes, in One of Christ's benefits, in One of the Spirits Graces, to hold
you study all your lives, and afford you still an increase of knowledge. To know
God the Father, Son and Spirit, and their relations to you and operations for
you, and your Duties to them, and the way of Communion with them, is that
knowledge in which you must still be growing, till it be perfected by the
celestial beatifical Vision. Those be not the wisest men that can answer most
questions; but those that have the fullest intellectual reception of the
infinite Wisdom. You will confess that he is a wiser man that has Wisdom to
get and Rule a Kingdom, than he that has wit enough to talk of a hundred
trivial matters, which the other is ignorant of. That Is the wisest Physician
that can do most to save men's lives; and not he that can best read a Lecture of
Anatomy, or is readiest in the terms of his Art. Knowledge is to be esteemed
according to the use of it, and the Dignity of its Object; and not according to
the number and subtilty of notions. And therefore I beseech you all that are
young and weak in the Faith, take much more pains to grow in the fuller
acquaintance with that same Faith which you have received, than to be
acquainted with smaller controversal Truths which you never knew. Men use to
call these Higher points, because they are more difficult; but certainly the
Articles of your Faith are much higher in point of excellency, though they are
lower in the due order of learning them, as the Foundation is the lowest part
of the building, and is first laid, but is that which must bear up all the rest.

And here you must observe, how gracelesly and unlike to Christians those men
speak, that say, They care not for reading such a Book, or hearing such or such
a Minister, because he tells them no more than they know already]. And on that
account some of them stay from Church, because they hear nothing but what they
know already. Its a certain sign that they do not know already, the blessed
nature of God, and the riches of Christ, which they say they know: For if they
did, they could not hear or think too much of them? They would long to know
more, and therefore to hear more of the same things. It Is a sign the Minister
takes the course that tends to your edification and enriching in knowledge, when
he is most upon the great and most necessary truths. All Saints do make it
their study to comprehend the height, and breadth, and length, and depth, and
know the Love of God in Christ: but when they have done, they confess that it
passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19. Its a graceless wicked Soul, in a state of
damnation, that conceits he knows so much of God and Jesus Christ and the
essentials of Christianity, that he cares not for hearing these things any
more, but had rather have novelties and let these alone; and feels not need
of knowing much more, and more of the same truths; and of using and living upon
these vital Principles which he knows. You have eaten Bread, and drank Beer an
hundred times; but perhaps you never did eat of Sturgeon or Whale, of a Bear or
a Leopard, of Chestnuts or Pig-nuts, or many strange and dangerous fruits, in
all your life. And yet I hope you will not seek after these because they are
novelties, and give over eating Bread because you have eaten of it already? Nor
will you churlishly refuse to go to a Feast, because there is no meat but what
you have eaten of before. We have not a new God to Preach to you, nor a new
Christ, nor a new Spirit, nor a new Gospel, nor a new Church, nor a new Faith,
nor a new Baptismal Covenant, nor a new Heaven, or Hope, or Happiness to
propound, Gal. 1.9, 10. Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5. Your growth in methods and definitions
and distinctions, and in additional points of knowledge, is principally to be
valued as it clears your understandings in the foresaid great essential
points, and brings you up to God himself. Some wretches think they have quickly
learned past the essential Articles of the Faith, and ere long they are past
the higher points; and shortly they are past the Scripture it self, and throw
it by, as a Scholar that has learnt one Book, and must be entered into
another: They understand not that the Ministry and spirit are but to teach them
the word of the Gospel; but they think they must outgrow the Word and Ministry,
and the Spirit must teach them some other Doctrine: or Gospel, which the
written Word does not contain. I pray mark the Apostles warning, Heb. 13.9. [
Be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines; for it is a good thing
that the heart be stablished with Grace.] And Ephesians. 4.14. [ That we henceforth
be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every mind of
Doctrine, by the sleight of men and cunning craftiness -- ]

II. Having showed you wherein your growth consists in the understanding, I
shall be short in the rest, and next I must tell you wherein it consists in
the Will.

And that is 1. When upon good understanding and deep consideration, you are
more fixedly, habitually, absolutely and practically resolved for God and Glory
than before. So that you are grown more beyond all shaking doubtfulness or
wavering of mind, and beyond all unevenness, mutability and unconstancy. When a
man is thus satisfied, that none but God has title to him, or can make him
happy, and that none but Christ can reconcile him to God, and that it were a
madness to make any other choice, and thereupon is settled and firm as Mount
Zion, and say [ Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none on earth that
I desire besides thee,] Psalm. 73.25. When you are firmly resolved, that let God
do with you what he will, and come of it what will, you will never choose
another Master, or Savior, or Rule, or Happiness, or Way, or Body than you are
in; and will never forsake the path of holiness; this is the fixed stability of
the Will, and the more of this, the more you grow.

2. And when you have the lowest esteem of the Creatures, and greatest and most
resolved aversness to all that would draw you from God, and can meet the
greatest worldly or fleshly allurements with a holy contempt; this shows a
settled confirmed Will.

3. And also when you are speedy in holy Resolutions, and see nothing in a
Temptation how great soever, that can make you demur upon it, or make a stop in
a Christian course; but go on to duty as if the Tempter had said nothing to
you, and the Flesh and the World had no interest in you; and you do not so much
as stand to think on it, whether you should yield to sin or not, as abhorring
to call such a matter into question: This shows a confirmed fixed Will: And the
more of this, the more of Holiness.

III. The strength and growth of holy Affections, consists principally in
these particulars; 1. When the Affections are Lively, and not dull; so that we
make out after God and Heaven with vigor and alacrity. 2. When they are ready
at hand, and not to seek, and need not a great deal ado to quicken them or call
them in. 3. When they are most pure and unmixed, having least of the Creature
and most of God in them. 4. But principally (and the surest point to try them
by) when they contain in them, or accompany the foresaid Confirmation and
Resolvedness of the Will: For it is more the Willingness that is in or with our
Affections, than the heat of them that we must judge them by. 5. And lastly,
when they follow the best guidance of the understanding; when they are hottest
about the greatest matters, and not about the smaller or more doubtful things:
When they are obedient and yielding to Faith and holy Reason, and not too ready
to hearken to sense, and be moved about fleshly sensible things. In these
things lies the growth of your affections.

IV. And then lastly for your Conversations, your stability and growth
consists, 1. In the Readiness of your obedience. 2. In the fullness and
universal exactness of it. 3. In the Resolved conquest of all temptations that
would pervert you. 4. In the diligent use of all those means that may farther
confirm and strengthen you. 5. In the Evenness of it, that it be constant and
not mixed with scandals, and stops in the way, or stepping out into by paths. 6.
In your fruitfulness and profitableness to others, according to the proportion
of your Talents: that you study to do good, and do it with all the care and
Wisdom and diligence you can. 7. In the Spirituality of it, that God be the
principle and the end of all, and that all be animated from the believing
consideration of his attributes, and the views of everlasting blessedness. So
that you have such lively fixed intentions of God, that you can perceive that
you do all, even common things, of purpose for his pleasure, will and glory;
and that the love of God does carry you about from duty to duty, and constrain
you to it. 8. And lastly, in the measure of your present seize of the End
and fruits of your obedience. For a taste of these ends are here to be attained.
When your inward Graces are more confirmed and increased, and your Talents are
doubled, and when you bring God a great deal of honor in the World, so that by
his Graces shining in your works, your Father is gloryfied; and when your
selves are readier to go to God, and meet your Redeemer, and long more for his
appearing: In all these consists, the stability, growth and excellency of
your conversations.

And now by all that I have said you may see, wherein your stability, strength
and growth does not consist. 1. It does not most or much consist in
speculations or less useful Truths. 2. It does not consist in the mere heat of
Affections: For Zeal may be misguided, and do hurt; and may prove sometime but a
mere natural or distempered sinful passion. 3. It consists not in mere Fears,
or Purposes that you are frightened into against your Wills. 4. Nor does it
consist in the common gifts of Grace or Nature. 5. Nor yet in running into
groundless singularities, and unusual strains. But, in a word, it consists in
holy Love, kindled by effectual faith. When a firmly believing Soul is fullest
of Love to God, and Christ, and Holiness, this is the most Confirmed state of
the Soul: and in this your chiefest growth consists.

DIRECT. IV.
My next advice to all young Christians for their Confirmation and Growth in
Grace, is this.

Grow downwards in Humility; be low and small in your own eyes; and affect not
to be high or great in the eyes of others; and still keep a deep apprehension
of the greatness and danger of the sin of Pride; but specially of that called
spiritual Pride. IT is the Tree that has the shallowest weakest rooting that
most shakes, and is soonest overthrown: The deeper roots, the higher growth,
for the most part. The building that has not a deep foundation, is soonest
shaken and overthrown. Christ is our Foundation; and Humiliation digs deep and
lets him into the heart. Pride is commonly thought to be the Devils first or
chiefest sin: Sure I am it is the Proud that fall into his condemnation. 1 Timothy
3.6. The Pride of our first Parents, affecting to be as Gods in knowledge, was
the inlet of all our sin and misery: And the tempter still follows the way
that he has found to be so successful. It is Pride that like a storm or
tempest, does set all the World in the rage and contention, and differences,
and confusion, that we see them in. It is Pride that has filled the Church
with Divisions; and it is Pride that causes the Apostasy of most that fall
away. And the more men have of it, the less do they usually discern it in
themselves: I am sure the less do they hate it and lament it. And though one
would think that young beginners and weak Christians that have little to be
proud of, should be out of the danger of this temptation, yet experience tells
us that it is they that fall by it, more than the wiser and stronger Christians
that have more to glory in. For the more men increase in Wisdom, the more do
they know their own unworthiness, their emptiness, and ignorance and manifold
sins: And the more do they know of the Holiness and jealousy of God; and the
more do they know of the evil of sin, and see what abundance of knowledge and
Grace they yet want. So that the more holy Wisdom and experience, the less
pride. But folly is the Parent and Nurse of Pride. Children will be proud of
toys and things of no value. There are two or three things that make young
Christians in greater danger of spiritual pride than others. 1. Because they
come so lately out of darkness, and so great a change is made upon their Souls,
that it makes them the more sensible of it; and therefore the readier to have
high thoughts of themselves. Though one would think that the remembrance of
former folly, and late dejectedness should keep them low, yet with too many
that is quickly gone, and they know not how to receive a comforting message, but
they make it an occasion of lifting up. 2. The ignorance of these novices or
young Christians is such, that they little know what abundance of things they
are yet ignorant of. Little do they know what knowledge they yet want. They
think there is little more to be reached to than is in their sight, and
therefore suppose themselves some body in the School of Christ, because they
have learnt the first Lesson. 3. And by reason of this ignorance, they know not
how to value the higher seize and understandings of others; but look on
the wisest as little wiser than themselves, because they are unacquainted with
the matter of their Wisdom, and therefore overlook it as if it were none, and
consequently think too highly of themselves. 4. And withal, they have not that
experience of their own hearts that should make them jealous of them, as
ancient Christians have.

The Humble Soul is still in an empty craving temper: He hungreth and thirsts
after Righteousness, and therefore shall be satisfied, Mat. 5.6. No man sets
so high a price on Christ and Grace, and all the means of Grace. Even the crumbs
are welcome to him, which the proud despise. The full foul loathes the
honeycomb: but to the hungry every bitter thing is sweet. Prove. 27.7. Therefore
such beggars are welcomest to God: He has respect to the humble contrite soul.
Isa. 57.15. and 66.2. Psalm. 51.17. The hungry he fills with good, but the
rich he sends empty away. Luke 1.53. He gives more grace to the humble, when
the proud are abhorred by him. 1 Pet. 5.5. The Church of Laodicea that said, I
am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, was miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked. Rev. 3.17. As many that are proud of their honor
and birth, run out of all by living above their estates, when meaner persons
grow rich, because they are still gathering, and make much of every little: So
proud Professors of Religion are in a Consumption of the Grace they have, while
the humble increase by making much of every little help, which is slighted and
neglected by the proud, and by shunning all those spending courses, which the
proud are plunged in. Be sure to keep mean thoughts of your selves, of your
knowledge and parts, and grace and duties, and be content to be mean in the
esteem of others, if you would not be worse than mean in the esteem of God.

DIRECT. V. Exercise your selves daily in a life of Faith upon Jesus Christ; as
your Savior, your Teacher, your Mediator, and your King; as your Example, your
Wisdom, your Righteousness, and your Hope.
ALL other studies and knowledge must be merely subservient to the study and
knowledge of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.2. That vain kind of Philosophy which St. Paul so
much cautioneth Christians against, is so far yet from being accounted vain,
that by many called Christians it is preferred before Christianity it self; and
to show that it is Vain while they overvalue it, they can show no solid worth
or virtue which they have got by it; but only a tumified mind, and an idle
tongue like a tinkling Cymbal, 1 Cor. 13.1. and 12.31. and 2.4.14, 15, 16. and
1.18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 27. Col. 2.8, 9. We are complete in Christ, in whom
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, ver. 10. No study in the World
will so much lead you up to God, and acquaint you with him, especially in his
Love and Goodness, as the study of Christ, his Person, his Office, his
Doctrine, his Example, his Kingdom, and his benefits. As the Deity is your
ultimate end, to which all things else are but helps and means; so Christ is
that great and principal means, by whom all other means are animated. Remember
that you are in continual need of him, for direction, intercession, pardon,
sanctification, for support and comfort, and for peace with God. Let no
thoughts therefore be so sweet and frequent in your hearts, nor any discourse
so ready in your mouths (next to the excellencies of the eternal Godhead) as
this of the design of man's Redemption. Let Christ be to your Souls, as the Air,
the Earth, the Sun, and your Food, are to your bodies, without which your life
would presently fail. As you had never come home to the Father but by him, so
without him you cannot a moment continue in the Fathers love, nor be accepted
in one duty, nor be protected from one danger, nor be supplied in any want: For
it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, Col. 1.18, 19. And
by him it is that being justified by Faith, we have peace with God, and have
access by Faith unto this Grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the
Glory of God. Romans ^. 1, 2. And it is in him the Head that we must grow up in
all things, from whom the whole body does receive it is increase. Ephesians. 4.15,
16. You grow no more in Grace, than you grow in the true knowledge and daily use
of Jesus Christ. But of this I will say no more, because I have said so much in
my Directions for a sound Conversion,

DIRECT. VI. Let the Knowledge and Love of God, and your obedience to him be the
Works of your Religion; and the everlasting fruition of him in Heaven, be the
continual end and ruling Motive of your Hearts and Lives: that your very
Conversation may be with God in Heaven.
YOu are so far HOLY as you are DIVINE and HEAVENLY. A Christian indeed in
casting up his accounts, being certain that this World does make no man happy,
has been led up by Christ to seek a Happiness with God above: If you live not
for this everlasting happiness, if you trade not for this, if this be not your
treasure, your hope and home, the chief matter of your desires, love and joy,
and if all things be not pressed to serve it, and despised when they stand
against it; you live not indeed a Christian life. GOD and HEAVEN, or GOD in
HEAVEN, is the Life and Soul, the beginning and the end, the Sum, the All, of
true Religion. And therefore it is that we are directed to lift up our Heads
and Hearts, and begin our Prayers with [ Our Father which art in Heaven] and
end them with ascribing to Him the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory for ever.]
It is not the Creatures, but God the Creator, that is the Father, the Guide and
the felicity of Souls, and therefore the ultimate end and object of all
Religious actions and affections. Dwell still upon God, and dwell in Heaven, if
you would understand the nature and design of Christianity. Take God for all,
that is, for God: Study after the knowledge of him in all his Works: Study him
in his Word: Study him in Christ: And never study him barely to know him, but
to know him that you may love him: Take your selves as dead when you live not
in the Love of God: Keep still upon your hearts a lively sense of the infinite
difference between him and the Creature. Look on all the World as a shadow, and
on God as the substance. Take the very worst that man can do, to be in
comparison of the punishments of God, but as a Flea-biting to the sorest death:
And take all the dreaming pleasures of the World, to be less in comparison with
the joys of Heaven, than one lick of honey is to a thousand years possession
of all the felicities on earth. Think not all the pleasures, honors or riches
of the world, to be worthy to be named in comparison of Heaven: nor the
Greatest of Men, to be worthy to be once thought on in comparison of God. As
one straw or feather won or lost, would neither much rejoice or trouble you, if
all the City or land were yours. So live as men whose eyes are open, and who
discern a greater disproportion, between the portion of a worldling and a
Saint. Let God be your King, your Father, your master, your friend, your
wealth, your joy, your All. Let not a day go over your heads, in which your
hearts have no converse with God in Heaven: when any trouble overtaketh you on
Earth, look up to Heaven, and remember that it is there that Rest and Joy are
prepared for believers When you are under any want or cross or sorrow, fetch
not your comfort from any hopes of deliverance here on Earth, but from the
place of your final full deliverance. If you feel any strangeness and
backwardness on your minds to Heavenly contemplations, do not make light of
them, but presently by Faith get up to Christ, who must make your thoughts of
Heaven familiar, and seek remedy before your estrangedness increase. The soul
is in a sad condition when it cannot fetch comfort and encouragement from
Heaven; for then it must have none, or worse than none. When the thoughts of
Heaven will not sweeten all your crosses, and relieve your minds against all
the encombrances of earth, your souls are not in a healthful state: It Is time
then to search out the cause, and seek a cure, before it come to worse.

There are three great causes of this dark and dangerous state of soul, which
make the thoughts of Heaven uneffectual and uncomfortable to us, which
therefore must be overcome with the daily care and diligence of your whole
lives. 1. Unbelief, which makes you look toward the life to come with
doubting and uncertainty: And this is the most common, radical, powerful and
pernicious impediment to a heavenly life. The second is the Love of present
things, which being the vanity of a poor low fleshly mind, the reviving of
Reason may do much to overcome it; but it is the sound Belief of the life to
come that must indeed prevail. The third is the inordinate Fear of Death, which
has so great advantage in the constitution of our nature, that it is commonly
the last enemy which we overcome, (as Death it self is the last enemy which
Christ overcomes for us). Bend all your strength, and spend your days in
striving against these three great impediments of a heavenly conversation: And
remember that so far as you suffer your heart to retire from Heaven, so far
they retire from a life of Christianity and peace.

DIRECT. VII. In the work of Mortification, let SELF-DENIAL be the First and
Last of all your study, care and diligence.
UNderstand how much of the fallen depraved state of man consists in the sin
of SELFISHNESS: How he is sunk into Himself in his fall from the Love of God,
and of his Neighbor; of the public or private good of others: And how this
inordinate Self-love is now the grand enemy of all true Love to God or Man; and
the root and heart of Covetousness, Pride, Voluptuousness, and all iniquity.
Let it be your work therefore all your days to mortify it, and watch against
it. When you feel your selves partial in your own cause, and apt to be drawing
from others to your selves, in point of reputation, precedence or gain, and apt
to make too great a matter of every word that is spoken against you, or every
little wrong that is done you, observe then the pernicious root of Selfishness,
from whence all this mischief does proceed. Read more of this in my Treatise of
Self-denial.

DIRECT. VIII. Take your corrupted fleshly Desires, for the greatest enemy of
your Souls; and let it be every day your constant work, to mortify the Flesh,
and to keep a watch upon your lusts and appetite and every sense.
REmember that our senses were not made to govern themselves, but to be
governed by right Reason: And that God made them at the first to be the
ordinary passage of his Love and mercy to our hearts, by the means of the
Creatures which represent or manifest him unto us: But now in the depraved
state of man, the Senses have cast off the Government of Reason, and are become
the Ruling power, and so man is become like the Beasts that perish. Remember
then, that to be sensual is to be brutish: And though Grace does not destroy
the appetite and sense, yet it subjecteth it to God and Reason. Therefore let
your appetite be pleased in nothing, but by the allowance of right Reason: And
think not that you have reason to take any meats or drink or sport, merely
because your flesh desires it: but consider whether it will do you good or
hurt, and how it conduces to your ultimate end? It is a base and sinful state
to be in servitude to your appetite and sense! When by using to please it, you
have so increased its desires, that now you know not how to deny it and
displease it. When you have taught it to be like a hungry dog or swine, that
will never be quiet till his hunger be satisfied; Whereas a well-governed
appetite and sense is easily quieted with a rational denial. Romans 8.1, 6, 7, 8,
13. and 13.13, 14. 1 Pet. 2.11. 1 John ^.16.

DIRECT. IX. Take heed lest you fall in love with the World or any thing
therein, and lest your thoughts of any place or condition which you either
possess or hope for, do grow too sweet and pleasing to you.
FOr there is no one perishes, but for loving some Creature more than God: And
complacency is the formal act of Love. Love not the World, nor the things that
are in the World, for if any man love the World, the love of the Father is not
in him, 1 John 2.15. Value all earthly things as they conduce to your Masters
Service, or to your Salvation; and not as they tend to the pleasing of your
Flesh: It is the commonest and most dangerous folly in the World, to be eager
to have our houses and lands and provisions and every thing about us in the
most pleasing and amiable state: when as this is the acknowledged way to Hell,
and the only poison of the Soul. Are you not in more danger of overloving a
pleasing and prosperous condition, than a bitter and vexatious state? and of
overloving Riches, honor, and sensual fullness and delights, rather than
Poverty, reproach, and mortification? And do you not know that if ever you be
damned, it will be for loving the World too much, and God too little? Is it for
nothing that Christ describes a Saint to you as a Lazarus in poverty and
sores, and a damned wretch as one that was clothed in Purple and Silk, and
fared sumptuously every day, Luke 16. Did not Christ know what he did when he
put the rich man upon this trial, to part with all his worldly riches, and
follow Christ for a treasure in heaven? Luke 18.22, 13. All things must be
esteemed as loss and dung for the knowledge of Christ, and the hopes of heaven,
if ever you will be saved, Phil. 3.6, 7, 8. You must so live by Faith, and not
by sight, as not to look at the temporal things that are seen, but at the
things eternal which are unseen, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. and 5.7, 8. And one that is
running in a race for his life, would not so much as turn his head to look back
on any one that called to him to stay; or to look aside to any one that would
speak with him in his way. Thus must we forget the things that are behind, as
counting them not worthy a thought or remembrance or a look, Phil. 3.13, 14. If
you feel this poison seize upon your hearts, and your condition in the world
(or at least your Hopes) begin to grow too sweet and pleasing to you, presently
make have to Christ your Physician, and take his antidote, and cast up the
poison as you love your Souls. You must know no other pleasure in your outward
mercies, but as God appears in and by them, and as they tend to profit you,
and further you in Gods Service, or to promote your own or others good; but not
as they are provision for the flesh, Romans 13.13, 14. See my Book of Crucifying
the World.

DIRECT. X. Cast not your selves wilfully upon temptations, but avoid them as
far as lawfully you can: And if you are cast upon them unwillingly, resist them
resolutely, as knowing that they come to entice you into Sin and Hell, from God
and your everlasting happiness; And therefore be well acquainted with the
particular Temptations of every company, calling, relation, business, time,
place, and condition of life; and go always furnished with particular
Antidotes against them all.
STrong Grace will do no more against strong Temptations, than weak Grace
against weak ones. Temptation is the way to sin, and sin is the way to Hell. If
you saw the dangerousness of your station, when you cast your self upon
temptations, you would tremble and fly as for your lives. I take that man as
almost gone already, who chooses temptations, or avoideth them not when he
may. Especially be acquainted with the diseases and greatest dangers of your
Soul; and there keep up a constant watch. Are you liable to a gluttonous
pleasing of your appetite? Avoid the temptation; set not that before you which
may be your snare: Let a little, and that of the least tempting kind of food,
be your ordinary provision. Sit not at the Gluttons Table, (who fares
deliciously every day) if you would escape the gluttons sin and misery. Or if
the provision be of other men's disposal, at least rise quickly and be gone. Are
you inclined to please your appetite in drinking? Avoid such strong drink as
may tempt your appetite; and avoid the place and company that draws you to
it. Are you inclined to fleshly lust? Avoid the presence of such of the other
Sex as are a temptation to you: Look not on them, nor talk not of them; but
above all take heed of nearness and familiarity, and privacy with them; and of
all opportunity of sin. When the Devil has brought the bait to your hand, and
tells you, now you may sin without any molestation or discovery, you are then
in a very dangerous case. Some that think they would not be guilty of the sin,
will yet tempt themselves, and delight to have it in their power, and to have
the opportunity of sining, and to come as near it as they dare; And these are
gone before they well perceive their danger. So if you are inclined to Pride
and Ambition, avoid the society of those that tempt you to it: Come not among
Superiors and Gallants, or such as kindle your ambition. A retired life, in
company of mean and humble persons, is fitest for one that has your disease.
Mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate, Romans 1^.16.

But if you cannot avoid the Temptation be sure yet to avoid the sin; Take it
as if you saw and heard the Devil himself persuading you to sin, and damn your
Souls. Abhor the motion, and give not the Devil a patient hearing, when you
know what he comes about: Resolution scapeth many a danger, which those are
ruined by, who stand disputing and dallying with the Tempter. Especially look
about you, when the Tempter employeth Great men, or Learned men, or Godly men,
or nearest friends, to be his instruments. And if their subtilty puzzle you, go
to the stronger and more experienced Christians for advice and help. VVatch and
pray that you enter not into temptation, Matthew. 6.13. and 26.41. It is a
dreadful thing to think what persons temptations have overthrown, Luke 18.13.
Heb. 6.6, 7. How Wise, and Learned, and excellent men have been over-witted by
Satan, and sinned like fools, when they have let go their watch: If we be as
resolved as Peter, temptations may quickly change our resolutions, if God leave
us to our selves, and we grow presumptuous or secure: And then our very Reason
will lose its power; and false representations will make things appear to us
quite contrary to what indeed they are; and those reasonings will seem probable
to us, which at another time we could easily see through as mere deceit.
Temptation as it prevails, does damp and cast asleep our Graces, and charm
and bewitch all the faculties of the Soul, 1 Timothy 6.9.

DIRECT. XI. If it be possible, make choice of such a Pastor for the help and
guidance of your Souls, as is judicious, experienced, humble, holy, heavenly,
faithful, diligent, lively, and peaceable; that lives not in separation from
the generality of the sober Godly Ministers and Christians where he lives.
1. THink not of being sufficient for your selves, without the help of those
whom Christ has appointed to be watchmen for your Souls, Heb. 13.7.17.24. As
you cannot live without the teaching and the Grace of Christ; so Christ does
vouchsafe you his teaching, and his grace, by the Ministry of his own Officers,
whom he has appointed to that end and use. It is mavelous to observe, how
Christ chose rather to convert men by the Preaching and Miracles of his
Apostles, than by his own: And how he would not fully Convert Paul without the
Ministry of Ananias, though he spoke to him from Heaven himself, and reasoned
the case with him against his Persecution. And how he would not fully Convert
Cornelius and his Household, without the Ministry of Peter, though he sent an
Angel to direct him to a Teacher: Nor would he convert the Ethiopian Eunuch
without the Ministry of Philip, nor the Jailer without the Ministry of Paul and
Silas, though he wrought a Miracle to prepare for his Conversion, Acts 16. and
10. And Paul must plant, and Apollo must water, before God will give the
increase, 1 Cor. 3.6. And though all true Christians are taught of God, and
must call no man on earth the Master of their Faith but Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 4.9.
John 6.45. Mat. 23.8, 9. Yet have they their Teachers, Fathers, and instructers
under Christ, who are helpers of their joy, though they have not dominion over
their Faith, and are Overseers, though not Lords and Owners of the Flock, and
are Ministers of Christ by whom he teaches, and stewards of the Mysteries of
God, and Ambassadors by whom he beseeches sinners to be reconciled to God,
having committed to them the word of reconciliation, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14. 1
Cor. 4.1, 15. Acts 20.28. 2 Cor. 1.24. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19,
20. These are Laborers together with God upon his husbandry and building; some
being Master Builders, and others Superstructors, 1 Cor. 3.9, 10. Christ knew
the necessity that the Infants of his Family had of such Nurses, and he knew
what numbers of such weak ones there would be in comparison of the strong; or
else he had never appointed the strong to such an Office: And having appointed
it, he will keep up the honor of his Officers, and will send you his Alms,
your food, your Physic, your Pardon, your Privileges by their hands. If you
be drawn by Seducers to forsake or neglect the Ministry of Christ's Officers,
you forsake or neglect your helps and mercies, you refuse his Grace, you are
like Infants that scorn their Nurses help; and like Subjects who reject all the
Officers of the King, and like the Chickens that forsake the Hen; you forsake
the School and Church of Christ, and may expect to be quickly caught up by the
Devil, as straglers that have no defense or guide.

2. Yet is there great difference between one Minister or Pastor and another,
as much as between Physicians, Lawyers, or men of any other function. And there
being no case in the world that you are so much concerned to be careful in, as
the instructing and conduct and safety of your souls, you have exceeding great
reason to take heed whom you choose to commit the care and conduct of your
Souls to. It is not enough to say, that He is a true Ordained Minister, and
that his administrations are not nullities, no more than to say of an ignorant
Physician, or Cowardly Captain, that he has a valid License or Commission;
when for all that, if you trust him, it may cost you your lives. Nor is it a
wise man's answer to say that God gives his Grace by the worst as soon as by
the best, and by the weakest as soon as by the strongest, and therefore I need
not be so careful in my choice. For though God have not confined the working of
his Spirit to the most excellent means, yet ordinarily he works according to
the means he uses: And this both Scripture, Reason, and daily experience fully
prove. God works rationally on man as man; that is, as a rational free agent,
by Moral operation, and not by a mere Physical injection of his Grace. When we
see the man that is made wise unto Salvation by mere infusion of Wisdom,
without a Teacher or the study of the Word of God, or when we see God work by
his Word as by a charm, that a few words shall convert a man, though the
speaker or hearer understood them not, then we may hearken to this conceit: And
then we may think that a Heretic may as well teach you the truth as the
Orthodox, or a Schismatic teach you Unity and Peace as well as a Catholic
peaceable Pastor; or a man that is ignorant of the mysteries of Regeneration
and holy Communion with God, may best teach you that which he knows not
himself, and an enemy to Piety and Charity, may teach you to be Pious and
Charitable as well as any other. But I need not say much more of this, for all
parties would never so strive to have such Ministers as they like, and to put
out such as they dislike, if they thought not that the difference between
Ministers and Ministers were very great.

See therefore that the Guide whom you choose for your Souls be 1. Judicious;
for an injudicious man may pervert the Scripture, and lead you into Error and
Heresy and sin before you are aware: As an unskilful Coachman may soon
overturn you, or an unskilful Waterman may drown you: yea though he be a
zealous fervent Preacher, yet if he be injudicious, he may ignorantly give you
Poison in your food, as the experience of this age has lamentably proved.

2. See if possible that he be an experienced man, that knows by experience
on himself not only what it is to be regenerate, and sanctified, and made a new
Creature, but also how all the combat between the Spirit and the Flesh is to
be managed, and what are the methods and stratagems of the tempter, and what
are the chief helps and defensatives of the Soul, and how they are all to be
used: For it is not harder to be a Judicious Physician, or Lawyer, or Soldier,
without experience, than a judicious Pastor. And therefore the Holy Ghost
commands that he be not a novice, or raw unexperienced Christian, 1 Timothy 3.6.

3. See that he be Humble, for if he be puffed up with pride, he falls into the
condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3.6. And then he will either scorn the labor
of the Ministry as a drudgery (to preach in season and out of season, to
beseech and exhort and stoop to the poorest of the flock): or else he will
speak perverse things to draw away Disciples after him, Acts 20.30. or he will
as Diotrephes, reject the Brethren as loving himself to have the pre-eminence,
3 John 9, 10. and will Oversee the Church by constraint, for filthy lucre, as
being a Lord over Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. (See Doctor Hammond on the
Text.)

4. See that he be Holy in his life; for though this be not essential to his
Office, yet the unholy are unexperienced, yea and have a secret enmity in their
hearts against that Holiness which they should daily Preach; and will usually
be showing it in their close disgracing discouraging speeches, against that
serious Piety which they should promote: And they will neglect most of the
personal care of their Flock; and will unpreach by their lives the good which
they Preach by their tongues, and harden and embolden the people in their sins,
and make them believe that they believe not what they Preach themselves. Choose
not an enemy of Holiness to lead you in the way of holiness (a way that he
never went himself), nor an enemy of Christ to conduct you in the Christian
warfare, when he is a servant of the Devil, the world and flesh, against whom
you fight.

5. See that he be of a Heavenly mind, or else his Doctrine will be unsavory
and dry, and he will be Preaching some speculations or barren Controversies,
instead of Heavenly edifying truth.

6. See that he be faithful and diligent in his Ministry, as one that knows
the worth of Souls and will not sell them or betray them to the Devil for
filthy lucre, or his fleshly ends; nor make Merchandise of them, as desiring
rather theirs than them, and preferring the Fleece before the safety of the
Flock. But one that imitateth the pattern Acts 20. and in meekness instructs
those that are opposers, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. 2 Pet. 2.3. 1 Cor. 4.2. Romans 16.17,
18. 1 Pet. 5.3, 4. 2 Cor. 12.14.

7. See that he be a Lively serious Preacher; for all will be little enough to
keep up a lively seriousness in such dull and frozen hearts as ours: A cold
Preacher with cold hearts, is like to make cold work. He that speaks senslesly
and sleepily about such matters as Heaven and Hell, does by the manner of his
speech contradict the matter. When hard heartedness and security and deadness
and lethargick drowsiness, is the common and dangerous disease of Souls, let
him that loves his Soul and would not perish by his disease make use of a
Physician and remedy that is suited to the cure, and not of one to rock him
asleep, or give him an opiate to increase his malady.

8. See also that he be one that is of a truly Catholic spirit; not addicted
to a Sect, nor to Divisions in the Church, nor one that lives in a separation
or distance from the generality of the godly sober Ministers* For you take him
not for your Guide, as separated from the Catholic Church, but as united to
it, and a Member of it; as valuing the Judgment of all the Church above the
judgment of any one Pastor, and knowing that you are your selves to be kept in
the unity of the Church, and not seduced into a Sect; and that the Pastors are
to be the bonds and ligaments of the body, that by their help it may grow up in
love and unity, and not the dividers of the body, Ephesians. 4.13, 14, 15, 16. As
Captains and inferior Officers in an Army, that are to conduct each Soldier in
Unity with the Army, and not to separate, and make every Troop or Regiment an
Army by it self, that they may be the petty Generals, In a word, read some good
Visitation Sermons, which tell you what a Minister must be, and choose, if
possible, to live under such a Minister; I say, if possible; for I know to many
it is not possible. Wives, and Children, and Servants, (while they are bound)
cannot leave their Husbands, Parents, or Masters: and strong Christians who are
called to do good to others, must prefer that before such advantages to
themselves, and many other impediments may deny men such a blessing: But yet I
say, undervalue not so great a mercy, and neglect it not where lawfully it may
be had, and prefer nothing before it (as a just impediment) which is not really
more worth. And remember that Divines do commonly resolve the case of the
Infidel Nations of the World, that they are unexcusable in their Infidelity,
because when they hear that other Nations profess to know the way to Heaven,
they do not in so great a case go over Sea and Land to enquire after the
Doctrine which we profess. And if the Tartarians, Indians, and other Nations
are bound to send to Christian nations, for Preachers of the Gospel, I only
leave you proportionably to measure your case by theirs (allowing for the
disproportion): And to consider how far you should deny your worldly profit in
removeing your habitations, for such helps as your own necessities require.

DIRECT. XII. Make choice of such Christians for your familiar friends and the
companions of your lives, as are holy, humble, heavenly, serious, mortified,
charitable, peaceable, judicious, experienced and fixed in the ways of God;
and not of ungodly persons, or proud self-conceited, censorious, dividing,
injudicious, unexperienced, sensual, worldly, opinionative, superficial,
lukewarm or unsettled Professors.
THe Reasons of this Direction you may perceive in what I said under the last.
Your company is a matter of exceeding great concernment to you, as one of the
greatest helps or hindrances, comforts or discomforts of all your lives,
especially those that you dwell with, and those that you choose for your
familiars and bosom friends. And therefore (so far as Gods Providence does not
forbid you, and make it impossible) choose such as are here described; or at
least one such for your bosom friend, if you can have acquaintance with no
more. It is of unspeakable importance to your Salvation, with whom you are
associated for most familiar converse. A good companion will teach you what you
know not, or remember you of that which you forget, or stir you up when you are
dull, or warm you when you are cold, and watch over you and warn you of your
danger, and save you from the poison of ill companions. O what a help and
delight it is, to have a holy, judicious, faithful friend to open your heart
to, and to walk with in the ways of life! And how exceeding hard is it to
escape sin and hell, and get well to Heaven, in company and familiarity of the
servants of the Devil, who are posting unto Hell? Let not your companions be
worse than your selves, lest they make you worse; but as much wiser and better
as you can procure. See Eccles. 4.9, 12. Psalm. 16.2. and 119.63. Prove. 13.20.

DIRECT. XIII. Subdue your passions, and abhor all uncharitable principles and
practices, and live in love; maintaining peace in your families, and with your
neighbors, but especially in the Church of God.
LOve as you would be loved; yea, Love if you would be loved: for there is no
surer way to purchase love. And love because you are so freely loved, by that
God whose wrath you have so often deserved: Let the thankful feeling of his Love
in Christ, even turn you wholly into love, to God and man: Abhor every thought
and word and deed, which is contrary to love, and tends to the hurt of
others: And hate the backbitings and bitter words of any, which tend to make
another odious, and to destroy your love to any one that God commands you to
love. Allow that moderate passion which is the fruit of love, and tends only
to do good; but resist that which inclines you to hatred, or to do evil. The
more men wrong you, remember that you are the more watchfully to maintain your
love, knowing that these temptations are sent by the Devil on purpose to
destroy and quench it, and fill your heart with uncharitableness and wrath.
Give place to the wrath of others, and stand not resisting it by words or
deeds, Romans 12.18, 19, 20. Recompense to no man evil for evil, in word or
action, ver. 17. Especially be most tender of the Union of true Christians, and
of the Churches peace: When you hear the men of several Sects representing one
another as odious, understand that it is the language of the Devil to draw you
from love, into hatred and divisions: And when you must speak odiously of men's
sin, speak charitably of their persons, and be as ready to speak of the good
that is in them, as of the evil. Believe not that dividing ungrounded Doctrine,
which tells you that you cannot sufficiently disown the Errors of any party
in Doctrine, and Worship, and Discipline, without a separation or withdrawing
from their Communion; and which tells you that you are guilty of the
Ministerial faults of every Pastor that you join with, or of the faults of all
that Worship which you are present at (which would first separate you from
every worshipping society and person upon earth, and then lead you to give over
the worshipping of God your selves.) You must Love Christians as Christians,
though they have errors and faults repugnant to their Christianity: And you
must join in Worship with Christians as Christians, though their Worship has
errors and faults repugnant to the right order and manner of Worship: so be it
you join not in that Worship which is substantially evil, and such as God does
utterly disown; Or that you commit no actual sin your selves, or that you
approve not of the errors and faults of the Worshippers, and justify not their
smallest evil; Or that you prefer not defective faulty Worship before that
which is more pure and agreeable to the Will of God. For while all the
Worshippers are faulty and imperfect, all their Worship will be so too: And if
your actual sin when you Pray or Preach defectively your selves, does not
signify that you approve your faultiness; much less will your presence prove
that you allow of the faultiness of others. The business that you come upon is
to join with a Christian Congregation in the use of those Ordinances which God
has appointed, supposing that the Ministers and Worshippers will all be
sinfully defective, in method, order, words, or circumstances: And to bear with
that which God does bear with, and not to refuse that which is Gods for the
adherent faults of men, no more than you will refuse every dish of meat which
is unhansomly Cooked, as long as there is no poison in it, and you prefer it
not before better, 1 Cor. 1.10. and 3.1, 2, 3. with 11.17, 18, 21. Romans 15.1, 2.

DIRECT. XIV. Keep up a constant Government over your Thoughts and Tongues;
especially against those particular sins which you are stronglyest tempted to,
and which you see other Christians most overtaken with.
KEep your Thoughts employed upon something that is good and profitable; either
about some useful Truths, or about some duty to God or man, of your general or
particular Calling; yea about all these in their several seasons: Learn how to
watch your thoughts, and stop them at their first excursions; and how to
quicken them and make them serviceable to every grace, and every duty. You can
never improve your solitary hours, if you have not the Government of your
Thoughts.

And as the Thoughts must be governed because they are the first and intimate
actings of good or evil; so the Tongue must be Governed as the first expresser
of the mind, and the first instrument of good or hurt to others. Especially
take heed of these sins which the faultiness of most Professors of Religion
does warn you to avoid. 1. An ordinary course of vain jesting, and unprofitable
talk. 2. Provoking, passionate, inconsiderate words, that tend to kindle wrath
in others. 3. Backbiting, censuring, and speaking evil of others without any
just call, when it is either upon uncertain reports, or uncharitable suspicion,
or tends more to hurt than good. 4. A forward venting of our own conceits,
and a confident pleading for our uncertain, unproved Opinions in Religion, and
a contentious wrangling for them, as if the Kingdom of God lay in them. And a
forwardness in all company to be the Speakers rather than the Hearers, and to
talk in a Magisterial Teaching way, as if we took our selves to be the wisest,
and others to have need to learn of us. But especially take heed of speaking
evil of those that have wronged you, or of those that differ from you in some
tolerable Opinions in Religion: And hate that devilish uncharitable vice,
which makes many ready to believe any thing, or say any thing, be it never so
false, of those that are against their Sect; yea of whole parties of men that
differ from them, when there is not one of a thousand of all the party that
ever they were acquainted with, or ever could prove the thing by of which they
are accused. By the means of these bold uncharitable reports, the Devil has
unspeakably gained against Christ; and the Kingdom of malice has won upon the
Kingdom of Love; and most Christians are easier known to be factious by hating
or slandering one another, than they can be known to be Christ's Disciples by
loving one another. And while every Sect without remorse does speak
reproachfully and hatefully of the rest, they learn hereby to hate one another,
and harden the Infidel and ungodly world, in hating and speaking evil of them
all: So that a Turk or Heathen need no other witness of the odiousness of all
Christians, than the venomous words which they speak against each other. And as
foul words in quarrels prepare for blows; so these malicious invectives upon
differences in Religion, prepare for the cruellest persecutions.

From my own observation, which with a grieved soul, I have made in this
Generation, I hereby give warning to this and all succeeding Ages, that if they
have any regard to Truth or Charity, they take heed how they believe any
factious partial Historian or Divine, in any evil that he says of the party
which he is against: For (though there be good and credible persons of most
parties, yet) you shall find that passion and partiality prevails against
Conscience, Truth, and Charity in most that are sick of this Disease. And that
the envious zeal which is described Jam. 3. does make them think they do God
service, first in believing false reports, and then in verting them, against
those that their zeal or laction does call the enemies of truth, so that there
is little credit to be given to their reproaches farther than some better
evidence is brought to prove the thing. Nay it would astonish a man to read the
impudent lies which I have often read, obtruded upon the World with such
confidence, that the Reader will be tempted to think, Surely all this cannot be
false. Yea about public words or actions, where you would think that the
multitude of Witnesses would deter them from speaking it, if it were not true;
and yet all as false as tongue can speak. Therefore believe not Pride; or
Faction, or Malice in any evil that it says, unless you have better evidence
of the truth.

Most Christian is that advice of Dr. H. More, that all Parties of Christians
would mark all the Good which is in other Parties, and be more forward to speak
of that than of the Evil: And this would promote the work of Charity in the
Church, and the interest of Christianity in the World; whereas the overlooking
of all that is good, and aggravating all the evil (and falsely seigning more than
is true) is the work of greatest service to the Devil, and of greatest enmity
to Christianity and Love, that I know commonly practiced in the World. Keep
your tongues from all such hellish work as this.

DIRECT. XV. Let every state of life and Relation that you are in, be
sanctified unto God, and conscionably used: And to that end understand the
advantages and duties of every condition and Relation, and the sins and
hindrances and dangers which you are most liable to.
THe duties of our Relations are a great part of the work of a Christians life:
As Magistrates and Subjects, Pastors and Flocks, Parents and Children, Husband
and Wife, Masters and Servants; as Superiors in Gifts or Places, or Inferiors
or equals; as Neighbors and companions. In our Teaching and learning, ruling
and obeying, buying and selling. Be conscionable in all these which are your
own Relations, if you will live as Christians and be acceptable unto God. An
ungodly or oppressing Magistrate, a murmuring rebellious Subject, an ungodly,
negligent or factious Pastor, an unteachable, refractory, ungodly Flock, a
Husband, Parent, or Master, without Religion, Love, or Justice, a Wife or Child
or Servant, without Love and dutiful obedience, and faithful diligence; a proud
contemptuous Superior, a malicious censorious inferior, an unjust uncharitable
Neighbor; a deceitful buyer or seller, borrower or lender, and a self-seeking
friend, and seducing unprofitable companion; are all as far from pleasing God
by the rest of their works or profession of Religion, as they are from being
obedient to his will: They provoke him to abhor their Prayers and Profession,
and to tell them that he will rather have Obedience than Sacrifice. If you are
false to men, you are not true to God. It is he that fears God, and works
Righteousness, that is accepted of him: and the unrighteous shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God.

DIRECT. XVI. Live as those that have all their powers, receivings and
opportunities to do Good with in the World; and must be answerable how they
have improved all: And as those that believe that the more Good they do, the
more they do receive, and the greater is the honor, the profit, and the
pleasure of their lives.
TO do no harm, is an honor which is common to a stone or a clod of Clay, with
the most innocent man. If this were all the excellency that you aim at, it were
better that you had never been born; for then you would certainly have done no
harm: Remember that to do good is the highest imitation of God, supposing that
it proceed from Holy Love, and be done to the Pleasing and Glorifying of God,
that the Principle and the End be suitable to the work. Remember who has told
you that it is more blessed to give than to receive, Acts 20.35. And has
promised that He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall
receive a Prophets reward; and he that receives a Righteous man in the name of
a Righteous man, shall receive a Righteous man's reward: and whosoever shall
give to drink unto one of these little ones, a Cap of cold water only, in the
name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward
(supposing that he have no better to give), Matthew. 10.41, 42. Give to every man
that asks of thee (according to thy ability), Give and it shall be given to
you, Luke 6.30, 38. and 12.33. Take that day or hour as lost in which you do no
good (directly or preparatorily): And take that part of your estate as lost,
with which directly or remotely) you do no good. Remember how the Judgment must
pass on you at last, according to the improvement of your several Talents,
Matthew. 25. When your time is past, and your estates are gone, or your
understandings or your strength decayed, and your power and greatness is
levelled with the poorest, it will be an unspeakable comfort to you, if you are
able to say, We laid them out sincerely to our Masters use; and an unspeakable
terror to you to say, They were lost and cast away on the service of the Flesh.
If therefore you are Rulers, and are entrusted with Power, study how to do all
the good with your Power that possibly you can: If you are Ministers of Christ,
lay out your time and strength and parts in doing good to the Souls of all
about you; study how you may be most serviceable to the Church and Cause of
Christ. If you are rich men, study how to do all the good with your Riches that
possibly you can do (not violating the order appointed you by God): In your
Neighbourhoods, and in all your Families and Relations, study to do the
greatest good you can. Take it thankfully as a great mercy to your selves, when
opportunity to do good is offered you. And content not your selves to do a
little, while you are able to do more. Gal. 6.7, 8, 9, 10. Be not deceived, God
is not mocked; for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap: For he
that sows to his Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap corruption; but he that
sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap everlasting Life. And let us not
be weary in well-doing, for in due season we shall reap if we faint not. As we
have therefore opportunity, let us do good to all men, especially unto them who
are of the household of Faith. 2 Cor. 9.6. He which sows sparingly shall reap
sparingly, and he which sows bountifully shall reap bountifully: Every man
according as he purposes in his heart, so let him give, not grudgingly, or of
necessity; for God loves a cheerful giver. Heb. 13.16. To do good, and to
communicate forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. Ephesians.
3.10. For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to good works, which
God has ordained, that we should walk in them. Let doing good be the business
and employment of your lives; Preferring still the public good before the
private good of any; and the good of men's Souls before that of the body. But
yet neglecting none, but doing the lesser in order to the greater.

Object. But I am a poor obscure person, that have neither abilities of mind or
body or estate; and what good can I do?

Answ. There is no rational person that is not entrusted with One Talent at the
least, Matthew. 25. and that is not in a capacity of doing good in the World, if
they have but hearts and be but willing. If you had neither money to give, nor
tongues to speak for God, and to provoke others to do good, yet a Holy, humble,
heavenly, patient, blameless life, is a powerful means of doing good, by
showing the excellency of Grace, and convincing the Ungodly, and stopping the
mouths of the enemies of Piety, and honoring the ways of God in the World:
Such a holy, harmless, exemplary life, is a continual, and a powerful Sermon:
And for giving, if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to
that a man has, and not according to that he has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. If you are
unseignedly willing to give if you had it, God takes it as done: What you
would have given, is set down on your account as given indeed. The Widows two
mites were praised by Christ as a bountiful gift, and a Cup of cold water is
not unrewarded to the willing Soul. No one therefore is excusable that lives
unprofitably in the World. But yet men of Power and Parts and Wealth have the
greatest reckoning to make: Their ten Talents must have a proportionable
improvement: It is a great deal of good that they must do: For to whomsoever
much is given, of him shall be much required; and to whom men have committed
much, of him they will ask the more, Luke 12.48.

DIRECT. XVII. Redeem your Time, and highly value every minute; and spare for
no labor in the work of your salvation: Dream not of an easy, idle, sluggish
life, as sufficient to your high and glorious ends: Nor rest not in a customary
and outside way of duty, without regard to the Life and the success.
IF any thing in all the World require all our power and time, it is that for
which all our powers and time are given us; and which we are sure will a
thousand fold recompense us for all: O what a sottish kind of stupidity is it,
for a man to trifle in the way to eternity, that has an endless life of joy or
sorrow, depending on the preparations of so short a life. How little does he
know the worth of his Soul, the Joys of Heaven, the terrors of Hell, the
malicious diligence of Satan, or the difficulty of Salvation, that can idle and
play away whole hours of time; and pray as if he prayed not, and seem to be
Religious when he is not in good earnest! and bestireth not himself so much to
escape Hell fire, and to obtain everlasting Joys with Christ, as he would do
to escape a temporal death or misery, or to obtain some dignity or riches in
the World, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30. O therefore as ever you care what becomes of your
Souls, and as ever you will have comfort in the review of your present life,
make not a jest of Heaven and Hell: Trifle not in your race and warfare; Dally
not with God and Conscience; Play not, and dream not away your Time, Know the
worth of an hours Time, for the sake of your work, and of your Souls, as it is
commonly known by dying men. But of this I have spoke already in my NOW or
NEVER, and a Saint or a Brute, and in the third part of the Saints Rest.

DIRECT. XVIII. Sit down and count what it may cost you to be Christians
indeed, and to be saved: Reckon not on prosperity, or a cheap Religion, but
resolve to take up the Cross and follow Christ in suffering, and to be
Crucified to the World, and by many tribulations, to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Luke 14.26, 27, 28, 30, 33. Gal. 6.14. Acts 14.22. 1 These. 3.4. and 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7, 8. Mal. 5.10, 11, 12. 2 Timothy 3.12.
ALL that will live godly in Christ shall suffer Persecution. It is not All
that are Baptized and called Christians, but All that will live godly in Christ
Jesus: It is Godliness, and not the bare name of Christianity, which the
Serpents Seed have so great an enmity to. I have elsewhere cited an excellent
saying of Dr. Th. Jacksons, to prove that this is to be expected under
Christian, as well as Heathen Governments, and that it is not through the
goodness of the Great ones of the World, but the cowardliness of our hearts,
that the Ministers of Christ are not ordinarily Martyrs. Though God may
possibly exempt you from any notable suffering for his Cause, yet it is not
wise or safe to expect such an exemption: For that will hinder your preparation
for Suffering: And a mind prepared to suffer, is essential to true
Christianity: And no man that is not a Martyr in Resolution and disposition can
be saved. If the fiery trial come upon you, let it not seem a strange
unexpected thing, 1 Pet. 4.12, 13, 14, 17. When Persecution arises because of
the Word, the unrooted, unfound, unsettled Christian is presently offended, and
falls away, Mat. 13.21. Mark 4.17. Then they will fall to distinguishing and
carnal reasoning, and prove any thing lawful which is necessary to their Peace,
Gal. 6.12. As many as desire to make a fair show in the Flesh, they constrain
you to be Circumcised, only lest they should suffer Persecution for the Cross
of Christ, Gal. 6.12. Shrink not for Sufferings; Fear not them that can but
kill the body, Luke 12.4. Never does the Spirit of God and Glory so much rest
upon Believers, as in their greatest Sufferings for Righteousness sake, 1 Pet.
4.14. and never have they cause of more exceeding joy, Matthew. 5.11, 12.
Prosperity does not so well agree with a life of Faith, as Sufferings and
Adversity. Our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory; while we look not at the (temporal)
things which are not seen, but at the things (eternal) which are not seen, 2
Cor. 4.17, 18. Read Romans 8.33. to the end*

DIRECT. XIX. If you fall into any sin, rise speedily by a through Repentance;
and take heed both of delay, and of a palliate Cure, Luke 13.3, 5. and 22.32.
TAke heed of trusting to a General Repentance or a Converted state, instead of
a particular Repentance and Conversion from any known sin, especially which is
more than the ordinary unavoidable infirmities of a Saint. For it is not
General Repentance indeed which reaches not to every known particular. If
temptation have cast you down, take heed of lying there, but presently get up
again: What the Apostle says of Wrath, Ephesians. 4.26. the same I may say of other
falls, Let not the Sun go down upon them: But go out with Peter and weep with
him, if you have sinned with him: If your bones be out of joint or broken, get
them set presently, before they settle in their dislocation: And let the Cure
be through, and spare not for a little pain at first: Let as open confession as
the case requires, and as full restitution, signify the sincerity of your
Repentance: For a gentle handling of your selves may undo you; And palliation
is the Hypocrites cure. O take heed lest you presume to sleep one night in your
unrepented sin; and take heed lest Delay encourage the Tempter to offer you the
bait again and again, and to say, Why not once more; Why may you not be as well
pardoned for twice as for once; and for thrice as for twice, etc. It Is
dangerous playing or sleeping at the brink of Hell. Away from the temptation
and occasion of your sin; stand not disputing, but Resolve and be gone; And sin
no more, lest a worse thing come unto you, John 5.14. Stick not man at the
shame or loss or suffering, which confession, restitution or reformation may
bring; but remember that you can never escape damnation at too dear a rate.
This is Christ's meaning, when he speaks of cutting off a Right hand, or
plucking out a right eye, if it offend; that is, ensnare and tempt you unto
sin, Matthew. 5.29, 30. Not that you should do so indeed, for you have an easier
way to avoid the sin; but that, this is far the lesser of the two evils, to
lose a hand or eye, than to lose the Soul, and therefore to be chosen if there
were no other remedy. If the thief had no other way to forbear stealing than to
cut off his hand; or the Fornicator to cure his lust, than to put out his eyes,
it were a cheap remedy. A cheap and easy superficial Repentance, may skin over
the sore and deceive an Hypocrite; but he that would be sure of pardon, and
free from fear, must go to the bottom.

DIRECT. XX. Live as with Death continually in your eye, and spend every day in
serious preparation for it, that when it comes, you may find your work
dispatched; and may not then cry out in vain to God to try you once again.
PRomise not your selves long life: Think not of death as at many years
distance, but as hard at hand. Think what will then be needful to your peace
and comfort, and order all your life accordingly, and prepare that now, which
will be needful then: Live now while you have time, as you will resolve and
promise God to live, when on your deathbed you are praying for a little time
of trial more: It is a great work to die in a joyful assurance and hope of
everlasting life, and with a longing desire to depart and be with Christ as
best of all, Phil. 1.21, 23. O then what a burden and terror it will be, to
have an unbelieving, or a worldly heart, or a guilty Conscience, Now therefore
use all possible diligence to strengthen Faith, to increase love, to be acquit
from guilt, to be above the World, to have the mind set free from the Captivity
of the flesh, to walk with God, and to obtain the deepest, most delectable
apprehensions of his love in Christ, and of the heavenly blessedness which you
expect. Do you feel any doubts of the state of immortality, or staggering at
the Promise of God through unbelief! Presently do all you can to conquer them,
and get a clear resolution to your souls, and leave it not all to do at the
time of sickness. Are the thoughts or God and Heaven unpleasant or terrible to
you? Presently search out the cause of all, and labor in the cure of it as for
your lives. Is there any former or present sin which is a burden or terror to
your Consciences? Presently seek out to Christ for a Cure, by Faith and true
Repentance; and do that to disburden your Consciences now, which you would do
on a sickbed; and leave not so great and necessary a (...) to so uncertain and
short and unfit a time. Is there any thing in this World that is sw^^t^r t^
your thoughts than God and Heaven? (...) which you cannot willingly let go.
M^rti^i^ it without delay; consider of its vanity; compare it with Heaven;
Crucify it by the Cross of Christ; cease not till you account it loss and
^^ung, for the excellent knowledge of Christ and life eternal, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.
Let not death surprise you as a thing that you never seriously expected* Can
you do no more in preparation for it than you do? If no, why do you wish a
death to be tried once again? and why are you troubled that you lived no
better? But if you can, when think you should it be done? Is the time of
uncertain painful sickness better than this? O how does sensuality besot the
World! and inconsiderateness deprive them of the benefit of their reason? O
Sirs, if you know indeed that you must shortly die, live then as dying men
should live: Choose your condition in the World, and manage it as men that must
shortly dye: Use your Power, and Command, and Honor, and use all your
Neighbors, and especially use the Cause and Servants of Christ, as men should
do that must shortly die. Build and plant, and buy and sell, and use your
Riches as those that must die, remembering that the fashion of all these things
is passing away, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30. Yea pray and read and hear and meditate as
those that must die. Seeing you are as sure of it as if it were this hour; in
the name of God delay not your preparations. It is a terrible thing for an
immortal Soul to pass out of the body in a carnal unregenerate, unprepared
state: and to leave a World which they loved and were familiar with, and go to
a World which they neither know nor love, and where they have neither heart nor
treasure, Matthew. 6.19, 20, 31. The measure of Faith which may help you to bear
an easy cross, is not sufficient to fortify and encourage your souls, to
enter upon so great a change. So also bear all your wants and crosses as men
that must shortly die: Fear the cruelties of men, but as beseems those that
are ready to die: He that can die well, can do any thing, or suffer any thing:
And he that is unready to die, is unfit for a fruitful and comfortable life.
What can rationally rejoice that man, who is sure to die, and unready to dye,
and is yet unfurnished of dying comforts? Let nothing be now sweet to you,
which will be bitter to your dying thoughts. Let nothing be much desired now,
which will be unprofitable and uncomfortable then. Let nothing seem very heavy
or grievous now, which will be light and easy then: Let nothing now seem
honorable, which will then seem despicable and vile Consider of every thing as
it will look at death; that when the day shall come which ends all the joys
of the ungodly, you may look up with joy, and say, Welcome Heaven, This is tho
day which I so long expected, which all my days were spent in preparation for,
which shall end my fears, and begin my felicity, and put me into possession of
all that I desired and prayed and labored for; when my Soul shall see its
glorified Lord: For he has said, John 12.26. If any man serve me, let him
follow me; and where I am, there shall also my servant be: If any man serve me,
him will my Father honor: Even so Lord Jesus, remember me now thou art in thy
Kingdom, and let me be with thee in Paradise, Luke 23.42, 43. O thou that
spakest those words so full of unexpressible comfort to a sinful woman in the
first speech after thy blessed Resurrection, Joh. 20.17. GO TO MY BRETHREN, AND
SAY UNTO THEM, I ASCEND UNTO MY FATHER AND YOUR FATHER, AND TO MY GOD AND YOUR
GOD.] Take up now this Soul that is thine own, that it may see the Glory given
thee with the Father, Joh. 17.24. and instead of this life of temptation,
trouble, darkness, distance, and sinful imperfection, I may delightfully Behold
and Love and Praise, thy Father, and my Father, and thy God and my God. Lord
now let thou thy servant depart in peace; Lord Jesus receive my Spirit,
Luke 2.29. Acts 7.59.

And now I have given you all these Directions, I shall only request you in the
close, that you will set your very hearts to the daily serious practice of
them; For there is no other way for a ripe confirmed state of Grace: And as
ever you regard the glory of God, the honor of your Religion, the welfare of
the Church and those about you, and the living and dying comforts of your
selves; O do not sluggishly rest in an Infant state of Grace! Did you but know
how a weak and strong Faith differ, and how a weak and a found Confirmed
Christian differ, as to the honor of God, and the good of others, and
especially to themselves, both in life and death, it would quickly awaken you
to a cheerful diligence, for so high and excellent an end. Did you but well
understand the wrong that Christ and the Gospel have sustained in the World,
yea in England, by weak, diseased, distempered Christians, your hearts would
bleed, and with shame and grief, it would be your secret and open lamentation.
Stir up then the Grace that is given you, and use Christ's means, and do your
best, and you will find that Christ is not an insufficient Physician, nor an
uneffectual Savior, or an empty Fountain; but that he is filled with all the
fullness of God, and has Spirit and life to communicate to his Members, Zech.
12.8. and that there is no want which he cannot supply, and no corruption or
temptation, which his Grace is not sufficient to overcome, John 4.14. 2 Cor.
12.9. Romans 6.4, 6. Col. 3.1, 3, 4.

FINIS.
THE CHARACTER Of a Sound Confumed CHRISTIAN. As also, 2. Of a Weak Christian:
And 3. Of a Seeming Christian.

Written to imprint upon men's minds the true Idea or (conception) OF Godliness
and Christianity.

By Richard Baxter.

The Second Part of the Directions for Weak Christians.

LONDON, Printed by R. White, for Nevill Simmons, at the Three Crowns near
Holborn Conduit. 1669.

THE PREFACE TO THE SECOND PART; Directed to my worthy Friend, Henry Ashurst,
Esquire, Citizen of London.
Dear and faithful Friend.
WHen this Book was Printed and passing into the World, without the ordinary
ornament of a prefixed honored Name, my thoughts reduced me into the common
way, though not upon the common reasons; assuring me that your name, would be
more than an accident or ceremony to such a discourse as this; even a part more
substantial than a Map is in a Treatise of Geography, or the well-cut Figures
in Tractates of Anatomy. Discourses of Navigation, Architecture, Music, etc.
may almost as hopefully instruct the Learners, without any visible operations
or effects, as the Characters of well-tempered Christians, can duly inform the
minds of ignorant ungodly men, of so Divine a thing as Christianity and
Godliness, without acquaintance with some such Persons, in whom these
Characters are manifestly exemplified. Wise and holy precepts, are to make wise
and holy persons: It is such Persons as well as such Precepts which bear the
image of God: which indeed is most perfect in exactness and integrity in the
precepts; (for in them is no imperfection or error, as they are of God;) But
it is of greater final Excellency; in activity and usefulness as it is in men.
And therefore as God delights in his servants, and is Glorified in and by
them in the world; so Satan usually chooses such Persons, to reproach and make
odious to the ignorant, rather than the holy Precepts immediately, by which
they are directed; both because their Holiness is most exasperating by
activity; and also most liable to calumny and contempt, through imperfection,
and mixture of that which indeed is worthy of dislike. Till Godliness and
Christianity be visible in full perfection, and elevated above the
contradiction of folly, and the contempt of pride, the blind distracted minds
of hardened forsaken sinners, will not acknowledge its divine celestial nature,
and worth: But then it will be too late to become partakers of it: They must
both know and possess it in its infancy and minority, who will ever enjoy it in
its heavenly dignity and glory. If seasonable illumination and conversion,
confute not the deceits and standers which pride and ignorance have
entertained, the too-late confutation of them by death and their following
experience, will make them wish, that they had been wise at cheaper rates, when
it will be in vain to cry, Give us of your Oil, for our Lamps are out, Mat.
25.8.

But while I offer your name to the malicious world, as an instance of the
temper which I here describe, I intend it not as a singular though an eminent
instance: For through the great mercy of God, there are thousands of examples
of confirmed Christians, among us in this Land, even before those eyes which
will not see them. But it is not Catalogues but single names, which Writers
have used in this way. And why may I not take the advantage of Custom, to
leave to the World the testimony of my estimation and great respects, to so
deserving a person of the primitive Christian Catholic temper: And to let them
know, what sort of men were my most dear and faithful friends? And also thus to
express my love, by telling you closely what you must be, as well as by telling
the World for their example, what you are. Upon these accounts, without your
knowledge or consent, I presume thus to prefix your name, to this Treatise
written long ago, but now published by

Your faithful Friend, Rich. Baxter.
From my Lodging in New-Prison, June 14. 1669.
ERRATA.
Reader, When I had gathered the Errata I was separated by a Prison from those
Collections; and having but two of the Sheets now at hand, I shall give you the
Errata of them only.

IN the Contents. n. 15. for Lovers of God read Love of God. Page 163. l. 5.
for to six 1. and six. page 163. l. 18. blot out that p. 164. l. 5. for that 1.
than. p. 169. l. 10. for of 1. for. p. 170. l. 1. for c^re 1. cure. All the
rest I have forgotten, save that some where I remember filthy for sl^shly.

TO THE READER.
Readers,
IT is a matter of greater moment than I can express, what Idea or Image of the
nature of GODLINESS and CHRISTIANITY is imprinted upon men's minds: The
description which is expressed in the sacred Scriptures, is true and full: The
thing described is rational, pure, perfect, unblameable and amiable. That which
is expressed in the Lives of the most, is nothing so; but is purblind, defiled,
maimed, imperfect, culpable, and mixed with so much of the contrary quality,
that to them that cannot distinguish the Chaff from the Wheat, the Sickness
from the Life, it seems an unreasonable, fancifull, loathsome and vexatious
thing; and so far from being worthy to be preferred before all the Riches,
Honors and Pleasures of the world, that it seems worthy to be kept under as
a troubler of Kingdoms, Societies and Souls. And doubtless this monstrous
Expression of it in men's Lives, is because the perfect expression of it in Gods
Word, has not made (...) impression upon the Mind, and consequently upon the
Heart. For as it is sound doctrine which must make sound Christians; so
Doctrine works on the will and affections not as it is in it self, and as
delivered, but as it is understood, believed, remembered, considered; even as
it is imprinted on the Mind, and used by it. And as interposed matter, or
defective application, may cause the Image on the Wax to be imperfect, though
made by the most perfect Seal: so is it in this case; when one man does
defectively understand the Scripture-description of a godly man, or Christian;
and another by misunderstanding mixeth false conceptions of his own; and
another by a corrupt depraved will does hinder the understanding from
believing, or remembering, or considering and using what it partly apprehends;
what wonder if the Godliness and Christianity in their hearts be unlike the
Godliness and Christianity in the Scriptures: When the Law of God in Nature and
Scripture is pure and incorrupt, and the Law of God written imperfectly on the
heart, is there mixed with the carnal Law in their members, no marvel if it be
expressed accordingly in their lives.

I have therefore much endeavored in all my writings, and especially in this,
to draw out the full pourtraiture of a Christian or godly man indeed, and to
describe Gods Image on the soul of man, in such a manner as tends to the just
information of the Readers mind, and the filling up of the wants, and
rectifying the errors which may be found in his former conceptions of it. And I
do purposely inculcate the same things often, in several writings (as when I
preached I did in all my Sermons) that the Reader may find that I bring him not
undigested needless novelties, and that the frequent repetition of them may
help to make the deeper and fuller impression: For my work is to subserve the
Holy Ghost, in putting Gods Law into men's hearts, and writing it out truly,
clearly and fully upon their inward parts; that they may be made such
themselves, by understanding thoroughly what they must be, and what a solid
Christian is: And that thus they may be born again by the incorruptible,
immortal seed, the Word of God which will live and abide for ever; and may
purify their souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.22, 23,
25. He is the best Lawyer, Physician, Soldier, etc. who has his Doctrine in
his brain, and not only in his Books; and has digested his reading into an
intellectual systeme and habit of knowledge. If Ministers had an hundred times
over repeated the integral pourtraiture or character of a sound Christian, till
it had been as familiar to the minds and memories of their hearers, as is the
description of a Magistrate, a Physician, a Schoolmaster, a Husbandman, a
Shephered, and such things as they are well acquainted with, it would have been
a powerful means to make sound Christians. But when men's minds conceive of a
Christian, as a man that differs from Heathens and Infidels, in nothing but
holding the Christian Opinions, and using different words and ceremonies of
worship, and such like, no wonder if such be but opinionative lifeless
Christians: And if their Religion make them no better than a Seneca or
Plutarch, I shall never believe that they are any surer to be saved than they.
And such a sort of men there are, that suppose Christianity to consist but of
these three parts; 1. The Christian Doctrine acknowledged (which they call
Faith.) 2. The Orders and Ordinances of the Christian Church and Worship,
submitted to, and decently used (which they call Godliness.) And 3. The heart
and life of a Cato, Cicero, or Socrates adjoined: But all that goes beyond
this, (which is the Life of Christianity and Godliness, a Lively Faith, and
Hope, and Love, a Heavenly and Holy mind and life, from the renewing in dweling
Spirit of God, which is described in this Treatise) they are strangers to it,
and take it to be but fancy and hypocrisy. These No-Christians do much to
reduce the Church to Infidelity; that there may be indeed No Christians in the
world. For my part I must confess, if there were no better Christians in the
world than these, I think I should be no Christian my self: And if Christ made
men no better than the Religion of Socrates, Cato or Seneca, and did no more to
the reparation and perfecting of men's hearts and lives, I should think no
better of the Christian Religion than of theirs: For the means is to be
estimated by the End and Use: And that is the best Physician that has the
Remedies which are fittest to work the cure. If God had not acquainted me with
a sort of men that have really more Holiness, Mortification, Spirituality, Love
to God, and to one another, and even to enemies, and more heavenly desires,
expectations and delights, than these men before described have, it would have
been a very great hinderance to my Faith.

The same may I say of those that place Godliness and Christianity only in
holding strict opinions, and in affected needless singularities, and in the
fluent Oratory and length of prayer, and avoiding other men's forms and modes of
worship, and in any thing short of a Renewed, Holy, Heavenly heart and life.

And undoubtedly if a true, full Character of Godliness had been imprinted in
their minds, we should never have seen the Professors of it so blotted with
sensuality, selfishness, pride, ambition, worldliness, distrust of God,
self-conceitedness, heresy, schism, rebellions, unquietness, impatiency,
unmercifulness, and cruelty to men's souls and bodies, as we have seen them in
this age; and all this justified as consistent with Religion.

And I fear that because this Treatise will speak to few that are not some way
guilty, every face which has a spot or blemish will be offended with the
glass: and lest the faulty will say that I particularly intended to disgrace
them: But I must here tell the Reader, to prevent his misunderstanding, that if
he shall imagine that I have my eyes upon particular parties, and as a
discontented person do intend to blame those that differ from my self, or to
grieve inferiors, or dishonor and asperse superiors, they will mistake me,
and wrong themselves, and me, who professedly intend but the true Description
of sound Christians, diseased Christians, and seeming Christians.

And for the manner of this writing, I am conscious it has but little to
commend it. The matter is that for which it is published. The Lord Verulam in
his Essays truly says, that much reading makes one full; much discourse does
make one ready, and much writing does make a man exact. Though I have had my
part of all these means, yet being parted five years from my Books, and three
years from my Preaching, the effects may decay; and you must expect neither
Quotations or Oratory Testimonies or ornament of style: But having not yet
wholly ceased from Writing, I may own so much of the exactness as will allow me
to entreat the Reader, not to use me as many have done; who by over-looking
some one word, have made the sense another thing, and have made it a crime to
be exact in Writing, because they cannot or will not be exact in Reading, or
charitable or humane in interpreting.

The Contents.
THE Characters of a strong confirmed Christian. page 1 1. He lives by such a
Faith of unseen things as governs his soul instead of sight. 6 2. He has
cogent Reasons for his Religion. 9 3. He sees the well-ordered frame of sacred
verities, and the integral parts in their harmony or consort; and sets not
up one truth against another. 11 4. He adhereth to them, and practices them,
from an inward connatural principle, called, The Divine Nature, and The Spirit
of Christ. 12 5. He serves not God for fear only, but for Love. 14 6. He
loves God, 1. Much for his Goodness to himself. 2. And more for his Goodness
to the Church. 3. And most of all for his essential Goodness and perfection. 16
7. He takes this Love and its Expressions, for the heart and height of all his
Religion. 19 8. He has absolutely put his soul and all his hopes into the hand
of Christ, and lives by faith upon him as his Savior. 21 9. He takes Christ
as the Teacher sent from God, and his Doctrine for the truest wisdom, and
learneth of none but in subordination to him. 23 10. His Repentance is
universal and effectual, and has gone to the Root of every sin. 25 11. He
loves the Light, as it shows him his sin and duty; and is willing to know
the worst of sin, and the most of duty. 27 12. He desires the highest degree
of Holiness, and has no sin which he had not rather leave than keep, and had
rather be the Best, though in poverty, than the Greatest in prosperity. 30 13.
He lives upon GOD and HEAVEN as the End, Reward, and Motive of his Life. 32
14. He counts no cost or pains too great for the obtaining it, and has
nothing so dear which he cannot part with for it. 35 15. He is daily exercised
in the practice of Self-denial as (next to the Lovers of God) the second half
of his Religion. 38 16. He has mortified his fleshly desires, and so far
mastereth his senses and appetite, that they make not his obedience very
uneasy or uneven. 42 17. He prefers the means of his holiness and
happiness, incomparably before all provisions and pleasures of the flesh. 45
18. He is crucified to the world, and the world to him by the Cross of Christ,
and contemns it through the belief of the greater things of the life to come.
47 19. He foreseeth the End in all his ways, and judges of all things as they
will appear at last. 50 20. He lives upon God alone, and is content with his
favor and approbation, without the approbation and favor of men. 53 21. He
has absolutely devoted himself, and all that he has to God, to be used
according to his will. 56 22. He has a readiness to obey, and a quick and
pleasant compliance of his will to the will of God. 58 23. He delights
himself more in God, and Heaven, and Christ, and Holiness, than in all the
world: Religion is not tedious and grievous to him. 59 24. He is conscious of
his own sincerity, and assured of his Justification, and title to Everlasting
Joys. 66 25. This Assurance does not make him more careless and remiss, but
increases his love and holy diligence. 68 26. Yet he abhors Pride as the
first born of the Devil, and is very low and vile in his own eyes, and can
easily endure to be low and vile in the eyes of others. 69 27. Being acquainted
with the deceitfulness of the heart, and the methods of temptation, he lives
as among snares, and enemies, and dangers, in a constant watch; and can conquer
many and subtle, and great temptations (through grace.) 72 28. He has counted
what it may cost him to be saved, and has resolved not to stick at suffering,
but to bear the Cross, and be conformed to his crucified Lord, and has already
in heart forsaken all for him. 74 29. He is not a Christian only for company or
carnal ends, or upon trust of other men's opinion, and therefore would be true
to Christ, if his Rulers, his Teachers, his Company, and all that he knows
should forsake him. 78 30. He can digest the hardest Truths of Scripture, and
the hardest passages of Gods Providence. 80 31. He can exercise all his Graces
in harmony, without neglecting one to use another, or setting one against
another. 81 32. He is more in getting and using Grace, than in enquiring
whether he have it (though he do that also in its place.) 82 33. He studieth
Duty more than Events, and is more careful what he should be toward God, than
how he shall (here) be used by him. 83 34. He is more regardfull of his duty to
others, than of theirs to him, and had much rather suffer wrong, than do it. 84
35. He keeps up a constant Government of his Thoughts, restraining them from
evil, and using them upon God, and for him. 87 36. He keeps a constant
Government over his passions, so far as that they pervert not his judgment,
his heart, his tongue or actions. 88 37. He governs his tongue; employing it
for God, and restraining it from evil. 90 38. Heart-work and Heaven-work are
the principal matters of his religious discourse, and not barren controversies,
or impertinencies. 92 39. He lives upon the common great substantials of
Religion, and yet will not deny the smallest Truth, or commit the smallest sin,
for any price that man can offer him. 93 40. He is a high esteemer, and
careful Redeemer of Time, and abhors Idleness and Diversions which would
rob him of it. 98 41. His heart is set upon doing all the good in the world
that he is able: It is his daily business and delight. 101 42. He truly loves
his neighbor as himself. 103 43. He has a special love to all godly
Christians as such, and such as will not stick at cost in its due expressions;
nor be turned into bitterness by tolerable differences. 104 44. He forgiveth
injuries, and loves his enemies, and does them all the good he can; from the
sense of the love of Christ to him. 106 45. He does as he would be done by; and
is as precise in the Justice of his dealings with men, as in acts of piety to
God. 108 46. He is faithful and laborious in his outward trade or calling, not
out of covetousness, but obedience to God. 111 47. He is very conscionable in
the duties of his several Relations, in his family or other society, as a
superior, inferior or equal. 112 48. He is the best subject whether his
Rulers be good or bad, though Infidel and ungodly Rulers may mistake and use
him as the worst. 113 49. His trust in God does overcome the fear of man, and
settle him in a constant fortitude for God. 121 50. Judgment and Zeal conjunct
are his constitution: His Judgment kindles Zeal, and his Zeal is still
judicious. 123 51. He can bear the infirmities of the weak; and their censures
and abuses of himself; and requiteth them not with uncharitable censure or
reproach. 126 52. He is a high esteemer of the Unity of Christians, and
abhors the principles, spirit and practices of Division. 128 53. He seeks
the Churches unity and concord not upon partial, unrighteous, or impossible,
but upon the possible righteous terms here mentioned. 139 54. He is of a mellow
peaceable spirit: not masterly, domineering, hurtful, unquiet or contentious.
146 55. He highliest regards the interest of God, and men's salvation in the
world; and regards no secular interest of his own, or any man's, but in
subserviency thereto. 152 56. He is usually hated for his Holiness by the
wicked, and censured for his Charity and Peaceableness by the factious and the
weak; and is moved by neither from the way of Truth. 157 57. Though he abhor
ungodly soul-destroying Ministers, yet he reverenceth the Office as necessary
to the Church and world; and highly valueth the holy, faithful Laborers. 159
58. He has great Experience of the Providence, Truth, and Justice of God, to
fortify him against temptations to Unbelief. 161 59. Though he greatly
desires lively Affections and gifts, yet he much more valueth the three
Essential parts of holiness. 1. A high estimation in the Understanding of God,
Christ, Holiness and Heaven, above all that be set in any competition. 2. A
resolved choice and adhesion of the Will, to these above and against all
competitors. 3. The seeking them first, in the endeavors of the life. And by
these be judges of the sincerity of his heart. 162 60. He is all his life
seriously preparing for his death, as if it were at hand; and is ready to
receive the sentence with joy; but especially he longs for the blessed day of
Christ's appearing, as the answer of all his desires and hopes. 164 Six Uses of
these Characters. 170
THE CHARACTER OF 1 A Sound Confirmed Christian, 2 And of the Weak Christian, 3
And of the Seeming Christian.

IN the Explication of the Text, which I made the ground of the foregoing
discourse, I have showed you that there is a Degree of Grace to be expected and
sought after by all true Christians, which puts the Soul into a sound,
confirmed, radicated state, in comparison of that weak, diseased, tottering
condition, which most Christians now continue in. And I have showed you how
desirable a state that is, and what calamities follow the languishing
unhealthfull state even of such as may be saved. And indeed did we but rightly
understand, how deeply the errors and sins of many well-meaning Christians,
have wounded the interest of Religion in this age; and how heynously they have
dishonored God, and caused the enemies of holiness to blaspheme, and hardened
thousands in Popery and Ungodliness, in probability to their perdition: Had we
well observed when Gods Judgments have begun, and understood what sins have
caused our Wars, and Plagues and Flames, and worse than all these, our great
heart-divisions, and Church-distractions and convulsions; we should ere this
have given over the flattering of our selves and one another, in such a
Heaven-provoking state; and the ostentation of that little goodness, which has
been eclipsed by such lamentable evils. And instead of these, we should have
betaken our selves to the exercise of such a serious deep Repentance as the
quality of our sins, and the greatness of Gods Chastisements do require. It is
a doleful case to see how light many make of all the rest of their distempers,
when once they think that they have so much Grace and Mortification, as is
absolutely necessary to save their souls: And expect that Preachers should say
little to weak Christians, but words of comfort, setting forth their happiness:
And yet if one of them, when he has the Gout, or Stone, or Colic, or
Dropsy, does send for a Physician, he would think himself derided or abused,
if his Physician instead of curing his disease, should only comfort him by
telling him that he is not dead. What excellent disputations have Cicero and
Seneca, the Platonists and Stoics, to prove that Virtue is of it self
sufficient to make Man happy? And yet many Christians live as if Holiness were
but the way and means to their felicity, or at best but a small part of their
felicity it self; or as if felicity it self grew burdensome, or were not
desirable in this life; or a small degree of it were as good as a greater.

And too many mistake the will of God, and the nature of Sanctification, and
place their Religion in the hot prosecution of those mistakes: They make a
composition of error and passion, and an unyielding stiffness in them, and
siding with the Church or party which maintains them, and an uncharitable
censuring those that are against them, and an unpeaceable contending for them;
And this composition they mistake for Godliness, especially if there be but a
few drams of Godliness and Truth in the composition, though corrupted and
overpowered by the rest.

For these miscarriages of many well-meaning zealous persons, the Land
mourns, the Churches groan; Kingdoms are disturbed by them; Families are
disquieted by them; Godliness is hindered, and much dishonored by them; the
Wicked are hardened by them, and encouraged to hate and blaspheme and oppose
Religion; the glory of the Christian Faith is obscured by them; and the
Infidel, Mohammedan and Heathen World, are kept from Faith in Jesus Christ, and
many millions of Souls destroyed by them. I mean, by the miscarriages of the
weaker sort of Christians, and by the wicked lives of those carnal Hypocrites,
who for custom or worldly interest do profess that Christianity which was
never received by their hearts.

And all this is much promoted by their indiscretion, who are so intent upon
the consolatory opening of the safety and happiness of Believers, that they
omit the due explication of their Description, their Dangers and their Duties.

One part of this too much neglected work I have endeavored to perform in the
foregoing Treatise; Another I shall attempt in this second Part: There are five
Degrees or ranks of true Christians, observable: 1. The Weakest Christians, who
have only the Essentials of Christianity, or very little more: As Infants that
are alive, but of little strength or use to others. 2. Those that are lapsed
into some wounding sin, though not into a state of damnation; Like men at age,
who have lost the use of some one member, for the present, though they are
strong in other parts. 3. Those that having the Integral parts of Christianity
in a considerable measure, are in a sound and healthful state; though neither
perfect, nor of the highest form or rank of Christians in this life, nor
without such infirmities, as are the matter of their daily Watchfulness and
Humiliation. 4. Those that are so strong as to attain extraordinary degrees of
grace, who are therefore comparatively called Perfect, as Mat. 5.45.5. Those
that have an absolute Perfection without sin, that is, The Heavenly Inhabitants.

Among all these, it is the third sort or degree, which I have here
characterized, and upon the by, the first sort and the Hypocrite. I meddle not
now with the Lapsed Christian as such, nor with those Giants in holiness of
extraordinary strength, nor with the perfect blessed Souls in Heaven: But, it
is the Christian who has attained that confirmation in grace, and composed,
quiet, fruitful state, which we might ordinarily expect, if we were
industrious, whose Image or Character I shall now present you with: I call him
ofttimes A Christian indeed, in allusion to Christ's description of Nathaniel,
Joh. 1.47. and as we commonly use that word, for one that answers his own
profession without any notable dishonor or defect: As we say, such a man is a
Scholar indeed; and not as signifying his mere sincerity. I mean one whose
heart and life is so conform to the Principles, the Rule and the Hopes of
Christianity, that to the Honor of Christ, the true Nature of our Religion is
discernible in his conversation, Mat. 5.16. In whom an impartial Infidel might
perceive the true nature of the Christian Faith and Godliness. If the World
were fuller of such living Images of Christ, who like true Regenerate Children
represent their Heavenly Father, Christianity would not have met with so much
prejudice, nor had so many enemies in the World, nor would so many millions
have been kept in the darkness of Heathenism and Infidelity, by flying from
Christians, as a sort of people that are common and unclean.

Among Christians, there are Babes, that must be fed with milk, and not with
strong meat, that are unskilful in the word of righteousness; 1 John.. 2.2.12,
13, 14. Heb. 5.12, 13, 14. and Novices, who are unsettled, and in danger of an
overthrow, 1 Timothy 3.6. Joh. 15.3, 5, etc. In these the nature and excellency of
Christianity, is little more apparent, than Reason in a little child. And
there are strong, confirmed Christians, who by reason of use have their senses
exercised to discern both good and evil, Heb. 5.13, 14. and who show forth the
glory of him that has called them out of darkness into his mavelous light:
of whom God himself may say to Satan and their malicious enemies, as once of
Job, Have thou not seen my servant Job, etc. This Christian indeed I shall now
describe to you, both to confute the Infidels slanders of Christianity, and to
unteach men those false descriptions which have caused the presumption of the
profane, and the irregularities of erroneous Sectaries; and to tell you what
manner of persons they be, that God is honored by; and what you must be if you
will well understand your own Religion. Be Christians indeed, and you will have
the Comforts indeed of Christianity; and will find that its Fruits and Joys
are not dreams and shadows and imaginations, if you content not your selves
with an imagination, dream and shadow of Christianity, or with some clouded
spark or buried seed.

The Characters.
I. A CHRISTIAN INDEED, (by which I still mean, a sound confirmed Christian) is
one that contenteth not himself to have a seed or Habit of Faith, but he Lives
by Faith, as the Sensualist lives by sight or sense: Not putting out the eye
of sense, nor living as if he had no Body, nor lived not in a world of sensible
Objects; But as he is a Reasonable creature; which exalts him above the
sensitive Nature, so Faith is the true information of his Reason, about those
high and excellent things, which must take him up above things sensible. He
has so firm a Belief of the Life to come, as procured by Christ, and promised
in the Gospel, as that it serves him for the Government of his Soul, as his
bodily sight does for the conduct of his Body. I say not, that he is assaulted
with no temptations, nor that his Faith is perfect in degree, nor that
believing moves him as passionately as sight or sense would do: But it does
effectually move him through the course and tenor of his life, to do those
things for the life to come, which he would do if he saw the Glory of Heaven;
and to shun those things for the avoiding of damnation, which he would shun, if
he saw the flames of Hell. Whether he do these things so fervently or not, his
Belief is powerful, effectual and victorious. Let sight and sense invite him
to their Objects, and entice him to sin, and forsake his God, the objects of
Faith shall prevail against them, in the bent of an even, a constant and
resolved life. It is things unseen which he takes for his treasure, and which
have his heart and hope, and chiefest labors. All things else which he has to
do, are but subservient to his Faith and Heavenly interest, as his sensitive
faculties are ruled by his Reason. His Faith is not only his Opinion, which
teaches him to choose what Church or Party he will be of; but it is his
Intellectual Light; by which he lives, and in the confidence and comfort of
which he dies, 2 Cor. 5.7, 8, 9. For we walk by faith, not by sight -- We
groan to be clothed upon with our heavenly house -- Wherefore we labor that
whether present or absent we may be accepted of him. Heb. 10.3. Now the just
shall live by faith -- Heb. 11.1. Now faith is the substance of things hoped
for, the evidence of things not seen. Most of the examples in Heb. 11. do show
you this truth, that true Christians live and govern their actions, by the firm
Belief of the promise of God, and of another Life when this is ended. v. 7. By
faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear,
prepared an Ark; to the saving of his house; by which he condemned the world,
and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith. V. 10. Abraham looked
for a City which had foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Moses feared
not the wrath of the King: for he endured, as seeing him who is invisible, v.
27. So the three witnesses, Dan. 3. and Daniel himself, chapter 6. And all
Believers have lived this life, as Abraham the Father of the faithful did;
who, as it is said of him, Romans 4.20. Staggered not at the promise of God
through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God. The Faith of a
Christian is truly Divine; and he knows that Gods truth is as certain as
sight it self can be; however sight be apter to move the passions: Therefore,
if you can judge but what a Rational man would be, if he saw Heaven and Hell,
and all that God had appointed us to Believe, then you may conjecture what a
confirmed Christian is; (though sense do cause more sensible apprehensions.)

2. The weak Christian also has a faith, that is Divine, as caused by God, and
resting on his word and truth. And he so far lives by this Faith, as that it
commands and guides the scope and drift of his heart and life: But he
believes with a great deal of staggering and unbelief: And therefore his Hopes
are interrupted by his troublesome doubts and fears; and the dimness and languor
of his Faith is seen in the faintness of his desires, and the many blemishes of
his Heart and Life: And sight and sensual objects are so much the more
powerful with him, by how much the light and life of faith is dark and weak.

3. The Hypocrite or best of the unregenerate, believes but either with a
Humane faith, which rests but on the Word of Man, or else with a dead
opinionative faith, which is overpowered by infidelity, or is like the dreaming
thoughts of a man asleep, which stir him not to action: He lives by sight
and not by faith: For he has not a Faith that will overpower Sense, and
sensual objects, Jam. 2.14. Mat. 13.22.

II. 1. A Christian indeed not only knows why he is a Christian, but sees
those Reasons for his Religion, which disgrace all that the cunningest Atheist
or Infidel can say against it: and so far satisfy, confirm and establish him,
that emergent difficulties, temptations and objections, do not at all stagger
him, or raise any deliberate doubts in him of the truth of the Word of God: He
sees first the natural evidence of those foundation-truths which Nature it
self makes known: (as that there is a God of infinite Being, Power, Wisdom and
Goodness, the Creator, the Owner, the Ruler, and the Father, Felicity and End
of man; that we owe him all our love and service; that none of our fidelity
shall be in vain or unrewarded, and none shall be finally a loser by his duty;
that man who is naturally governed by the hopes and fears of another life, is
made and lives for that other Life, where his Soul shall be sentenced by God
his Judge to happiness or misery, etc.) And then he discerns the attestation
of God to those supernatural, superadded Revelations of the Gospel, containing
the Doctrine of man's Redemption: And he sees how wonderfully these are built
upon the former, and how excellently the Creators and Redeemers Doctrine and
Laws agree; and how much countenance supernatural truths receive from the
presupposed naturals: so that he does not adhere to Christ and Religion by the
mere engagement of education, friends or worldly advantages; nor by a blind
resolution, which wants nothing but a strong temptation (from a Deceiver or a
worldly Interest) to shake or overthrow it: But he is built upon the Rock,
which will stand in the assault of Satan's storms, and the gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it. Mat. 16.18. and 13.23. and 7.25. Joh. 6.68, 69.

2. But a weak Christian has but a dim and general kind of knowledge of the
reasons of his Religion; or at least but a weak apprehension of them, though he
have the best and most unanswerable reasons: And either he is confident in the
dark upon grounds which he cannot make good, and which want but a strong
assault to shake them; or else he is troubled and ready to stagger at every
difficulty which occurreth: Every hard saying in the Scripture does offend him:
And every seeming contradiction shakes him: And the depth of mysteries which
pass his understanding, do make him say as Nicodemus of Regeneration, How can
these things be? And if he meet with the objections of a cunning Infidel, he is
unable so to defend the truth, and clear his way through them, as to come off
unwounded and unshaken, and to be the more confirmed in the truth of his
belief, by discerning the vanity of all that is said against it. Heb. 5.12, 13.
Matthew. 15.16. 1 Cor. 14.20. Joh. 12.16.

3. The seeming Christian either has no solid Reasons at all for his Religion,
or else if he have the best, he has no sound apprehension of them: But though
he be never so learned and orthodox, and can preach and defend the Faith, it is
not so rooted in him as to endure the trial; but if a strong temptation from
subtilty or carnal interest assault him, you shall see that he was built upon
the sand, and that there was in him a secret root of bitterness, and an evil
heart of unbelief, which causes him to depart from the living God, Heb. 3.12.
Matthew. 13.20, 21, 22. Matthew. 7.26, 27. Heb. 12.15. Joh. 6.60, 64, 66. 1 Timothy
6.10, 11.

III. 1. A Christian indeed, is not only confirmed in the essentials of
Christianity, but he has a clear delightful sight of those useful truths,
which are the Integrals of Christianity, and are built upon the fundamentals,
and are the branches of the master-points of Faith. Though he see not all the
lesser Truths (which are branched out at last into innumerable particles) yet
he sees the main body of sacred Verities, delivered by Christ for man's
sanctification; and sees them methodically in their proper places; and sees
how one supports another, and in how beautiful an order and contexture they
are placed: And as he sticks not in the bare Principles, so he receives all
these additions of knowledge, not notionally only, but practically, as the food
on which his Soul must live. Heb. 5.13, 14. and 6.1, 2, etc. Matthew. 13.11. Ephesians.
1.18. and 3.18, 19. Joh. 13.17.

2. A weak Christian (in knowledge) besides the Principles or Essentials of
Religion, does know but a few disordered scattered Truths; which are also but
half known, because while he has some knowledge of those points, he is
ignorant of many other, which are needful to the supporting, and clearing, and
improving of them: And because he knows them not in their places, and order,
and relation, and aspect upon other Truths. And therefore if Temptations be
strong, and come with advantage, the weak Christian in such points is easily
drawn into many errors; and thence into great confidence and conceitedness in
those Errors; and thence into sinful dangerous courses in the prosecution and
practice of those Errors: Such are like children tossed up and down, and carried
to and fro by every wind of doctrine, through the cunning slight and subtilty
of men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4.14. 2 Cor. 11.3. Col. 2.4.
2 Timothy 3.7.

3. The seeming Christian having no saving practical knowledge of the
Essentials of Christianity themselves, does therefore either neglect to know
the rest, or knows them but notionally, as common Sciences, and subjecteth
them all to his Worldly interest: And therefore is still of that side or party
in Religion, which upon the account of safety, honor or preferment, his flesh
commands him to follow. Either he is still on the greater, rising side, and
of the Rulers Religion, be it what it will; or if he dissent, it is in pursuit
of another game, which Pride or fleshly ends have started. 2 Pet. 2.14. Gal.
3.3. Joh. 9.22. and 12.42, 43. Matthew. 13.21.22.

IV. 1. The Christian indeed, has not only Reason for his Religion, but also
has an inward connatural principle, even the spirit of Christ, which is as a
New-nature, inclining and enlivening him to a holy life: whereby he minds and
savoureth the things of the Spirit: Not that his Nature does work blindly, as
Nature does in the irrational creatures; but at least it much imitateth Nature
as it is found in Rational creatures, where the Inclination is necessary, but
the Operations free, and subject to Reason: It is a spiritual appetite in the
Rational appetite, even the will, and a spiritual visive disposition in the
understanding: Not a faculty in a faculty; but the right disposition of the
faculties to their highest objects, to which they are by corruption made
unsuitable. So that it is neither a proper power in the Natural sense, nor a
mere act, but nearest to the nature of a seminal disposition or habit. It is
the health and rectitude of the faculties of the Soul. Even as Nature has made
the understanding disposed to Truth in general, and the will disposed or
inclined to Good in general, and to self-preservation and felicity in
particular; so the Spirit of Christ does dispose the understanding to spiritual
truth, to know God and the matters of salvation, and does incline the will to
God and Holiness; not blindly, as they are unknown; but to love and serve a
known God. So that whether this be properly or only analogically called A
Nature, or rather should be called a Habit, I determine not; but certainly it
is a fixed Disposition and Inclination, which Scripture calls the Divine
Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and [ the seed of God abiding in us, 1 John 3.9. But most
usually it is called [ the Spirit of God, or of Christ in us: Romans 8.9. If any
man have not the Spirit of Christ the same is none of his. 1 Cor. 12.13. By one
Spirit we are all baptized into one body, -- Therefore we are said to be in the
Spirit, and walk after the Spirit, and by the Spirit to mortify the deeds of
the Body, Romans 8.1.9, 13. And it is called, the Spirit of the Son, and the
Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father; or are inclined to God, as
Children to their Father; and the Spirit of grace and supplication, Romans
8.15.23.26. Gal. 4.6. and 5.17, 18. Ephesians. 2.18, 22. and 4.3, 4. Phil. 1.27. and
2.1. Zech. 12.10. From this Spirit and the fruits of it, we are called New
Creatures, and quickened and made alive to God, 2 Cor. 5.17. Ephesians. 2.15. Romans
6.11, 13. It is a great controversy, whether this Holy disposition and
inclination, was Natural to Adam or not, and consequently, whether it be a
restored nature in us, or not? It was so natural to him, as Health is natural
to the body, but not so natural as to be a Necessitating Principle, nor so as
to be inseparable and unlosable.

2. This same Spirit and holy inclination is in the weakest Christian also, but
in a small degree, and remisly operating, so as that the fleshly inclination
often seems to be the stronger, when he judges by its passionate struglings
within him: Though indeed the Spirit of life does not only strive, but conquer
in the main, even in the weakest Christians, Romans 8, 9. Gal. 5.17, 18, 19, 20,
21.

3. The seeming Christian has only the uneffectual motions of the Spirit to a
Holy Life, and effectual motions, and inward dispositions to some common duties
of Religion: And from these with the natural principles of self-love and common
honesty, with the outward persuasions of company and advantages, his Religion
is maintained, without the Regeneration of the Spirit, Joh. 3.6.

V. From hence it follows, 1. That a Christian indeed does not serve God for
fear only, but for love; even for love both of himself, and of his holy work
and service: Yea, the strong Christians Love to God and Holiness, is not only
greater than his Love to Creatures, but greater than his fear of wrath and
punishment. The Love of God constrains him to duty, 2 Cor. 5.14. Love is the
fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. therefore the Gospel cannot be obeyed
without it. He says not, O that this were no duty, and O that this forbidden
thing were lawful, (Though his Flesh say so, the Spirit which is the
predominant part does not) But he says, O how I love thy Law! O that my ways
were so directed that I might keep thy statutes! Psalm. 119.5. For the spirit is
willing even when the flesh is weak: He serves not God against his will; but
his will is to serve him more and better than he does: He longs to be
perfect, and perfectly to do the will of God, and takes the remnant of his
sinful infirmities to be a kind of bondage to him, which he groaneth to be
delivered from: To will even perfection is present with him, though not
perfectly; and though he do not all that he wills: And this is the true
meaning of Paul's complaints, Romans 7. Because the flesh warreth against the
Spirit, he cannot do the good that he would, that is, he cannot be perfect, for
so he would be, Gal. 5.17. His love and will excells his practice.

2. The weak Christian also has more love to God and holiness than to the
world and fleshly pleasure: But yet his fear of punishment is greater than his
Love to God and Holiness. To have no Love to God is inconsistent with a state
of Grace, and so it is to have less love to God than to the world, and less
love to holiness than to sin: But to have more Fear than Love is consistent
with sincerity of Grace: Yea, the weak Christians love to God and Holiness is
joined with so much backwardness and aversness, and interrupted with weariness,
and with the carnal allurements and diversions of the Creature, that he cannot
certainly perceive whether his love and willingness be sincere or not: He goes
on in a course of duty, but so heavily, that he scarce knows, whether his
love or loathing of it be the greater. He goes to it as a sick man to his
meat, or labor: All that he does is with so much pain or undisposedness, that
to his feeling his aversness seems greater than his willingness, were it not
that necessity makes him willing. For the habitual love and complacency which
he has toward God and Duty, is so oppressed by fear, and by aversness, that
it is not so much felt in act as they.

3. A seeming Christian has no true Love of God and Holiness at all, but some
uneffectual liking and wishes which are overborn by a greater backwardness, and
by a greater love to earthly things; so that Fear alone, without any true
effectual Love, is the spring and principle of his Religion and obedience, God
has not his heart, when he draws near him with his lips: He does more than
he would do, if he were not forced by Necessity and Fear; and had rather be
excused, and lead another kind of life. Mat. 15.8. Isa. 29.13. Though Necessity
and fear are very helpful to the most sincere, yet Fear alone without Love or
Willingness is a graceless state.

VI. 1. A Christian indeed does love God in these three gradations: He loves
him much for his mercy to himself, and for that Goodness which consists in
benignity to himself; But he loves him more for his Mercy to the Church, and
for that Goodness which consists in his Benignity to the Church. But he
Loves him most of all for his Infinite perfections and essential excellencies;
His Infinite Power, and Wisdom and Goodness simply in himself considered. For
he knows that Love to himself obliges him to returns of Love: especially
differencing saving grace. And he knows that the souls of millions are more
worth incomparably then his own, and that God may be much more honored by them
than by him alone: And therefore he knows that the mercy to many is greater
mercy, and a greater demonstration of the goodness of God; and therefore does
render him more amiable to man. Romans 9.3. And yet he knows that the Essential
perfection and goodness of God as simply in himself and for himself, is much
more amiable than his Benignity to the creature: And that he that is the first
efficient must needs be the ultimate final cause of all things: And that God is
not finally for the creature, but the creature for God, (for all that he
needs it not) For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things. Romans
11.36. And as he is Infinitely better than our selves, so he is to be better
Loved than our selves: As I love a wise and virtuous person, though he be one I
never expect to receive any thing from, and therefore Love him for his own
sake, and not for his benignity or usefulness to me: So must I love God most
for his essential perfections, though his benignity also does represent him
amiable. As he is blindly selfish that would not rather himself be annihilated
or perish, than whole Kingdoms should all perish, or the Sun be taken out of
the world; (because that which is best must he loved as best, and therefore be
best loved:) so is he more blind who in his estimative complacential Love,
prefers not Infinite Eternal Goodness, before such an imperfect silly
creature as himself (or all the world): We are commanded to love our Neighbor
as our selves, when God is to be loved with all the heart and soul and might,
which therefore signifies more than to love him as our selves; (or else he
were to be loved no more than our Neighbor.) So that the strong Christian
loves God so much above himself, as that he accounts himself and all his
interests, as nothing in comparison of God, yea and loves himself more for God
than for himself: Though his own salvation be loved and desired by him, and God
must be loved for his mercy and benignity; yet that salvation it self which he
desires, is nothing else but the love of God: Wherein his love is the final
felicitating act, and God is the final felicitating object, and the felicity of
loving is not first desired, but the attractive object does draw out our love,
and thereby make us consequentially happy in the enjoying exercise thereof.
Thus God is All and in all to the soul. Psalm. 73.25. Romans 11.36. 1 Cor. 10.31.
Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 23.37. Mat. 19.17.

2. A weak Christian also loves God as one that is infinitely better than
himself and all things: (or else he did not love him at all as God.) But in the
exercise he is so much in the minding of himself, and so seldom and weak in the
contemplation of Gods perfections, that he feels more of his love to himself,
than unto God: and feels more of his love to God as for the Benefits which he
receives in and by himself, than as for his own perfections: yea and often
feels the love of himself to work more strongly than his Love to the Church,
and all else in the world. The care of his own salvation is the highest
principle which he ordinarily perceives in any great strength in him; and he
is very little and weakly carried out to the Love of the whole Church, and to
the Love of God above himself. Phil. 2.20, 21, 22. 1 Cor. 10.24. Jer. 45.5.

3. A seeming Christian has a common Love of God as he is Good, both in
himself, and unto the world, and unto him. But this is not for his Holiness;
and it is but a general uneffectual approbation and praise of God, which
follows a dead uneffectual belief: But his chiefest predominant Love is
always to his Carnal self, and the Love both of his soul, and of God is
subjected to his fleshly self-love. His chiefest Love to God is for prospering
him in the world, and such as is subservient to his sensuality, pride,
coveteousness, presumption and false hopes. Luke 18.21, 22. 1 John 2.15.2 Tim.
3.2, 4. Joh. 12.43. Joh. 5.42.

VII. 1. A Christian indeed does practically take this Love of God and the holy
expressions of it, to be the very life and top of his Religion, and the very
life and beauty and pleasure of his soul; He makes it his work in the world,
and loves himself (complacentially) but so far as he finds in himself the
Love of God; And so far as he finds himself without it, he loatheth himself
as an unlovely carcass: And so far as his prayers and obedience are without it,
he looks on them but as unacceptable loathsome things. And therefore he is
taken up in the study of Redemption, because he can no where so clearly see the
Love and Loveliness of God, as in the face of a Redeemer, even in the wonders
of Love revealed in Christ. And he studieth them, that Love may kindle Love.
And therefore he delights in the contemplating of Gods attributes and
infinite perfections; and in the beholding of him in the frame of the Creation,
and reading his name in the book of his works, that his soul may by such steps,
be raised in Love and Admiration of his Maker: And as it is a pleasant thing
for the eyes to behold the sun or light, so is it to the mind of the Christian
indeed to be frequently and seriously contemplating the nature and glory of
God: And the exercise of Love in such contemplations, is most of his daily walk
with God. And therefore it is also, that he is more taken up in the exercises
of thanksgiving and the Praises of the Almighty, than in the lower parts of
Godliness: so that though he neglect not confession of sin and humiliation; yet
does he use them but in subserviency to the Love and Praise of God: He does but
rid out the filth that is undecent in a Heart that is to entertain its God. He
places not the chief part of his Religion in any outward duties, nor in any
lower preparatory acts; Nor does he stop in any of these, however he neglect
them not. But he uses them all, to advance his soul in the Love of God: And
uses them the more diligently, because the Love of God to which they conduce,
as to their proper end, is so high and exellent a work. Therefore in David's
Psalms you find a heart delighting it self in the praises of God; and in Love
with his word and works in order to his praises. Psalm. 116.1. etc. Psalm. 106.
and 103. and 145. and 146. etc. Romans 8.37.

2. The weak Christian is taken up but very little, with the lively exercises
of Love and Praise; nor with any Studies higher than his own distempered heart:
The care of his poor soul, and the complaining of his manifold infirmities, and
corruptions, is the most of his Religion: And if he set himself to the Praising
of God or to Thanksgiving, he is as dull and short in it as if it were not his
proper work. Psalm. 77. Mar. 9.24. and 16.14.

3. The seeming Christian lives to the flesh; and carnal self-love is the
active principle of his life: and he is neither exercised in Humiliation or in
Praise sincerely; being unacquainted both with holy Joy and Sorrow; But knowing
that he is in the hands of God, to prosper or destroy him, he will humble
himself to him to escape his judgments, and praise him with some gladness for
the sunshine of prosperity; and he will seem to be piously thanking God when he
is but rejoicing in the accommodations of his flesh, or strengthening his
presumption and false hopes of heaven. Luke 18.11. and 12.19. Isa. 58.2.

VIII. 1. A Christian indeed is one that is so apprehensive of his lost
condition, unworthyness and utter insufficiency for himself, and of the office,
perfection and sufficiency of Christ, that he has absolutely put his soul and
all his hopes into the hands of Christ; and now lives in him and upon him; as
having no Life but what he has from Christ, nor any other way of access to
God, or acceptance of his person or his service but by him: In him he beholds
and delightfully admireth the Love and goodness of the Father: In him he has
access with boldness unto God: Through him the most terrible avenging Judge is
become a Reconciled God, and he that we could not remember but with trembling,
is become the most desirable object of our thoughts. He is delightfully
employed in prying into the unsearchable mystery; And Christ does even dwell
in his heart by faith: and being rooted and grounded in love, he apprehends
with all saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and
knows the love of Christ which passes knowledge: Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19. He
perceives that he is daily beholden to Christ, that he is not in hell, that
sin does not make him like to Devils, and that he is not utterly forsaken of
God: He feels that he is beholden to Christ, for every hours time, and every
mercy to his soul or body, and for all his hope of mercy in this life or in the
life to come. He perceives that he is dead in himself, and that his life is
hid with Christ in God. And therefore he is as buried and risen again with
Christ; even dead to sin, but alive to God through Jesus Christ. Romans 6.3, 4,
11. Col. 4.4. He says with Paul, Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ:
Nevertheless I live: yet not I, but Christ lives in me: and the life which I
now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me and
gave himself for me. Thus does he live as truly and constantly by the second
Adam who is a quickening spirit, as he does by the first Adam who was a living
soul. 1 Cor. 15.45. This is a confirmed Christians life.

2. But the weak Christian, though he be also united unto Christ, and live by
faith, yet how languid are the operations of that faith? How dark and dull are
his thoughts of Christ? How little is his sense of the wonders of Gods love
revealed to the world in the mystery of Redemption? How little use does he
make of Christ? And how little life receives he from him? And how little
comfort finds he in believing, in comparison of that which the confirmed
find? He is to Christ as a sick person to his food: He only picketh here and
there a little of the crumbs of the bread of life, to keep him from dying; but
is woefully unacquainted with the powerfullest works of faith. He is such a
Believer as is next to an unbeliever, and such a member of Christ, as is next
to a mere stranger.

3. And for the seeming Christian, he may understand the letter of the Gospel,
and number himself with Christ's disciples, and be baptized with water, and have
such a faith as is a dead opinion: But he has not an effectual living faith,
nor is baptized with the Holy Ghost, nor is his soul engaged absolutely and
entirely in the covenant of Christianity to his Redeemer: He may have a
handsome well-made image of Christianity, but it is the flesh and sense, and
not Christ and faith, by which his life is actuated and ordered. Joh. 3.6. Romans
2.28.

IX. 1. A Christian indeed does firmly believe that Christ is a Teacher sent
from God (Joh. 3.2.) and that he came from Heaven to reveal his Fathers will,
and to bring life and immortality more fully to light by his Gospel; and that
if an Angel had been sent to tell us, of the life to come and the way thereto,
he had not been so credible and venerable a messenger as the Son of God: And
therefore he takes him alone for his chief Teacher, and knows no Master on
Earth but him, and such as he appoints under him: His study in the world is
to know a crucified and glorified Christ, and God by him, and he regards no
other knowledge, nor uses any other studies, but this, and such as are
subservient to this. Even when he studieth the works of nature, it is as by the
conduct of the restorer of nature, and as one help appointed him by Christ, to
lead him up to the knowledge of God. And therefore he perceives that Christ is
made of God unto us, wisdom as well as Righteousness: And that Christianity is
the true Philosophy: and that the wisdom of the world, which is only about
worldly things, from worldly principles, to a worldly end, is foolishness with
God: He takes nothing for wisdom which tends not to acquaint him more with
God, or lead him up to everlasting happiness. Christ is his Teacher (either by
natural or supernatural revelation,) and God is his ultimate end, in all his
studies, and all that he desires to know in the world. He valueth knowledge
according to its usefulness: And he knows that its chief use is to lead us to
the love of God. Math. 23.8. 1 Cor. 1.30. and 2.2. etc. Joh. 1.18. Col. 2.3.
Ephesians. 4.13.

2. Though the weak Christian has the same Master, yet alas how little does he
learn? and how often is he harkening to the teaching of the flesh? and how
carnal, and common is much of his knowledge? How little does he depend on
Christ in his enquiries after the things of nature? And how apt is he to think
almost as highly of the teaching of Aristotle, Plato, Seneca, or at least of
some excellent preacher, as of Christ's? and to forget that these are but his
messengers and instruments, to convey unto us several parcells of that Truth,
which is his and not theirs, and which ( naturally or supernaturally) they
received from him; and all these Candles were lighted by him who is the Sun?
And how little does this weak Christian refer his common knowledge to God? or
use it for him? or to the furtherance of his own and others happiness? 1 Timothy
2.4.

3. And the seeming Christian though materially he may be eminent for
knowledge, yet is so far from resigning himself to the teachings of Christ,
that he makes even his knowledge of Christian Verities to be to him but a
common carnal thing, while he knows it but in a common manner, and uses it
to the service of the flesh, and never yet learned so much as to be a new
creature, nor to love God as God above the world. 1 Cor. 13.2.

X. 1. A Christian indeed is one whose Repentance has been deep, and serious,
and universal, and unchangeable: It has gone to the very roots of sin, and to
the bottom of the sore, and has not left behind it any reigning unmortified
sin; nor any prevalent love to fleshly pleasures: His Repentance did not only
disgrace his sin, and cast some reproachful words against it, and use
confessions to excuse him from mortification, and to save its life, and hide it
from the mortal blow. Nor does he only repent of his open sins, and those that
are most censured by the beholders of his life: But he specially perceives the
dangerous poison of Pride, and unbelief, and worldliness, and the want of the
Love of God, and all his outward and smaller sins, do serve to show him the
greater malignity of these, and these are the matter of his greatest
lamentations. He takes not up a profession of Religion with strong corruptions
secretly covered in his heart: But his Religion consists in the death of his
corruptions, and the purifying of his heart; He does not secretly cherish any
sin as too sweet or too profitable to be utterly forsaken, nor overlook it as a
small inconsiderable matter. But he feels sin to be his enemy and his
disease, and as he desires not one enemy, one sickness, one wound, one broken
bone, one serpent in his bed, so he desires not any one sin to be spared in
his soul: But faith with David, Psalm. 139.23. Search me O God, and know my
heart: try me and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me;
and lead me in the way everlasting. He lives in no gross or scandalous sin:
And his infirmities are comparatively few and small; so that if he were not a
sharper accuser of himself, than the most observant spectators are (that are
just) there would little be known by him that is culp^ble and matter of
reproof. He walks in all the commandments and ordinances of God blameless (as
to any notable miscarriage) Luke 1.6. He is blameless and harmless, as the son
of God, without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation; among
whom he shines as a light in the world, Phil 2 15. The fear, and love, and
obedience of God is the work and tenor of his life.

2. But the weak Christian, though he has no sin but what he is a hater of,
and fain would be delivered from, yet alas how imperfect is his deliverance?
and how weak is the hatred of his sin, and mixed with so much proneness to it,
tha^ his life is much blemished with the spots of his offenses. Though his
unbelief, and pride, and worldleness are not predominant in him, yet are they
(or some of them) still so strong, and fight so much against his faith,
humility, and heavenliness, that he can scarcely tell which has the upper
hand; nor can others that see the failings of his life, discern whether the
good or the evil be most prevalent. Though it be Heaven which he most seeks,
yet Earth is so much regarded by him, that his Heavenly mindedness is greatly
damped and suppressed by it. And though it be the way of Godliness and
obedience which he walks in, yet is it with so many stumblings and falls, if
not deviations also, that makes him often a burden to himself, a shame to his
profession, and a snare or trouble to those about him. His heart is like an ill
swept house, that has many a sluttish corner in it. And his life is like a
moth-eaten garment, which has many a hole, which you may see if you bring it
into the light. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3. and 6.6, 7, 8. and 11.18, 21, 22, etc.

3. And for the seeming Christian, his Repentance does but cropp the branches,
it goes not to the root and heart of his sin: It leaves his fleshly mind and
interest in the dominion: It pollisheth his life, but makes him not a new
creature. It casts away those sins which the flesh can spare, and which bring
more shame or loss or trouble with them, than worldly honor, gain or pleasure:
But still he is a very worldling at the heart; and the sins which his fleshly
pleasures and felicity consists in, he will hide by confessions and seeming
oppositions, but never mortify and forsake. As Judas, that while he followed
Christ was yet a thief and a coveteous hypocrite. Joh. 12.6. 1 Timothy 6.10 11.

XI. 1. Hence it follows that a Christian indeed does heartily love the
searching light, that it may fully acquaint him with his sins: He is truly
desirous to know the worst of himself: And therefore uses the word of God, as
a candle to show him what is in his heart; and brings himself willingly into
the light: He loves the most searching Books and Preachers: not only because
they disclose the faults of other men, but his own: he is not one that so
loves his pleasant and profitable sins, as to fly the light, lest he should be
forced to know them, and so to forsake them: But because he hates them, and is
resolved to forsake them, therefore he would know them. Joh. 3.19, 20, 21.
Therefore he is not only patient under Reproofs, but loves them, and is
thankful to a charitable reprover; and makes a good use even of malicious and
passionate reproofs. Psalm. 141.5. 2 Samuel 16.11. He says as in Job 34.32. That
which I see not, teach thou me. If I have done iniquity, I will do no more. His
hatred of the sin, and desire to be reformed, suffer not his heart by pride to
rise up against the remedy, and reject reproof. Though he will not falsely
confess his duty to be his sin, nor take the judgment of every selfish,
passionate or ignorant reprover to be infallible, nor to be his rule; yet if a
judicious impartial person do but suspect him of a fault, he is ready to
suspect himself of it, unless he be certain that he is clear. He loves him
better that would save him from his sin, than him that would entice him to it:
and takes him for his best friend who deals freely with him, and is the
greatest enemy to his faults: And a flatterer he takes but for the most
dangerous insinuating kind of foe.

2. But the weak Christian, though he hate his sin, and love reformation, and
loves the most searching Books and Preachers, and loves a gentle kind of
reproof, yet has so much pride and selfishness remaining, that any reproof
that seems disgraceful to him, goes very hardly down with him: like a
bitter medicine to a queasie stomach: If you reprove him before others, or if
your reproof be not very carefully sugured and minced, so that it rather
extenuate than aggravate his fault, he will be ready to cast it up into your
face, and with retortions to tell you of some faults of your own, or some way
show you how little he loves it, and how little thanks he gives you for it.
If you will not let him alone with his infirmities, he will distaste you, if
not fall out with you, and let you know by his smart and impatience, that you
have touched him in the sore and galled place. He must be a man of very great
skill in managing a Reproof, that shall not somewhat provoke him to distaste.

3. And for the seeming Christian, this is his condemnation, that Light is come
into the world, and he loves darkness rather than light, because his deeds are
evil. He comes not to the light, lest his deeds should be discovered and
reproved, Joh. 3.19, 20, 21. He likes a searching Preacher for others, and
loves to hear their sins laid open, if it no way reflect upon himself. But for
himself he likes best a General or a smoothing Preacher; and he flies from a
quick and searching ministry, lest he should be proved and convinced to be in a
state of sin and misery. Guilt makes him fear or hate a lively searching
Preacher, even as the guilty prisoner hates the Judge. He loves no company so
well as that which thinks highly of him, and applaudeth and commends him,
and neither by their reproves nor stricter lives, will trouble his conscience
with the remembrance of his sin, or the knowledge of his misery. He will take
you for his enemy for telling him the truth, if you go about to convince him of
his undone condition, and tell him of his beloved sin: Sin is taken to be as
himself; It is He that does evil, and not only sin that dwells in him: And
therefore all that you say against his sin, he takes it as spoken against
himself; and he will defend his sin as he would defend himself: He will hear
you till you come to touch himself, as the Jews did by Stephen Act. 7.51, 54.
when they heard him call them stiffnecked resisters of God and persecutors,
then they were cut to the heart, and grind their teeth at him. And as they did
by Paul Act. 22.22. They gave audience to this word, and then lift up their
voices and said, away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not fit that
he should live. Gal. 4.16. Joh 9.40. Mat. 21.45. The priests and pharisees
would have laid hands on Christ, when they perceived that he spoke of them. And
Ahab hated Michaiah, because he did not prophecy good of him, but evil. 1
King. 22.8. Deservedly do they perish in their sin and misery, that hate him
that would deliver them, and refuse the remedy. Prove. 12.1. Whose loves
instruction loves knowledge, but he that hates reproof is brutish. Prove.
29.1. He that being often reproved hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy.

XII. 1. A Christian indeed, is one that unfeignedly desires to attain to the
highest degree of holiness, and to be perfectly freed from every thing that is
sin. He desires perfection, though not with a perfect desire. He sits not
down contentedly in any low degree of grace. He looks on the holiest (how
poor soever) with much more reverence and esteem than on the most rich and
honorable in the world. And he had far rather be one of the most holy, than
one of the most prosperous and great: He had rather be a Paul or Timothy, than
a Caesar or an Alexander. He complains of nothing with so much sorrow, as
that he can Know and Love his God no more! How happy an exchange would he count
it, if he had more of the Knowledge and Love of God, though he lost all his
wealth and honor in the world. His smallest sins are a greater burden to him,
than his greatest corporal wants and sufferings. As Paul, who because he could
not perfectly fulfill Gods Law, and be as good as he would be, cries out as in
bondage, O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of
death? Romans 7.27.

2. And for the weak Christian, though he is habitually and resolvedly of the
same mind, yet alas his desires after perfection are much more languid in him:
And he has too much patience and reconciledness to some of his sins; and
sometimes takes them to be sweet: So that his enmity to his Pride, or
Coveteousness, or passion is much abated, and suffers his sin to wast his
grace and wound his conscience, and hinder much of his communion with God. He
sees not the odiousness of sin, nor the beauty of Holiness with so clear a
fight as the confirmed Christian does. He hates sin more for the ill effects
of it, than for its malignant hateful nature. He sees not clearly the
intrinsic evil that is in sin, which makes it deserve the pains of hell. Nor
does he discern the difference between a holy and an unholy soul, so clearly as
the stronger Christian does. 1 Cor. 3.2, 3. Heb. 12.1.

3. And as for the seeming Christian, though he may approve of perfect holiness
in another, and may wish for it himself, when he thinks of it but in the
general, and not as it is exclusive and destructive of his beloved sin; yet
when it comes to particulars he cannot away with it: He is so far from
desiring it, that he will not endure it. The name of holiness he likes; and
that preservation from Hell which is the consequent of it: But when he
understands what it is, he has no mind of it. That holiness which should
cure his ambition and pride, and make him contented with a low condition, he
does not like: He loves not that holiness, which would deprive him of his
coveteousness, his intemperance in pleasant meats and drinks; his fleshly
lusts, and inordinate pleasures! Nor does he desire that holiness should employ
his soul in the Love of God, and in daily prayer and meditating on his word,
and raise him to a heavenly life on earth.

XIII. 1. A Christian indeed is one that makes God and Heaven the End, Reward
and Motive of his Life: And lives not in the world for any thing in the world,
but for that endless happiness which the next world only can afford. The
Reasons which actuate his thoughts, and choice, and all his life, are fetched
from Heaven. The interest of God and his soul as to eternity, is the ruling
interest in him. As a traveller goes all the way, and bears all the
difficulties of it, for the sake of the End or Place that he is going to: (how
ever he may talk of many other matters by the way:) so is it with a Christian:
he knows nothing worthy of his life and labors, but that which he hops for
hereafter. This world is too sinful, and too vile, and short, to be his
felicity. His very trade and work in the world is to lay up a treasure in
heaven, Mat. 6.20. and to lay up a good foundation against the time to come,
and to lay hold on eternal life: 1 Timothy 6.19. And therefore his very heart is
there Mat. 6.21. and he is employed in seeking and setting his affections on
the things above Col. 3.1.2, 3. And his conversation and trafick is in Heaven
Phil. 3.20, 21. He looks not at the things which are seen which are temporal,
but at the things which are not seen which are eternal 2 Cor. 4.18. He is a
stranger upon earth, and Heaven is to him as his home.

2. The weak Christian also has the same End and Hope and Motive; and
prefers his hopes of the life to come before all the wealth and pleasures of
this life: But yet his thoughts of Heaven are much more strange and dull: He
has so much doubting and fear yet mixed with his faith and hope, that he
looks before him to his everlasting state, with backwardness and trouble, and
with small desire and delight: He has so much hope of Heaven, as to abate his
fears of hell, and make him think of eternity with more quietness, than he
could do if he found himself unregenerate: But not so much as to make his
thoughts of Heaven so free and sweet and frequent, nor his desires after it so
strong, as the confirmed Christians are. And therefore his duties and his
speech of Heaven, and his endeavors to obtain it, are all more languid and
unconstant: And he is much proner to fall in love with earth, and to entertain
the motions of reconciliation to the world, and to have his heart too much set
upon some place, or person or thing below, and to be either delighted too much
in the possession of it, or afflicted and troubled too much with the loss of
it. Earthly things are too much the Motives of his life, and the reasons of his
joys and griefs: Though he has the true belief of a life to come, and it
prevails in the main against the world, yet it is but little that he uses it
to the commanding and raising and comforting his soul, in comparison of what a
strong believer does: Mat. 16.22, 23.

3. But the seeming Christian would serve God and Mammon, and places his chief
and certainest happiness practically upon earth: Though speculatively he know
and say that Heaven is better, yet does he not practically judge it to be so to
him: And therefore he loves the world above it, and he does most carefully lay
up a treasure on earth Mat. 6.19. and is resolved first to seek and secure his
portion here below; and yet he takes Heaven for a reserve, as knowing that he
world will cast him off at last, and dye he must, there is no remedy; and
therefore he takes heaven as next unto the best; as his second hope; as better
than hell; and will go in Religion as far as he can, without the loss of his
prosperity here: so that earth and flesh do govern and command the design and
tenor of his life; But heaven and his soul shall have all that they can spare;
which may be enough to make him pass with men for eminently religious. 1 John
2.15. Mat. 13.22. Luke 18.22, 23. Luke 14, 24, 33. Ps. 17.14. Phil. 3.18, 19,
20.

XIV. 1. A Christian indeed is one that having taken heaven for his felicity
does account no labor or cost too great for the obtaining of it: he has
nothing so dear to him in this world, which he cannot spare and part with for
God and the world to come. He does not only notionally know that nothing should
seem too dear or hard for the securing of our salvation; but he knows this
practically and is resolved accordingly. Though difficulties may hinder him in
particular acts, and his executions come not up to the height of his desires (
Romans 7.16, 17. etc.) yet he is resolved that he will never break on terms with
Christ: There is no duty so hard which he is not willing and resolved to
perform: and no sin so sweet or gainful which he is not willing to forsake: He
knows how unprofitable a bargain he makes, who wins the world, and loses
his own soul; and that no gain can ransom his soul, or recompense him for the
loss of his salvation. Mar. 8.36. He knows that it is impossible to be a
loser by God; or to purchase heaven at too dear a rate: he knows that
whatsoever it cost him, heaven will fully pay for all: and that it is the
worldlings labor, and not the saints, that is repented of at last. He
marvelleth more at distracted sinners, for making such a stir for wealth and
honors and command, than they marvail at him for making so much a-doe for
heaven. He knows that this world may be too dear bought, but so cannot his
salvation: yea he knows that even our duty it self, is not our smallest
privilege and mercy: And that the more we do for God, the more we receive, and
the greater is our gain and honor: and that the sufferings of believers for
righteousness sake, do not only prognosticate their joys in heaven, but
occasion here the greatest joys, that any short of heaven partake of: Mat.
5.11, 12. Romans 5.12, 3, etc. He is not one that desires the end without the
means, and would be saved so it may be on cheap and easy terms: But he
absolutely yields to the terms of Christ, and says with Austin, Da quod
jubes, and jube quod vis: Cause me to do what thou command, and command what
thou will. Though Pelagius contradicted the first sentence, and the flesh the
second, yet Augustine owned both: and so does every true believer. He greatly
complains of his backwardness to obey, but never complains of the
strictness of the command. He loves the holiness, justness and goodness of the
Laws when he bewaileth the unholiness and badness of his heart: He desires not
God to command him less, but desires grace and ability to do more. He is so
far from the mind of the ungodly world, who cry out against too much holiness
and making so much ado for heaven, that he desires even to reach to the degree
of Angels, and would fain have Gods will to be done on earth, as it is done in
heaven: and therefore the more desires to be in heaven, that he may do it
better. Psalm. 119.5. Romans 7.24.

2. The weak Christian has the same estimation and resolution: But when it
comes to practice, as his will is less confirmed and more corrupted and
divided, so little impediments and difficulties are great temptations to him,
and stop him more in the way of his obedience. All his duty is much more
tedious to him, and all his sufferings are much more burdensome to him, than
to confirmed Christians: And therefore he is easier tempted into omissions and
impatiency, and walks not so evenly, or comfortably with God. When the spirit
is willing, it yields often to the weakness of the flesh, because it is willing
in too remiss a degree. Mat. 26.41. Gal. 2.14.

3. But the seeming Christian (though notionally and generally he may approve
of strictness) yet secretly at the heart has always this reserve, that he
will not serve God at too dear a rate. His worldly felicity he cannot part
with, for all the hopes of the life to come: And yet he will not, he dare not
renounce and give up those hopes: And therefore he makes himself a Religion of
the easiest and cheapest parts of Christianity, (among which sometimes the
strictest opinions may fall out to be one part, so be it they be separated from
the strictest practice:) And this easy cheap Religion he will needs believe to
be true Christianity and Godliness; and so will hope to be saved upon these
terms: And though he cannot but know that it is the certain character of a
hypocrite, to have any thing nearer and dearer to his heart than God, yet he
hops that it is not so with him, because his convinced judgment can say that
God is best and the world is vanity, while yet his heart and affections so much
contradict his opinion, as almost to say: There is no God: For his heart
knows and loves no God as God, that is, above his worldly happiness. He is
resolved to do so much in religion as he finds necessary to delude his
conscience, and make himself believe that he is godly and shall be saved: but
when he comes to forsake all and take up the Cross, and practice the costlyest
parts of duty, then you shall see that Mammon was better loved than God, and he
will go away sorrowful, and hope to be saved upon easier terms. Luke 18.23. For
he was never resigned absolutely to God.

XV. 1. A confirmed Christian is one that takes selfdenial for the one half of
his Religion; and therefore has bestowed one half of his endeavors to attain
and exercise it. He knows that the fall of man, was a turning to himself from
God: And that selfishness and want of Love to God, are the sum of all
corruption and ungodliness: And that the Love of God and selfdenial are the
sum of all religion: And that conversion is nothing but the turning of the
heart from carnal self to God by Christ: And therefore on this has his care
and labor been so succesfully laid out, that he has truly and practically
found out something that is much better than himself, and to be loved and
preferred before himself; and which is to be his chiefest ultimate end: He
makes not a God of himself any more, but uses himself for God, to fulfill his
will, as a creature of his own, that has no other end and use. He no more
prefers himself above all the world, but esteems himself a poor and
despicable part of the world: And highlier valueth the honor of God, and the
welfare of the church, and the good of many, than any interest of his own.
Though God in nature has taught him to regard his own felicity and to love
himself, and not to seek the glory of God, and the good of many souls in
opposition to his own, yet has he taught him to prefer them (though in
conjunction) much before his own: For reason tells him that man is nothing in
comparison of God, and that we are made by him and for him; and that the
welfare of the Church or public societies is better (in order to the highest
ends) than the welfare of some one. Selfishness in the unregenerate, is like an
inflammation or apposteme, which draws the humors from other parts of the
body to it self: The interest of God and man are all swallowed up in the regard
that men have to self-interest: And the Love of God and our neighbor are
turned into self-love. But self is as annihilated in the confirmed Christian,
so that it rules not his Judgment, his affections, or his choice: And he that
lived in and to himself, as if God and all the world were but for him, does now
live to God, as one that is good for nothing else, and finds himself in
seeking him that is infinitely above himself. Luke 14.31, 32, 33. Phil. 2.4, 21.

2. And the weak Christian has attained to so much selfdenial that self is not
predominant in him against the Love of God and his neighbor: But yet above all
other sins, too great a measure of selfishness still remains in him: These
words [ own, and mine, and self] are too significant with him: every thing of
his, own is regarded inordinately, with partiality and too much selfishness. A
word against himself, or an injury to himself, is more to him than worse
against his brother: He is too little mindful of the glory of God, and of the
public good, and the souls of others; and even when he is mindful of his own
soul, he is too regardless of the souls of many, that by prayer or exhortation
or other means he ought to help: As a small candle lights but a little way,
and a small fire heateth not far off, so is his Love so much confined, that it
reaches not far from him: He valueth his friends too much upon their respect
to please himself, and loves men too much as they are partial for him; and
too little upon the pure account of grace, and their love to Christ and
servisableness to the Church: He easily overvalueth his own abilities, and is
too confident of his own understanding, and apt to have too high conceits of
any opinions that are his own; he is too apt to be tempted unto
uncharitableness, against those that cross him in his interest or way: he is
apt to be too negligent in the work of God, when any selfinterest does stand
against it; and too much to seek himself, his own esteem, or his own commodity,
when he should devote himself to the good of souls, and give up himself to the
work of God: Though he is not like the hypocrite that prefers himself before
the will of God and the common good, yet selfishness greatly stops,
interrupteth and hinders him in Gods work; and any great danger or loss or
shame, or other concernment of his own, does seem a greater matter to him, and
oftener turn him out of the way, than it will with a confirmed Christian: They
were not all hypocrites that Paul speaks of in that sad complaint, Phil.
2.20, 21. For I have no man like minded (to Timothy) who will naturally care
for your state, for all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus
Christ's:] that is; They too much seek their own, and not entirely enough the
things that are Christ's: which Timothy did naturally as if he had been born to
it, and Grace had made the Love of Christ and the souls of men and the good of
others as natural to him as the Love of himself Alas how lowdly do their own
distempers and soul miscarriages, and the divisions, and calamities of the
Church, proclaim, that the weaker sort of Christians have yet too much
selfishness, and that selfdenial is lamentably imperfect in them.

3. But in the seeming Christian selfishness is still the predominant
principle: he loves God but for himself; and he never had any higher end than
self: All his Religion, his opinions, his practice is animated by self-love,
and governed by it, even by the Love of carnal self: self-esteem,
self-conceitedness, self-love, self-willedness, self-seeking and self-saving,
are the constitution of his heart and life. He will be of that opinion, and way
and party in Religion, which selfishness directs him to choose: He will go no
farther in Religion, than self-interest and safety will allow him to go. He can
change his friend, and turn his love into hatred, and his praises into
reproach, when ever self-interest shall require it. He can make himself
believe, and labor to make others believe, that the wisest and holiest
servants of God, are erroneous, homorous, hypocrites, and unsufferable, if they
do but stand cross to his opinions and interest. For he judges of them, and
loves or hates them, principally as they conform to his will and interest, or
as they are against it: As the godly measure all persons and things, by the
will and interest of God, so do all ungodly men esteem them as they stand in
reference to themselves. When their factious interest required it, the Jews,
and specially the Pharisees, could make themselves and others believe, that the
Son of God himself was a breaker of the Law, and an enemy to Caesar, and a
blasphemer, and unworthy to live on the earth: And that Paul was a pestilent
fellow, and a mover of sedition among the people, and a ringleader of a sect,
and a prophaner of the Temple, Act. 24.5, 6. and which of the Prophets and
Apostles did they not persecute? Because Christ's doctrine does cross the
interest of selfish men, therefore the world does so generally rise up against
it with indignation; even as a Country will rise against an invading enemy: For
he comes to take away that which is dearest to them: As it is said of Luther,
that he meddled with the Popes crown, and the Friars bellies: and therefore no
wonder if they swarmed all about his ears. Selfishness is so general and
deeply rooted, that (except with a few self-denying Saints) self-love and
self-interest rules the world: And if you would know how to please a graceless
man, serve but his carnal interest, and you have done it: Be of his opinion (or
take on you to be so,) applaud him, admire him, flatter him, obey him, promote
his preferment, honor and wealth, be against his enemies; in a word, make him
your God, and sell your soul to gain his favor, and so it is possible you may
gain it.

XVI. 1. A Christian indeed has so far mortified the flesh, and brought all
his senses and appetite into subjection to sanctified Reason, as that there is
no great rebellion or perturbation in his mind; but a little matter, a holy
thought, or a word from God, does presently rebuke and quiet his inordinate
desires: The flesh is as a well-broken and well-ridden horse, that goes on his
journey obediently and quietly, and not with striving and chasing and vexatious
resisting: Though still flesh will be flesh, and will be weak, and will fight
against the spirit, so that we cannot do all the good we would, ( Isa. 5.17.
Romans 7.16, 17, etc.) yet in the confirmed Christian, it is so far tamed and
subdued, that its rebellion is much less, and its resistance weaker, and more
easily overcome: It causes not any notable unevenness in his obedience, nor
blemishes in his life: it is no other than consists with a readiness to obey
the will of God. Gal. 5.24, 25. 1 Cor. 9.26, 27. They that are Christ's have
crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof: They run not as
uncertainly: they fight not as one that beats the air: but they keep under
their bodies, and bring them into subjection, lest by any means they should be
castawaies: They put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the
flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof Romans 13.13, 14. As we see to a temperate
man, how sweet and easy temperance is, when to a glutton or drunkard, or
riotous liver it is exceeding hard: so it is in all other points with a
confirmed Christian. He has so far crucified the flesh, that it is as dead to
its former lusts, and so far mastered it, that it does easily and quickly
yield: And this makes the life of such a Christian, not only pure, but very
easy to him, in comparison of other men's. Nay, more than this, he can use his
sense (as he can use the world, the objects of sense) in subserviency to faith
and his salvation. His eye does but open a window to his mind to hold and
admire the Creator in his work: His taste of the sweetness of the creatures is
but a means, by which the sweeter Love of God does pass directly to his heart:
His sense of pleasure is but the passage of spiritual holy pleasure to his
mind: His sense of bitterness and pain is but the messenger to tell his heart,
of the bitterness and vexatiousness of sin. As God in the creation of us, made
our senses, but as the inlet and passage for himself into our minds, (even as
he made all the creatures to represent him to us by this passage;) so grace
does restore our very senses (with the creature) to this their holy original
use: that the goodness of God through the goodness of the creature, may pass to
our hearts, and be the effect and end of all.

2. But, for the weak Christian, though he have mortified the deeds of the body
by the spirit, and live not after the flesh but be freed from its captivity or
reign (Gal. 5.24. Romans 8.1, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.) yet has he such remnants
of concupiscence and sensuality, as make it a far harder matter to him to live
in temperance, and deny his appetite, and govern his senses; and restrain them
from rebellion, and excess: He is like a weak man upon an ill-ridden headstrong
horse, who has much ado to keep his saddle and keep his way. He is stronglier
inclined to fleshly lusts, or excess in meat, or drink, or sleep, or sports, or
some such fleshly pleasure, than the mortified temperate person is, and
therefore is ofter guilty of some excess: so that his life is a very tiresome
conflict, and very uneasy to himself: because the less the flesh is mortified,
the more able it is to raise perturbations, and to put faith and reason to a
continual fight. And most of the scandals and blemishes of his life arise from
hence; even the successes of the flesh against the spirit; so that (though he
live not in any gross or wilful sins; yet) in lesser measures of excess he is
too frequently overtaken: How few be there that in meat and sleep do not
usually exceed their measure? And they are easily tempted to libertine
opinions, which indulge the flesh, having a weaker preservative against them
than stronger Christians have. Mat. 16.22, 23. Gal. 5.13. and 1.16. and 2.12,
13, 14. Col. 2.11.

3. But the seeming Christian is really carnal. The flesh is the predominant
part with him; and the interest of the flesh is the ruling interest. He washes
away the outward filth, and in hope of salvation, will be as religious as the
flesh will give him leave; and will deny it in some smaller matters; and will
serve it in a religious way, and not in so gross and impudent a manner as the
Atheists and openly profane. But for all that he never conquered the flesh
indeed; but seeks its prosperity more than the pleasing of God and his
salvation: And among prayers and sermons and holy conference and books, yea and
formal fastings too, he is serving the flesh, with so much the more dangerous
impenitencie, by how much the more his cloak of formality hinders him from
the discerning of his sin: many a one that is of unblemished reputation in
Religion, does constantly serve his appetite in meat and drink, (though without
any notable excess,) and his fleshly mind in the pleasure of his dwelling,
wealth and accommodations, as much as some profane ones do, if not much more.
And whenever it comes to a parting trial, they will show that the flesh was
the ruling part, and will venture their souls to secure its interest. Luke
18.23. and 14.33, Romans 8.5, 6, 7, 9, 13. Mat. 13.21, 22. Jud. 19.

XVII. 1. Hence it follows that a Christian indeed prefers the means of
his spiritual benefit and salvation incomparably before all corporal
commodities and pleasures. He had rather dwell under the teaching and guidance
of an able experienced Pastor, though it be cross to his prosperity and wordly
gain, than to live under an ignorant or dead hearted Preacher, when it
furthereth his trading or more accommodateth his flesh: (Though yet he must not
remove when God lays any restraint upon him, by his duty to his family, or
others:) He had rather if he be a servant, dwell in a family, where he may do
or receive most spiritual good, than in a carnal family, where he may have more
ease, and better fare, and greater wages. If he be to marry, he had rather have
one that has wisdom and piety without wealth, than one that has riches
without wisdom and piety. He is gladder of an opportunity (in public or
private) for the profit of his soul, than of a feast, or a good bargain, or an
opportunity for some gain in wordly things. Mat. 6.20.33.

2. And the weak Christian is of the same mind in the main. He valueth mercies
and helps for his soul, above those for his body: But it is with less zeal, and
more indifferency; and therefore is more easily and ofter drawn to the omitting
of spiritual duties, and neglect of spiritual helps and mercies: and goes to
them with more averness, and as driven by necessity: and is much less sensible
of his loss, when he misseth of any such spiritual helps. Luke 10.41, 42. Heb.
10.25. Act. 2.42. and 4.32.

3. But the seeming Christian being a real worldling, does serve God and
Mammon; and Mammon with the first and best: He had rather miss a Sermon, than a
good bargain or commodity: he had rather dwell where he may thrive best, or
have most ease and pleasure, than where he may find the greatest helps for
heaven: he will be Religious, but it must be with an easy and a pleasant and
merry Religion; which may not be too nigardly with his flesh, nor use it too
strictly: unless when one days austerity may procure him an indulgence for his
liberty all the week following. He will make his bargain with Christ so, as to
be sure that he may not lose by him: And he will not believe that God is
pleased with that which is much dipleasing to his flesh. Romans 8.5, 6, 7, 8, 13.
Mat. 13.21, 22.

XVIII. 1. The Christian indeed is one that is crucified to the world, and the
world is as a crucified thing to him: Gal. 6.14. He has overcome the world by
faith, and follows Christ in the pursuit of it, to a perfect conquest. 1 John
5.4, 5. Joh. 16.33. He has seen through all its glosing vanity, and foreseen
what it will prove at last: He has found that it cannot quiet conscience, nor
reconcile the guilty soul to God, nor save it from his consuming wrath; nor
serve instead of God or Heaven, of Christ or grace; but will cast off its
servants in their last extremity, naked and desolate into remediless despair:
And therefore he is resolvedly at a point with all things under the Sun: Let
them take the world for their portion and felicity that will: For his part, he
accounts all things in it dung and dross in comparison of Christ and things
eternal, Phil. 3.7, 8, 19, 20. All the preferments, and honors, and command,
and wealth, and greatness of the world, do not seem to him a bate considerable,
to make a wise man once question whether he should persevere in faithfulness to
God, or to tempt him to commit one wilful sin: He would not speak, or own a
lie, or approve the sin of any other, for all that worldlings enjoy in their
greatest prosperity while they live. He accounts his peace with God and
conscience, and his communion with Christ in the greatest poverty, to be
incomparably better than all the pleasures and commodities of sin: yea the very
reproach of Christ is better to him than all the treasures of Court or Country,
Heb. 11.25, 26. Grace has mortified and annihilated the world to him: And that
which is dead and nothing can do nothing with him against God and his soul. He
looks on it as a carrion, which dogs may love and fight for; but is unfit to
be the food of man: He is going to the land of promise; and therefore will not
contend for an inheritance in this howling wilderness. Whether he be high or
low, rich or poor, are so small a part of his concernments, that he is almost
indifferent to them, farther than as the interest of God and souls, may
accidentally be concerned in them. The world set against God and Heaven and
holiness, does weigh no more in his estimation, than a feather that is put in
the balance against a mountain or all the world. He feels no great force in
such temptations, as would draw him to win the world and lose his soul. His eye
and heart are, where his God and treasure is, above; and worldly wealth and
greatness are below him, even under his feet: He thinks not things temporal
worth the looking at, in comparison of things eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18. He thinks
that their money and riches do deservedly perish with them, who think all the
money in the world, to be a thing comparable with grace. Act. 8.20.

2. And the weak Christian is of the same judgment and resolution in the main:
But yet the world retains a greater interest in his heart: It grieveth him
more to lose it: It is a stronger temptation to him: To deny all the
preferments and honors and riches of it, seems a greater matter to him: and
he does it with more striving and less ease: and sometimes the respect of
worldly things prevails with him in lesser matters, to wound his conscience,
and makes work for repentance; and such are so entangled in worldly cares, and
prosperity tastes so sweet with them, that grace even languisheth and falls
into a consumption, and almost into a swoun. So much do some such let out their
hearts, to the world which they renounced, and scrape for it with so much care
and eagerness, and contend with others about their commodities and rights, that
they seem to the standers by to be as worldly as worldlings themselves are; and
become a shame to their profession, and make ungodly persons say, Your godly
professors are as coveteous as any, 2 Timothy 4.10.

3. But seeming Christians are the servants of the world: when they have learnt
to speak hardliest of it, it has their hearts: Heaven (as I said before) is
valued but as a reserve, when they know they can keep the world no longer. They
have more sweet and pleasing thoughts and speeches of the world, than they have
of God and the world to come: It has most of their hearts, when God is most
preferred by their tongues: there it is that they are daily laying up their
treasure, and there they must leave it at the parting hour, when they go naked
out as they came naked in: the love of deceitful riches choaketh the word of
God, and it withers in them, and becomes unfruitful, Mat. 13.22. They go
away sorrowful because of their beloved riches, when they should part with all
for the hopes of heaven. Luke 18.23. yea though they are beggars that never
have a days prosperity in the world, for all that, they love it better than
heaven, and desire that which they cannot get: because they have not an eye of
faith, to see that better world which they neglect, and therefore take it for
an uncertain thing: nor are their carnal natures suitable to it, and therefore
they mind it not. Romans 8.7. When an Hypocrite is at the best, he is but a
Religious worldling: The world is nearer to his heart than God is, but pure
Religion keeps a man unspotted of the world: Jam. 1.27.

XIX. 1. A confirmed Christian is one, that still sees the end in all that he
does, and that is before him in his way: and looks not at things as at the
present they seem or relish to the flesh, or to short sighted men; but as they
will appear and be judged of at last. The first letter makes not the word, nor
the first word the sentence, without the last. Present time is quickly past;
and therefore he less regards what things seem at present, than what they
will prove to all eternity. When temptations offer him a bate to sin, with the
present profit, or pleasure, or honor, he sees at once the final shame: he
sees all worldly things as they are seen by a dying man: and as after the
general conflagration they will be. He sees the godly in his adversity and
patience, as entering into his masters joys: he sees the derided vilified
saint, as ready to stand justified by Christ at his right hand; and the lies of
the malicious world, as ready to cover themselves with shame: he sees the
wicked in the height of their prosperity as ready to be cut down and withered,
and their pampered flesh to turn to dirt; and their filthy and malicious souls,
to stand condemned by Christ at his left hand, and to hear, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Mat. 25. 1 Pet. 1.24.
Jam. 1.10, 11. Psalm. 73. and 37. Therefore it is that he valueth grace, because
he knows what it will be: and therefore it is that he flies from sin,
because he knows the terrors of the Lord, and what it will prove to the
sinner in the end; and how sinners themselves will curse the day that ever they
did commit it; and wish when it is too late, that they had chosen the holiness
and patience of the saints: and therefore it is that he pitieth rather than
envieth the prosperous enemies of the Church, because he foreseeth what the end
will be of them that obey not the Gospel of Christ; and if the righteous be
scarcely saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. 2
These. 1.8, 9, 10. If the wicked unbelievers saw but the ending of all things as
he does, they would be all then of his mind and way. This puts so much life
into his prayers, his obedience and patience, because he sees the end in all.
Deuteronomy. 32.39, Prove. 19.20. Isai. 47.7.

2. And the weakest Christian does the same in the main, so far as to turn his
heart from things temporal, to things eternal; and to resolve him in his main
choice, and to conduct the course of his life toward heaven. But yet in
particular actions he is often stopped in present things, and forgetfully loses
the fight of the end, and so is deluded and entised into sin, for want of
seeing that which should have preserved him: he is like one that travelleth
over hills and valleys, who when he is upon the hills does see the place that
he is going to, but when he comes into the valleys, it is out of his sight.
Too often does the weak Christian think of things as they appear at the present,
with little sense of the change that is near: when he sees the bates of sin,
whether riches, or beauty, or meat and drink, or any thing that is pleasing to
the senses, the remembrance of the end does not so quickly and powerfully work,
to prevent his deceived imaginations, as it ought. And when poverty, or shame,
or sufferings, or sickness, are presented to him, the foresight of the end is
not so speedy and powerful in clearing his judgment, and settling his
resolution, and preventing his misapprehension and trouble as it ought. And
hence come his often mistakes and falls: and herein consists much of that
foolishness, which he confesses when Repentance brings him to himself. 2 Samuel 24.10. 2 Chronicles. 16.9.

3. But the seeming Christian has so dim and doubtful a foresight of the end,
and it is so frequently out of his mind, that things present do carry away his
heart, and have the greatest power and interest with him, and are most regarded
and sought after in this life. For he is purblind, not seeing a far off, as it
is said, 2 Pet. 1.9. He wants that faith which is the substance of things
hoped for, and the evidence of things unseen Heb. 11.1. Things promised in
another world, seem to him too uncertain, or too far off, to be preferred
before all the happiness of this world: he is resolved to make his best of that
which he has in hand, and to prefer possession before such hopes. Little does
his heart perceive what a change is near, and how the face of all things will
be altered! How sin will look, and how the minds of sinners will be changed,
and what all the riches, and pleasures, and honors of the world will appear at
the latter end! He foreseeth not the day when the slothful, and the worldly,
and the fleshly and the proud, and the enemies of godliness shall all wish in
vain, O that we had laid up our treasure in heaven, and labored for the food
that perishes not, and had set less by all the vanities of the world! and had
imitated the holiest and most mortified believers! Though the hypocrite can
himself foretell all this, and talk of it to others, yet his belief of it is so
dead, and his sensuality so strong, that he lives by sense, and not by that
belief; and present things are practically preferred by him, and bear the sway,
so that he needs those warnings of God, as well as the profane, Deuteronomy. 32. O
that they were wise, that they understood this, and that they would consider
their latter end: And he is one of the foolish ones, Mat. 25.8, 11. who are
seeking oil for their lamps when it is too late, and are crying out, Lord,
Lord, open to us, when the door is shut; and will not know the time of their
visitation, nor know effectually in this their day the things which belong to
their everlasting peace.

XX. 1. The Christian indeed is one that lives upon God alone. His faith is
Divine: his love and obedience and confidence are Divine: his chiefest converse
is Divine: his hopes and comforts are Divine: As it is God that he depends
on, and trusts to, and studieth to please above all the world, so it is Gods
approbation that he takes up with for his justification and reward: He took
him for his absolute Governor, and judge, and full felicity, in the day when
he took him for his God. He can live in peace without man's approbation: If men
are never acquainted with his sincerity, or virtues, or good deeds, it does not
discourage him nor hinder him from his holy course: he is therefore the same in
secret as in public; because no place is secret from God. If men turn his
greatest virtues or duties to his reproach, and slander him, and make him
odious to men, and represent him as they did Paul, a pestilent fellow, a mover
of sedition, and the ringleader of a sect, and make him as the filth of the
world, and the offscouring of all things, this changes him not, for it
changes not his felicity, nor does he miss of his reward. 1 Cor. 4.9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14. Read the words in the text: Though he has so much suspicion of his
own understanding, and reverence for wiser men's, that he will be glad to learn,
and will hear reason from any one; yet praise and dispraise are matters of very
small regard with him, and, as to himself, he accounts it but a small thing
to be judged of men, whether they justify or condemn him; because they are
fallible and have not the power of determining any thing, to his great
commodity or detriment, nor is it their judgment to* which he stands or falls:
1 Cor. 4.3.4. He has a more dreadful or comfortable judgment to prepare for:
man is of small account with him in comparison of God. Romans 8.33, 34, 35, 36.

2. And though with the weakest true Christian it is so also as to the
predominancie of Gods esteem and interest in him, yet is his weakness daily
visible in the culpable effects. Though God have the chiefest place in his
esteem, yet man has much more than his due. The thoughts and words of men seem
to such, of far greater importance than they should. Praise and dispraise,
favors and injuries, are things which affect their hearts too much: they bear
not the contempts and wrongs of men, with so quiet and satisfied a mind, as
beseems those that live upon God. They have so small experience of the
comforts of God in Christ, that they are tasting the deeper of other delights,
and spare them not so easily as they ought to do: God, without friends, or
house, or land, or maintenance or esteem in the world, does not fully quiet
them, but there is a deal of pievish impatience left in their minds, though it
does not drive them away from God.

3. But the seeming Christian can better take up with the world alone than with
God alone: God is not so much missed by him as the world: He always breaks
with Christ when it comes to forsaking all: He is godly notionally and
professedly, and therefore may easily say that God is his portion, and enough
for those that put their trust in him: But his heart never consented truly to
reduce these words to practice. When it comes to the trial, the praise or
dispraise of man, and the prosperity or matters of the world, do signify more
with him than the favor or displeasure of God; and can do more with him.
Christ and riches and esteem he could be content with; but he cannot away with
a naked Christ alone. Therefore he is indeed a practical Atheist, even when he
seems most religious: For if he had ever taken God for his God indeed, he had
certainly taken him as his portion, felicity, and all: and therefore as enough
for him without the creature. Luke 18.23.

XXI. 1. For all this it follows that A Christian indeed has with himself
devoted all that he has to God; and so all that he has is sanctified: he is
only in doubt often times in particular cases, what God would have him do with
himself, and his estate; but never in doubt whether they are to be wholly
employed for God, in obedience to his will, so far as he can know it: and
therefore does estimate every creature and condition, purely as it relates
unto God and life eternal. HOLINESS TO THE LORD is written upon all that he has
and does: he takes it as sent from God; and uses it as his Masters goods and
talents, not chiefly for himself, but for his Masters ends and will: God
appears to him in the creature; and is the life, and sweetness, and glory of
the creature to him: his first question in every business he undertaketh, or
every place or condition that he chooses is, how it conduces to the Pleasing
of God, and to his spiritual ends: Whether he eats or drinks or what ever
he does, he does all to the glory of God. 1 Cor. 10.31. The posie engraven on
his heart is the name of GOD, with [OF HIM, and THROUGH HIM, and TO HIM ARE ALL
THINGS, TO HIM BE GLORY FOR EVER, AMEN.] Romans 11.36. He lives as a steward,
that uses not his own, though yet he have a sufficient reward for his
fidelity: and he keeps accounts both of his receivings and layings out; and
reckons all to be worse than lost, which he finds not expended on his Lords
account. For himself he asks not that which is sweetest to the flesh, but
that which is fittest to his end and work. And therefore desires not Riches
(for himself) but his daily bread, and food convenient for him; and having food
and raiment is therewith content, having taken godlyness for his gain: he
asks not for superfluity, nor any thing to consume it on his lusts, nor to
become provision for his flesh, to satisfy the wills thereof: But as a runner
in his race, desires not any provisions which may hinder him: and therefore
forgetting the things which are behind (the world which he has turned his back
upon) he reaches forth to the things which are before (the crown of glory) and
presses toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus: not turning an eye to any thing that would stop him in his course. Thus
while he is employed about things below, his mind and conversation is heavenly
and divine, while all things are estimated and used purely for God and Heaven.
Luke 16.1, 2. 1 Pet. 4.10. Tit. 1.15. Prove. 30.8. 1 Timothy 6.8. 1 Timothy 6.6. Jam.
4.3. Romans 13.14. Phil. 3.13, 14, 15.

2. But the weak Christian, though he have all this in desire, and be thus
affected and resolved in the main, and lives to God in the scope and course of
his life; yet is too often looking aside, and valuing the creature carnally for
it self; and oft-times uses it for the pleasing of the flesh, and almost like
a common man: his house, and land, and friends, and pleasures, are relished too
carnally, as his own accommodations; and though he walk not after the flesh but
after the spirit, yet he has too much of the fleshly taste, and is greatly out
in his accounts with God; and turns many a thing from his masters use, to the
service of the flesh; and though he be not as the slothful wicked servant, yet
is it but little improvement that he makes of his talent. Mat. 25.17, 26, 27,
28.

3. But the seeming Christian being carnal and selfish, while his notions and
professions are spiritual and divine, and his selfish and fleshly interest
being predominant; it must needs follow that he estimateth all things
principally as they respect his fleshly interest; and uses them principally
for his carnal self; even when in the manner he seems to use them most
religiously (as I have said before) And so to the defiled nothing is pure, Romans
8.5, 6, 7, 8, 13. Tit. 1.15.

XXII. 1. A Christian indeed has a promptitude to obey, and a ready compliance
of his will to the will of God. He has not any great averseness and
withdrawing, and does not the good which he does with much backwardness and
striving against it: but as in a well ordered watch or clock, the spring or
poise do easily set all the wheels a going, and the first wheel easily moves
the rest; so is the will of a confirmed Christian presently moved, as soon as
he knows the will of God. He stays not for other moving Reasons: Gods will
is his Reason. This is the Habit of subjection and obedience: which makes him
say, speak Lord for thy servant hears: and Lord what would thou have me do.
And Teach me to do thy will O God: Psalm. 143.10. 1 Samuel 3.10. Act. 9.6. I
delight to do thy will O God; yea thy Law is within my heart: Psalm. 40.8. The
Law written in our heart, is nothing else but the knowledge of Gods Laws, with
this Habit or promptitude to obey them; the special fruit of the spirit of
grace.

2. But a weak Christian, though he love Gods will and way, and be sincerely
obedient to him, yet in many particulars where his corruption contradicts,
has a great deal of backwardness and striving of the flesh against the spirit;
and there needs many words and many considerations, and vehement persuasions,
yea and sharp afflictions sometimes to bring him to obey: and he is fain to
drive on his backward heart, and has frequent use for the rod and spurr; and
therefore is more slow and uneven in his obedience, Gal. 5.17.

3. The seeming Christian is forward in those easy cheaper parts of duty,
which serve to delude his carnal heart, and quiet him in a worldly life; but he
is so backward to through sincere obedience in the most flesh-displeasing parts
of duty, that he is never brought to it at all; but either he will fit his
opinions in religion to his will, and will not believe them to be duties, or
else he will do something like them in a superficial formal way; but the thing
it self he will not do. For he is more obedient to his carnal mind and lusts,
than he is to God, Romans 8.6, 7. And forwarder much to sacrifice than obedience,
Eccl. 5.1.

XXIII. 1. A Christian indeed does daily delight himself in God, and finds
more solid content and pleasure in his commands and promises, than in all this
world: His duties are sweet to him, and his hopes are sweeter. Religion is not
a tiresome task to him, The yoke of Christ is easy to him, and his burden
light, and his commandments are not grievous, Psalm. 37.4. and 1.2. and 40.8.
and 94.19. and 119.16.35.47.70. Mat. 11.28, 29. Joh. 5.3. That which others
take as Physic, for mere necessity, against their wills, he goes to as a
feast, with appetite and delight. He prays because he loves to pray: and he
thinks and speaks of holy things, because he loves to do it. And hence it is
that he is so much in holy duty, and so unwearied, because he loves it, and
takes pleasure in it. As voluptuous persons are often, and long at their sports,
or merry company, because they love them, and take pleasure in them: so are
such Christians often, and long in holy exercises because their hearts are set
upon them, as their recreation and the way and means of their felicity. If it
be a delight to a studious man, to read those books which most clearly open the
abstrusest mysteries of the sciences; or to converse with the most wise and
learned men, and if it be a delight to men, to converse with their dearest
friends, or to hear from them and read their letters; no marvel if it be a
delight to a Christian indeed to read the Gospel mysteries of Love, and to find
there the promises of everlasting happiness, and to see in the face of Jesus
Christ the clearest Image of the eternal deity: and foresee the Joys which he
shall have for ever. He sticks not in superficial formalitie, but breaking
the shell does feed upon the kernel: It is not bare external duty which he is
taken up with: nor any mere creature that is his content: but it is God in
creatures and ordinances that he seeks and lives upon: and therefore it is
that Religion is so pleasant to him. He would not change his Heavenly delights,
which he finds in the exercise of faith, and hope, and love to God, for all
the carnal pleasures of this world: he had rather be a door keeper in the house
of God, than to dwell in the tents or palaces of wickedness: A day in Gods
court is better to him than a thousand, in the court of the greatest Prince on
earth. He is not a stranger to the joy in the Holy Ghost, in which the Kingdom
of God does in part consist, Romans 14.17. Psalm. 84.10.2. and 65.4. In the
multitude of his thoughts within him, the comforts of God do delight his soul.
Psalm. 94.19. His meditation of God is sweet, and he is glad in the Lord. Psalm.
104.34. The freest and sweetest of his thoughts and words, run out upon God and
the matters of salvation. The word of God is sweeter to him than honey, and
better than thousands of Gold and Silver: Psalm. 119.72. and 119.103. and 19.10.
Prove. 16.24. And because his delight is in the law of the Lord, therefore does
he meditate in it day and night. Psalm. 1.2. He sees great reason for all those
commands, Rejoice ever more: 1 These. 5.16. Let the righteous be glad, let them
rejoice before God, yea let them exceedingly rejoice. Psalm. 68.3.4. and 64.10.
and 31.1. and 32.11. Be glad in the Lord and rejoice ye righteous: and shout
for joy all that are upright in heart. He is sorry for the poor unhappy world,
that have no better things than meat, and drink, and clothes, and house, and
land, and money, and lust, and play, and domineering over others, to rejoice in.
And heartily he wishes that they had but a taste of the Saints delights, that
it might make them spit out their luscious, unclean, unwholesome pleasures: One
look to Christ, one promise of the Gospel, one serious thought of the life
which he must live with God for ever, does afford his soul more solid comfort,
than all the kingdoms on earth can afford. And though he live not continually
in these high delights, yet peace with God, and peace of conscience, and some
delight in God, and godliness, is the ordinary temperature of his soul, and
higher degrees are given him in season for his cordials and his feasts.

2. But the weak Christian has little of these spiritual delights: his
ordinary temper is to apprehend that God and his ways are indeed most
delectable: his very heart acknowledges that they are worthiest and fittest to
be the matter of his delights: And if he could attain assurance of his special
interest in the love of God; and his part in Christ and life eternal, he would
then rejoice in them indeed, and would be gladder than if he were Lord of all
the world: But in the mean time, either his fears and doubts are damping his
delights; or else (which is much worse) his appetite is dull, and God and
holiness relish not with him half so sweetly, as they do with the confirmed
Christian; and he is too busy in tasting of fleshly and forbidden pleasures,
which yet more deprave his appetite, and dull his desires, to the things of
God: so that though in his Estimation, choice, resolution and endeavor he much
prefers God before the world yet as to any delightful sweetness in him, it
is but little that he tastes. He loves God with a Desiring Love, and with a
Seeking Love, but with very little of a Delighting Love. The remnant of corrupt
and alien affections do weaken his affections to the things above; and his
infant measure of spiritual life, conjunct with many troublesome diseases,
allow him very little of the joy of the Holy Ghost. Nay perhaps he has more
grief, and fear, and doubts, and trouble, and perplexity of mind, than ever he
had before he turned unto God: and perhaps he has yet less pleasure in God,
than he had before in sin and sensuality. Because he had his sin in a state of
fruition, but he has God only in a seeking, hoping state: he had the best of
sin, and all that ever it will afford him: but he has yet none of the full
felicity which he expects in God: The fruition of him is yet but in the
prospect of hope. His sensual sinful life was in its maturity, and the object
present in its most alluring state: but his spiritual life of faith and love,
is but yet in its weak beginnings, and the object absent from our sight: He is
so busy at first in blowing up his little spark, not knowing whether the fire
will kindle or go out, that he has little of the use or pleasure, either of
its light or warmth. Infants come crying into the world; and afterward oftener
cry than laugh: Their senses and reason are not yet perfected, or exercised to
partake of the pleasures of life. And when they do come to know what a laughter
is, they will laugh and cry almost in a breath: And those weak Christians that
do come to taste of joy and pleasure in their religious state, it is commonly
but as a flash of lightning, which leaves them as dark as they were before.
Sometimes in the beginning, upon their first apprehensions of the love of God
in Christ, and of the pardon of their sins, and the privileges of their new
condition, and the hopes of everlasting joy, their hearts are transported with
unspeakable delight; which is partly from the newness of the thing, and partly
because God will let them have some encouraging taste, to draw them further, and
to convince them of the difference between the pleasures of sin, and the
comforts of believing: But these first rejoycings soon abate, and turn into a
life of doubts, and fears, and griefs, and care, till they are grown to greater
understanding, experience, and setledness in the things of God: The root must
grow greater and deeper, before it will bear a greater top. Those Christians
that in the weakness of grace have frequent joys, are usually persons whose
weak and passionate nature does occasion it: (some women especially) that have
strong fantasies and passions are always passionately affected with
whatsoever they apprehend: And these are like a ship that is tossed in a
tempest; that is one while lifted up as to the clouds, and presently cast down
as into an infernal gulf: There one day in great joy, and quickly after in as
great perplexity and sorrow. Because their comforts or sorrows do follow their
present feeling, or mutable apprehensions. But when they come to be confirmed
Christians, they will keep a more constant judgment of themselves, and their
own condition, and constantly see their grounds of comfort; and when they
cannot raise their souls to any high and passionate joys, they yet walk in a
settled peace of soul, and in such competent comforts, as make their lives to
be easy and delightful; being well pleased and contented with the happy
condition that Christ has brought them to, and thankful that he left them not
in those foolish vain pernicious pleasures, which were the way to endless
sorrows.

3. But the seeming Christian seeks and takes up his chief contentment in
some carnal thing: If he be so poor and miserable as to have nothing in
possession that can much delight him, he will hope for better days hereafter,
and that hope shall be his chief delight: or if he have no such hope he will be
without delight, and show his love to the world and flesh, by mourning for that
which he cannot have, as others do in rejoicing in what they do possess; and he
will, in such a desperate case of misery, be such to the world as the weak
Christian is to God, who has a mourning and desiring love, when he cannot
reach to an enjoying and delighting Love. His carnal mind most savoureth the
things of the flesh, and therefore in them he finds or seeks his chief
delights. Though yet he may have also a delight in his superficial kind of
Religion, his hearing, and reading and praying and in his ill-grounded hopes of
life eternal: But all this is but subordinate to his chiefest earthly pleasure.
Isai. 58.2. Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation
that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinances of their God: they ask
of me the ordinances of justice; they take delight in approaching unto God. And
yet all this was subjected to a covetous oppressing mind. Mat. 13.20. He that
received the seed into stony places, the same is he that hears the word, and
anon with joy receives it, yet has he not root in himself, but dureth for a
while, for when tribulation or persecution arises because of the word, by and
by he is offended. Whereby it appears that his love to the word, was
subjected to his love to the world.

Obj. But there are two sorts of people that seem to have no fleshly delights
at all, and yet are not in the way to salvation: viz. the Quakers, and
Behmenists that live in great austerity, and some of the Religious orders of
the Papists, who afflict their flesh. Answ. Some of them undergo their fastings
and penance for a day, that they may sin the more quietly all the week after:
And some of them proudly comfort themselves with the fancies and conceit of
being and appearing more excellent in austerity than others: And all these take
up with a carnal sort of pleasure. As proud persons are pleased with their own,
or others conceits of their beauty, or wit, or worldly greatness; so prouder
persons are pleased with their own and others conceits of their holiness. And
verily they have their reward, Mat. 6.2. But those of them that place their
chiefest happiness in the love of God, and the eternal fruition of him in
heaven, and seek this sincerely according to their helps and power, though they
are mislead into some superstitious errors, I hope I may number with those that
are sincere; for all their errors and the ill effects of them.

XXIV. 1. A confirmed Christian does ordinarily discern the sincerity of his
own heart, and consequently has some well grounded assurance of the pardon of
his sins, and of the favor of God, and of his everlasting happiness: And
therefore no wonder if he live a peaceable and joyful life. For his grace is
not so small as to be undiscernable, nor is it as a sleepy buried seed or
principle; but it is almost in continual act: And they that have a great degree
of grace, and also keep it in lively exercise, do seldom doubt of it. Besides
that they blot not their Evidence by so many infirmities and falls: They are
more in the light, and have more acquaintance with themselves, and more sense
of the abundant love of God, and of his exceeding mercies, than weak Christians
have: and therefore must needs have more assurance. They have boldness of
access to the throne of grace, without unreverent contempt: Ephesians. 3.12. and
2.18. They have more of the spirit of Adoption, and therefore more childlike
confidence in God, and can call him Father with greater freedom and comfort
than any others can. Romans 8.15, 16. Gal. 4.6. Ephesians. 1.6. 1 John 5.19, 20. [ And
we know that we are of God, and that the whole world lies in wickedness: etc.

2. But the weak Christian has so small a degree of grace, and so much
corruption, and his grace is so little in act, and his sin so much, that he
seldom if ever attaineth to any well-grounded assurance, till he attain to a
greater measure of grace. He differs so little from the seeming Christian,
that neither himself nor others do certainly discern the difference. When he
searches after the truth of his faith, and love, and heavenly mindedness, he
finds so much unbelief and aversness from God, and earthly mindedness, that
he cannot be certain which of them is predominant; and whether the interest of
this world or that to come, do bear the sway. So that he is often in
perplexities and fears, and more often in a dull uncertainty: And if he seem at
any time to have assurance, it is usually but an illgrounded persuasion of the
truth: though it be true which he apprehends, when he takes himself to be
the child of God, yet it is upon unfound reasons that he judges so, or else
upon sound reasons weakly and uncertainly discerned: so that there is commonly
much of security, presumption, fancy, or mistake, in his greatest comforts. He
is not yet in a condition fit for full assurance, till his love and obedience
be more full.

3. But the seeming Christian cannot possibly in that estate, have either
certainty, or good probability that he is a child of God, because it is not
true: His seeming certainty is merely self-deceit, and his greatest confidence
is but presumption, because the spirit of Christ is not within him, and
therefore he is certainly none of his, Romans 8.9.

XXV. 1. The Assurance of a confirmed Christian does increase his alacrity and
diligence in duty, and is always seen in his more obedient, holy, fruitful
life: The sense of the love and mercy of God, is as the rain upon the tender
grass. He is never so fruitful, so thankful, so heavenly, as when he has the
greatest certainty that he shall be saved: The Love of God is then shed abroad
upon his heart by the Holy Ghost, which makes him abound in love to God, Romans
5.1, 2, 3, 4. He is the more steadfast, unmovable and always, abounding in the
work of the Lord, when he is most certain that his labor shall not be in vain
in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58.

2. But the weak Christian is unfit yet to manage assurance well: and therefore
it is that it is not given him: Graces must grow proportionably together. If he
be but confidently persuaded that he is justified and shall be saved, he is
very apt to gather some consequence from it, that tends to security and to
the remitting of his watchfulness and care: He is ready to be the bolder with
sin, and stretch his conscience, and omit some duties, and take more fleshly
liberty and ease, and think, Now I am a child of God, I am out of danger, I am
sure I cannot totally fall away: And though his judgment conclude not [
therefore I may venture further upon worldly fleshly pleasures, and need not be
so strict and diligent as I was] yet his heart and practice thus conclude. And
he is most obedient when he is most in fear of hell, and he is worst in his
heart and life, when he is most confident that all his danger is past. Heb.
4.1, 2. and 3.14, 15.16.

3. But the seeming Christian, though he have no assurance, is hardened in his
carnal state by his presumption. Had he but assurance to be saved without a
holy life, he would cast off that very image of godliness which he yet
retains. The conceit of his own sincerity and salvation, is that which
deludeth and undoeth him. What sin would not gain or pleasure draw him to
commit, if he were but sure to be forgiven? It is fear of hell that causes
that seeming religion which he has: And therefore if that fear be gone, all is
gone; and all his piety and diligence and righteousness is come to naught: Gal.
6.3. Joh. 8.39, 42, 44.

XXVI. 1. For all his assurance, a confirmed Christian is so well acquainted
with his manifold imperfections, and daily failings, and great unworthiness,
that he is very low and vile in his own eyes; and therefore can easily endure
to be low and vile in the eyes of others: He has a constant sense of the
burden of his remaining sin: Especially he does even abhor himself, when he
finds the averseness of his heart to God, and how little he knows of him,
and how little he loves him, in comparison of what he ought, and how little of
Heaven is upon his heart, and how strange and backward his thoughts are to the
life to come. These are as fetters upon his soul: He daily groaneth under them
as a captive, that he should be yet so carnal, and unable to shake off the
remnant of his infimities, as if he were sold under sin, that is, in bondage to
it, Romans 7.14. He hates himself more for the imperfections of his love and
obedience to God, than hypocrites do for their reigning sin. And O how he
longs for the day of his deliverance! Romans 7.24. He thinks it no great
injury for another to judge of him as he judges of himself, even to be less
than the least of all Gods mercies: He is more troubled for being over praised
and overvalued, than for being dispraised and vilified; as thinking those that
praise him are more mistaken, and lay the more dangerous snare for his soul.
For he has a special antipathy to pride: and wondreth that any rational man
can be so blind as not to see enough to humble him: For his own part (in the
midst of all Gods graces) he sees in himself so much darkness, imperfection,
corruption, and want of further grace, that he is loathsome and burdensome
continually to himself: If you see him sad or troubled, and ask him the cause,
it is ten to one but it is himself that he complains of: The frowardest wife,
the most undutiful child, the most disobedient servant, the most injurious
neighbor, the most malicious enemy, is not half so great a trouble to him as
he is to himself. He prays abundantly more against his own corruption, than
against any of these. O could he but know and love God more, and be more in
heaven, and willinger to die, and freer from his own distempers, how easily
could he bear all crosses, or injuries from others? He came to Christ's school
as a little child, Mat. 18.3. And still he is little in his own esteem: And
therefore disesteem and contempt from others, is no great matter with him. He
thinks it can be no great wrong, that is done against so poor a worm, and so
unworthy a sinner as himself (except as God or the souls of men may be
interested in the cause.) He heartily approves of the justice of God, in
abhorring the proud; and has learned that Romans 12.10. [ in honor preferring
one another] and Gal. 5.26. Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one
another, envying one another.

2. But the remnant of Pride is usually the most notable sin, of the weak
Christian: Though it reigns not, it souly blemisheth him. He would fain be
taken for some body in the Church: He is ready to step up into a higher room,
and to think himself wiser and better than he is. If he can but speak
confidently of the principles of Religion, and some few controversies which he
has made himself sick with, he is ready to think himself fit to be a preacher.
He looks through a magnifying glass upon all his own performances and gifts:
He loves to be valued and praised: He can hardly bear to be slighted and
dispraised, but is ready to think hardly of those that do it, if not to hate
them in some degree. He loves not to be found fault with, though it be
necessary to his amendment. And though all this vice of pride be not so
predominant in him, as to conquer his humility, yet does it much obscure and
interrupt it: And though he hate this his pride and strive against it, and
lamenteth it before God, yet still it is the forest ulcer in his soul: And
should it prevail and overcome him, he would be abhorred of God, and it would
be his ruin. 2 Chro. 16.10, 12. Luke 22.24, 25, 26.

3. But in the Hypocrite Pride is the reigning sin: The praise of men is the
air which he lives in: He was never well acquainted with himself; and never
felt aright the burden of his sins and wants: and therefore cannot bear
contempt from others: Indeed if his corrupt disposition turn most to the way of
coveteousness, tyranny, or lust, he can the easier bear contempt from others,
as long as he has his will at home; and he can spare their love, if he can be
but feared and domineer. But still his Pride is predominant; and when it
affects not much the reputation of goodness, it affects the name of being
rich or great. Sin may make him sordid, but grace does not make him humble.
Pride is the vital spirit of the corrupted state of man.

XXVII. 1. A confirmed Christian is acquainted with the deceitfulness of man's
heart, and the particular corrupt inclinations that are in it; and especially
with his own; and he is acquainted with the wiles and methods of the tempter,
and what are the materials which he makes his baits of, and what is the manner
in which he spreads his nets: He sees always some snares before him: And
what company soever he is in, or what business soever he is about, he walks
as among snares, which are visible to his sight: And it is part of his business
continually to avoid them. He lives in a continual watch, and warfare. He can
resist much stronger and subtle temptations, than the weak can do. He is
always armed, and knows what are the special remedies, against each
particular snare and sin. Ephesians. 6. 2 Cor. 2.11. Prove. 1.17. And he carries
always his antidotes about him, as one that lives in an infectious world, and
in the midst of a froward and perverse generation, from which he is charged to
save himself. Phil. 2.15. Act. 2.40.

2. And the weak Christian is a soldier in the army of Christ, and is engaged
in striving against sin, Heb. 12.4. And really takes the flesh and world, as
well as the Devil, to be his enemies, and does not only strive, but conquer in
the main: But yet alas, how poorly is he armed? How unskilfully does he manage
his Christian armor? How often is he soild and wounded? How many a temptation
is he much unacquainted with? And how many a snare does lie before him which he
never did observe? And often he is overcome in particular temptations, when he
never perceives it, but thinks that he has conquered.

3. But the Hypocrite is fast ensnared when he gloryeth most of his integrity,
and is deceived by his own heart, and thinks he is something, when he is
nothing, Gal. 6.3. Luke 18.20, 21, 22, 23. When he is thanking God that he is
not as other men, he is rejoicing in his dreams, and sacrificing for the
victory which he never obtained. Luke 18.11. He is led by Satan captive at his
will, when he is boasting of his uprightness; and has a beam of coveteousness,
or pride, or cruelty in his own eye, while he is reviling, or censuring another
for the mote of some difference about a ceremony, or tolerable opinion. And
usually such grow worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. Mat. 7.3, 4,
5. 2 Timothy 3.13.

XXVIII. 1. A Christian indeed, is one that has deliberately counted, what it
may cost him to follow Christ and to save his soul; and knowing that suffering
with Christ is the way to our reigning with him, he has fully consented to the
terms of Christ: He has read Luke 14.26, 27, 33. and finds that bearing the
Cross and forsaking all, is necessary to those that will be Christ's disciples:
And accordingly in resolution he has forsaken all; and looks not for a
smooth and easy way to heaven: He considers that all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus must suffer persecution, and that through many tribulations we
must enter into heaven: And therefore he takes it not for a strange or
unexpected thing, if the fiery trial come upon him. He does not wonder at the
unrighteousness of the world, as if he expected reason, or honesty, justice, or
truth, or mercy in the enemies of Christ, and the instruments of Satan: He will
not bring his action against the Devil, for unjust afflicting him. He will
rather turn the other cheek to him that smites him, than he will hinder the
good of any soul by seeking right; much less will he exercise unjust revenge.
Though where government is exercised for truth and righteousness, he will not
refuse to make use of the justice of it to punish iniquity, and discourage evil
doers, yet this is for God and the common good, and for the suppression of sin,
much more than for himself. Suffering does not surprise him as a thing unlooked
for: He has been long preparing for it, and it finds him garrisoned in the
love of Christ: Yea (though his flesh will be as the flesh of others, sensible
of the smart, and his mind is not senseless of the sufferings of his body, yet)
it is some pleasure and satisfaction to his soul, to find himself in the common
way to heaven, and to see the predictions of Christ fulfilled, and to feel
himself so far conform to Jesus Christ his head, and to trace the footsteps of
a humbled Redeemer in the way before him: As Christ has suffered for us in the
flesh, so does the Christian arm himself with the same mind. 1 Pet. 4.1. He
rejoices that he is made partaker of the sufferings of Christ, that when his
glory shall be revealed, he may also be partaker of the exceeding joy. 1 Pet.
4.12, 13. yea he takes the reproach of Christ for a treasure, yea a greater
treasure than Riches, or men's favors can afford, Heb. 11.25, 26. For he
knows if he be reproached for the name or sake of Christ he is happy: For
thereby he glorifieth that God whom the enemy does blaspheme, and so the spirit
of God, and of glory rests on him, 1 Pet. 4.14. He lives and suffers as
one that from his heart believes, that they are blessed that are persecuted
for righteousness sake, for great is their reward in heaven. And they are
blessed when men shall revile them and persecute them, and say all manner of
evil against them falsely for Christ's sake: In this they Rejoice and are
exceeding glad, as knowing that herein they are followers of them who through
faith and patience inherit the promise, Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. Heb. 6.12. If he be
offered upon the sacrifice and service of the says of Gods elect, he can
rejoice in it as having greater good than evil, Phil. 2.17. He can suffer the
loss of all things, and account them dung, that he may win Christ, and be found
in him, and know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of
his sufferings, being made conformable to his death. Phil. 3.8, 9, 10. Not out
of surliness and pride does he rejoice in sufferings; (as some do, that they
may carry the reputation of holy and undaunted men; and seem to be far better
and constanter than others.) When pride makes men suffer, they are partly the
Devils martyrs, though the cause be never so good: Though it is much more
ordinary for pride to make men suffer rejoycingly in an ill cause than in a
good; the Devil having more power on his own ground than on Christ's. But it is
the Love of Christ, and the belief of the reward, and the humble neglect of the
mortified flesh, and the contempt of the conquered world, that makes the
Christian suffer with so much joy. For he sees that the Judge is at the door:
And what torments the wicked are preparing for themselves: And that as
certainly as there is a God that governs the world, and that in
Righteousness, so certainly are his eyes upon the Righteous, and his face is
set against them that do evil: 1 Pet. 3.12: and though sinners do evil an
hundred times and escape unpunished till their days be prolonged, yet vengeance
will overtake them in due time, and it shall be well with them that fear the
Lord; and that he keeps all the tears of his servants till the reckoning day:
And if judgment begin at the house of God, and the righteous be saved through
so much suffering and labor, what then shall be their end that obey not the
Gospel? and where shall the ungodly and sinner appear. 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. Eccl.
8.12. Prove. 11.31. and 13.6. Psalm. 56.8. Deuteronomy. 32.35. Jam. 5.9,

2. And the weak Christian is one that will forsake all for the sake of Christ,
and suffer with him that he may be glorified with him, and will take his
treasure in heaven for all: Luke 14.26, 33. Luke 18.22. But he does it not with
that easiness, and alacrity, and joy as the confirmed Christian does. He
hearkens more to the flesh which says, favor thy self: suffering is much more
grievous to him: And sometimes he is wavering before he can bring himself fully
to resolve, and let go all. Mat. 16.22.

3. But the seeming Christian looks not for much suffering: He reads of it in
the Gospel, but he saw no probability of it, and never believed that he should
be called to it in any notable degree: He thought it probable that he might
well escape it: And therefore though he agreed verbally to take Christ for
better and worse, and to follow him through sufferings, he thought he would
never put him to it. And indeed his heart is secretly resolved, that he will
never be undone in the world for Christ: Some reparable loss he may undergo,
but he will not let go life and all. He will still be religious and hope for
heaven: But he will make himself believe (and others if he can) that the Truth
lies on the safer side, and not on the suffering side; and that it is but for
their own conceits and scrupulosity that other men suffer who go beyond him;
and that many good men are of his opinion, and therefore he may be good also in
the same opinion (though he would never have been of that opinion, if it had
not been necessary to his escaping of sufferings) what flourish soever he
makes for a time, when persecution arises he is offended and withers. Mat.
13.21, 6. Unless he be so deeply engaged among the suffering party, that he
cannot come off without perpetual reproach, and then perhaps Pride will make
him suffer more, than the belief of heaven o^ the love of Christ could do: And
all this is because his very belief is unrooted and unsound, and he has
secretly at the heart a fear that if he should suffer death for Christ, he
should be a loser by him, and he would not reward him according to his promise,
with everlasting life. Heb. 3.12.

XXIX. 1. A Christian indeed is one that follows not Christ for company, nor
holds his belief in trust upon the credit of any in the world, and therefore
he would stick to Christ, if all that he knows or converseth with should
forsake him. If the Rulers of the Earth should change their religion, and turn
against Christ, he would not forsake him: If the multitude of the people turn
against him; nay if the professors of Godliness should fall off, yet would he
stand his ground and be still the same: If the learnedest men, and the Pastors
of the Church should turn from Christ, he would not forsake him: Yea if his
nearest relations and friends, or even that Minister that was the means of his
conversion, should change their minds and forsake the truth, and turn from
Christ or a holy life, he would yet be constant and be still the same: And what
Peter resolved on, he would truly practice, Mat. 26, 33, 35. Though all men
should be offended because of thee, yet would not I be offended: Though I
should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. And if he thought himself as
Elias did, left alone, yet would he not how the knee to Baal Romans 11.3. If he
hear that this eminent Minister falls off one day, and the other another day,
till all be gone, yet still the foundation of God stands sure; he falls not
because he is built upon the rock, Mat. 7.22, 23. His heart says; Alas,
whither shall I go, if I go from Christ? Is there any other that has the word
and spirit of eternal life? Can I be a gainer if I lose my soul? Joh. 6.67, 68.
Mat. 16.26. He uses his Teachers to bring him that light and evidence of
truth, which dwells in him when they are gone: And therefore though they fall
away, he falls not with them.

2. And the weakest Christian believes with a Divine faith of his own, and
depends more on God than man: But yet if he should be put to so great a
trial, as to see all the Pastors and Christians that he knows change their
minds, I know not what he would do: For though God will uphold all his own whom
he will save, yet he does it by means and outward helps, together with his
internal grace; and keeps them from temptations, when he will deliver them
from the evil: And therefore it is a doubt whether there be not degrees of
grace so weak, as would fail in case the strongest temptations were permitted
to assault them. A strong man can stand and go of himself; but an infant must
be carried; and the same and sick must have others to support them. The weak
Christian falls if his Teacher or most esteemed company fall: If they run
into an error, sect, or schism, he keeps them company. He grows cold, if he
have not warming company: He forgeteth himself, and lets loose his sense and
passion, if he have not some to watch over him, and warn him: No man should
refuse the help of others, that can have it; and the best have need of all Gods
means: But the weak Christian needs them much more than the strong, and is
much less able to stand without them. Luke 22.32. Gal. 2.11, 12, 13, 14.

3. But the seeming Christian is built upon the sand, and therefore cannot
stand a storm: He is a Christian more for company, or he credit of man, or the
interest that others have in him, or the encouragement of the times, than from
a firm Belief and love of Christ: and therefore falls when his props are
gone: Mat. 7.24.

XXX. 1. A strong Christian can digest the hardest Truths, and the hardest
works of Providence. He sees more of the reason and evidence of truths than
others: And he has usually a more comprehensive knowledge, and can reconcile
those truths which short sighted persons suspect to be inconsistent and
contradictory: And when he cannot reconcile them, he knows they are
reconcilable: For he has laid his foundation well, and then he reduces other
truths to that, and builds them on it. And so he does by the hardest
Providence: Whoever is high or low, whoever prospers or is afflicted,
however humane affairs are carried, and all things seem to go against the
Church and cause of Christ; he knows yet that God is good to Israel, Psalm.
73.1, 2. and that he is the righteous Judge of all the earth, and that the
righteous shall have dominion in the morning, and it shall go well with them
that fear the Lord: For he goes into the Sanctuary, and foreseeth the end.
Eccl. 8.11, 12, 13. Psalm. 73.17. Psalm. 115.11, 13. and 31.19.

2. But the weak Christian is very hard put to it, when he meets with
difficult passages of Scripture, and when he sees it go with the righteous
according to the work of the wicked, and with the wicked according to the work
of the righteous, Eccl. 8.14. Though he is not over-turned by such
difficulties, yet his foot is ready to slip, and he digesteth them with much
perplexity and trouble.

3. But the seeming unsettled Christian is often overcome by them, and turns
away from Christ, and says, These are hard sayings, or hard Providence, who
can bear them, Joh. 6.60.66. And thus unbelief thence gathers matter for its
increase.

XXXI. 1. A Christian indeed is one that can exercise all Gods graces in
conjunction, and in their proper places and proportion, without setting one
against another, or neglecting one while he is exercising another. He can be
humbled without hindering his thankefulness and joy; and he can be thankful
and joyful without hindering his due humility. His knowledge does not destroy
but quicken his zeal: His wisdom hinders not, but furthereth his innocence.
His faith is a help to his repentance, and his repentance to his faith. His
love to himself does not hinder but help his love to others: and his Love to
God is the end of both. He can mourn for the sins of the times, and the
calamities of the Church, yea for his own sins and imperfections, and yet
rejoice for the mercies which he has in possession or in hope. He finds that
piety and charity are necessarily conjunct; and every grace and duty is a help
to all the rest. Yea he can exercise his Graces methodically, which is the
comeliness and beauty of his heart and life. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21. 1 Pet. 2.17.

2. But the weak Christian, though he have every Grace, and his Obedience is
universal, yet can he hardly set himself to any duty, but it hinders him from
some other duty, through the narrowness and weakness of his mind. When he is
humbling himself in confession of sin, he can scarce be lively in thankfulness
for mercy: When he rejoices it hinders his humiliation. He can hardly do one
duty without omitting or hindering another. He is either all for joy, or all
for sorrow; all for love or all for fear; and cannot well do many things at
once, but is apt to separate the Truths and Duties which God has inseparably
conjoined.

^. And for the seeming Christian, he exercises no grace in sincerity, nor is
he universal in his Obedience to God; Though he may have the image of every
Grace and Duty.

XXXII. 1. A Christian indeed is more in getting and using his Graces, than in
enquiring whether he have them. He is very desirous to be assured that he is
sincere; but he is more desirous to be so: And he knows that even assurance
is got more by the exercise and increase of Grace than by bare enquity whether
we have it already; Not that he is a neglecter of self-examination: But he
oftener asks, What shall I do to be saved? than, How shall I know that I
shall be saved?

2. But the weak Christian has more of self, and less of God in his
solicitousness: And though he be willing to obey the whole Law of Christ, yet
he is much more solicitous to know that he is out of danger, and shall be
saved, than to be fully pleasing unto God. And therefore proportionably, he is
more in enquiring by what marks he may know that he shall be saved, than by
what means he may attain more holiness, and what diligence is necessary to his
salvation.

3. But the seeming Christian is most careful how to prosper in the World, or
please his flesh? and next, how he may be sure to escape damnation when he has
done; and least of all how he may be conform to Christ in holiness.

XXXIII. 1. A Christian indeed does study Duty more than Events: and is more
careful what he shall be toward God, than what he shall have from God in this
life. He looks to his own part, more than unto Gods; as knowing that it is he
that is like to sail; but God will never fail of his part. He is much more
suspicious of himself than of God. And when any thing goes amiss, he blames
himself, and not Gods Providence: he knows that the hairs of his head are
numbered, and that his Father knows what he needs; and that God is
infinitely wiser and fitter to dispose of him than he is to choose for himself:
and that God loves him better than he can love himself: And therefore he
thankfully accepts that easy, indulgent command; Cast all your care on him,
for he cares for you: Take no thought what you shall eat or drink, or
wherewith you shall be clothed. Heb. 12.15. and 13.5. Job 1.21, 22. Mat.
10.30. and 6.25, 31, 32. 1 Pet. 5.7.

2. But alas, how guilty is the weak Christian of meddling with Gods part of the
work. How sinfully careful what will become of him, and of his Family and
Affairs, and of the Church, as if he were afraid lest God would prove
forgetful, unfaithful, or insufficient for his work: so imperfect is his
Trust in God.

3. And the seeming Christian really trusts him not at all, for any thing
that he can trust himself or the Creature for: He will have two strings to his
bow if he can; but it is in man that he places his greatest trust for any
thing that man can do. Indeed to save his Soul he knows none but God is to be
trusted, and therefore his life is still preferred before his Soul, and
consequently man whom he trusts most with his life and prosperity, is really
trusted before God, however God may have the Name. Jer. 17 5, 7. Psalm. 34.8.
and 20.7. and 34.22. and 37.3.

XXXIV. 1. A Christian indeed is much more studious of his own duty toward
others, than of theirs to him: He is much more fearful of doing wrong, than of
receiving wrong. He is more troubled if he say ill of others, than if others
speak ill of him. He had far rather be slandered himself, than slander
others; or be censured himself than* censure others; or be unjustly hurt
himself, than unjustly hurt another; or to be put out of his own possessions or
right, than to put another out of his. He is oftener and sharper in judging and
reproving himself than others: he falls out with himself more frequently than
with others: and is more troubled with himself than with all the world besides:
he takes himself for his greatest enemy, and knows that his danger is most
at home; and that if he can escape but from himself, no one in Earth or Hell
can undo him. He is more careful of his duty to his Prince, his Parents, his
Pastor, or his Master, than of theirs to him: he is much more unwilling to be
disobedient to them in any lawful thing, or to dishonor them, than to be
oppressed or unjustly afflicted or abused by them. And all this is, because he
knows that sin is worse than present suffering; and that he is not to answer
for other men's sins but for his own: nor shall he be condemned for the sins of
any but himself: And that many millions are condemned for wronging others, but
no one for being wronged by others. 1 Pet. 4 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Matthew. 5.10,
11, 12. 1 Pet. 2.13, 15, 16, 17.

2. And the weak Christian is of the same mind in the main; but with so much
imperfection, that he is much more frequent in censuring others, and
complaining of their wrongs, and finding fault with them, and aggravating all
that is said or done against himself, when he is hardly made so sensible of as
great miscarriages in himself; as having much more uncharitableness,
partiality, and selfishness, than a confirmed Christian has. There are few
things which weakness of Grace does more ordinarily appear in, than this
partiality and selfishness, in judging of the faults or duties of others, and
of his own. How apt are (not only Hypocrites, but) weak Christians, to
aggravate all that is done against them? and to extenuate or justify all that
they do against another? O what a noise they make of it, if they think that any
one has wronged them? defamed them? disparaged them? or incroached on their
right? If God himself be blasphemed or abused, they can more patiently bear it,
and make not so great a matter of it. Who hears of such angry complaints on
Gods behalf, as on men's own? Of such passionate invectives, such sharp
prosecutions, against those that wrong both God, and men's Souls, as against
those that wrong a selfish person; (And usually every man seems to wrong him,
who keeps from him any thing which he would have, or says any thing of him
which is displeasing to him.) Go to the Assizes and Courts of Justice; look
into the Prisons, and enquire whether it be Zeal for God, or for men's selves,
which is the Plaintiff and Prosecutor? and whether it be for wronging God or
them, that all the stir is made? Men are ready to say, God is sufficient to
right himself: As if he were not the Original and the End of Laws and
Government, and Magistrates were not his Officers, to promote obedience to Him
in the World.

At this time how universal is men's complaint against their Governors! how
common are the cries of the poor and sufferers, of the greatness of their
burdens, miseries and wants. But how few lament the sins against Government,
which this Land has been sadly guilty of? The Pastors complain of the Peoples
contempt: The People complain of the Pastors insufficiency and lives: The
Master complains how hard it is to get good Servants, that will mind their
business and profit, as if it were their own: Servants complain of their
Masters for over-labouring them, or using them too hardly. Landlords say that
their Tenants cheat them: And Tenants say, that their Landlords oppress and
grind them. But if you were Christians indeed, the commonest and saddest
complaints would be against your selves: I am not so good a Ruler, so peaceable
a Subject, so good a Landlord, so good a Tenant, so good a Master, so good a
Servant, as I ought to be Your Rulers sin, your Subjects sin, your Landlords
sin, your Tenants sin, your Masters sin, your Servants sin, shall not be
charged upon you in Judgment, nor condemn you, but your own sin. How much more
therefore should you fear and feel, and complain of your own, than of theirs.

3. As for the seeming Christian, I have told you already that selfishness is
his nature and predominant constitution: And according to self-interest he
judges of almost all things: of the faults, and duties of others and himself:
And therefore no man seems honest or innocent to him, who displeases him,
and is against his wordly interest: Cross him about Mine and Thine, and he will
beknave the honestest man alive, and call his ancient friend his enemy. But of
his dealings with them, he is not so scrupulous, nor so censorious of himself.

XXXV. 1. A Christian indeed is much taken up in the Government of his
Thoughts; and has them so much ordinarily in obedience, that God and his
service, and the matters of his salvation have that precedence in them; and his
eye is fixed on his end and duty: And his thoughts refuse not to serve him for
any work of God to which he calls them. He suffers them not to be the
in-lets or agents for Pride, or Lust, or Envy, or Voluptuousness, or to
contrive iniquity: But if any such sparks from Hell are cast into his thoughts,
he presently labors to extinguish them: If they intrude, he lets them not
lodge or dwell there. And though he cannot keep out all disorder or vanity, or
inordinate delights; yet is it his endeavor, and he leaves not his heart in
any thing to it self.

2. The weak Christian also makes conscience of his thoughts, and allows
them not to be the in-lets or servants of any reigning sin: But alas how
imperfectly does he govern them? what a deal of vanity and confusion is in
them? how carelessly does he watch them? how remisly does he rebuke them, excite
them and command them? how often are they defiled with impurity and
uncharitableness? And how little does he repent of this, or endeavor to reform
it? And little serviceable are his thoughts, to any high and heavenly work, in
comparison of the confirmed Christian.

3. And the seeming Christian is very little employed about his Thoughts; but
leaves them to be the servants of his pride and worldlyness or sensuality, or
some reigning sin. Psalm. 10.4. Matthew. 15.19. 1 Cor. 3.20. Isa. 55.7. Jer. 4.14.
and 6.19.

XXXVI. 1. A Christian indeed is much employed in the Government of his
passions: and has so far mastered them, as that they prevail not to pervert
his Judgment, nor to discompose his heart so far as to interrupt much his
communion with God, nor to ensnare his heart to any Creature, nor to breed any
fixed uncharitableness or malice in him, nor to cause his tongue to speak
things injurious to God or Man, to curse or swear, or rail, or lie: nor yet to
cause him to hurt and injure any in his heart. But when passion would be
inordinate, either in delights or desires, or anger, or grief, or fear or hope,
he flies to his helps to suppress and govern them. (Though fear is more out of
man's power than the rest, and therefore ordinarily has less of sin). He
knows that Christ has blessed the meek, Matthew. 5.5. and bid us learn of him
to be meek and lowly, Matthew. 11.28, 29. And that a meek and quiet spirit is in
the sight of God of great price, 1 Pet. 3.4. It is therefore his care and
course to give place to wrath, when others are angry, Romans 12.18, 19. and if it
be possible as much as in him lies to live peaceably with all men: Yea to
follow peace when it flies from him, Heb. 12.14. And not when he is reviled to
revile again; nor to threaten or revenge himself on them that injure him: 1
Pet. 2.21, 22, 23, 24. Reason and Charity hold the reins, and passion is kept
under: Yea, it is used holily for God; Ephesians. 4.26. Slow to anger he is in his
own cause, and watchful over his anger even in Gods cause. Prove. 15.18. and
16.32. Ephesians. 4.31. Col. 3.8.

2. But the weak Christian does greatly show his weakness, in his unruly
passions, (if he have a temper of body disposed to passion): They are often
rising, and not easily kept under: Yea and too often prevail for such unseemly
words, as makes him become a dishonor to his profession. Often he resolves,
and promises and prays for help; and yet the next provocation shows how
little Grace he has to hold the reins. And his passionate Desires, and
Delights, and Love and Sorrows, are often as unruly as his anger, to the further
weakening of his Soul. They are like Ague fits that leave the health impaired.

3. And the seeming Christian has much less power over those Passions, which
must subserve his carnal mind. For Anger it depends much upon the
temperature of the body: and if that incline him not strongly to it, his credit
or common discretion may suppress it: Unless you touch his chiefest carnal
interest; and then he will not only be angry but cruel, malicious, and
revengefull: But his carnal Love, and Desire and Delight which are placed upon
that pleasure, or profit, or honor, which is his Idol, are indeed the reigning
passions in him: and his grief, and fear and anger are but the servants unto
these. Act. 24.26, 27.

XXXVII. 1. A Christian indeed is one that keeps a constant Government of his
Tongue: He knows how much duty or sin it will be the instrument of: According
to his ability and opportunity he uses it to the service and honor of his
Creator: In speaking of his Excellencies, his Works and Word: inquiring after
the knowledge of him and his will: instructing others, and pleading for the
Truth and ways of God, and rebuking the impiety and inquities of the world, as
his place and calling does allow him: He bridleth his Tongue from uttering
vanity, filthiness, ribbaldry, foolish and uncomely talk and jests; from rash
and unreverent talk of God, and taking of his Name in vain; from the venting of
undigested and uncertain doctrines, which may prove erroneous, and perilous to
men's souls: from speaking imprudently, unhandsomly, or unseasonably about holy
things, so as to expose them to contempt and scorn: from lying, censuring
others without a warrantable ground and call; from backbiting, slandering,
false accusing, railing and reviling, malicious, envyous, injurious speech,
which tends to extinguish the love of the hearers to those he speaks of:
from proud and boasting speeches of himself, much more from swearing, cursing,
and blasphemous speech, and opposition to the Truths and holy ways of God, or
opprobrious speeches, or derision of his servants. And in the Government of his
Tongue, he always begins with his heart; that he may understand and love
the good which he speaks of, and may hate the evil which his tongue
forbeareth; and not hypocritically to force his tongue against or without his
heart: His tongue does not run before his heart, but is ruled by it. Ephesians.
4.15.31.29. and 5.3.4.6. Psalm. 37.30. and 15.2, 3. Prove. 16.13. and 10.20. and
21.23. and 18.21. and 15.2.4. Psalm. 34.13. Prove. 25.15, 23. and 28.23. Matthew.
12.31, 32, 34.

2. But the weak Christian, though his tongue be sincerely subject to the Laws
of God, yet frequently miscarryeth, and blemisheth his Soul by the words of his
lips; being much ofter than the confirmed Christian overtaken with words of
vanity, meddling, folly, imprudence, uncharitableness, wrath, boasting, venting
uncertain or erroneous opinions, etc. so that the unruliness of his tongue is
the trouble of his heart, if not also of the Family, and all about him.

3. The seeming Christian uses his tongue in the service of his carnal ends,
and therefore allows it so much unjustice, uncharitableness, falsehood, and
other sins; as his carnal interest and designs require: But the rest perhaps he
may suppress, especially if natural sobriety, good education and prudence do
assist him: And his tongue is always better than his heart. Pro. 10.32. and
19.5.9. Ps. 50.20 and 12.3. and 144.8. and 120.2, 3. Prove. 21.6.23.

XXXVIII. 1. The Religious discourse of a confirmed Christian is most about the
greatest and most necessary matters: Heart-work and heaven-work are the usual
employment of his Tongue and Thoughts: unprofitable Controversies, and hurtful
wranglings he abhors: And profitable Controversies he manageth sparingly,
seasonably, charitably, peaceably, and with caution and sobriety, as knowing
that the servant of the Lord must not strive, and that strife of words
perverteth the hearers, and hinders edifying. 1 Timothy 6.4, 5, 6. and 4.7, 8. 2 Timothy 2.14, 15, 16, 17, 24, 25. His ordinary discourse is about the Glorious
Excellencies, Attributes, Relations, and works of God, and the Mystery of
Redemption, the Person, Office, Covenant and Grace of Christ; the renewing,
illuminating, sanctifying works of the Holy Ghost; the Mercies of this life,
and that to come: the Duty of Man to God as his Creator, Redeemer, and
Regenerater: the corruption and deceitfulness of the Heart; the methods of the
Tempter; the danger of particular Temptations; and the means of our escape, and
of our growth in Grace; and how to be profitable to others; and especially to
the Church. And if he be called to open any Truth which others understand not,
he does it not proudly to set up himself as the Master of a Sect, or to draw
Disciples after him, nor make divisions about it in the Church; but soberly to
the edification of the weak: And though he be ready to defend the Truth against
perverse gainsayers in due season, yet does he not turn his ordinary edifying
discourse into Disputes or talk of Controversies; nor has such a proud
pugnacious Soul, as to assault every one that he thinks erroneous, as a man
that takes himself for the great champion of the truth.

2. But the weak Christian has a more unfruitful wandering tongue: And his
religious discourse is most about his opinions or party, or some external
thing: As which is the best preacher, or person, or book: or if he talk of any
text of scripture, or doctrine of Religion, it is much of the outside of it;
and his discourse is less feeling, lively and experimental: yea many a time he
hinders the more edifying savoury discourse of others, by such religious
discourse as is imprudent, impertinent, or turns them away from the heart and
life of the matter in hand. But especially his opinions, and distinct manner of
worship, are the chief of his discourse,

3. And for the seeming Christian, though he can affectedly force his tongue to
talk of any subject in religion, especially that which he thinks will most
honor him in the esteem of the hearers; yet when he speaks according to the
inclination of his heart, his discourse is first about his fleshly interest and
concernments, and next to that of the mere externals of religion, as
controversies, parties, and the several modes of worship.

XXXIX. 1. A Christian indeed is one that so lives upon the great sustantial
matters of Religion, as yet not willingly to commit the smallest sin, nor to
own the smallest falsehood, nor to renounce or betray the smallest holy truth
or duty, for any price that man can offer him. The works of Repentance, Faith
and Love are his daily business, which take up his greatest care and diligence.
Whatever opinions or controversies are a foot, his work is still the same:
whatever changes come, his Religion changes not: He places not the Kingdom of
God in meats, and drinks, and circumstances, and ceremonies; either being for
them or against them; but in righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost:
and he that in these things serves Christ; as he is acceptable to God, so is
he approved by such a Christian as this, however factious persons may revile
him. Romans 14.17, 18, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10. The strong Christian can bear the
infirmities of the weak, and not take the course that most pleases himself,
but that which pleases his neighbor for his good to edification. Romans 15.1,
2, 3. The essentials of Religion, Faith, and Love and obedience are as Bread
and drink, the substance of his food: These he meditateth on, and these he
practices, and according to these he esteems of others.

But yet no price can seem sufficient to him to buy his innocence: Nor will he
wilfully sin, and say it is a little one, nor do evil that good may come by
it; nor offer to God the sacrifice of disobedient fools, and then say, I knew
not that I did evil: For he knows that God will rather have obedience than
sacrifice, and that disobedience is as the sin of witchcraft: And he that
breaks one of the least commands and teaches men so, shall be called Least
in the Kingdom of God: And he that teaches men to sin by the example of his
own practice, can little expect to turn them from sin, by his better
instructions and exhortations. He that will deliberately sin in a small matter,
does set but a small price on the favor of God and his salvation. Wilful
disobedience is odious to God, how small soever the matter be about which it is
committed. Who can expect that he should stick at any sin, when his temptation
is great, who will considerately commit the least; especially if he will
approve and justify it. Therefore the sound Christian will rather forsake his
riches, his liberty, his reputation, his friends, and his country, than his
conscience, and rather lay down liberty, and life it self, than choose to sin
against his God; as knowing that never man gained by his sin: Romans 3.8. Eccl.
5.2. 1 Samuel 15.15, 21, 22, 23. Mat. 5.19. The sin that Saul was rejected for
seemed but a little thing; nor the sin that Vzzah was slain for: and the
service of God, even his sacrifice and his ark were the pretense for both. The
sin of the Bethshemites, of Achan, of Gebezi, of Ananias and Saphira which had
grievous punishments, would seem but little things to us. And it is a great
aggravation of our sin to be chosen, deliberate, justified and fathered upon
God, and to pretend that we do it for his service, for the worshipping of him,
or the doing good to others; as if God would own and bless sinful means, or
needed a lie to his service or glory: When he hates all the workers of
iniquity, Psalm. 5.5. and requires only the sacrifices of righteousness, Psalm.
4.5. He abhors sacrifice from polluted hands; they are to him as the
offering a dog; and he will ask who has required this at your hand: see Psalm.
50.8.4. Isa. 1.9, 10, 11, 12. etc. and 58.1, 2, 3, 4. etc. Jer. 6.19.20. The
sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.8. and 21.27. It
is not pleasing to him: all that eat thereof shall be polluted, Ho. 9.4. See
Isa. 66.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. The preaching, the praying, the sacraments of wilful
sinners especially when they choose sin as necessary to his service, are a
scorn and mockery put upon the most Holy one; As if your servant should set
dung and carrion before you, on your table for your food: such offer Christ
vinegar and gall to drink.

2. In all this the weakest Christian that is sincere is of the same mind;
saving that in his ordinary course, he uses to place too much of his Religion
in controversies, and parties, and modes, and ceremonies, (whether being for
them or against them,) and allow too great a proportion in his thoughts, and
speech, and zeal, and practice; and hinders the growth of his grace, by
living upon less edifying things, and turnning too much from the more
substantial nutriment.

3. And the seeming Christians are here of different ways. One sort of them
place almost all their Religion in Pharisaical observation of little, external,
ceremonial matters; as their washings, and fastings, and tythings, and
formalities, and the traditions of the Elders: Or in their several opinions,
and ways, and parties, which they call, Being of the true Church:] As if their
sect were all the Church: But living to God in faith and love, and in a
Heavenly conversation, and worshipping him in spirit and truth, they are
utterly unacquainted with. The other sort are truly void of these essential
parts of Christianity, in the life and power, as well as the former: But yet
being secretly resolved, to take up no more of Christianity than will consist
with their worldly prosperity and ends, when any sin seems necessary to their
preferment, or safety in the world, their way is to pretend their high esteem
of greater matters, for the swallowing of such a sin as an inconsiderable
thing: And then they extol those larger souls that live not upon
circumstantials, but upon the great and common truths and duties, and pity
those men of narrow principles and spirits, who by unnecessary scrupulosity
make sin of that which is no sin, and expose themselves to needless trouble.
And they would make themselves and others believe that it is their excellency
and wisdom, to be above such trifling scruples: And all is because, they never
took God and Heaven for their All, and therefore are resolved never to lose all
for the hopes of Heaven; and therefore to do that whatever it be, which their
worldly interest shall require, and not to be of any religion that will undo
them.

And three great pretenses are effectual means in this their deceit. One is
because indeed, there are a sort of persons, that tithe mint and cummin, while
they pass by the greatest matters of the Law, and that are causelessly
scrupulous, and make that to be sin, which indeed is no sin: And when such a
scrupulous people are noted by their weakness, and under dishonor among wiser
men, the Hypocrite has a very plausible pretense for his hypocrisy, in
seeming only to avoid this ignorant scrupulosity, and taking all for such who
judge not his sin to be a thing indifferent.

Another great shelter to the credit and conscience of this Hypocrite is, the
Charity of the best sincerest Christians; who always judge rigedly of
themselves, and gently of others: They would rather die than wilfully choose
to commit the smallest sin themselves; but if they see another commit it, they
judge as favorably of it as the case will bear, and hope that he did it not
knowingly, or wilfully: For they are bound to hope the best till the worst be
evident. This being the upright Christians case, the hypocrite knows, that he
shall still have a place in the esteem and love of those charitable Christians
(whose integrity and moderation, makes their judgments most valuable:) And
then for the judgment of God he will venture on it; and for the censures of
weaker persons, who themselves are censured by the best for their
censoriousness, he can easily bear them.

And another covert for the hypocrite in this case is, the different judgments
of learned and religious men, who make a controversy of the matter: And what
duty or sin is there that is not become a controversy? Yea and among men
otherwise well esteemed of (except in the essentials of religion.) And if once
it be a controversy, whether it be a sin or not, the hypocrite can say, I am
of the judgment of such and such good learned men: they are very judicious
excellent persons; and we must not judge one another in controverted cases:
though we differ in judgment, we must not differ in affection: And thus
because he has a shelter for his reputation from the censures of men, by the
countenance of such as accompany him in his sin, he is as quiet as if he were
secured from the censures of the Almighty.

XL. 1. A Christian indeed is one that highly valueth time: He abhors
Idleness, and all diversions which would rob him of his Time, and hinder him
from his work: He knows how much work he has to do, and of what unspeakable
consequence to his soul (if not also to others:) He knows that he has a soul
to save or lose, a heaven to win; a hell to escape; a death and judgment to
prepare for; many a sin to mortify, and many graces to get and exercise and
increase; and many enemies and temptations to overcome; and that he shall never
have more time of trial; but what is now undone, must be undone for ever: He
knows how short, and hasty time is, and also how uncertain; and how short
many hundred years is to prepare for an everlasting state, if all were spent in
greatest diligence: And therefore he wondereth at those miserable souls, that
have time to spare, and wast in those fooleries which they call pastimes; even
in stage-plaies, cards and dice, and long and tedious feastings, delights,
complements, idleness, and overlong or needless visits, or recreations. He
marvelleth at the distraction, or sottishness of those persons, that can play,
and prate, and loyter, and feast away precious hours, as if their poor
unprepared souls had nothing to do, while they stand at the very brink of a
dreadful eternity; and are so fearfully unready as they are. He takes that
person who would cheat him of his time, by any of these forenamed baits, to be
worse to him than a thief that would take his purse from him by the high way. O
precious time! how highly does he value it, when he thinks of his everlasting
state, and thinks what have his death is making, and what reckoning he must
make for every moment: what abundance of work has he for every hour, which he
is grieved that he cannot do? He has a calling to follow, and he has a heart
to search, and watch, and study; and a God to seek and faithfully serve, and
many to do good to; and abundance of particular duties to perform, in order to
every one of these; But alas time does make such have away, that many things
are left undone, and he is afraid left death will find him very much behind
hand: And therefore he is up and doing, as one that has use for every minute;
and works while it is day, because he knows that the night is coming when
none can work: Joh. 9.4. Redeeming Time is much of his wisdom and his work:
Ephesians. 5.16. Col. 4.5. He had rather labor in the house of correction, than live
the swinish life of idle and voluptuous Gentleman, or Beggars: that live to no
higher end than to live, or to please their flesh: or to live as worldlings,
that lose all their lives in the service of a perishing world. He knows how
precious time will be ere long, in the eyes of those that now make light of it,
and trifle it away as a contemned thing, as if they had too much.

2. The weak Christian is of the same mind in the main: But when it comes to
particular practice, he is like a weak or weary traveller, that goes but
slowly, and makes many a stop: Though his face is still Heaven-wards, he goes
but a little way in a day: He is too easily tempted to idle, or talk, or feast,
or play away an hour unlawfully, so it be not his ordinary course, and he do it
but seldom: He takes not the loss of an hour for so great a loss as the
confirmed Christian does: He could sooner be persuaded to live (though not an
idle and unprofitable; yet) an easier, less-profitable life. The world and the
flesh have far more of his hours, than they ought to have. Though his weakness
tell him, that he has most need of diligence.

3. But the Time of a seeming Christian is most at the service of his fleshly
interest: and for that it is principally employed: And for that he can Redeem
it, and grudge if it be lost. But as he lives not to God, so he cannot redeem
his time for God. He loses it even when he seems to employ it best: when he
is praying, or otherwise worshipping God, and doing that good which feeds his
false hopes, he is not redeeming his time in all this. While he is sleeping in
security, and deluding his soul with a few formal words, and an image of
Religion, and his time passes on, and he is hurried away to the dreadful day,
and his damnation slumbreth not. 2 Pet. 2.3. Pro. 20.4. Mat. 25.6, 7, 8.

XLI. 1. A Christian indeed is one whose very heart is set upon doing good: As
one that is made to be profitable to others, according to his ability and
place; even as the Sun is made to shine upon the world: he could not be content
to live idly, or to labor unprofitably, or to get never so much to himself,
and live in never so much plenty himself, unless he some way contribute to the
good of others: Not that he grudgeth at the smallness of his talents, and
lowness or obscurity of his place; for he knows that God may dispose his
creatures and talents as he please; and that where much is given, much is
required, Mat. 25. Luke 12.48. and 19.23. But what his Lord has entrusted him
with, he is loath to hide, and willing to improve to his Masters use. He is so
far from thinking that God is beholden to him for his good works, that he
takes it for one of his greatest mercies in the world, that God will use him
in doing any good. And he would take it for a very great suffering to be
deprived of such opportunities, or turned out of service, or called to less of
that kind of duty. If he were a Physician and denied liberty to practice, or a
minister and denied liberty to preach, it would far more trouble him that he is
hindered from doing good, than that he is deprived of any profits, or honors,
to himself. He does not only comfort himself with the foresight of the reward,
but in the very doing of good he finds so much pleasure, as makeeth him think
it the delightfullest life in the world: And he looks for most of his
receivings from God, in a way of duty, Joh. 5.29. Gal. 6.10. Heb. 13.16. 1 Pet.
3.11.

2. But the weak Christian, though he have the same disposition, is far less
profitable in the world: He is more for himself, and less able to do good to
others: He wants either parts, or prudence, or zeal, or strength: Yea he is
often like the infants and sick persons of a family, that are not helpful, but
troublesome to the rest: They find work for the stronger Christians, to bear
their infirmities, and watch them, and support and help them: Indeed as an
infant is a comfort to the mother, through the power of her own love, even when
she endures the trouble of its crying and uncleaness; so weak Christians are a
comfort to charitable ministers and people; we are glad that they are alive;
but sadded often by their distempers, Romans 14.1. and 15.12.

3. The seeming Christian lives to himself, and all his good works are done
but for himself, to keep up his credit, or quiet his guilty conscience, and
deceive himself with the false hopes of a reward, for that which his
falseheartedness makes to be his sin: If he be a man of learning and good
parts, he may be very serviceable to the Church: But the thanks of that is due
to God, and little to him; who seeks himself more than God, or the good of
others, in all that he does. Mat. 25, 24, 25, 26.

XLII. 1. A Christian indeed does truly love his neighbor as himself: He is
not all for his own commodity: His neighbors profit or good name is as his
own: He feels himself hurt, when his neighbors is hurt: And if his neighbor
prosper, he rejoices as if he prospered himself: Though his neighbor be not
united to him, in the nearest bonds of Christianity, or Piety, yet he is not
disregardfull of the common Unity of Humanity. Love is the very soul of life,
Lev. 19.18. Mat. 19.19. and 22.39. Romans 13.9. Gal. 5.14. Jam. 2.8. Mark. 10.21.
1 John 4.10.

2. But the Love that is in weaker Christians, though it be sincere, is weak as
they are; and mixed with too much selfishness; and with too much sowerness and
wrath: Little matters cause differences and fallings out: When it comes to
MINE, and THINE, and their neighbors cross their interest or commodity, or
stand in their way, when they are seeking any preferment or profit to
themselves; you shall see too easily by their sowreness and contention, how
weak their love is. Mat. 24.12. 1 Timothy 6.10. Luke 22.24.

3. But in the seeming Christian selfishness is so predominant, that he loves
none but for himself, with any considerable love: All his kindness is from
self-love; because men love him, or highly value him, or praise him, or have
done him some good turn, or may do him good hereafter, or the like. If he has
any love to any for his own worth, yet self-love can turn all that to hatred,
^f they seem against him, or cross him in his way: For no man that is a Lover
of the world, and flesh, and carnal self, can ever be a true friend to any
other. For he loves them but for his own ends; and any cross Interest will
show the falsehood of his love. 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4. Mat. 5.46.

XLIII. 1. A Christian indeed has a special Love to all the Godly: such as
endeareth his heart unto them: and such as will enable him, to visit them and
relieve them in their wants, to his own loss and hazard, according to his
ability and opportunity. For the image of God is beautiful and honorable in
his eyes: He loves not them so much as God in them; Christ in them; the Holy
Spirit in them. He foreseeth the day when he shall meet them in Heaven, and
there rejoice in God with them to Eternity. He loves their company and
converse; and delights in their gracious words and lives: And the converse of
ungodly empty men, is a weariness to him (unless in a way of duty, or when he
can do them good.) In his eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honors
them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15.4. Other men grieve his soul with their
iniquities, while he is delighted with the appearances of God in his holy ones:
even the excellent ones on earth, Psalm. 16.3. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. Yea, the
infirmities of Believers destroy not his Love; for he has learned of God
himself to difference between their abhorred frailties and their predominant
Grace; and to love the very Infants in the Family of Christ. Yea, though they
wrong him, or quarrel with him, or censure him in their weakness, he can honor
their sincerity, and love them still: And if some of them prove scandalous, and
some seeming Christians fall away, or fall into the most odious crimes, he
loves Religion never the less; but continues as high an esteem of piety, and
of all that are upright as he had before, 1 John 4.7, 8, 10. Joh. 13.34, 35. 1 Thessalonians. 4.9. 1 John 3.11, 14, 23. Matthew. 25.39, 40, etc.

2. The weak Christian sincerely loves all that bear his Fathers image: But it
is with a Love so weak (even when it is most passionate) as will sooner be
abated or interrupted by any tempting differences: He is usually quarrelsome
and froward with his Brethen; and apter to confine his love to those that are
of his own opinion or party: And because God has taught him to love all that
are sincere; the Devil tempts him to censure them as not sincere, that so he
may justify himself in the abatement of his love. And weak Christians are
usually the most censorious, because they have the smallest degree of Love,
which covers faults, and thinks no evil, and is not suspicious, but ever
apt to judge the best, till the worst be evident, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5. It bears
all things, believes all things (that are credible) hops all things,
endures all things, v. 7. But it is no wonder to see children fall out, even
about their childish toys and trifles: And what the dissentions of the
children of the Church have done against themselves in these Kingdoms, I need
not, I delight not to record. See 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. And I brethren could not
speak unto you, as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in
Christ. I have fed you with milk, and not with meat; for hitherto ye were not
able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able: For ye are yet carnal: for
whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are you not
carnal, and walk as men.

3. The seeming Christian may have some love to real Christian, even for their
goodness sake: But it is a Love subservient to his carnal self-love: And
therefore it shall not cost him much: As he has some Love to Christ, so he may
have some Love to Christians; but he has more to the world and fleshly
pleasures: And therefore all his Love to Christ or Christians, will not make
him leave his worldly happiness for them. And therefore Christ at the day of
Judgment will not enquire after empty barren love, but after that love which
visited and relieved suffering Saints. An hypocrite can allow both Christ and
Christians such a cheap superficial kind of love, as will cost him little: He
will bid them lovingly, Depart in peace, be you warmed and filled, Jam. 2.15,
16, 17. But still the World is most beloved.

XLIV. 1. A Christian indeed does love his enemies, and forgive those that
injure him, and this out of a thankful sense of that grace which forgave him a
far greater debt: Not that he thinks it unlawful to make use of the Justice
of the Government which he is under, for his necessary protection, or for the
restraint of men's abuse and violence: Nor is he bound to love the malice or
injury, though he must love the man: Nor can he forgive a crime as it is
against God or the common good, or against another, though he can forgive an
injury or debt, that is his own: Nor is he bound to forgive every debt, though
he is bound so far to forgive every wrong as heartily to desire the good of
him that did it. Even Gods Enemies he so far loves, as to desire God to
convert and pardon them, while he hates their sin, and hates them as Gods
enemies, and desires their restraint, Psalm. 139.21, 22. and 101.3. and 119.4.
and 68.1. and 21.8. But those that hate, and curse, and persecute himself, he
can unfeignedly love, and bless, and pray for, Matthew. 5.43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48.
For he knows that else he cannot be a child of God, v. 45. And that to love
those that love him is not much praiseworthy, being no more than Heathens and
wicked men can do: v. 46, 47. He is so deeply sensible of that wondrous love,
which so dearly redeemed him, and saved him from Hell, and forgave him a
thousandfold worse than the worst that ever was done against himself, that
Thankfulness and Imitation, or Conformity to Christ in his great compassions,
do overcome his desires of revenge, and make him willing to do good to his most
cruel enemies; and pray for them as Christ and Stephen did at their deaths,
Luke 23.34. Acts 7.60. And he knows that he is so inconsiderable a worm, that
a wrong done to him as such, is the less considerable: And he knows that he
daily wrongeth God more than any man can wrong him, and that he can hope for
pardon but on condition that he himself forgive, Matthew. 6.12, 14, 15. and
18.34, 35. And that he is far more hurtful to himself, than any other can be
to him.

2. And the weakest Christian can truly love an enemy, and forgive a wrong;
but he does it not so easily and so fully as the other. But it is with much
striving, and some unwillingness and aversness; and there remains some grudge
or strangeness upon the mind: He does not sufficiently forget the wrong which
he does forgive. Indeed his forgiving is very imperfect like himself, Matthew.
18.21. Luke 9.54, 55. not with that freeness and readiness required, Ephesians. 4.2.
With all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in
love, Col. 3.12, 13. Put on therefore (as the Elect of God, holy and beloved)
bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering,
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another; even as Christ forgave you,
so also do ye, Romans 12.14, 19. Avenge not your selves, etc.

3. As for the seeming Christian, he can seem to forgive wrongs for the sake of
Christ, but if he do it indeed it is for his own sake: As because it is for his
honor, or because the person has humbled himself to him, or his commodity
requires it, or he can make use of his love and service for his advantage, or
some one has interposed for reconciliation who must not be denied, or the
like: But to love an enemy indeed, and to love that man (be he never so good)
who stands in the way of his preferment, honor or commodity in the world, he
never does it from his heart, whatever he may seem to do, Matthew. 6.14, 15. and
18.27, 30, 32. The Love of Christ does not constrain him.

XLV. 1. A Christian indeed is as precise in the Justice of his dealings with
men, as in acts of piety to God. For he knows that God requires this as
strictly at his hands, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. That no man go beyond, or defraud his
Brother in any matter; for the Lord is the avenger of all such, as we also have
forewarned and testified. He is one that walks uprightly, and works
righteousness, and speaks the truth in his heart; that backbiteth not with
his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against
his neighbor. If he swear to his own hurt, he changes not: He puts not out
his money to (unjust or unmercifull) Usury; nor takes reward against the
innocent, Psalm. 15. He obeys that, Lev. 19.13. Thou shall not defraud thy
neighbor, neither rob him, the wages of him that is hired shall not abide with
thee all night until the morning. He can say as Samuel, 1 Samuel 12. Whose Ox
or Ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of
whose hand have I received any bribe, to blind mine eyes therewith, and I will
restore it? And they said, Thou have not defrauded us, nor oppressed us,
neither have thou taken ought of any man's hand. And if heretofore he was ever
guilty of defrauding any, he is willing to his power to make restitution; and
says as Zacheus, Luke 19.8. If I have taken any thing from any man by false
accusation, I restore him fourfold. Though flesh and blood persuade him to the
contrary, and though it leave him in want, he will pay his debts, and make
restitution of that which is ill gotten, as being none of his own. He will not
sell for as much as he can get, but for as much as it is truly worth: He will
not take advantage of the weakness, or ignorance, or necessity of his
neighbor: He knows that a false balance is abomination to the Lord; but a
just weight is his delight, Prove. 11.1. He is afraid of believing ill reports,
and rebukes the backbiter, Prove. 25.23. He is apt to take part with any man
behind his back, who is not notoriously inexcusable; not to justify any evil;
but to show his charity, and his hatred of evil speaking, especially where it
can do no good. He will not believe evil of another till the evidence do
compel him to believe it. If he have wronged any by incautelous words, he
readily confesses his fault to him, and asks him forgiveness, and is ready
to make any just satisfaction for any wrong that he has done. He borrows not
when he sees not a great probability that he is like to pay it: Nor will
remain in debt by retaining that which is another man's against his will,
without an absolute necessity. Romans 13.8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one
another. For to borrow when he cannot pay is but to steal. Begging is better
than borrowing for such, Psalm. 37.21. The wicked borrows and pays not.

2. And the weak Christian makes conscience of Justice as well as acts of
piety, as knowing that God has no need of our Sacrifices, but loves to see us
do that which is good for humane society, and which we have need of from each
other. But yet he has more selfishness and partiality than the confirmed
Christian has, and therefore is often overcome by temptations to unrighteous
things: As to stretch his Conscience for his commodity, in buying or selling,
and concealing the faults of what he sells, and sometimes overreaching
others: Especially he is ordinarily too censorious of others, and apt to be
credulous of evil reports, and to be overbold and forward in speaking ill of
men behind their backs, and without a call: especially against persons that
differ from him in matters of Religion, where he is usually most unjust and apt
to go beyond his bounds, Jam. 3.15, 16. Tit. 3.2. Ephesians. 4.31. 1 Pet. 2.1.

3. The seeming Christian may have a seeming Justice. But really he has none
but what must give place to his fleshly interest; and if his honor and
commodity and safety require it, he will not stick to be unjust. And that
Justice which wants but a strong temptation to overturn it, is almost as bad
as none. If he will not seize on Naboths Vineyard, nor make himself odious by
oppression or deceit; yet if he can raise or enrich himself by secret
consenage, and get so fair a pretense for his injustice, as shall cloak the
matter from the fight of men, he seldom sticks at it. It is an easy matter
to make an Achan think that he does no harm, or a Gebazi think that he wrongeth
no man, in taking that which was offered and due. Covetousness will not confess
its name; but will find some Reasonings to make good all the injustice which it
does, 1 Timothy 6.5. 2 King. 5.19, 20.

XLVI. 1. A Christian indeed is faithful and laborious in his particular
calling, and that not out of a covetous mind; but in obedience to God, and
that he may maintain his Family, and be able to do good to others. For God has
said, In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread, Genesis 3.19. And six
days shall thou labor, Exodus 20.10. And with quietness men must work, and eat
their own bread; and if any will not work, neither should he eat, 2 Thessalonians.
3.10, 11, 12. Abraham and Noah and Adam labored in a constant course of
employment. He knows that a sanctified calling and labor is a help, and not
a hinderance to devotion; and that the body must have work as well as the soul,
and that Religion must not be pretended for slothful idleness, nor against
obedience to our Masters will, Prove. 31.

2. The weak Christian is here more easily deceived, and made believe that
Religion will excuse a man from bodily labor: and under the color of devotion
to live idly. 2 Thessalonians. 3.8. 1 Timothy 5.13. They learn to be idle, wandering about
from house to house, and not only idle, but tatlers also and busybodies,
speaking things which they ought not. Slothfulness is a sin much condemned in
the Scriptures, Ezekiel. 16.49. Prove. 24.30. and 18.9. and 21.25. Mat. 25.26. Romans
12.11.

3. The seeming Christian in his labor is ruled chiefly by his flesh: If he be
rich, and it incline him most to sloth, he makes small conscience of living in
idleness, under the pretense of his Gentility or wealth: But if the flesh
incline him more to Covetousness, he will be laborious enough; but it shall not
be to please God by obedience, but to increase his Estate, and enrich himself
and his Posterity (whatever better reason he pretend.)

XLVII. 1. A Christian indeed is exactly conscionable in the duties of his
relation to others in the family and place of his abode: If he be a husband, he
is loving and patient and faithful to his wife: If he be a father, he is
careful of the holy education of his children: If he be a Master, he is just
and merciful to his servants, and careful for the saving of their souls. If
he be a child or servant, he is obedient, trusty, diligent and careful, as
well behind his Parents or his Masters back, as before his face. He dare not
lie, nor steal, nor deceive, nor neglect his duty, nor speak dishonourably of
his Superiors, though he were sure he could conceal it all. For he knows that
the fifth Commandment is enforced with a special Promise, Ephesians. 6.2.5.9. And
that a bad Child, or a bad Servant, a bad Husband or Wife, a bad Parent or
Master cannot be a good Christian, Col. 3.18, 19, etc. 4.1. 1 Pet. 2.18.

2. But weak Christians (though sincere) are ordinarily weak in this part of
their duty; and apt to yield to temptations, and carry themselves proudly,
stubbornly, idly, disobediently, as eye-servants that are good in sight: or to
be unmercifull to inferiors and neglecters of their souls: And to excuse all
this from the faults of those that they have to do with, and lay all upon
others; as if the fault of husband, wife, parent, master or servant would
justify them in theirs; and passion and partiality would serve for innocence.

3. And the Hypocrite ordinarily shows his hypocrisies, by being false in his
relations to man, while he pretends to be pious and obedient unto God. He is
a bad master, and a bad servant, when his filthy interest requires it, and yet
thinks himself a good Christian for all that. For all men being faulty, it is
easy to find a pretense from all men that he does abuse, to cover the injury
of his abuse. Cain, Cham, Eli, Absalom, Judas, etc. are sad examples of this.

XLVIII. 1. A Christian indeed is the best subject, whether his Prince be good
or bad: Though by infidel and ungodly Rulers he be often mistaken for the worst.
He obeys not his Rulers only for his own ends; but in obedience to God; and
not only for fear of punishment, but for conscience sake: He looks on them in
their relations as the Officers of God, and armed with his authority, and
therefore obeys God in them. He permits not dishonorable thoughts of them
in his heart; much less dare he speak dishonourably of them, Exodus 12. Prove.
24.21. 1 Pet. 2.13, 17. Prove. 8.15. Act. 23.4, 5. Eccles. 10* 4, 20. He knows
that every soul must be subject to the higher powers, and not resist; and that
there is no power but of God: Whosoever therefore resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God; and he that resists shall receive to himself
damnation, Romans 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Therefore in all things lawful he obeys
them: And though he must not, nor will not obey them against God, yet will he
suffer patiently when he is wronged by them; and not only forbear resistance by
arms or violence, but also all reproachful words; as knowing that the righting
of himself is not so necessary to the public order and good, as the honor of
his Rulers is. Usurpers may probably charge him to be a Traitor, and seditious
and rebellious, because he dare not approve of their Usurpations: and when
several are contending for the Government, and in a litigious Title the Lawyers
mislead him, when the controversy is only among them, and belongs to their
profession, its possible he may mistake as well as the Lawyers, and take him to
have the better Title that has the worse: But in Divinity he knows there is
no controversy whether every soul must be subject to the highest power, so far
as he can know it: And that prayers and patience are the Subjects arms; and
Religion is so far from being a warrant to resist, that it plainly forbids
disobedience and resistance: and none are more obliged to submission and
quietness than Christians are: The spirit of Christianity is not of this world:
Their Kingdom and their Hopes are not of this world: And therefore they contend
not for dignities and rule; much less by resisting or rebelling against their
lawful Governors. But they are resolved to obey God, and secure their
everlasting portion, and bear all the injuries which they meet with in the way;
especially from those whom God has set over them. There is no Doctrine that
ever was received in the world, so far from be friending seditions and
rebellion as the Doctrine of Christ; nor any people in the world so loyal as
Christians, while Christianity retained its genuine simplicity; till proud,
domineering, worldly men for carnal ends pretended themselves to be Christians,
and perverted the Doctrine of Christ, to make it warp to their ambitious ends;
suffering seems not so great a matter to a holy, mortified, heavenly mind, as
to tempt him to hazard his salvation to resist it. No man is so likely to be
true to Kings, as he that believes that his salvation lies on it, by the
ordinance of God, Romans 13.3. And Princes that are wise and just do always
discern that the best Christians are their best subjects: Though those that are
unbelieving and ungodly themselves, have ever hated them as the greatest
troublers of the Earth. And it has ever been the practice of the Enemies of
Christ and Godliness, to do all they can to engage the Rulers of the Earth
against them; and to persuade them that the most godly Christians are persons
of disloyal and unquiet minds; and by vexing and persecuting them, they do
their worst to make them such as they falsely called them: Even Christ himself
was crucified as an enemy to Caesar, and Pilate driven to it by the noise of
them that cried out, that if he let them go, he was not Caesar's friend, Joh.
19.12. They first tempted him with the question, whether it were lawful to
give tribute unto Caesar, Matthew. 22.17. Luke 20.22. And though they could this
way take no hold of him, yet this was the first article of his accusation, Luke
23.2. we have found this fellow perverting the Nation, and forbidding to give
tribute to Caesar. And how loyal would those rebellious Jews seem, when they
thought it the only way to engage the Roman Power against Christ? Then they cry
out, We have no King but Caesar, Joh. 19.15. And this was the common accusation
against the Christians both by Jews and Gentiles: The language of the Jews you
may hear from Tertullus, Acts 24.5. We have found this man a pestilent fellow,
and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a
ringleader of the sect of the Nazarens. And at Thessalonica, Acts 17.6, 7. the
charge against them was, that they turned the world upside down, and did all
contrary to the decrees of Caesar. And thus the best Christians have by such
been slandered from age to age: because the Devil and his instruments know not
how sufficiently to molest them, except they engage the Rulers against them.
But yet all this does not conquer the patience and loyalty of confirmed
Christians. They are wiser than that wise man that Solomon faith, Oppression
makes mad, Eccles. 7.7. If usurpers or malicious liars shall a thousand times
call them rebellious and seditious, it shall not drive them from their due
subjection: They can patiently follow their Lord and the ancient Christians, in
the enduring of such slanders, and suffering as enemies to Caesar, so they do
but escape the sin, and be not such as malice calls them. They had rather die
as reputed enemies to Government, than to be such indeed. They prefer
subjection before the reputation of it; For they look not for their reward from
Princes, but from God. If they can preserve their innocence, they can bear the
defamation of their names; being satisfied in the hopes of the joyful day of
the Judgment of Christ, which will fully justify them, and set all strait.
Indeed they know that a state of subjection is easier and safer than places of
command; and that it is easier to obey than govern. And so far are they from
envying men's greatness, and from desiring dominions, that they pity the
tempted, and dangerous, and troublesome state of those in power, and are
thankful to God for their quieter and safer station. They heartily pray for
Kings, and all that are in Authority; not that by their favor they may rise to
places of wealth and honor; but that under them they may live a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. Yea, though Infidel
Princes hate and persecute them, they continue to pray for them, and to honor
their authority, and will not thereby be driven from their duty. If God cast
their lot under Infidel, ungodly and malicious Governors, they do not run to
arms, to save themselves, or save the Gospel, as if God had called them to
reform the world, or keep it from the oppression of the higher powers: Nor do
they think it a strange intolerable matter for the best men to be lowest, and
to be the suffering side; and so fall to fighting that Christ and the Saints
may have the rule. For they know that Christ's Kingdom is not of this world,
Joh. 18.36. (that is, not a visible Monarchy, as his usurping Vicar does
pretend;) and that Christ does most eminently rule unseen, and disposes of all
the Kingdoms of the world, even where he is hated and resisted: and that the
reign of Saints is in their state of glory: and that all Gods graces do sit
them more for a suffering life, than for worldly power: Their humility,
meekness, patience, self-denial, contempt of the world, and heavenly
mindedness, are better exercised and promoted in a suffering, than a prosperous
reigning state, Where (...) think of the holy blood which has been shed by
Heathen Rome, from Christ and Stephen till the days of Constantine; and the
far greater streams which have been shed by the bloody Papal Rome; wherever
they had power, in Piedmont, Germany, Poland, Hungary, in Belgia, England, and
in other Lands; the 30000, or 40000 murdered in a few days at the Bartholomew
Massacre in France; the two hundred thousand murdered in a few weeks in
Ireland; they are not so unlike their suffering Brethren, as to think that
striving for honors and command, is their way to Heaven: When Christ has
foretold them that self-denial under the Cross, tribulation and persecution, is
the common way, Luke 14.26, 27, 29, 33. Acts 14.22. Joh. 16.33. Romans 5.3. and
8.35. 2 Timothy 3.12. Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. 2 These. 2.6, 7, 10. Mark 10.30. So far
are they from fighting against the injuries and cruelties of their Governors,
that they account the reproach of Christ to be greater riches than all their
treasures, Heb. 11.25, 26. and think they are blessed when they are persecuted,
Matthew. 5.10. and say with Paul, God forbid that I should glory, save in the
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified to me, and I
unto the world, Gal. 6.14. And 2 Cor. 12.19. Therefore I take pleasure in
infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for
Christ's sake; for when I am weak, then I am strong, Romans 8.35, 36, 37. Nay in
all these things (when persecuted and killed all the day long, and counted as
sheep to the slaughter) they are more than Conquerours through Christ; They
obtain a nobler conquest than that which is obtained by the sword.

2. But the weak Christian having less patience, and more selfishness and
passion, is easilier tempted to break his bounds, and with Peter, to run to his
unauthorized sword, when he should submit to suffering, Matthew. 26.51, 52. And
his interest and sufferings cause his passion to have too great a power on his
Judgment; so that he is easilier tempted to believe that to be lawful, which
he thinks to be necessary to his own preservation: and to think that the Gospel
and the Church are falling, when the power of men is turned against them; and
therefore he must with Vzzah, put forth his hand to save the Ark of God from
falling. He is more troubled at men's injustice and cruelty, and makes a wonder
of it to find the enemies of Christ and Godliness, to be unreasonably impudent
and bloody; as if he expected reason and righteousness in the malicious world.
His sufferings fill him more with discontent, and desires of revenge from God,
Luke 9.54. and his prosperity too much lifts him up, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. And in the
litigious titles of pretenders to supremacy, he is often too hasty to interess
himself in their contentions; as if he understood not, that whoever is the
conqueror, will count those rebels that were on the other side; and that the
enemies of Christ will cast all the odium upon Christianity and piety, when the
controversy is only among the Statesmen and Lawyers, and belongs not to
Religion at all.

3. The seeming Christian will seem to excel all others in loyalty and
obedience, when it makes for his carnal ends: He will flatter Rulers for
honors and preferment, and always be on the rising side, unless when his
pride engages him in murmurings and rebellions. He has a great advantage
above true Christians and honest men, to seem the most obedient subject;
because he has a stretching conscience that can do any thing for his safety,
or his worldly ends: If he be among Papists, he can be a Papist; if among
Protestants, he is a Protestant; and if he were among Turks, its like he would
rather turn a Mohammedan than be undone. No Prince or Power can command him any
thing which he cannot yield to, if his wordly interest require it. If there be
a Law for worshipping the golden Image, it is the conscionable servants of God,
and not the time-servers, that refuse to obey it, Dan. 3. If there be a Law
against praying, Dan. 6. it is Daniel and not the ungodly multitude that
disobey it. If there be a command against preaching, Acts 4.17, 18. it is the
holy Apostles and best Christians that plead the command of God against it, and
refuse obedience to it, verse. 20, 29. The self-seeking temporizing hypocrite
can do any thing: And yet he obeys not while he seems to obey. For it is
not for the Authority of the Commander that he does it, but for his own ends.
He never truly honors his superiors: for he does not respect them as the
Officers of God; nor obey them for his sake with a conscionable obedience. He
fears the Higher Powers as Bears or Tigers that are able to hurt him; or
uses their favor, as he uses his horse to do him service. Were it not for
himself, he would little regard them. The true Christian honors the basest
creature, more than the hypocrite and worldling honors his King. For he
sees God in all, and uses the smallest things unto his glory: Whereas the
worldling debaseth the highest, by the baseness of his esteem, and use, and
end; For he knows not how to esteem or use the greatest Prince, but for
himself or for some worldly ends, 2 Timothy 3.3, 4.

XLIX. 1. A Christian indeed, is a man of courage and fortitude in every cause
of God. For he trusts God, and firmly believes that he will bear him out. He
knows his superiors, and has a charitable respect to all men; but as for
any selfish or timorous respect, he has the least regard to man. For he
knows that the greatest are but worms; whose breath is in their nostrils;
that pass away as shadows and return to dust; and that the most potent are
impotent when they contend with God; and are unequal matches to strive against
their maker: and that it will prove hard for them to kick against the pricks;
and that whoever seems now to have the day, it is God that will be Conqueror
at last. Job 25.6. and 17.14. and 24.20. Psalm. 79.31. and 103.16. and 144.4.
Act. 9.4, 5, 6. Psalm. 144.3, 4, 5. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the
son of man, in whom there is no help: his breath goes forth; he returns to
his earth: in that very day, his thoughts perish. Happy is he that has the God
of Jacob for his help; whose hope is in the Lord his God, Isa. 45.9. Woe to him
that striveth with his maker. He knows that it is more irrational to fear man
against God, than to fear a flea or a fly against the greatest man. The
infinite disproportion between the creature that is against him, and the
Creator that is for him, does resolve him to obey the command of Christ, Luke
12.4. Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more
that they can do: but I will forewarn you whom you shall fear: Fear him which
after he has killed has power to cast into hell: yea I say unto you fear him.
Isa. 57.7, 8. Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose
heart is my law: Fear ye not the reproof of man, neither be afraid of their
revilings: for the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall
eat them like wool: but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my Salvation
from generation to generation. Isa. 50.6, 7, 8, 9. I gave my back to the
smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face
from shame and spitting. For the Lord God will help me: therefore shall I not
be confounded: therefore have I set my face like a flint; and I know that I
shall not be ashamed: He is near that justifies me; who will contend with me:
Let us stand together who is mine adversary: let him come near to me: Behold
the Lord God will help me: who is he that shall condemn me; Lo, they all shall
wax old as a garment; the moth shall eat them up. Isa. 35.4. and 41.10, 13, 14.
and 7.4. Jer. 46.27, 28. Mat. 10.26, 31. Isa. 2.22. Cease ye from man whose
breath is in his nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted of. Jer. 17.5, 8,
9. Cursed be the man that trusts in man, etc. Blessed is the man that
trusts in the Lord, etc. Alas how terrible is the wrath of God, in comparison
of the wrath of man! and how easy an enemy is the cruellest afflicter, in
comparison of a holy sin revenging God. Therefore the confirmed Christian says
as the three witnesses, Dan. 3.16, 17, 18. We are not careful to answer thee
in this matter: the God whom we serve is able to deliver us -- But if not, be
it known unto thee O King that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the
golden image which thou have set up. Dan. 6.10. When Daniel knew that the
Decree was past, he prayed openly in his house, as heretofore, Heb. 11.27.
Moses, feared not the wrath of the King, for he endured as seeing him that is
invisible, Prove. 28.1. The righteous is bold as a Lion: Act. 4 13. when they
saw the boldness of Peter and John they marvelled. 2 Cor. 11.21. Paul's bonds
made others bold, Ephesians. 6.19, 20. Act. 4.29, 31. 1 John 4.18. Perfect love
casts out fear: 1 Pet. 3.14. If ye suffer for righteousness sake happy are
ye; and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled. Heb. 13.6. So that
we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do
unto me.

2. But the weak Christian, though he also trust in God, is much more fearful,
and easily daunted and discouraged: and ready with Peter to be afraid, if he
perceive himself in danger: Matthew. 26.69. He is not valiant for the truth, Jer.
9.3. Though he can forsake all (even life it self) for Christ ( Luke 14.26,
33.) yet is it with a deal of fear and trouble: And Man is a more significant
thing to him than to the stronger Christian.

3. But the seeming Christian does fear man more than God, and will venture
upon the displeasure of God to avoid the displeasure of men that can do him
hurt: because he does not soundly believe the threatenings of the word of God.

L. 1. A Christian indeed is made up of Judgment and Zeal conjunct. His
Judgment is not a patron of Lukewarmness, nor his Zeal an enemy to knowledge:
His judgment does not destroy but increase his Zeal: and his Zeal is not blind
nor self-conceited, nor does run before or without judgment. If he be of the
most excellent sort of Christians, he has so large a knowledge of the
mysteries of godliness, that he sees the body of sacred truth with its parts
and compages or joints, as it were at once, It is all written deeply and
methodically in his understanding: He has by long use his senses exercised to
discern both good and evil, Heb. 5.14. He presently discerns where mistaken
men go out of the way, and lose the truth by false suppositions, or by false
definitions, or by confounding things that differ. And therefore he pittyeth
the contentious sects and disputers who raise a dust to blind themselves and
others, and make a stir to the trouble of the Church, about things which they
never understood: And in the sight of that truth which others obscure or
contradict, he enjoys much content or pleasure in his own mind, though
incapable persons zealously reject it. Therefore he is steadfast, as knowing on
what ground he seteth his foot. And though he be the greatest lover of truth,
and would with greatest joy receive any addition to his knowledge, yet
ordinarily by erroneous zealots, he is censured as too stiff and self-conceited
and tenacious of his own opinions; because he will not entertain their errors
and obey them in their self-conceitedness: For he that knows that it is truth
which he holds, is neither able, nor willing to hold the contrary (unless he
imprison the truth in unrighteousness) But if he be one that has not attained
to such a clear comprehensive judgment, yet with that measure of judgment
which he has, he does guide and regulate his zeal, and makes it follow after,
while understanding goes before. He treads on sure ground, and knows it to
be duty indeed which he is zealous for, and sin indeed which he is zealous
against; and is not put to excuse all his fervor and forwardness after with a
non putarem, or I had thought it had been otherwise, 1 Cor. 1.5. 2 Cor. 8.7.
Col. 3.16. and 4.12.

2. But the weak Christian either hearkeneth too much to carnal wisdom, which
suppresseth his zeal, and makes him too heavy and dull and indifferent in many
of his duties, and the concernments of his soul; permitting the world to take
up too much of the vigor of his spirit; Or else he is confident in his
mistakes, and verily thinks that he understands better than many wiser men,
these things which he never understood at all. He chooses his party by the
Zeal that he finds in them without any judicious trial of the truth of what
they hold and teach: He is very earnest for many a supposed truth and duty,
which proves at last to be no truth or duty at all: And he censureth many a
wiser Christian than himself, for many a supposed sin which is no sin, but
perhaps a duty. For he is always injudicious, and his heat is greater than his
light (or else his light is too flashy without heat:) Peremptorily he does set
down some among the number of the most wise and excellent men, for keeping him
company in his mistakes: And he boldly numbreth the best and wisest of his
Teachers with the transgressors, for being of a sounder understanding than
himself, and doing those duties which he calls sins: And hence it is that he
is a person apt to be mislead, by appearances of Zeal; and the Passions of his
Teachers prevail more with him than the Evidence of Truth. He that Prays and
Preaches most fervently is the man that carries him away, though none of his
Arguments be truly cogent. If he hear any hard name against any opinion or
manner of worship, he receives that prejudice which turns him more against
it, than reason could have done: so the bugbear name of Heresy, Lutheranism
and Calvinism frightneth many a well-meaning Papist both from the Truth and
almost from his wits: And the names of Popery, Arminianism, Prelacy,
Presbyterianism, Independency, etc. do turn away the hearts of many, from
things which they never tried or understood: If a zealous Preacher do but call
any opinion or practice Antichristian, or Idolatrous, it is a more effectual
terror than the clearest proof. Big and terrible words do move the passions,
while the understanding is abased, or a stranger to the cause; And Passion is
much of their Religion. And hence, alas, is much of the calamity of the Church:
Romans 14.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Act. 21.20. Gal. 4.17, 18.

3. But the seeming Christian is only zealous finally for Himself, or zealous
about the smaller matters of Religion, as the Pharisees were for their
Ceremonies and traditions; or for his own inventions, or some opinions or
ways, in which his honor seems to be interessed, and pride is the bellows
of his zeal: But as for a holy zeal about the substance and practice of
Religion, and that for God as the final cause, he is a stranger to it. He may
have a zeal of God, and of, and for the Law and Worship of God as the material
cause, but not a true zeal for God as the chief final cause. Romans 10.2. 2 Samuel
21.2. 2 King. 10.16. Act. 22.3.

LI. A Christian indeed can bear the infirmities of the weak: Though he love
not their weakness, yet he pittyeth it because he truly loves their persons.
Christ has taught him not to break the bruised reed, and to gather the Lambs
in his arms, and carry them in his bosom, and gently lead them that are with
young, Isa. 40.11. and 42.3. If they have diseases and distempers, he seeks
in tenderness to cure them, and not in wrath to hurt and vex them. He turns
not the Infants or sick persons from the family, because they cry or are
unquiet, unclean, infirm and troublesome: but he exercises his love and pity
upon their weaknesses. If they mistake their way, or are ignorant, and peevish
and froward in their mistakes, he seeks not to undo them, but gently to
reduce them. If they censure himself, and call him erroneous, heretical,
antichristian, idolatrous, because he concurreth not with them in their
mistakes, he bears it with Love and patience, as he would do the peevish
chidings of a child, or the frowardness of the sick. He does not lose his
charity, and set his wit against a Child, and aggravate the crimes, and being
reviled revile again; and say, you are Schismatics, hypocrites, obstinate, and
fit to be severely dealt with: but he overcomes them with love and patience,
which is the conquest of a Saint, and the happiest victory both for himself and
them. It is a small matter to him to be judged of man, 1 Cor. 4.3, 4. He is
more troubled for the weakness and disease of the consorious, than for his own
being wronged by their censures, Phil. 1.16, 17, 18. Romans 15.1, 2, 3. and 14.2,
3.

2. But the weak Christian is readier to censure others than patiently to bear
a censure himself. Either he stormeth against the Censurers as if they did him
some unsufferable wrong, (through the overgreat esteem of himself and his
reputation;) or else to escape the fangs of censure, and keep up his repute
with them, he complyeth with the censorious, and overruns his judgment and
conscience to be well spoken of, and counted a sincere and steadfast man, Gal.
2.12, 13, 14.

3. But the seeming Christian is so proud and selfish, and wants Charity and
tenderness to the weak, that he is impatient of their provocations; and would
cure the diseases of the servants of Christ, by cutting their throats, or
ridding the Country of them. If a Child do but wrangle with him, he cries,
Away with him, he is a troubler of the World: He takes more notice of one of
their infirmities, than of all their graces: yea he can see nothing but
obstinacy and hypocrisy in them, if they do but cross him in his opinions, or
reputation, or worldly ends. Selfishness can turn his Hypocrisy into Malignity
and cruelty, if once he take them to be against his interest. Indeed his
interest can make him patient: He can bear with them that he looks to gain
by: but not with them that seem to be against him. The radical enmity against
sincerity that was not mortified but covered in his heart will easily be again
uncovered, Mark. 6.18, 20, 21, 22. Phil. 1.15, 16. 3 John 9.

LII. 1. A Christian indeed is a great esteemer of the Unity of the Church, and
greatly averse to all Divisions among Believers. As there is in the natural
body an abhorring of dismembring or separating any part from the whole; so
there is in the mystical body of Christ: The members that have life cannot but
feel the smart of any distempering attempt: For abscision is destruction: The
members die that are separated from the body. And if there be but any
obstruction or hinderance of communion, they will be painful or unusefull. He
feels in himself the reason of all those strict commands, and earnest
exhortations, 1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you Brethren, by the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions
among you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in
the same judgment, Phil. 2 1, 2, 3, 4. If there be any consolation in Christ,
if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and
mercies; fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same Love, being
of one accord, of one mind: Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory;
but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better than themselves. Look
not every man on his own things; but every man also on the things of others,
Ephesians. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. I therefore the prisoner of the Lord beseech you,
that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness
and meekness, with long suffering, forbearing one another in love; endeavoring
to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. There is one body, and
one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through
all, and in you all: But unto every one of us is given grace according to the
measure of the gift of Christ. Read also Ephesians. 4.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. 1 Cor.
12. throughout. He looks at uncharitableness, and divisions with more
abhorrence, than weak Christians do at drunkenness or whoredom, or such other
heinous sin. He fears such dreadful warnings, as Acts 20.29, 30. For I know
this, that after my departing shall grievous Wolves enter in among you, not
sparing the flock: Also of your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse
things, to draw away Disciples after them. And he cannot slight such a vehement
exhortation, as Romans 16.17, 18. Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them which
cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned
and avoid them. For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but
their own belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple. Therefore he is so far from being a divider himself, that when he sees
any one making divisions among Christians, he looks on him as on one that is
flashing and mangling the body of his dearest friend; or as on one that is
setting fire on his house, and therefore does all that he can to quench it: As
knowing the confusion and calamity to which it tends. He is of a Christian,
and therefore of a truly Catholic spirit; that is, He makes not himself a
member of a divided Party or a Sect: He regards the interest and welfare of
the body, the universal Church, above the interest or prosperity of any party
whatsoever: And he will do nothing for a party which is injurious to the whole,
or to the Christian cause. The very names of Sects and Parties are displeasing
to him; And he could wish that there were no name but that of Christians among
us; save only the necessary names of the criminal, such as that of the
Nicolaitans, Rev. 2.6.15. By which those that are to be avoided by Christians
must be known. Christianity is confined to so narrow a compass in the world,
that he is unwilling to contract it yet into a narrower. The greatest party of
divided Christians, whether it be the Greeks or Papists, is too small a body
for him to take for the Catholic (or Universal) Church: He admireth at the
blindness and cruelty of faction, that can make men damn all the rest of the
Church, for the interest of their proper sect; and take all those as no
Christians that are better Christians than themselves. Especially the Papists,
who unchurch all the Church of Christ, except their Sect; and make it as
necessary to salvation to be a subject of the Pope as to be a Christian; and
when by their great corruption and abuses of Christianity, they have more need
of charitable censures themselves than almost any sort of Christians, yet are
they the boldest condemners of all others. The confirmed Christian can
difference between the strong and weak, the sound and unsound members of the
Church, without dismembring any, and without unwarrantable separations from
any. He will worship God in the purest manner he can; and locally join with
those Assemblies, where all things considered, he may most honor God, and
receive most edification; and will not sin for communion with any: He will
sufficiently difference between a holy orderly Assembly, and a corrupt
disordered one; and between an able faithful Pastor, and an ignorant or
worldly hireling: And he desires that the Pastors of the Church may make that
due separation by the holy Discipline of Christ, which may prevent the peoples
disorderly separation. But for all this, he will not deny his presence upon
just occasion to any Christian Congregation that worshipeth God in truth,
though with many modal imperfections, so be it they impose no sin upon him as
necessary to his communion with them. Nor will he deny the spiritual communion
of faith and Love to those that he holds not local communion with: He knows
that all our worship of God is sinfully imperfect; and that it is a dividing
principle to hold, that we may join with none that worship God in a faulty
manner: for then we must join with none on earth: He knows that his presence
in the worship of God, is no sign of his approbation of all the failings of
Pastors or people in their personal or modal imperfections; as long as he
joyneth not in a worship so corrupt as to be it self unacceptable to God. While
men who are all imperfect and corrupt are the worshippers, the manner of their
worship will be such as they, in some degree imperfect and corrupt. The solid
Christian has his eye upon all the Churches in the world, in the determining
of such questions: He considers what worship is offered to God in the
Churches of the several parties of Christians, the Greeks, Armenians,
Abassines, Lutherans, etc. as well as what is done in the Country where he
lives: and he considers whether God disown and reject the worship of almost
all the Churches in the world, or not: For he dare no further reject them than
God rejects them: nor will he voluntarily separate from those Assemblies
where the presence of Christ, in his Spirit and acceptance, yet remains. And
his fuller acquaintance with the gracious nature, office and tenderness of
Christ, together with greater Love to his Brethren, does cause him in this to
judge more gently than young censorious Christians do. And his humble
acquaintance with his own infirmities, makes him the more compassionate to
others. If he should think that God would reject all that order not, and word
not their prayers aright, he would be afraid of being rejected himself, who is
still conscious of greater faultiness in his own prayers, than a mere defect in
words and order; even of a great defectiveness in that faith, and desire, and
love, and zeal, and reverence which should be manifested in prayer. Though he
be more apprehensive than others of the excellency and necessity of the
holiness and spirituality of the soul in worship; yet withal he is more
judicious and charitable than the pievish and passionate infant Christians, who
think that God does judge as they do, and sees no grace where they see none;
and takes all to be superstitious or fanatical, that differ from their
opinions or manner of worship; or that he is as ready to call every error in
the method or the words of prayer, Idolatry or Wilworship, as those are that
speak not what they they know, but what they have heard some Teachers whom they
reverence say before them. He that dwells in Love, does dwell in God, and God
in him, and he that dwells in God, is liker to be best acquainted with his
mind concerning his children and his worship, than he that dwells in wrath,
and pride, and partiality.

2. But the weak Christian (though so far as he has grace, he is of the same
mind, and abhors discord and division among the flock of Christ, yet) being
more dark, and selfish, and distempered, he is much more prone to unwarrantable
separations and divisions than the stronger Christian is. He is narrower
fighted, and looks little further than his own acquaintance, and the Country
where he lives; and minds not sufficiently the general state of the Churches
through the world, nor understands well the interest of Christ and
Christianity in the earth. His knowledge and experience being small, his
charity also is but small; and a little thing tempts him to condemn another,
and aggravate his faults, and think him unworthy of the communion of the
Saints. He is much more sensible of the judgment, and affections, and
concernments of those few with whom he does converse, and that are of his
opinion, than of the judgment and practice, and concernments of the universal
Church. He knows not how to prefer the judgments and holiness of some that
he thinks more excellent than the rest, without much undervaluing and
censuring of all others, that are not of their opinion: He cannot choose the
actual local communion of the best society, without some unjust contempt of
others, or separation from them. He has not so much knowledge as may
sufficiently acquaint him with his ignorance; And therefore he is apt to be
unreasonably confident of his present apprehensions, and to think verily that
all his own conceptions are the certain truth; and to think them ignorant or
ungodly, or very weak at least that differ from him. For he has not thoroughly
and impartially studied all that may be said on the other side. The Authority
of his chosen Teacher and sect is greater with him (if he fall into that way)
than the Authority of all the most wise and holy persons in the world besides.
What the Scripture speaks of the unbelieving world, he is apt to apply to all
those of the Church of Christ, that are not of his mind and party: And when
Christ commands us to come out of the world, he is prone to understand it of
coming out from the Church into some stricter and narrower society; and is apt
with the Papists, to appropriate the name and privileges of the Church, to his
party alone, and to condemn all others. Especially if the Church Governors be
carnal and self-seeking or otherwise very culpable, and if Discipline be
neglected, and if profaneness be not sufficiently discountenanced, and
godliness promoted; he thinks that such a Church is no Church, but a profane
society: God has taught him by repentance to see the mischief of ungodliness;
but he yet wants that experience which is needful to make him know the
mischiefs of Church-divisions: He had too much experience himself of the evil
of profaneness before his conversion: but he has not tried the evil of
Schism; and without some sad experience of its fruits, in himself or others, he
will hardly know it as it should be known. Because it is the custom of some
malignant enemies of godliness, to call the godly Heretics, Schismatics,
factious Sectaries, etc. therefore the very names do come into credit with him;
and he thinks there are no such persons in the world, or that there is no
danger of any such crimes: Till he be taught by sad experience that the
professors of sincerity are in as much danger on that side as on the other; and
that the Church (as well as Christ) does suffer between two thieves, the
Profane and the Dividers. Paul was unjustly called the ringleader of a Sect,
Acts 24.5. and Christianity called a Heresy and a Sect every where spoken
against, Acts 28.22. and 24.14. But for all that, Heresy is a fruit of the
flesh, Gal. 5.20. and some of them called damnable, 2 Pet. 2.1. and they are
the trial of the Church, to difference the approved members from the chaff, 1
Cor. 11.19. And an obstinate Heretic is to be avoided by true Believers, Titus
3.10. And the Pharisees and Sadduces are well reputed to be several Sects, Acts
5.17. and 15.5. and 26.5. And dividers and divisions are justly branded in
Scripture, as aforesaid: There must be no Schism in the body of Christ, 1 Cor.
12.25. The following of selected Teachers in a way of division from the rest,
or opposition to them, does show that men are carnal in too great a measure,
though it be not in predominancy as in the profane. 2 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3. And I
Brethren could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, as
unto babes in Christ: I have fed you with milk, and not with meat; for hitherto
ye were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able. For ye are yet
carnal: For whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are
ye not carnal, and walk as men? For while one says, I am of Paul, and another,
I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal? How much more when he that is for Paul does
censure and rail at Cephas and Apollo? He that has seen the course of men
professing godliness in England in this age, may easily and sadly know how
prone weak Christians are to unjust separations and divisions, and what are the
effects: He that had heard many zealous in prayer, and other duties, and the
next year see them turning Quakers, and railing in the open Congregations at
the ablest, holiest, self-denying Ministers of Christ, and at their flocks,
with a [ Come down thou deceiver, thou hireling, thou wolf; ye are all greedy
dogs, etc.] and shall see how yet poor souls run into that reviling and
irrational Sect, (to say nothing of all other Sects among us) will no longer
doubt whether the weak be inclinable to Schism, but will rather lament the
dangerousness of their station; and know that all is not done when a sinner is
converted from an ungodly state. Study the reason of those three texts, Ephesians.
4.13, 14, 15, 16. For the edifying the body of Christ, till we all come in the
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man;
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; that we henceforth be
no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in
wait to deceive; but speaking the truth in Love may grow up into him in all
things, which is the Head, even Christ: from whom the whole body fitly joined
together and compacted, by that which every joint supplyeth, according to the
effectual working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body, to
the Edifying of it self in love. Here you see the children are apt to be
carried into dividing parties. And that they are aptest to be Proud, and that
way to miscarry, see 1 Timothy 3.6. Not a novice (or raw young Christian) lest
being lifted up with Pride, he fall into the condemnation of the Devil; And
then follows the effect, Act. 20.30. Also of your own selves shall men arise,
speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them. I would not have
you groundlesly accuse any Christian with a charge of Pride; But I must tell
you, that the childish Pride of apparel, is a petty business, in comparison of
that Pride which many in sordid attire have manifested, who in their ignorance
do rage and foam out words of falsehood and reproach against Christ's Ministers
and Servants, as if they were all fools or impious in comparison of them;
speaking evil of that which they never understood: The lifting up the Heart
above the people of the Lord, in the Pride of supposed Holiness, is
incomparably worse, than Pride of Learning, honor, greatness, wit or wealth.
Nay it has often been to me a matter of wonder to observe how little all those
plain and urgent Texts of Scripture, which cry down Division, do work upon many
of the younger Christians, who yet are as quickly touched as any, with a Text
that speaks against profaneness and lukewarmness. In a word, they are often
of the temper of James and John, when they would fain have had Christ have
revenged himself on his opposers by fire from Heaven: They know not what manner
of Spirit they are of, Luke 9.55. They think verily that it is a holy zeal for
God, when it is the boiling of passion, pride and selfishness: They feel not
the sense of such words as Christ's, Joh. 17.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. I pray also for
them who shall believe on me, through their word; that they All may be one, as
thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, that the
World may believe that thou have sent me, etc.

3. And as for the seeming Christians, in this they are of several sorts. When
their carnal interest lies in compliance with the Major part and stronger
side, then no men do more cry up Unity and Obedience: what a noise do many
thousand Papist-Prelates, Jesuits and Friars, make with these two words
throughout the world. Unity and Obedience (unto them upon their terms) do
signify Principally their worldly greatness, wealth and power. But if the
Hypocrite be engaged in point of honor or other carnal interest on the
suffering side, or be out of hope of any advantage, in the common rode; then no
man is so much for separation and singularity as he. For he must needs be noted
for some body in the world, and this is the chief way that he finds to
accomplish it. And so being lifted up with pride, be falls into the
Condemnation of the Devil, and becomes a firebrand in the Church.

LIII. 1. A Christian indeed is not only zealous for the Unity and Concord of
Believers, but he seeks it on the right terms, and in the way, that is fitest
to attain it. Unity, Peace and Concord are like Piety and Honesty, things so
unquestionably good, that there are scarce any men of reason and common
sobriety, that ever were heard to oppose them Directly and for themselves: And
therefore all that are enemies to them are yet pretenders to them; and oppose
them 1. In their causes only, 2. Or covertly and under some other name. Every
man would have Unity, Concord and Peace in his own way and upon his own terms:
But if the right terms had been understood and consented to as sufficient, the
Christian world had not lain so many hundred years in the sin and shame and
ruins as it has done. And the cause of all is, that Christians indeed, that
have clear confirmed judgments, and strength of grace, are very few; and for
number and strength unable to persuade or overrule the weak, the passionate and
the falsehearted worldly hypocritical multitude; who bear down all the counsels
and endeavors of the wise.

The judicious faithful Christian knows, that there are three degrees or
sorts of Christian Communion, which have their several terms: 1. The
universal-church Communion, which all Christians as such must hold among
themselves. 2. Particular Church Communion, which those that are conjoined for
personal Communion in Worship do hold under the same Pastors and among
themselves. 3. The extraordinary intimate communion that some Christians hold
together, who are bosom friends, or are specially able and fit to be helpful
and comfortable to each other.

The last concerns not our present business: we must hold Church Communion
with many that are unfit to be our bosom friends, and that have no eminency of
parts or piety, or any strong-perswading evidence of sincerity. But the terms
of Catholic Communion, he knows, are such as these. 1. They must be such as
were the terms of Church Communion in the days of the Apostles. 2. They must
be such as are plainly and certainly expressed in the holy Scriptures. 3. And
such as the Universal Church has in some ages since been actually agreed in.
4. And those points are likest to be such, which all the differing parties of
Christians are agreed in as Necessary to Communion to this day (so we call not
those Christians that deny the essentials of Christianity) 5. Every man in the
former ages of the Church was admitted to this Catholic Church Communion, who
in the Baptismal Vow or Covenant, gave up himself to God, the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost; as his Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier, his Owner, Governor and
Father, renouncing the flesh, the world and the Devil. And more particularly,
as man has an Understanding, a Will and an executive power, which must all be
sanctified to God, so the Creed was the particular Rule for the Credenda or
things to be Believed, and the Lords Prayer for the Petenda or things to be
Willed, Loved and Desired, and the Ten Commandments for the agenda or things to
be done: so that to Consent to these Rules particularly, and to all the Holy
Scriptures implicitly and generally, was the thing then required to Catholic
Communion. The belief of the doctrine being necessary for the sanctifying of
the heart and life, the Belief of so much is of Necessity, without which the
Heart cannot be sanctified, or devoted in Covenant to God our Creator, Redeemer
and Regenerater; and without which we cannot Love God (as reconciled to us in
Christ) above all, and our neighbors as our selves. So that, in a word, he
that can tell what the Baptismal Vow or Covenant is, can tell what is necessary
to that Catholic Church Communion, which belongs to Christians as
Christians, at how great a distance soever they dwell from one another.

And, then for Particular Church Communion, which is local and personal, it is
moreover necessary, 1. That each member acknowledge and submit to the same
Pastors. 2. That they be guided by them in the convenient circumstances and
adjuncts of Worship: For if some persons will not consent or submit to the same
Pastors that the body of the Church consents and submiteth to, they cannot
have communion particularly and locally with that Church, nor are they members
of it; no more than they can be members of the same Kingdom that have not the
same King: And there being no solemn worship performed but by the Ministry of
those Pastors, they cannot join in the worship that join not with the Minister.
And if some members will not consent and submit to the necessary determination
of the adjuncts or external modes of worship, they cannot join in local,
particular Church Communion where that Worship is performed: As if the Pastor
and the body of the Church will meet in such a place, at such a day and hour,
and some members will not meet with them at that place and day and hour, they
cannot possibly then have their local personal communion. Or if the Pastor will
use such a Translation of the Scriptures, or such a Version of the Psalms, or
such a Method in Preaching and Prayer, or such Notes or books and other like
helps; if any members will not submit, nor hold Communion with the rest, unless
that Translation, or Version, or Method of Preaching, or Praying, or Notes or
Books be laid aside, he cannot have Communion while he refuses it. If the
Pastor and all the rest will not yield to him, he must join with some other
Church that he can agree with. And as long as the Catholic Church communion is
maintained (which consists in Unity of the Christian-covenant, or of
Christianity, or of Faith, Love and Obedience) the difference of modes and
circumstances between particular Churches must be allowed without any breach of
Charity or without disowning one another: And he that cannot be a member of one
particular Church, may quietly join himself to another without condemning that
which he dissenteth from, so far as to hinder his Catholic Communion with it;
(even as among the Papists, men may be of which Order of Religious persons they
best like, as long as they submit to their General Government.) And here the
strong judicious Christian for his part will never be guilty of
Church-divisions: For, 1. He will make nothing necessary to Church Communion,
which any sober, pious, peaceable minds shall have any just reason to except
against, or which may not well be manifested to be for the Edification of the
Church: 2. And he will bear with the weak dissenters so far as will stand with
the peace and welfare of the Church. 3. And he will particularly give leave to
such weak ones as cannot yet hold communion with him, being peaceable, and not
promoting heresy, ungodliness or sedition to join to another Church where they
can hold communion, with peace to their own Consciences: as long as they
continue their foresaid Catholick-communion. For the strong know that they must
not only [ bear with] but [ bear] the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please themselves, but every one of them to please his neighbor for good to
edification, For even Christ pleased not himself. -- And so they will receive
one another, as Christ also received us to the glory of God, not despising the
weak, nor rejecting them that God receives, Romans 15.1, 2, 3, 7. and 14.1, 2,
3, 4, 17, 18. And thus you may see how easy a matter it were to unite and
reconcile all the Christian World, if the principles of the judicious confirmed
Christian might be received and prevail; and that it is not he that is the
cause of the abundance of sin and calamity which divisions have caused, and
continued in the Church. But that which now seems an impossible thing may
quickly and easily be accomplished if all were such as he: And that the
difficulty of reconciling and uniting Christians, lies not first in finding
out the terms, but in making men fit to receive and practice the terms from the
beginning received by the Churches: This is Lirinensis his Quod semper, ubique
and ab omnibus receptum est. (supposing still that the Magistrate be submitted
to by every soul, even as he is the keeper of both talles, Romans 13.1, 2, 3.)

2. But the weak Christian is too easily tempted to be the divider of the
Church, by expecting that it be united upon his impossible or unrighteous
terms. Sometime he will be Orthodox overmuch, or rather wise in his own
conceit, Romans 12.16. and then none are judged fit for his communion that be not
of his opinion, in controverted Doctrinals ( e.g. predestination, the manner of
the work of grace, freewill, perseverance, and abundance such:) sometime he
will be righteous overmuch, or (to speak more properly) superstitious: And then
none are fit for his communion, that Worship not God in that method and manner
for circumstantials, which he esteems best: And his charity is so weak that
it freeth him not from thinking evil, 1 Cor. 13. and so narrow that it covers
not either many or great infirmities. The more need he has of the forbearance
and charity of others, the less can he bear or forbear others himself. The
strong Christian must bear the infirmities of the weak; but the weak Christian
can scarce bear with the weak or strong: Nay he is often too impatient with some
of their virtues and duties, as well as with their infirmities. He is of too
private a spirit, and too insensible of the public interest of the Church of
Christ. And therefore he must have all the World come over to him, and be
conformed to his opinion and party, and unite upon his mistaken narrow terms if
they will have Communion with him: I mean, it is thus with him when the
temptation on that side prevails. And sometime he is overcome with the
temptation of Domination, to make his judgment the Rule to others: and then he
quite overvalueth his own understanding, and will needs be judge of all the
controversies in the Church; and takes it as unsufferable, if wiser and better
men do not take him as infallible and in every thing observe his will. And when
his brethren give him the reason of their dissent, as his judgment is not
clear enough to understand them, so his passion and partiality are too strong
to suffer his judgment to do its part. And thus oft-times he is a greater
hinderance to the Churches Unity, than the enemies of the Church themselves:
For he has not judgment enough to guide him the right way, and yet he has so
much zeal as will not suffer him to keep his errors to himself.

3. And all these distempers that are but in a lower degree in the weak
Christian, are predominant in the Hypocrite. The Church shall have no concord
or peace if he can hinder it, but what is consistent with his carnal interest,
his honor, or wealth, or dignity in the world. The pride and covetousness
which rule himself, he would have to make the terms of concord, and to rule all
others. It is Hypocrites in the Church that are the greatest cause of discord
and divisions; having selfish spirits, principles and ends, and having always
a work of their own to do, which suits not well with the work of Christ; and
yet Christ's work must be subjected to it, and ordered and overruled by it. And
while they pretend to go to the Scriptures, or to Councils, or Fathers for
their reasons, indeed they go first for them to their worldly interest; and
then would fain hire or press the Scripture, Church or Fathers to serve their
turn, and come in as witnesses on their side. And thus the Church, as well as
Christ, is betrayed by the covetous Judas's of his own family: And the servants
of the world, the flesh and Devil, that take up the livery of Christ, and usurp
the name and honor of Christians, do more effectually hinder the concord and
prosperity of the Church, than any open enemies do. And those that are indeed
no Christians, do cause Christianity to be reproached: Even as Spies and
Traitors that are hired by the enemy to take up arms in the Army which they
fight against, that they may betray it by their fraud, and do more harm to it,
by raising mutinies, and by false conduct, than a multitude of professed
enemies could have done. It is proud, and worldly carnal Hypocrites, that
hinder most the concord of Believers.

LIVE. 1. A confirmed Christian is of a peaceable spirit. He is not masterly,
domineering, turbulent, hurtful, cruel, seditious, factious, or contentious.
He is like ripened fruits, that are mellow and sweet, when the younger, greener
fruits are sour and harsh. He is not wise in his own conceit, Romans 12.16. and
therefore not over urgent in obtruding his conceits on others, nor quarrelsome
with all that cannot entertain them; nor will he easily lay men's salvation or
damnation, no nor the Churches peace, upon them. He is kindly affectioned to
others with brotherly love, yea, loves his neighbor as himself, Romans 12.10.
and 13 9, 10. And therefore he does to others as he would they should do to
him; and uses them as he would be used by them: And then how far they are like
to suffer by him, you may easily judge. For Love works no ill to his
neighbor, Romans 13.10. He is above the portion of the worldling, and a
contemner of that vanity which carnal men account their felicity; and therefore
he prefers love and quietness before it, and can lose his right when the
interest of Love and Peace requires it. He is become as a little child in his
conversion, Matthew. 18.3. and is low and little in his own eyes, and therefore
contendeth not for superiority or pre-eminence, either in place or power, or
reputation of his learning, wisdom or piety; but in honor prefers others
before himself, Romans 12.10. He minds not high things, but condescendeth to
men of low estate, Romans 12.16. and therefore will not contend for estimation or
precedence, nor scramble to he highest, though he rise by the ruins of men's
bodies and souls. If it be possible, as much as lies in him, he will live
peaceably with all men, Romans 12.18. For he is not one that by word or deed will
avenge himself; but when the wrath of others is up like a blustering storm, he
gives place to it, he boweth before it, or goes out of the way, Romans 12.19.
If his enemy hunger, he feeds him; if he thirst, he gives him drink, when
oppressors would deprive not only an enemy, but the righteous of their meat and
drink: and thus he melts his hardened enemies, by heaping kindnesses upon
them when they are wrathful, and proud, and contentious, and do him wrong, or
use provoking words against him, he is not overcome of their evil to imitate
them, but he overcomes their evil with his good, Romans 12.20, 21. If God have
given him more knowledge and abilities than others, he does not presently set
up himself to be admired for it, nor speak disdainfully and contemptuously of
those that are not of his mind: But he shows the eminency of his wisdom, with
meekness by the works of a good conversation, and by doing better than the
unwiser do, James 3. from verse 1. to 13. He is endued with the wisdom from
above, which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full
of mercy and good fruit, without partiality (or wavering in persecution, as Dr.
Hammond renders it) and without hypocrisy. And thus the fruit of righteousness
is sown in peace of them that make peace, Jam. 3.17, 18. As he is taught of God
to love his brother, 1 These. 4.9. So that same teaching with experience of the
effects assures him, that they that pretend to be wiser and better than
others, when they have bitter, envious zeal and strife in their hearts, they
vainly glory and lie against the truth. This wisdom descends not from above,
but is earthly, sensual and devilish. For where envying and strife is, there is
confusion and every evil work, James 3.14, 15, 16. (Read but the story of the
Jewish Zealots in Josephus, and the heretical Zealots in all ages of the
Church, and you will perceive the truth of this) when such quarrelsome spirits
are filling the Church with contentions or vexations about their meats, and
drinks, and days, etc. the Christian indeed understands that the Kingdom of
God consists not of such things as these, but in righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost; and he that in these things serves Christ, is
acceptable to God, and approved of (wise and sober) men. Therefore he follows
after things which make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another;
and will not for meats, etc. destroy the work of God, Romans 14.17, 18, 19, 20.
He stays not till peace be offered him, or brought home to him, but he
follows peace with all men, as well as holiness, Heb. 12.14. If it fly from
him, he pursues it: if it be denied him, he seeks it, and will not refuse to
stoop to the poorest for it, and to beg it of his inferiors, if it were upon
his knees, rather than be denied it, and live an unpeaceable disquiet life,
Psalm. 34.14. For he believes, that blessed are the Peacemakers, for they
shall be called the children of God, Matthew. 5.9.

2. And the weak Christian has the same spirit, and therefore the love of
peace is most predominant in him: But alas he is too easily tempted into
Religious passions, discontents, contentious disputations, quarrelsome and
opprobrious words; and his judgment lamentably darkened and perverted whenever
contentious zeal prevails, and passions do perturb the quiet and orderly
operations of his soul. He wants both the knowledge and the experience and
the mellowness of spirit, which riper Christians have attained: He has a less
degree of Charity, and is less acquainted with the mischiefs of
unpeaceableness: And therefore it is the common course of young professors, to
be easily tempted into unpeaceable ways: and when they have long tried them
(if they prove not Hypocrites) to come off at last upon experience of the evils
of them, and so the young Christians conjunct with some hypocrites make up the
rigorous, fierce, contentious and vexatious party, and the aged riper
Christians make up the holy, moderate, healing party, that groan and pray for
the Churches peace, and mourn in secret both for the ungodliness and violence
which they cannot heal. Yea the difference is much apparent in the Books and
Sermons which each of them is best pleased with. The ripe experienced Christian
loves those Sermons that kindle Love, and tend to Peace; and love such healing
Books as do narrow differences, and tend to reconcile and heal (such as Bishop
Halls Peacemaker, and Pax terris, and all his writings; and Bishop Davenants,
Bishop Mortons, and Bishop Hall's Pacificatory Epistles to Duraeus, and Mr.
Burroughs's Irenicon, Ludov. Crocius, Amyraldus, Junius, Paraeus's, and many
other Irenicons written by foreign Divines, to say nothing of those that are
upon single controversies. But the younger sour uncharitable Christians are
better pleased with such Books and Sermons as call them aloud to be very
zealous for this or that controverted point of Doctrine, or for or against some
circumstance of worship or Church discipline, or about some fashions, or
customs, or indifferent things, as if the Kingdom of God were in them, Romans
14.1, 2, 15, 16.

3. But the seeming Christian is either a mere temporizer, that will be of that
Religion whatever it be which is most in fashion, or which the higher powers
are of, or which will cost him least: Or else he will run into the other
extreme, and lift up himself by affected singularities, and by making a bustle
and stir in the world about some small and controverted point, and cares not
to sacrifice the peace and safety of the Church, to the honor of his own
opinions. And as small as the Christian Church is, he must be of a smaller
society than it, that he may be sure to be amongst the best; while indeed he
has no sincerity at all, but places his hopes in being of the right Church or
Party, or Opinion: And for his Party or Church, he burns with a feverish kind
of zeal, and is ready to call for fire from Heaven; and to decieve him, the
Devil sends him some from Hell, to consume those that are not of his mind:
Yet does he bring it as an Angel of light to defend the Truth and Church of
Christ: And indeed when the Devil will be the Defender of Truth, or of the
Church, or of Peace, or Order, or Piety he does it with the most burning zeal:
You may know him by the means he uses. He defends the Church by forbidding
the people to read the Scriptures in a known tongue, and by imprisoning and
burning the soundest and holiest members of it, and abusing the most learned
faithful Pastors, and defends the flock by casting out the Shepherds, and
such like means; as the murders of the Waldenses, and the Massacres of France
and Ireland, and the Spanish Inquisition, and Queen Mary's Bonefires, and the
Powder Plot; yea and the Munster, and the English rage and phrensies, may give
you fuller notice of: He that has no Holiness, nor Charity to be zealous for,
will be zealous for his Church, or Sect, or Customs, or Opinions. And then this
zeal must be the evidence of his piety: and so the Inquisitors have thought
they have religiously served God, by murdering his servants; and it is the
badge of their honor to be the Devils hang-men, to execute his malice on the
members of Christ; and all this is done in zeal for Religion by irreligious
Hypocrites. There is no standing before the malicious zeal of a graceless
Pharisee, when it rises up for his carnal interest, or the honor, and
traditions, and customs of his Sect, Luke 6.7. And they were filled with
madness, and communed with one another what they might do to Jesus, Luke 4.28.
Acts 5.17. and 13.45. John 16.2. Romans 10 2. Phil. 3.6. Acts 36.10, 11. The zeal
of a true Christian consumes himself with grief to see the madness of the
wicked: But the zeal of the Hypocrite consumes others, that by the light of
the fire his Religiousness may be seen: You may see the Christians fervent Love
of God, by the fervent flames which he can suffer for his sake: And you may see
the fervent Love of the Hypocrite, by the flames which he kindles for others:
By these he cries with Jehu, Come and see my zeal for the Lord, 2 King. 10.16.
2 Samuel 21.2.

LV. 1. A Christian indeed is one that most highly esteems and regards the
interest of God and men's salvation in the world; and takes all things else to
be inconsiderable in comparison of these. The interest of Great men, and
Nobles, and Commanders; yea and his own in corporal respects, as riches,
honor, health and life, he takes to be things unworthy to be named in
competition with the interest of Christ and Souls. The thing that his heart is
most set upon in the world, is that God be glorified, and that the world
acknowledge him their King, and that his Laws be obeyed, and that darkness, and
infidelity, and ungodliness may be cast out; and that pride, and worldliness,
and fleshly lusts may not hurry the miserable world unto perdition. It is one
of the saddest and most amazing thoughts that ever enters into his heart, to
consider how much of the world is overwhelmed in ignorance and wickedness, and
how great the Kingdom of the Devil is in comparison of the Kingdom of Christ:
that God should forsake so much of his Creation: that Christianity should not
be owned in above the sixth part of the world; and Popish pride and ignorance,
with the corruptions of many other Sects, and the worldly carnal minds of
Hypocrites, should rob Christ of so much of this little part, and leave him so
small a flock of holy ones, that must possess the Kingdom. His soul consents
to the Method of the Lords Prayer, as prescribing us the order of our Desires:
And in his prayers he seeks first (in order of estimation and intention) the
Hallowing of Gods name, and the coming of his Kingdom, and the doing of his
Will on Earth as it is done in Heaven, before his daily bread, or the pardon of
his sins, or the deliverance of his own soul from temptations and the evil one.
Mark him in his prayers, and you shall find that he is, above other men taken
up in earnest petitions for the Conversion of the Heathen and Infidel world,
and the undeceiving of Mahometans, Jews and Heretics, and the clearing of the
Church from those Papal tyrannies, and sopperies and corruptions, which make
Christianity hateful or contemptible in the eyes of the Heathen and Mohammedan
world, and hinder their Conversion. No man so much lamenteth the Pride, and
Covetousness, and Laziness, and Unfaithfulness of the Pastors of the Church,
because of the doleful consequents to the Gospel, and the souls of men; and yet
with all possible honor to the sacred office which they thus profane. No man
so heartily lamenteth the contentions and divisions among Christians, and the
doleful destruction of charity thereby: It grieveth him to see how much
selfishness, pride and malice prevails with them that should shine as lights
in a benighted world, and how obstinate and uncurable they seem to be, against
the plainest means, and humblest motions, for the Churches edification and
peace, Psalm. 120.6, 7. and 122.6. Phil. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 119.136. Zeph.
3.18. Ezekiel. 9.4. Psalm. 69.9. Joh. 2.17. He envieth not Kings and Great men
their dominions wealth or pleasure; nor is he at all ambitious to participate
in their tremendous exaltation: But the thing that his heart is set upon is,
that the Kingdoms of the World may all become the Kingdoms of the Lord, Rev.
11.15. and that the Gospel may every where have free course and be glorified,
and the Preachers of it be encouraged, or at least delivered from unreasonable
wicked men, 2 These. 3.1, 2. Little cares he who is uppermost or conquereth in
the world, or who goes away with the preferments or riches of the earth
(supposing that he fail not of his duty to his Rulers) so that it may go well
with the affairs of the Gospel, and souls be but helped in the way to Heaven.
Let God be honored, and souls converted and edified, and he is satisfied. This
is it that makes the Times good in his account: He thinks not as the proud
and carnal Church of Rome, that the Times are best when the Clergy is richest
and greatest in the world, and overtop Princes, and claim the secular power,
and live in worldly pomp and pleasures: But when holiness most abounds, and
the members of Christ are likest to their Head, and when multitudes of sincere
believers are daily added to the Church; and when the Mercy and Holiness of God
shine forth, in the Numbers and Purity of his Saints. It is no Riches or Honor
that can be heaped upon himself or any others, that make the Times seem good to
him, if Knowledge and Godliness are discountenanced and hindered, and the way
to Heaven is made more difficult; if Atheism, infidelity, ungodliness, pride
and malignity do prevail, and truth and sincerity are driven into the dark, and
when he that departs from evil makes himself a prey, Isa. 59.15. When the
godly man cease, and the faithful fail from among the children of men, when
every man speaks vanity to his neighbor, and the poor are oppressed, and the
needy sigh, and the wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted,
Psalm. 12.1, 2, 5, 8. The Times are Good, when the Men are good; and Evil when
the Men are evil, be they never so great or prosperous. As Nehemiah when he was
Cup bearer to the King himself, yet wept and mourned for the desolations of
Jerusalem, Neh. 1.3, 4. and 2.2, 3. Whoever prospers, the Times are ill when
there is a famine of the Word of the Lord, and when the chief of the Priests
and people do transgress, and mock Gods messengers, and despise his words, and
misuse his Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 36.14, 16. Amos 8.11, 12. When the Apostles are
charged to speak no more in the name of Christ, Act. 4.18. and 5.40. It is a
text enough to make one tremble, to think into what a desperate condition the
Jews were carried by a partial selfish zeal, 1 These. 2.15, 16. who both killed
the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have persecuted us, and they please
not God, and are contrary to all men; forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles
that they might be saved; to fill up their sin always: for the wrath is come
upon them to the uttermost. When the interest of themselves and their own
Nation and Priesthood did so far blind and pervert them, that they durst
persecute the Preachers of the Gospel, and forbid them to speak to the people
that they may be saved, it was a sign that wrath was come upon them to the
uttermost: A Christian indeed had rather be without Jereboams Kingdom, than
make Israel to sin, and make the basest of the people Priests, and stretch out
his hand against the Prophet of the Lord, 1 King. 12.30, 31. and 13.4. He had
rather labor with his hands; as Paul, and live in poverty and rags, so that
the Gospel may be powerfully and plentifully preached, and holiness abound,
than to live in all the prosperity of the world, with the hinderance of men's
salvation. He had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of God, than be a Lord
in the Kingdom of Satan: He cannot rise by the ruins of the Church, nor feed
upon those morsels that are the price of the blood of souls.

2. And the weakest Christian is in all this of the same mind; saving that
private and selfish interest is not so fully overcome, nor so easily and
resolutely denied, Luke 14.26, 33.

3. But here the Hypocrite shows the falseness of his heart: His own interest
is it that chooses his Religion; and, that he may not torment himself by being
wicked in the open light, he makes himself believe that whatsoever is most for
his own interest, is most pleasing unto God, and most for the good of souls,
and the interest of the Gospel; so that the carnal Romish Clergy can persuade
their Consciences, that all the darkness and superstitions of their Kingdom,
and all their Opposition of the light of the Gospel of Christ, do make for the
honor of God and the good of souls, because they uphold their tyranny, wealth
and pomp and pleasure. Or if they cannot persuade their Consciences to believe
so gross a lie, let Church and Souls speed how they will, they will favor
nothing that favors not their interest and ends: And the interest of the
flesh and spirit, of the world and Christ, are so repugnant, that commonly such
worldlings take the serious practice of Godliness, for the most hateful thing,
and the serious practicers of it, for the most unsufferable persons, Act. 7.57.
and 21.36. and 22.22. and 24.5, 6. Joh. 19.15. The enmity of interests, with
the enmity of nature, between the Woman's and the Serpent seed, will maintain
that warfare to the end of the world, in which the Prince of the powers of
darkness, shall seem to prevail, (as he did against our Crucified Lord:) but he
shall be overcome by his own successes, and the just shall conquer by patience
when they seem most conquered. The name and form, and image of Religion, the
carnal hypocrite does not only bear, but favor, and himself accept: But the
Life and serious practice he abhors, as inconsistent with his worldly
interest and ends. For these he can find in his heart, with Ahab to hate and
imprison Micaiah, and prefer his four hundred flattering Prophets, 1 King.
22.6, 8, 24, 27. If Luther will touch the Popes Crown and the Friars Bellies,
they will not scruple to Oppose and ruin, both him and all such Preachers in
the World, if they were able, John 11.48.50. Acts 5.28.

LVI. 1. A Christian indeed is one whose Holiness usually makes him an eyesore
to the ungodly world, and his charity, and peaceableness, and moderation makes
him to be censured as not strict enough, by the superstitious and dividing
sects of Christians. For seeing the Church has suffered between these two
sorts of opposers, ever since the suffering of Christ himself, it cannot be but
the solid Christian offend them both, because he has that which both dislike.
All the ungodly hate him for his holiness, which is cross to their interest and
way; and all the Dividers will censure him for that universal charity, and
moderation which is against their factious and destroying zeal (described, Jam.
3.) Even Christ himself was not strict enough (in superstitious observances)
for the ceremonious, zealous Pharisees: He transgressed (with his Disciples)
the tradition of the Elders, in neglecting their observances, who transgressed
the commandment of God by their tradition, Matthew. 15.2, 3. He was not strict
enough in their uncharitable observation of the Sabbath day, Matthew. 12.2. John
that was eminent for falling, they said, had a Devil: The Son of man came
eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a man gluttonous and a wine bibber, a
friend of Publicans and sinners: But wisdom is justified of her Children, Mat.
11.18, 19. And the weak Christians, Romans 14.1, 2, 3. did censure those that
durst eat those meats and do those things, which they conceived to be unlawful:
They that err themselves, and make God a Service which he never appointed,
will censure all as lukewarm, or temporizers, or wide conscienced men, that
err not with them, and place not their Religion in such superstitious
observances, as Touch not, taste not, handle not, etc. Col. 2.18, 21, 22, 23.
And the raw censorious Christians are offended with the Charitable Christian,
because he damneth not as many and as readily as they, and shuts not enough
out of the number of believers, and judges not rigorously enough of their
ways. In a word, he is taken by one sort to be too strict, and by the other to
be too complyant or indifferent in Religion, because he places not the Kingdom
of God in meats and days, and such like circumstances, but in righteousness,
peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.15, 16, 17. And as Paul withstood
Peter to his face, for drawing men to make scruple or conscience of things
lawful, Gal. 2.11, 12, 13. so is the sound Christian withstood by the
superstitious, for not making scruple of lawful things.

2. And the weak Christian is in the same case, so long as he follows
prudent, pious, charitable guides: But if he be taken in the snares of
superstition, he pleases the superstitious party, though he displease the
World.

3. And whereas the solid Christian will not stir an inch from truth and duty,
to escape either the hatred of the wicked, or the bitterest censures of the
Sectary or the weak; the Hypocrite must needs have one party on his side: For
if both condemn him, and neither applaud him, he loses his peculiar reward,
Matthew. 6.2, 5. and 23.5, 6, 7, 8.

LVII. 1. The confirmed Christian does understand the necessary of a faithful
Ministry, for the safety of the weak, (as well as the conversion of the wicked)
and for the preservation of the interest of Religion upon earth! And therefore
no personal unworthiness of Ministers, nor any calumnies of enemies; can make
him think or speak dishonourably of that sacred office: But he reverenceth it
as instituted by Christ; and though he loathes the sottishness and wickedness of
those that run before they are sent, and are utterly insufficient or ungodly,
and take it up for a Living or Trade only, as they would a common work, and are
Sons of Belial that know not the Lord, and cause the offering of the Lard to be
abhorred, 1 Samuel 2.2, 17. Yet no such temptation shall overthrow his reverence
to the office, which is the Ordinance of Christ: much less will he be
unthankful to those that are able and faithful in their office, and labor
instantly for the good of souls, as willing to spend and be spent for their
Salvation. When the World abuses and derideth and injureth them, he is one
that honors them, both for their work and masters sake, and the experience
which he has had of the blessing of God on their labors to himself. For he
knows that the smiting of the Shepherds is but the devils ancient way for
the scattering of the flock. Though he knows that if the salt have lost its
savor, it is good for nothing, neither fit for the land, nor yet for the
dunghill, but men cast it out, and it is trodden under foot: (he that has ears
to hear, let him hear) Luke 14.34, 35. Mat. 5.13, 14. Yet he also knows, that
he that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet shall receive a Prophets
reward, Matthew. 10.41, 42. And that he that receives them, receives Christ,
and he that despises them, that are sent by, him, despises him, Luke 10.16.
He therefore readily obeys those commands, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have
the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch for your souls as
those that must give account: 1 These. 5.12, 13. We beseech you brethren to know
them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord and admonish you: and
to esteem them very highly in Love for their work sake, and be at peace among
your selves. 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of
double honor: especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine.

2. But though the weak Christian be of the same mind so far as he is
sanctified, yet is he much more easily tempted into a wrangling censoriousness
against his Teachers, though they be never so able and holy men: and by
seducers may be drawn to oppose them or speak contemptuously of them, as the
Galathians did of Paul, and some of the Corinthians; accounting him as their
Enemy for telling them the truth, when lately they would have plucked out their
eyes to do him good, Gal. 4.15, 16.

3. But the Hypocrite is most easily engaged against them; either when they
grate upon the guilt of his bosom sin, or open his hypocrisy, or plainly
cross him in his carnal interest, or else when his Pride has conquered his
Sobriety, and engaged him in some Sect or erroneous way, which his Teachers are
against, and would reduce him from, Joh. 6.66. Mark 5.27. 2 Chronicles. 25.16.

LVIII. 1. A Christian indeed is one that has stored up such manifold
experience of the fulfilling of Gods promises, and the bearing of prayers, and
of the goodness of his holy ways, as will greatly fortify him against all
temptations to Infidelity, Apostasy or Distrust. No one has stronger
temptations usually than he; and no one is so well furnished with weapons to
resist them. The arguments of most others are fetched out of their Books only;
but he has moreover a life of experiences to confirm his faith; and so has
the witness in himself. He has tried and found that in God, in holiness, in
faith, in prayer, which will never suffer him to forsake them. Yea it is like
that he has upon record some such wonders in the answer of prayers, as might
do much to silence an Infidel himself. I am sure many Christians have had such
strange appearances of the extraordinary hand of God, that has done much to
destroy the remnants of their own unbelief, Psalm. 66.16.

2. But the Experiences of the younger, weaker Christians, are much shorter,
and less serviceable to their faith: And they have not judgment enough to
understand and make use of the dealings of God; but are ready to plead his
providence unto evil ends and consequences; and to take their own passionate
imaginations for the workings of the Spirit: It is ordinary with them to say,
[This or that was set upon my heart, or spoken to me] as if it had been some
divine inspiration, when it was nothing but the troubled workings of a weak
distempered brain: and it is their own fantasy and heart that says that to
them, which they think the Spirit of God within them said, Heb. 5.11, 12, 13. 2
These. 2.21. John 4.1. 1 Timothy 4.1. 1 Cor. 12.10. Jer. 23.28.27.32. and 29.8.

3. And the Hypocrite wants those establishing Experiments, of the power of
the Gospel, and the hearing of prayers, and fulfilling of promises, and
communion with Christ in the spirit: And therefore he is the more open to the
power of temptations, and a subtle disputer will easilier corrupt him, and
carry him away to flat Apostasy: For he wants the Root and Witness in
himself, Mat. 13.21, 22 1 John 5.10. Heb. 6.6, 7, 8. Luke 8.13.

LIX. 1. A Christian indeed is one that highly valueth sanctified affections
and passions, that all he does may be done as lively as possibly he can: And
also holy abilities for expression. But he much more valueth the three great
essential constant parts of the new creature within him; that is, 1. A high
estimation of God, and Christ, and Heaven, and Holiness in his understanding;
above all that can be set in any competition. 2. A resolved choice and adhesion
of the Will, by which he prefers God, and Christ, and Heaven, and Holiness
above all that can be set against them, and is fixedly resolved here to place
his happiness and his hopes. 3. The main drift and endeavors of his Life, in
which he seeks first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, Mat.
6.33.9.20.21. In these three (his Highest estimation, his Resolved choice and
complacencies, and his Chief endeavors) he takes his standing constant
evidences of his sincerity to consist: And by these he tries himself as to his
state; and not by the passionate feelings or affections of his heart; nor by
his memory or gifts or orderly thinking of expression. And it is these Rational
operations of his Soul in which he knows that Holiness does principally
consist; and therefore he most labors to be strong in these. 1. To ground
his Judgment well; 2. And to resolve to fix his Will; 3. And to order his
Conversation aright, Psalm. 50.23. Yet highly valuing sensible Affections and
gifts of utterance, but in subserviency to those which are the vital acts, 1
Cor. 13. Romans 7.18, 19, etc. and 6.16, 22. Romans 8.13. Jam. 2. Col. 1.9. and
3.16.

2. But the weak Christian usually places most of his religion in the more
affectionate and expressive part. He striveth more with his heart for
passionate apprehensions, than for complacency and fixed resolution: He is
often in doubt of his sincerity, when he wants the feeling affectionate
workings which he desires, etc. thinks he has no more grace, than that he
has sensibility of expressive gifts. And so as he builds his comfort upon
these unconstant signs, his comforts are accordingly unconstant: sometime he
thinks he has grace, when his body or other advantages do help the
excitation of his lively affections. And when the dullness of his body or other
impediments hinder this, he questioneth his grace again, because he
understands not aright the nature and chiefest acts of grace.

3. The Hypocrite has neither the Rational, nor the Passionate part in
Sincerity: But he may go much further in the latter than in the former: A quick
and passionate nature, though unsanctified, may be brought to shed more tears,
and express more fervor, than many a holy person can. Especially upon the
excitation of some quickening Sermon, or some sharp affliction, or great
conviction, or at the approach of death. Few of the most holy persons can
constantly retain so lively, fervent, passionate repentings, and desires and
resolutions to amend, as some carnal persons have in sickness. The power of
fear alone does make them more earnest, that Love makes many a gracious soul.
But when the fear is over, they are the same again. How often have I heard a sick
man most vehemently profess his resolutions for a holy life, which all have
come to nothing afterward? How often have I heard a common drunkard with tears
cry out against himself for his sin, and yet go on in it? And how many gracious
persons have I known, whose judgments and wills have been groundedly resolved
for God and holiness, and their lives have been holy, fruitful and obedient,
who yet could not shed a tear for sin, nor feel any very great sorrows or joys?
If you judge of a man by his earnestness in some good moods, and not by the
constant tenor of his life, you will think many an Hypocrite to be better than
most Saints. Who would have thought that had seen him only in that fit, but
that Saul had been a penitent man, when he lift up his voice and wept, and said
to David, Thou art more righteous than I; for thou have rewarded me good,
whereas I have rewarded thee evil, 1 Samuel 24.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. A smaller
matter will raise some sudden passions, than will renew the soul, and give the
pre-eminence to God, and Holiness, and Heaven, in the Judgment Will and
Conversation, Hos. 6.4. and 13.3. Isa. 58.2. Mat. 13.20.

LX. 1. A Christian indeed confirmed in Grace, is one that makes it the
business of his life to prepare for death; and delayeth not his serious
thoughts of it, and preparations for it till it surprise him; and therefore
when it comes it finds him prepared, and he gladly entertaineth it as the
messenger of his Father, to call him to his everlasting home. It is not a
strange unexpected thing to him, to hear he must die: He died daily in his
daily sufferings, and mortified contempt of worldly things, and in his daily
expectation of his change. He wondereth to see men at a dying time, surprised
with astonishment and terror, who jovially or carelessly neglected it before;
as if they had never known till then that they must die? Or as if a few years
time were reason enough for so great a difference: For that which he certainly
knows will be, he looks at as if it were even at hand; and his preparation
for it is more serious in his health than other men's is on their deathbed. He
uses more carefully to bethink himself, what graces he shall need at a dying
time, and in what case he shall then wish his soul to be; and accordingly he
labors in his provisions now; even as if it were to be tomorrow. He verily
believes that it is incomparably better for him to be with Christ, than to
abide on earth, and therefore (though Death of it self be an enemy, and
terrible to nature) yet being the only passage into happiness, he gladly
entertaineth it. Though he have not himself any clear and satisfactory
apprehensions of the place and state of the happiness of departed souls, yet it
quieteth him to know that they shall be with Christ, and that Christ knows
all, and prepares and secureth for him that promised Rest, Joh. 12.26. 2 Cor.
5.1, 7, 8. Phil. 1.21, 23. Luke 23.43. Though he is not free from all the
natural fears of death, yet his belief and hope of endless happiness does abate
those fears by the joyful expectation of the gain which follows. (See my
Book called The last enemy; and the last work of a Believer, and that of
self-denial, against the fears of death.)

But especially he loves and longs for the coming of Christ to judgment: as
knowing that then the Marriage-day of the Lamb is come, and then the desires
and hopes of all Believers shall be satisfied: Then shall the Righteous shine
as Stars in the Kingdom of their Father; and the hand of violence shall not
reach them. Every enemy then is overcome, and all the Redeemers work is
consummated, and the Kingdom delivered up unto the Father. Then shall the
ungodly and the unmercifull be confounded, and the righteous filled with
overlasting joy, when their Lord shall thoroughly plead their cause, and
justify them against the accusations of Satan, and all the lies of his
malicious instruments. O blessed, glorious, joyful day, when Christ shall come
with thousands of his Angels, to execute vengeance on the ungodly world, and to
be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that now believe, 2 These.
1.8, 9, 10 When the patient followers of the Lamb shall behold him in glory
whom they have believed in, and shall see that they did not pray, or hope, or
wait in vain! When Christ himself and his sacred truth, shall be justified and
glorified in the presence of the world, and his enemies mouths for ever
stopped: When he shall convince all that are ungodly of all their ungodly
deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him, Jude 14, 15. Where then is the mouth
that pleads the cause of infidelity and impiety? and reproached the serious
holiness of Believers? and made a jest of the Judgments of the Lord? Then what
terrors, and confusion, and shame, what fruitless repentings will seize upon
that man, that set himself against the holy ones of the Lord, and knew not the
day of his visitation, and embraced the image and form of godliness, while he
abhorred the power. The Joys which will then possess the hearts of the
Justified, will be such as now no heart can comprehend. When Love shall come to
be glorified in the highest expression, to those that lately were so low; when
all their doubts, and fears, and sorrows, shall be turned into full contenting
sight, and all tears shall be wiped away, and all reproaches turned into glory,
and every enemy overcome, and sin destroyed, and holiness perfected, and our
vile bodies changed, and made like the glorious body of Christ, Phil. 3.20, 21.
Col. 3.3, 4. Then will the Love and work of our Redemption be fully understood:
And then a Saint will be a Saint indeed; when with Christ they shall judge the
Angels and the world, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. and shall hear from Christ, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world, Mat. 25.34. Enter ye into the joy of your Lord, Mat. 25.21. Then
every knee shall bow to Christ, and every tongue shall confess that he is Lord,
to the glory of God the Father, Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. Then sin will fully appear
in its malignity, and holiness in its luster unto all: The proud will then be
abased, and the mouths of all the wicked stopped; when they shall see to their
confusion the Glory of that Christ whom they despised, and of those holy ones
whom they made their scorn: In vain will they then knock when the door is shut,
and cry, Lord, Lord, open unto us, Mat. 25.10, 11, 12. And in vain will they
then wish, O that we had known the day of our visitation, that we might have
died the death of the righteous, and our latter end might have been as his,
Numb. 23.10. Romans 3.19. Job 5.16. Psalm. 107.42. and 31.23* and 13.6, 8.

The day of Death is to true Believers a day of Happiness and Joy: But it is
much easier for them to think with joy on the coming of Christ, and the day of
Judgment, because it is a day of fuller joy, and soul and body shall be
conjoined in the blessedness; and there is nothing in it to be so great a stop
to our desires, as Death is, which naturally is an enemy. God has put a love
of life, and fear of death into the nature of every sensible creature, as
necessary for the preservation of themselves and others, and the orderly
Government of the world: But what is there in the blessed day of Judgment,
which a Justified child of God should be averse to. O if he were but sure that
this would be the day, or week, or year of the coming of his Lord, how glad
would the confirmed Christian be? and with what longings would he be looking
up, to see that most desired sight.

2. And the weak Christian is so far of the same mind, that he had rather come
to God by Death and Judgment, than not at all: (except when temptations make
him fear that he shall be condemned.) He has fixedly made choice of that
Felicity, which till then he cannot attain. He would not take all the pleasures
of this world, for his hopes of the happiness of that day: But yet he thinks
not of it with so strong a faith, and great consolation, nor with such boldness
and desire, as the confirmed Christian does: but either with much more dull
security, or more perplexity and fear. His thoughts of God and of the world to
come, are much more dark and doubtful; and his fears of that day are usually
so great as make his desires and joys scarce felt: Only he thinks not of it
with that contempt or stupidity as the Infidel or hardened sinner; nor with the
terrors of those that have no God, no Christ, no hope: (except when temptation
brings him near to the borders of despair.) His death indeed is unspeakably
safer than the death of the ungodly; and the joys which he is entering into will
quickly end the terror; but yet he has no great comfort of the present; but
only so much trust in Christ, as keeps his heart from sinking into despair.

3. But to the Hypocrite or seeming Christian, Death and Judgment are the most
unwelcome days, and the thoughts of them the most unwelcome thoughts: He would
take any tolerable life on earth, at any time, for all his hopes of Heaven; and
that not only through the doubts of his own sincerity (which may sometime be
the case of a tempted Christian) but through the unsoundness of his belief of
the life to come, or the utter unsuitableness of his soul to such a
blessedness; which makes him look at it as less desirable to him, than a life
of fleshly pleasures here. All that he does for Heaven is upon mere necessity,
because he knows that Die he must, and he had rather be in Heaven than in
Hell, though he had rather be in prosperity on earth than either: And as he
takes Heaven but as a reserve or second good, so he seeks it with reserves,
and in the second place: And having no better preparations for Death and
Judgment, no marvel if they be his greatest terror. He may possibly by his
self-deceit have some abatement of his fears, and he may by Pride and Wit seem
very valiant and comfortable at his death, to hide his fear and pusillanimity
from the world. But the (...) of all his misery is, that he sought not first
the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and laid not up a treasure in Heaven,
but upon earth, and loved this world above God, and above the world to come,
and so his heart is not set on Heaven, nor his affections on the things above;
and therefore he has not that Love to God, to Christ, to Saints, to perfect
Holiness, which should make that world most desirable in his eyes, and make him
think unfeignedly that it is best for him to depart and live with Christ for
ever. Having not the Divine Nature, nor having lived the Divine Life in walking
with God, his complacency and desires are carnal according to the nature which
he has. And this is the true cause, (and not only his doubts of his own
sincerity) of his unwillingness to die, or to see the day of Christ's
appearance, Matthew. 6.33.19.20, 21. 1 John 2.15. Col. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Romans 8.5, 6,
7, 8. 1 Cor. 2.13, 14. 2 Pet. 1.4.

And thus I have showed you from the Word of God, and the Nature of
Christianity, the true Characters of the confirmed Christian, and of the weak
Christian, and of the seeming Christian.

The Uses for which I have drawn up these Characters, and which the Reader is
to make of them, are these.

I. Here the weak Christian and the Hypocrite may see what manner of persons
they ought to be. Not only how unsafe it is to remain in a state of Hypocrisy,
but also how uncomfortable, and unserviceable, and troublesome it is, to remain
in a state of weakness and diseasedness; what a folly (and indeed a sign of
Hypocrisy) is it to think, If I had but grace enough to save me, I would
desire no more, or I would be well content. Are you content if you have but
Life here, to difference you from the dead? If you were continually Infants,
that must be fed, and carried, and made clean by others, or if you had a
continual Gout, or Stone, or Leprosy, and lived in continual want and misery,
you would think that Life alone is not enough: and that non vivere tantum sed
valere vita est: that Life is uncomfortable, when we have nothing but Life, and
all the delights of life are gone. He that lies in continual pain and want, is
weary of his life, if he cannot separate it from those calamities. He that
knows how necessary strength is, as well as life, to do any considerable
service for God, and how many pains attend the diseases and infirmities of the
weak, and what great dishonor comes to Christ and Religion, by the faults and
childishness of many that shall be pardoned and saved, would certainly bestir
him with all possible care to get out of this sick or infant state.

II. By this you may see who are the strong Christians, and who are the weak:
It is not always the man of Learning and free expressions, that can speak
longest and wiseliest of holy things, that is the strong confirmed Christian:
But he that most excels in the Love of God and man, and in a heavenly mind
and holy life. Nor is it he that is unlearned, or of a weak memory, or slow
expression, that is the weakest Christian: But he that has least Love to God
and man, and the most Love to his carnal self, and to the world, and the
strongest corruptions, and the weakest grace. Many a poor day-labourer or
woman, that can scarce speak sense, is a stronger Christian (as being stronger
in Faith, and Love, and Patience, and Humility, and Mortification, and
Self-denial) than many great Preachers and Doctors of the Church.

III. You see here what kind of men they be that we call the Godly; and what
that Godliness is which we plead for, against the malicious Serpentine
Generation. The liars would make men believe, that by Godliness we mean a few
affected strains, or hypocritical shows, or heartless lip-service, or singular
opinions, or needless scrupulosity, or ignorant zeal; yea a schism, or faction,
or sedition, or rebellion, or what the Devil please to say. If these sixty
Characters describe any such thing, then I will not deny, that in the way that
such men call heresy, faction, schism, singularity, so worship we the God of
our Fathers: But if not, the Lord rebuke thee Satan, and hasten the day when
the lying lips shall be put to silence, Psalm. 131.18. and 120.2. and 109.2.
Prove. 12.19, 22. and 10.18.

IV. By this also you may see how unexcusible the enemies of Christianity and
Godliness are, and for what it is that they hate and injure it. Is there any
thing in all this Character of a Christian, that deserves the suspicion or
hatred of the world? what harm is there in it? or what will it do against them?
I may say to them of his servants as Christ did of himself, Joh. 10.32. Many
good works have I showed you from my Father: for which of these works do ye
stone me? Many heavenly graces are in the sanctified Believer: For which of
these do you hate and injure him? I know that Goodness is so far in credit with
humane nature, that you will answer as the Jews did, v. 33. For a good work we
stone thee not, but for blasphemy: We hate them not for Godliness, but for
Hypocrisy and Sin. But if it be so indeed, 1. Speak not against Godliness it
self, nor against the strictest performance of our duty. 2. Yea plead for
Godliness, and countenance and promote it, while you speak against Hypocrisy
and Sin. 3. And choose out the Hypocrite whose Character is here truly set
before you; and let him be the object of your enmity and distaste: Let it fall
on those that are worldlings and time-servers, and will stretch their
consciences to their carnal interest, and can do any thing to save their skin;
and being false to Christ, can hardly be true to any of their superiors, but
only in subordination to themselves. As it is said of Constantius, that he
commanded that all his servants should be turned out of their places that would
not renounce Christianity: And when he had thereby tried them, he turned out
all the Apostates, (and kept in the sincere) and told them; They could not be
true to him, that were not true to their God and Savior. 4. And see that you
be not Hypocrites your selves. You profess your selves Christians: and what is
it to be a Christian indeed, you may here perceive. If any that fall under the
character of Hypocrites (or worse) shall vilify or hate the sincere Christians
as Hypocrites, what a horrid aggravation of their Hypocrisy will it be?

Indeed it is the best and strongest Christians that have most of the hatred
both of the Unbelieving and the Hypocritical world. And for my own part I must
confess, that the very observation of the universal implacable enmity, which is
undeniably seen throughout the world, between the woman's and the serpents seed
(being such as is not found among any other sorts of men on other occasions)
does not a little confirm my belief of the holy Scriptures, and seems to be
an argument not well to be answered by any enemy of the Christian cause. That
it should begin between the two first Brothers that ever were born into the
world, and stop in nothing lower than shedding the righteous blood of Abel for
no other cause, but because the works of Cain were evil, and his Brothers
righteous, 1 John 3.12, 13. And that it should go down to the Prophets, and
Christ, and the Apostles, and Primitive Saints, and continue to this day
throughout the earth: and that the profession of the same Religion does not
alter it, but rather enrage the enmity of Hypocrites against all that are
serious and sincere in the Religion which they themselves profess: These are
things that no good account can be given of, save only from the predictions and
verities of the word of God.

V. Also you may hence perceive, how exceedingly injurious Hypocrites and
scandalous Christians are, to the Name of Christ, and Cause of Christianity and
Godliness in the world. The blind malicious enemies of Faith and Godliness,
instead of judging of them by the sacred Rule, do look only to the Professors,
and think of Religion as they think of them. If they see the Professors of
Christianity to be covetous, proud, usurpers, time-servers, self-exalters,
cruel, schismatical, rebellious; they presently charge all this upon their
Religion; and Godliness must bear the blame; when all comes but for want of
Godliness and Religion. And all the world has not done so much against these
and all other sins, as Christ has done. What if Christ's Disciples strive who
shall be the greatest? Is it long of him, who girdeth himself to wash and wipe
their feet? and tells them, that except they be converted, and become as
little children, they shall not enter into the Kingdom of God, Mat. 18.3. and
tells them, that though the Kings of the Gentiles do exercise Lordship over
them, and they that exercise authority upon them are called Benefactors, yet ye
shall not be so, Luke 22.25, 26. Is it long of him that has said to the
Elders, Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof,
not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind:
neither as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being examples to the flock? Who
has set the Elders such a lesson as you find in Acts 20. and 2 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3.
and 1 Timothy 5.17. If any called Christians shall be truly schismatical, factious
or turbulent, is it long of him that has prayed the Father that they may all
be One, Joh. 17.21, 22, 23. and has so vehemently entreated them that they
speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among them, and that they
be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, 1
Cor. 7.10. and has charged them to mark them that cause divisions and offenses
contrary to the Doctrine which they had learned, and to avoid them? Romans 16.16,
17. If any called Christians shall be seditious, or rebellious, or as the
Papists believe, that the Clergy are from under the Jurisdiction of Kings, and
that the Pope has power to excommunicate Princes, and absolve their subjects
from their allegiance, and give their dominions to others, (as it is decreed in
the General Council at the Lateran under Innocent the third, Can. 3.) Is all
this long of Christ, who has paid tribute to Caesar, and has commanded that
every soul be subject to the higher Powers, and not resist, and this for
conscience sake, Romans 13 1, 2, 3. and has bid his Disciples rather to turn the
other cheek, than to seek revenge, Luke 6.29. and has told them that they that
use the sword (of rebellion, or revenge, or cruelty) shall perish by the sword,
Joh. 18.11. If any Christians will under pretense of Religion, set up a cruel
Inquisition, or kill men to convert them, or become self-lovers, covetous,
boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy,
without natural affection, truce breakers, false-accusers, incontinent, fierce,
despisers of those that are good, etc. Is this long of him that has forbid all
this? 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5. If for their own domination, lust or covetousness,
men called Christians, will be worse than Heathens and Wolves to one another,
is this long of him that has made it his sheep-mark by which we must be known
to all men to be his Disciples, that we love one another? Joh. 13.35. and has
told them, that if they bite and devour one another, they shall be devoured one
of another? Gal. 5.15. and has blessed the merciful, as those that shall find
mercy, Mat. 5.7. and has told men that what they do to his little ones, shall
be taken as if it were done to himself, Mat. 25. and has commanded the strong
to bear with the infirmities of the weak, and not to please themselves, Romans
15.1, 2, 3. and to receive one another as Christ received us, Romans 15.7. and
has told those that offend but one of his little ones, that it were good for
that man that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were drowned in the
depth of the Sea, Matthew. 18.6. and has told him that suiteth his fellow
servants, that his Lord will come in a day when he looks not for him, and
shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the Hypocrites, where
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 24.48, 49, 50, 51. I wonder what
men would have Christ do, to free himself and the Christian Religion from the
imputation of the sins of the Hypocrites, and the weak distempered Christians.
Would they have him yet make stricter Laws (when they hate these for being so
strict already?) Or would they have him condemn sinners to more grievous
punishment, when they are already offended at the severity of his threatenings?
O what an unrighteous generation are his enemies, that blame the Law because
men break it? and blame Religion because many are not Religious enough? As if
the Sun must be hated, because that shadows and dungeons do want light; or Life
and Health must be hated, because many are sick and pained by their diseases!
But Christ will shortly stop all the mouths of these unreasonable men; and O
how easily will he justify himself, his Laws, and all his holy ways; when all
iniquity shall be for ever silent! And though it must needs be that offenses
come, yet woe to the world because of offenses, and woe to the man by whom they
come, Mat. 18.7. Luke 17.1.

The wrong that Christ receives from hypocrites and scandalous Christians (of
all ranks and places) is not to be estimated. These are the causes that
Christianity and Godliness are so contemptible in the eyes of the world! that
Jews, and Heathens, and Mahometans, are still unconverted and deriders of the
Faith: Because they see such scandalous tyranny and worship among the Papists,
and such scandalous lives among the greatest part of professed Christians in
the world: whereas if the Papal Tyranny were turned into the Christian
Ministry, (Luke 22.25, 26, 27. and 1 Timothy 5.17.) and their irrational
sopperies, and historical hypocritical worship were changed into a reverent,
rational and spiritual worship; and the cruel, carnal, worldly lives of men
called Christians, were changed into Self-denial, Love and Holiness. In a word,
if Christians were Christians indeed, and such as I have here described from
their Rule; what a powerful means would it be of the conversion of all the
unbelieving world? Christianity would then be in the eye of the world, as the
Sun in its brightness, and the glory of it would dazzle the eyes of beholders,
and draw in millions to enquire after Christ, who are now driven from him by
the sins of Hypocrites and scandalous Believers.

And this does not contradict what I said before, of the Enmity of the world to
Holiness, and that the best are most abused by the ungodly: For even this
enmity must be rationally cured, as by the error of reason it is sed. God
uses by the power of intellectual light, to bring all those out of darkness
whom he saves, and so brings them from the power of Satan to himself, Acts
26.18. Men hate not Holiness as Good, but as misconceived to be evil. Evil I
say to them, because it is opposite to the sensual pleasures, which they take
to be their chiefest good. And the way of curing their enmity, is by showing
them their error; and that is by showing them the excellency and necessity of
that which they unreasonably distaste, Acts 26.9, 10, 11, 14, 19. Luke 15.13,
14, 15, 16. Acts 2.36, 37.

VI. Lastly, In these Characters you have some help in the work of
Self-examination, for the trial both of the Truth and Strength of grace. I
suppose it will be objected, that in other Treatises I have reduced all the
infallible Marks of Grace to a smaller number. To which I answer, I still say,
that the predominancy or prevalency of the Interest of God as our God, and
Christ as our Savior, and the Spirit as our Sanctifier, in the estimation of
the Understanding, the Resolved Choice of the Will, and the Government of the
Life, against all the worldly interest of the Flesh, is the only infallible
sign of a justified regenerate soul. But this whole has many parts, and it is
abundance of particulars materially in which this sincerity is to be found:
Even all the sixty Characters which I have here named, are animated by that
one, and contained in it. And I think to the most the full description of a
Christian in his essential and integral parts, (yet showing which are indeed
essential) is the best way to acquaint them with the nature of Christianity,
and to help them in the trial of themselves. And as it were an abuse of Humane
Nature, for a Painter to draw the picture of a man, without arms, or legs, or
nose, or eyes, because he may be a man without them: so would it have been in
me to draw only a maimed picture of a Christian, because a maimed Christian is
a Christian. Yet because there are so many maimed Christians in the world, I
have also showed you their lamentable defects; not in a manner which tends to
encourage them in their sins and wants under pretense of comforting them, but
in that manner which may best excite them to their duty in order to their
recovery, without destroying their necessary supporting comforts.

O happy Church, and State, and Family, which are composed of such confirmed
Christians! where the predominate temperature is such as I have here described!
Yea happy is the place where Magistrates and Ministers are such; who are the
vital parts of State and Church, and the instruments appointed to communicate
these perfections to the rest. But how much more happy is the New Jerusalem,
the City of the Living God, where the perfected spirits of the just in Perfect
Life, and Light and Love, are perfectly beholding, and admiring, and praising,
and pleasing the Eternal God, their Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier for ever!
where the least and meanest is greater and more perfect than the confirmed
Christian here described! And where Hypocrisy is utterly excluded, and
Imperfection cease, with scandal, censures, uncharitableness, division, and
all its other sad effects: And where the souls that thirsted after
Righteousness shall be fully satisfied; and Love God more than they can now
desire! and never grieve themselves or others with their wants or weaknesses,
or misdoings any more. And, O blessed day, when our most Blessed Head shall be
revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, and shall come to be glorified in
his Saints, and admired in all them that now believe; whose weakness here
occasioned his dishonor, and their own contempt! when the seed of Grace is
grown up into Glory, and all the world whether they will or not, shall discern
between the Righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him
that serves him not; between the clean and the unclean, and between him that
swears, and him that fears an oath: And though now our Life is hid with
Christ in God, and it yet appears not (to the sight of our selves or others)
what we shall be; yet then when Christ who is our Life shall appear, we also
shall appear with him in Glory, Heb. 12.22, 23. Rev. 22.3, 4, 5, 14, 15. and
21.3, 4, 8. 2 These. 1.9, 10. Mat. 5.4, 6. Mal. 3.18. Eccles. 9.2. 1 John 3.2,
3. Col. 3.3, 4. Away then my soul from this dark, deceitful and vexatious
world! Love not thy diseases, thy setters and calamities: Groan daily to thy
Lord, and earnestly groan to be clothed upon with thy house which is from
Heaven, (2 Cor. 5.2, 4.) that mortality may be swallowed up of Life! Join in
the harmonious desires of the Creatures, who groan to be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8.20,
21, 22. Abide in him, and walk in Righteousness, that when he shall appear,
thou may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming, 1 John
2.28, 29. Join not with the evil servants, who say in their hearts, Our Lord
delayeth his coming, and begin to smite their fellow servants, and to eat and
drink with the drunken; whose Lord shall come in a day when they look not for
him, and in an hour that they are not aware of, and shall cut them asunder, and
appoint them their portion with the Hypocrites, where shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth, Mat. 24.48, 49, 50, 51. O watch and pray that thou enter not
into temptation! And be patient, for the Judge is at the door! Lift up thy head
with earnest expectation, O my soul, for thy Redemption draws near! Rejoice
in hope before thy Lord, for he comes; he comes to judge the world in
Righteousness and Truth. Behold he comes quickly, though faith be failing, and
iniquity abound, and Love waxes cold, and scoffers say, where is the promise
of his coming! Make haste O thou whom my soul desires! and come in Glory as
thou first came in Humility! and conform them to thy self in Glory, whom thou
made conformable to thy sufferings and humility! Let the Holy City New
Jerusalem be prepared as a bride adorned for her husband; and let Gods
Tabernacle be with men! that he may dwell with them and be their God, and wipe
away their tears, and death, and sorrow, and crying; and pain may be no more,
but former things may pass away! Keep up our Faith, our Hope, our Love! And
daily vouchsafe us some beams of thy directing consolatory Light in this our
darkness: And be not as a stranger to thy scattered flock, in this desolate
wilderness! But let them hear thy voice, and find thy presence, and have such
conversation with thee in Heaven, in the exercise of Faith, and Hope, and Love,
which is agreeable to their low and distant state: Testify to their souls that
thou art their Savior and Head, and that they abide in thee, by the Spirit
which thou have given them, abiding, and overcoming in them, and as thy Agent
preparing them for eternal life. O let not our darkness, nor thy strangeness
feed our odious Unbelief! O show thy self more clearly to thy Redeemed ones!
And come and dwell in our hearts by Faith! And by holy Love, let us dwell in
God, and God in us! that we grope not after him, as those that worship an
unknown God. O save us from Temptation! And if the messenger of Satan be sent
to buffet us, let thy strength be manifest in our weakness, and thy grace
appear sufficient for us. And give us the patience which thou tellest us we
need, that having done thy will, we may inherit the promise: And bring us to
the sight and fruition of our Creator, of whom, and through whom, and to whom
are all things; to whom be Glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

