Compassionate COUNSEL TO ALL Young Men.

Especially, I. LONDON-Apprentices. II. Students of Divinity, Physic, and Law.
III. The Sons of Magistrates and Rich Men.


By RICHARD BAXTER.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. and are to be Sold by B. Simmons, and Ionath.
Greenwood, at the Three Golden Cocks at the West End of St. Paul's, and at the
Crown in the Poultry. 1681.

The CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. Prefatory. Chapter 2. Of what grand Importance the Case of Youth is to
themselves, that betimes they live to God. Chapter 3. Of what public Concernment
the quality of Youth is. Chapter 4. How the Case stands with our Youth in matter
of Fact. Chapter 5. How sad the Case of many of them is. Chapter 6. The joyful State
and Blessing of good Children to themselves and others. Chapter 7. Undeniable
Reasons for the speedy Repentance of those that have miscarried: By way of
Exhortation. Chapter 8. Directions to them that are willing to amend. Chapter 9.
Special Counsel to the Candidates for the Ministry. Chapter 10. Short Counsel to
young Students in Physic. Chapter 11. Short Counsel to young Men in the Inns of
Court, that study the Law. Chapter 12. Short Counsel to the Sons of Nobles and
Magistrates. Chapter 13. Some Memorials to Parents. Chapter 14. A short Word to Church
Ministers for Youth.
To the YOUTH of London, (and the rest of England) Richard Baxter's Last and
Compassionate Warning and Advice.
CHAP. I.
THere is no man that ever understood the Interest of Mankind, of Families,
Cities, Kingdoms, Churches, and of Jesus Christ the King and Savior, but he
must needs know that the right Instruction, Education, and Sanctification of
Youth is of unspeakable consequence to them all. In the place where God most
blessed my labors (at Kidderminster, in Worcestershire) my first and greatest
success was upon the Youth. And (which was a mavelous way of Divine Mercy)
when God had touched the hearts of young Men and Girls with a love of goodness,
and delightful obedience to the truth, the Parents and Grandfathers who had
grown old in an ignorant worldly State, did many of them fall into liking and
love of Piety, induced by the love of their Children, whom they perceived to be
made by it, much wiser and better, and more dutiful to them. And God by his
unexpected disposing Providence, having now twenty years placed me in and near
London, where in variety of places and conditions, (sometimes under restraint
by men, and sometimes at more liberty) I have Preached but as to Strangers, in
other men's Pulpits as I could, and not to any special flock of mine, I have
been less Capable of judging of my success: But by much experience have been
made more sensible of the Necessity of warning and instructing youth, than I
was before. The sad reports of fame have taught it me: The sad Complaints of
mournful Parents have taught it me: The sad observation of the wilful
impenitence of some of my acquaintances tells it me. The many score if not
hundred bills that have been publicly put up to me, to pray for wicked and
obstinate Children have told it me. And by the grace of God, the penitent
Confessions, Lamentations, and restitutions of many Converts have more
particularly acquainted me with their Case. Which moved me on my Thursdays
Lecture a while to design the first of every month, to speak to youth and those
that educate them.

And though I have already loaded the world with books, finding that God seems
to be about ending my life and labors, I am urged in my mind by the greatness
of the case to add yet this Epistle to the younger sort. Which shall contain I.
The great importance of the Case of youth. II. How it stands with them in
matter of fact. III. What are the Causes of their sin and dangerous degeneracy.
IV. How great a blessing wise and godly youth are to themselves and others. V.
How great a plague and calamity the ungodly are. VI. What great reason ungodly
sensual youth have, presently to Repent and Turn to God. VII. Directions to
them how to do it. VIII. And some Directions to Parents about their Education.
And all must be with the Brevity of an Epistle.

CHAP. II. To begin betimes to live to God, is of unspeakable importance* to
your selves.
FOR, 1. You were betimes solemnly Dedicated to God, as your God, your Father,
your Savior* and your Sanctifier, by your Baptismal Vow. And as that was a
great Mercy, it obliged you to great Duty: You were capable in Infancy of that
holy Dedication and Relation; and your Parents were presently obliged as to
Dedicate you to God, so to Educate you for God: And as soon as you are capable
of performance, the Vow is upon your selves to do it. If your Childhood is not
presently obliged to Holiness, according to your natural capacity, no doubt
your Vow and Baptism should have been also delayed. Little think many that talk
against Anabaptists, how they condemn themselves by the Sacred Name of
Christians, while they by perfidious Sacrilege deny God that which they Vowed
to him.

2. All your time and life is given you by God, for one End and Use; and all is
little enough; and will you alienate the very beginning, and be Rebels so soon?

3. The youngest have not assurance of Life for a day, or an hour. Thousands go
out of the World in youth. Alas, the Flesh of young men is corruptible, liable
to hundreds of Diseases, as well as the old. How quickly may a vein break, and
cold seize on your head and lungs, and turn to an uncurable Consumption? How
quickly may a Fever, a Pleurisy, an Impostume, or one of a thousand Accidents,
turn your Bodies to corruption? And O that I knew how to make you sensible how
dreadful a thing it is to die in an unholy state, and in the guilt of any
unpardoned sin? An unsanctified Soul, that has lived here but to the flesh,
and the world, will be but fuel for the fire of Hell, and the wrathful Justice
of the most holy God. And though in the course of undisturbed Nature, young men
may live longer than the old, yet Nature has so many disturbances and crosses,
that our lives are still like a Candle in a broken Lanthorn, which a blast of
wind may soon blow out. To tell you that you are not certain in an unsanctified
state; to be one day or hour more out of Hell, I expect will not move you so
much as the weight of the Case deserves, because mere possibility of the
greatest hurt, does not affect men when they think there is no probability of
it. You have long been well, and long you hope to be so: But did you think how
many hundred Veins, Arteries, Nerves, must be kept constantly in order, and all
the blood and humors in due temper; and how the stopping of one vein, or
distemper of the blood, may quickly end you; it would rather teach you to
admire the merciful providence of God, that such a body should be kept alive
one year.

4. But were you sure to live to maturity of Age, alas! how quickly will it
come? What haste makes Time? How fast do Days and Years roll on? Methinks it
is but as a few days since I was playing with my School-fellows, who now am in
the 66th year of my Age: Had I no service done for God, that I could now look
back upon, I should seem as if I had not lived. A thousand years, and one hour,
are all one (that is, nothing) when they are past. And every year, day and hour
of your lives has its proper work: And how will you answer for it? Every day
offers you more and more mercies; and will you despise and lose them? If you
were Heirs to Land, or had an Annuity, which amounted but to an hundred pounds
a year, and you were every day to receive a proportionable part of it, or lose
it; would you lose it through neglect, and say, I will begin to receive it when
I am old? Poor Laborers will work hard all the day, that at night they may
have their wages: And will you contemptuously lose your every days mercies,
your safety, your communion with God, your daily blessings and his grace, which
you should daily beg, and may daily receive?

5. Either you will Repent and live to God, or not; if not, you are undone for
ever: Oh how much less miserable is a Dog, or a Toad, than such a sinner! But
if God will show you so great mercy, oh how will it grieve you to think of the
precious time of Youth, which you madly cast away in sin! Then you will think,
O what Knowledge, what Holiness might I then have got! What a comfortable life
might I have lived! O what days and years of mercy did I cast away for
nothing! Yea, when God has given you the pardon of your sin, the taste of his
love, and the hopes of Heaven, it will wound your hearts to think that you
should so long, so unthankfully, so heinously offend so good a God, and neglect
so merciful a Savior, and trample upon Infinite Divine Love, for the love of
so base a freshly pleasure. That ever you should be so bad, as to find more
pleasure in sinning, than in living unto God.

6. And be it known to you, if God in mercy convert and save you, yet the
bitter fruit of your youthful folly may follow you in this World to the grave.
God may forgive the pains of Hell to a penitent sinner, and not forgive the
temporal chastisement to his flesh. If you waste your Estate in Youth, you may
be poor at Age: If you marry a wicked Wife, you may feel it till death,
notwithstanding your Repentance: If by drinking, gluttony, idleness, or filthy
lust, you contract any uncurable Diseases in Youth, Repentance may not cure
them till death. All this might easily have been prevented, if you had but had
foreseeing Wisdom. Beggary, Prisons, Shame, Consumptions, Dropsies, Stone,
Gout, Pox, which make the lives of many miserable, are usually caused by
youthful sins.

7. And if ever you think to be men of any great wisdom, and usefulness in the
World, to your selves or others, your preparations must be made in Youth. Great
Wisdom is not got in a little time. Who ever was an able Lawyer, Physician, or
Philosopher, without long and hard Study? If you will not learn in the
Grammar-Schools in your Childhood, you will be unfit for the University at
riper Age; and if when you should be Doctors, you are to learn to Spell and
Read, your shame will tell you, that you should have sooner begun. O that you
well knew how much of the safety, fruitfulness and comfort of all your
after-life, depends on the preparations of your Youth! on the Wisdom and the
Grace which you should then obtain! As men's after trading does on their
Apprentiship!

8. And O what a dreadful danger is it, lest your youthful sin become
remediless, and custom harden you, and deceivers blind you, and God forsake you
for your wilful resistance of his Grace! God may convert old hardened sinners:
But how ordinarily do we find, that Age does but answer the preparations of
Youth, and the Vessel ever after savoureth of the Liquor which first thoroughly
tainted it: And men are but such as they learned to be and do at first. If you
will be perfidious breakers of your Baptismal Vows, it is just with God to leave
you to your selves, to a deluded understanding, to think evil good, and good
evil, to a seared conscience, and a hardened heart, and as past feeling, to
work uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 3.18. and to fight against Grace and
your own Salvation, till Death and Hell convince you of your madness. O sport
not with the Justice of a sin-hating God! Play not with sin, and with the
unquenchable fire! Forsaking God, is the way to be forsaken of him. And what is
a forsaken soul, but a miserable Slave of Satan?

9. Yea, did you but know of what moment it is, to prevent all the heinous
sins, that else you will commit, you would make haste to Repent, though you
were sure to be forgiven. Forgiveness makes not sin to be no sin, or to be no
evil, no shame, no grief to the soul that has committed it. You will cry out,
O that I had never known it! To look back on such an ill-spent life, will be no
pleasant thought. Repentance, though a healing work, is bitter; yea, oft-times
exceeding bitter: Make not work for it, if you love your peace.

10. And is it a small thing to you, that you are all this while doing hurt to
others? And drawing them to sin, and plunging them into that dangerous guilt,
which can no way be pardoned but by the blood of Christ, upon true Conversion:
And when they have joined with you in lust and fleshly pleasure, it is not in
your power to turn them, that they may join with you in sound Repentance: And
if not, they must lie in Hell for ever: And can you make a sport of your own
and other men's damnation? But this leads me to the Second Point. I have
showed you of what vast concernment it is to your selves to begin betimes a
holy life. I will next show you of what concernment it is to others.

CHAP. III. Of what Public Concernment the Quality of Youth is.
1. THe welfare of the World is of far greater worth than of any single person;
and he has put off Humanity who does not more earnestly desire it. If this
World consisted but of one Generation, then to make that Generation wise and
good, would be enough to make it a happy World. But it is not so: In Heaven,
and in the future glorious Kingdom, there is neither marrying, nor giving in
marriage, but they are as the Angels, in a fixed everlasting State, and one
continued Generation makes up the New Jerusalem: Being once holy and happy,
they are so for ever: But here it is not so: One Generation comes, and another
goes: If the Father be as wise as Solomon, the Son may be as foolish as
Rehoboam: O what a great work it is to make a man truly wise and good! How many
years study does it usually require? What wisdom and diligence in Teachers?
What teachableness and diligence in Learners; and especially the Grace of God!
And when all is done, the man quickly dies, and obtains his ends in another
world: But his Children are born as ignorant, and perhaps as bad as he was
born: He can neither leave them his Knowledge; nor his Grace. They must have
all the same teaching, and labor, and blessing as he had, to bring them to the
same seize: The Mercy and Covenant of God takes them into his Church,
where they have great advantages and helps, and promises them more mercy for
their relation to a faithful Parent, if he or they do make no forfeiture of it:
But as their Nature is the same with others, so their actual Wisdom must come
by Gods blessing on the use of the same means, which are necessary to the
Children of the worst men. A Christian's Child is born with no more Knowledge
than a Heathen's, and must have as much labor and study to make him wise.

2. It is certain then that the welfare of this world lies on a good
succession of the several Generations: And that all the endeavors of one
Generation, with God's greatest blessing on them, will not serve for the Ages
following: All must begin anew, and be done over again, or all will be as
undone to the next Age: And it is not the least blessing on the faithful that
their faith and godliness disposes them to have a care of posterity, and to
devote their Children wholly to God, as well as themselves, and to educate them
in his fear. If Nature had not taught Birds and Beasts to feed their Young, as
well as to generate them, their kind would be soon extinct. O what a blessed
World were it, if the blessings of men famous for wisdom and godliness, were
entailed on all that should spring from them! and if this were the common case!

3. But the doleful miseries of the World have come from the degenerating of
good men's posterity. Adam has his Cain, and Noah his Cham, and David his
Absalom; Solomon, Hezekiah, Josiah, left not their like behind them. The
present State of the Eastern Churches is a dreadful instance. What places on
Earth were more honorable for Faith and Piety, than Alexandria, Antioch,
Jerusalem, Constantinople, Ephesus, Philadelphia, and the rest of those great
and noble Countries; and these also strengthened with the powerfullest
Christian Empire that ever was on Earth: And now they are places of Barbarism,
Tyranny, and foolish Mahometanism, where the Name of Christ is made a scorn,
and the few Christians that keep up that sacred Profession, by Tyranny kept in
so great Ignorance, that, alas! the vices of most of them dishonor their
Profession, as much as their Enemies Persecutions do. O what a doleful
difference is there between that great part of the World now, and what it was
1400 or 1000 years ago?

And alas! were it not for the name of a pompous Christian-Church, how plain an
instance would Rome be of the same Degeneracy? And some Countries that received
the blessing of Reformation, have revolted into the darkness of Popery. What a
change was in England by Queen Mary's Reign? And how many particular Cities and
Towns are grown ignorant and malignant, which in former times were famous for
Religion? The Lord grant it may never be the case of London! Yea, how many
persons of Honorable and great Families have so far degenerated from the
famous Wisdom and Piety of their Grandfathers, yea and Fathers, as to hate that
which their Parents loved, and persecute those whom their Ancestors honored.
The names of many Great men stand honored in History, for their Holiness to
God, and their Service to their Countries, whose posterity are the men that we
are most in danger of: Alas! in how few such houses has Piety kept any long
succession; yea, some take their Fathers virtues to be so much their dishonor,
that they turn malignant Persecutors, to free themselves from the supposed
reproach of their Relations. Yea, some Preachers of the Gospel, devoted to God
by pious Parents, become Revilers of their own Parents, and despisers of their
Piety, as the effect of factious Ignorance.

4. And on the other side, when Piety has successively as a River kept its
course, what a blessing has it proved? (But how rare is that?) And when
Children have proved better than their Parents, it has been the beginning of
welfare to the places where they lived. How marvellously did the Reformation
prevail in Germany in Luther's time, when God brought out of Popish Monasteries
many excellent Instruments of his Service? And Princes became wise and pious,
whose Parents had been blind or impious? Godliness or wickedness, welfare or
calamity, follow the changes and quality of posterity.

And men live so short a time, that the work of Educating Youth aright, is one
half the great business of man's Life: He that has a Plantation of Oaks, may
work for twenty Generations: But he that planteth Gardens and Orchards with
Plants that live but a little time, must be still planting, watering, and
defending them.

5. Among the Ancient Sages of the World, the Greeks and Romans, and much more
among the Israelites, the care of posterity, and public welfare, was the great
thing which differenced the virtuous and laudable, from those of a base,
selfish, sensual disposition. He was the bravest Citizen of Rome, that did most
love, and best serve his Country: And he was the Saint among the Jews, who most
loved Sion, and the Security and Succession of its holy and peaceable
posterity. And the Christian Faith, and Hope, and Interest, does lead us herein
to a much higher pitch, and to a greater zeal for public good, in following
him that whipped out prophaners from the Temple; even a zeal of God's House,
which eats us up: It teaches us by the Cross most effectually to deny our
selves, and to think nothing too dear to part with, to edify the Church of
God; nor any labor or suffering too great for common good. It teaches us to
pray for the Hallowing of God's Name, the Coming of his Kingdom, and the doing
of his Will on Earth, as it is done in Heaven, before our daily Bread, and any
other personal Interest of our own. Therefore the Families of Christians should
be as so many Schools, or Churches, to train up a succession of persons meet
for the great communicative works which God calls all Believers to, in their
several measures: It is eminently Teachers, but it is also all others in their
several ranks, who must be the Salt of the Earth, and the Lights of the World.
And indeed the Spirit of Holiness is so eminently the Spirit of Love to God and
Man, that it inclines every sanctified person to a Communicative Zeal, to make
others wise, and good, and ^appy.

6. And God in great mercy has ^lanted yet more deeply and fixedly, the
Natural Love of Parents to their Children, that it might be in them a spring of
all this ^uty; so that though fleshly vice may make men mistake their Childrens
good, ^s most ungodly men do their own, and ^hink that it consists in that
which it does not; yet still the general desire of their Childrens welfare,
as well as of their own, is deeply rooted, and will work for their welfare,
as soon as they well know wherein it does consist. And God has not given them
this Love only for the good of the individual Children; but much more for the
Commonwealth, and Church, that as many sticks make one fire, and many
exercised Soldiers one Army, so many well educated Children, may make up one
peaceable and holy Society.

7. And accordingly it is much to be observed, that God has not given Children
a natural Love and submissiveness to Parents, only for the personal benefit of
their provision, and other helps; but especially that hereby they may be
teachable and obedient to those Instructions of their Parents, by which they
may become Blessings in their Generations, and may conjunctly make up wise and
holy Societies, Families, Churches, and Commonwealths. For these ends it is,
that God has bound you, as to reverence your Masters, Tutors and Pastors, so
especially both to reverence and love your Parents, that you may be the more
capable of their necessary Instruction and Advice.

8. Yea, the great strictness of God, in condemning Polygamy, Adultery and
Fornication, seems to be especially for the securing of the good Education of
Children, for their Souls, and for the public good: For it is notorious, that
confusion in Marriages and Generation, would many ways tend to the depraving of
humane Education, while Mothers had not the necessary encouragement to perform
their part: The younger Women would be a while esteemed, and afterward be cast
off, and made most miserable, and Families be like wandering beggars, or like
exposed Orphans* Disorder, and Confusion would deprive Children of much of
their necessary helps, and Barbarousness and bruitishness corrupt Mankind.

By all this it is most evident, that the great means of the welfare of the
World, must be the faithful and holy endeavors of Parents, and the willing
teachableness and obedience of Children, that they may escape the snares of
folly and fleshly Lusts, and may betimes get that Wisdom and love of Goodness,
which may make them fit to be blessings to the places where they ^ive.

CHAP. IV. How the Case stands with our Youth in matter of Fact.
1. THrough the great mercy of God, many Families are sacred Nurseries for
Church and Kingdom; and many Parents have great comfort in the Grace of God
appearing in their Children. From their early Childhood many are of humble,
obedient Dispositions, and have a love to Knowledge, and a love to the word of
God, and to those that are good and virtuous persons. They have inward
convictions of the evil of Sin, and a fear of sinning, and a great dislike of
wicked persons, and a great Love and reverend Obedience to their Parents, and
when they grow up, they diligently learn in private, and in public: They
increase in their love to the Scriptures and good Books, and to Godly teachers,
and godly Company, and God saves them from temptations, and worldly deceits,
and fleshly Lusts, and they live to God, and are blessings to the Land, the joy
of their Friends, and exemplary and useful to those whom they converse with.

2. But all, even religious Parents have not the like blessing in their
Children. 1. Some of them, though religious otherwise, are lamentably careless
of the duty which they promised to perform (at Baptism) in the education of
their Children, and do but superficially and formally instruct them, and are
too faulty as to the Example which they should give them, and seem to think
that God must bless them, because they are theirs, and because they are
baptized, while they neglect their promised Endeavors. 2. And some Children
when they grow up, and are bound to resist temptations, and to use Gods
appointed means for their own good, do wilfully resist Gods Grace, and run into
temptations, and neglect, and wretchedly betray themselves, and forfeit the
mercies which they needed.

3. In all my observation God has most blessed the Children of those Parents,
who have educated them as follows: 1. Those that have been particularly
sensible what they promised for them in the Baptismal Vow, and made Conscience
of performing it. 2. Those that have had more care of their Souls than of their
outward Wealth. 3. Those that have been most careful to teach them the pravity
of corrupted nature by original sin, and to humble them and teach them the need
of a Savior, and his renewing as well as pardoning Grace, and to tell them the
work of the Spirit of Sanctification, and teach them above all to look to the
inward state of their Souls. 4. Those that have most seriously minded them of
death, judgment, and the Life to come. 5. Those that have always spoken of God
with the greatest reverence, affection and delight. 6. Those that have most
wisely labored to make all the knowledge and practice of Religion pleasant
unto them, by the suitableness of Doctrines and Duties to their capacity. 7.
Those that have most disgraced sin to them, especially base and fleshly
pleasures. 8. Those that have kept them from the baits of sensuality, not
gratifying their appetites in meats and drink, to bring them to an unruly
habit; but used them to a habit of temperance, and neglect of appetite. 9.
Those that have most disgraced worldliness and Pride to them, and used them so
low things in Apparel and Possession, and told them how the proud are hateful
to God, and set before them the example of a crucified Christ, and opened to
them the Doctrine of Mortification, and self-denial, and the great necessity of
true humility. 10. Those that have been most watchful to know their Childrens
particular inclinations and temptations, and apply answerable remedies, and not
carelessly leave them to themselves. 11. Those that have been most careful to
keep them from ill Company, especially, (1.) Of wicked Youths, of their own
grouth and neighborhood, (2.) And of tempting Women. 12. Those that have most
wisely used them to the meetest public Teachers, and help them to remember and
understand what they hear, especially the fundamental truths in the Catechism.
13. Those that have most wisely engaged them into the familiarity and frequent
converse of some suitable, godly, exemplary Companions. 14. Those that have
most conscionably spent the Lords days in public and in their families. 15.
Those that have done all this, as with reverend gravity, so especially with
tender, endearing Love to their Children, convincing them, that it is all done
for their own good: And that do not by imprudent weaknesses ignorance,
passions, or scandal, frustrate their own Endeavors. 16. Those that use not
their Children as mere patients, only to hear what their Parents say; but
engage them to constant Endeavors of their own, for their own good; especially
in the reading of Scripture, and the most suitable Books, and meditating on
them, and daily personal Prayer to God. 17. Lastly, Those that pray most
heartily and believingly for Gods Grace and his Blessing on their endeavors:
Such men's Children are usually blessed.

4. But it is no wonder, where such means are neglected, much more when Parents
are ungodly, fleshly, worldly persons, and perhaps Enemies to a holy life, if
the Children of such are ignorant, deluded, ungodly, and drowned in fleshly
Lusts. And, alas! it is the multitude of such, and their sad conditions, which
is the occasion of my writing this Epistle.

5. 1. We see, to our grief, that many Children are of a stupid and unteachable
disposition, and almost incapable of Instruction, who yet can as quickly learn
to talk of common matters, as other persons, and can as easily learn a Trade,
or how to do any ordinary business. And though some inconsiderate persons
overlook the causality of the more immediate Parents sins, in such judgments on
their Children, as if it were only Adam's Sin that hurt them, I have elsewhere
proved, that this is their great and dangerous mistake. As David's Child dyed
for the Fathers sin, the Children of Gluttons, Drunkards, Fornicators, often
contract such bodily distempers, as greatly tend to stupifie or further vitiate
the mind. And their Souls may have sad additions to the common humane pravity.

2. Accordingly many Children have more violent passions, and carnal desires,
than others, which run them into wicked ways impetuously, as if they were
almost bruits that had no reason or power to resist. And all words and
corrections are to them of little force, but they are as blocks, that when you
have said and done what you can, go away as if they had not heard you.

3. And some have cross and crooked natures, addicted to that which is naught,
and the more, by how much the more you do contradict them: Froward and
obstinate, as if it were a desirable Victory to them, to overcome their
Parents, and escape all that would make them wise and good: Dogged, sour,
proud, self-willed, and utterly disobedient.

4. And too many have so great an Enmity and aversness to all that is holy,
spiritual and heavenly, that they are weary to hear you talk of it, and you
persuade them to learn, to read, to pray, to meditate, or consider, as you
persuade a sick man to the meat which he does loath, or a man to dwell with
those that he hates. They have no appetite to such things; no pleasure in
them; when you have said all of God, and Christ, and Glory, they believe it
not, or they savor it not: They are things above their reach and love, yea,
things against their carnal minds: You tire them worse than if you talked in a
strange Language to them, such enmity is in the heart of corrupted man to God
and Heaven, till the Grace of the great Reconciler overcome it by a new Life,
and Light and Love.

5. And when custom is added to all these vicious dispositions, alas, what
slaves and drudges of Satan does it make them! For instance,

1. Some are so corrupted with the Love of sport, that gaming or Stage Plays,
or one such foolery or another, becomes so pleasant to them, that they can
understand or believe nothing that is said against it by God or man; their
diseased Fantasy has so conquered reason, that they cannot restrain
themselves; but in their callings and in religious Exercises they are weary,
and long to be at their sports, and must be gone; neither God, nor Holiness,
nor the Joys of Heaven are half so sweet to their thoughts as these are: For
they have that mark of misery, 2 Timothy 3 4. They are lovers of pleasures more
than lovers of God.

The same I say of sinful mirth, and the company which does cherish it. Little
do they believe Solomon, Eccles. 7.2, 3, 4. It is better to go to the House of
Mourning, than to go to the House of Feasting: For that is the end of all men,
and the living will lay it to his heart. Sorrow is better than Laughter: For by
the sadness of the Countenance the Heart is made better: The Heart of the wise
is in the House of Mourning, but the Heart of fools is in the House of Mirth.
It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to hear the Song of
fools: For as the crackling of Thorns under a Pot, so is the Laughter of Fools.

It Is true, that Mirth is very desirable to nature: And God is not against it,
but much more for it than sinners will believe: But it is a rational Mirth
which beseems a rational Creature; and such as he can justify, and as will
make him better, and tends to felicity, and everlasting mirth; and not the
causeless mirth of mad men, that set their house on fire, and then laugh and
sing over it, nor like the mirth of a drunken man, whose shame exposes him to
pity or derision, nor any such mirth as leads a man from God to sin, and
keeps him from the way of man-like and everlasting joy, and prepares for the
greatest sorrows.

2. There are some so enslaved to their Appetites, that their Reason has no
power to rule them; but like bruits they must needs have what the Belly and
Throat desire: And if they be the Children of the Rich, who have always full
and pleasant food, constant flesh-pleasing, and true Gluttony, is taken for no
sin; and like Swine, they do but live to eat, whereas they should but eat to
live, and cheerfully serve God.

But it is never so dangerous as when it turns to the love of drink; Then the
pleasing of the Throat, and the pleasing of the Brain by mirth going together,
do so much corrupt the appetite and fantasy, that their thoughts run after it,
and reason has no power to shut their Mouths, nor keep them from the House of
Sin. Some sin against an accusing Conscience, and under their convictions and
Terrors do drink on, which yet they could forbear, if they knew there were
Poison in the Cup. Some are more miserable, and have sinned themselves into
fearedness of Conscience, and past feeling, and perhaps into infidelity, and a
blinded mind, persuading them that there is no great harm or danger in the Sin,
and that it is but some precise people that make so great a matter of it: And
some that have purposes to forsake the sin, when appetite stirs forget it all;
and when Company enticeth, and when they see the Cup, they have no power to
forbear. O what a pitiful sight it is, to see men in the flower of Youth and
Strength, when they should most rejoice in God and Holiness, to be still
thirsty after a forbidden pleasure, and hasting to the Tavern or Alehouse, as a
Bird to the snare of the Fowler, and sweetly and greedily swallowing the
poisonous Cup which God forbids! And that false Repentance which Conscience
and Experience force them to sometimes, is forgotten the next day when the
temptation is renewed: Yea, the Throat-madness, and the merry and Belly-Devils
are within them a continual temptation, which the miserable slaves cannot
resist.

3. And these beastly, fleshly sins, do usually make them weary of their
callings, and of any honest labor: The Devil has by this time got possession
of their thoughts, by the bias of Delight and sinful Lust; and they are
thinking of Meat, or Drink, or Play, or merry Company, when they should be
diligently at work: And so Idleness becomes the nursery of Temptation, and of
all their other vice, as well as a constant sin of Omission, and loss of hasty
precious time. And custom increases the habits, and makes them good for
nothing, and like dead men to all that life is given them for, and only alive
to prepare by sin for endless misery.

4. And usually Pride also takes its part, to make the sin of Sodom in them
complete, Ezekiel. 16.49. Pride, Fullness, and Idleness. They that must be in their
jovial Company, must not seem despicable among them, but must be in the mode
and fashion, what ever it cost. When they make themselves odious in the sight
of God, and the pity of all wise men, and a terror to themselves, yet they
must be some body to their sottish Companions, especially of the Female Sex:
Lest the Image of the Devil, and his victory over them should not be perfect,
if Pride were left out, how unreasonable soever.

5. And by this time they have (usually here amongst the rich and idle,) a
further step toward Hell to go, and yet a deep Gulf to fall into; Fleshly Lust
next entangleth them in immodest Converse with Women, and thence into filthy
Fornication. The Devil will seldom lose a Soul for want of a temptation: Either
he will provide them one abroad among their lewd Companions, or at home some
Daughter or servant of the House, where they can often get opportunity, first for
uncivil sights and touches, and then for actual Fornication. And if they have
done it once, they are usually like the Bird that is fast in the Lime-twigs:
Conscience may struggle, but Lust holds them fast, and the Devil says, If once
may be pardoned, why not twice, and if twice, why not thrice; and so they go on
as an Ox to the Slaughter, and a fool to the correction of the Stocks, and know
not that it is for their lives. Prove. 7.21, 22, 23. Till they mourn at last
(perhaps) when Flesh and Body are consumed, and say, How have I hated
Instruction, and my heart despised reproof, and have not obeyed the voice of my
Teachers, nor inclined my Ears to them that instructed me? I was almost in all
evil, etc. Pro. 5.12, 13, 14. And it is well for the wretches if this Repentance
be true and in time, that though the Flesh be destroyed, the Spirit may be
saved: For Solomon says, Prove. 2.18, 19. Her house enclineth to death, and her
paths to the dead: None that go unto her return again, neither take they hold
of the paths of Life. God, I doubt not, recovereth some, but the case is
dangerous: For though Age and Sickness cure Lust, usually before that the
Conscience is seared and debauched, and they being past feeling work
Uncleanness with greediness, and forsaking God are so forsaken by him, that all
other Sin, Sensuality, and Enmity against a holy life prevails against them,
and the unclean Devil lets in many more. Most debauched Drunkards, Gluttons and
Fornicators are so enslaved to Satan, that they think, say, and do what he
would have them, and become the Enemies and Persecutors of those that are
against their sin, and the blinded Sodomites go on to grope for the door of
Lot, as one that reproves them, till the Flames of Justice stop the rage.

6. And when all these sins have enslaved sensual Youths, they must have Money
to maintain them; and if they have it not of their own, and be not the Sons of
great men, that will maintain them in the service of the Flesh, they must steal
to get it, which usually is either by thievish borrowing when they cannot pay,
or by robbing their Parents or Masters. If all the Masters in London knew what
Thieves their Apprentices vices are, for their own sakes they would take
greater care to watch over them, and keep them from ill company, Drunkenness
and Plays, and would teach them to seek pleasure in good Books, good Company,
and serving God. I had not known it my self, if the Confessions and Restitution
of many penitent Converts had not made me know it. I thank God that he
recovereth any, yea, so many; but I must tell foolish Youth, that Repentance
itself, especially when it must have Restitution, is so bitter, that they would
prevent that need of it, if they had but the use of reason and foresight. O
what heart-tearing Confessions, and sad Letters have I had from many young
Apprentices in this City* Much ado to escape utter despair they had, when
Conscience was awakened to remember all their sin and danger* And when they
knew that they must restore, if possible, all that ever they deceived or robbed
their Masters or any others of; O what difficulties has it put them to, both
as to the shame of Confession, and the actual Restitution! Some have not Money;
and to go and confess the sin and debt, and promise to pay it if ever they are
able, seems hard, but must be done. Some have rough Masters that will
disgrace them when they confess it. Some have Parents that paid dear to set
them Apprentices, and would go near to cast them off if they knew their case.
Some marry after, and it will grieve their Wives to know what they have been,
and how much they must restore. Wisdom might have prevented this; but if the
Thorn be got into the Conscience, it must come out, and if the poison be
swallowed, it must come up, what gripes soever the Vomit cost. There is no
playing with Hell fire, nor jeasting with the Justice of the most Holy God. One
penitent review of fleshly Lust, and sinful pleasure, and falsehood, and deceit,
(though wholesome if true and rimely) will turn it all into Gall and Wormwood*
For the end of sinful mirth is sorrow.

7. And too many there be that escape the gross and disgraceful part of the
foresaid sensuality and unrighteousness, that yet do but choose another Idol,
and set themselves wholly to rise in the World, and Riches, Preferment, and
Honor have almost all their hearts and care: That have no delight in God and
holiness; nor does the state of their Souls, or the thought of their
everlasting state, affect them in any measure, according to its unspeakable
weight, nor so much as these shadows which, they pursue. And when great
Travelers, that have seen much of the world, and old men, and dying men, that
have had all that it can do, are forced by experience to call all Vanity and
Vexation, unexperienced Youth, that are taken up with the hopes of long
prosperity, and provision for all that the Flesh desires, have other thoughts
of it, and will not know that it is deceitful Vanity, till it has deceived
them of their chiefest Hope and Treasure. And when they have overtaken the
Shadow which they pursue so greedily, they find it what others have done before
them, the sweeter the more dangerous, and the parting will be the more bitter:
Whereas had they sought first Gods Kingdom and its Righteousness, and six days
labored in obedience to God, and referred all corporal Blessings to spiritual
uses, and everlasting ends, taking them as from God to serve him by them, they
might have had enough as an overplus to their satisfying Treasure.

CHAP. V. How sad a Case it is that I have described.
I Have told you the very lamentable case of too many young men, especially
rich men's Sons, and Apprentices in this City: I told you before of what concern
the state of Youth is to themselves and others. From thence (and alas from sad
experience) it is easy to gather the dolefulness of the case of those that are
drowned in fleshly Lust, and have sinned themselves into the guilt and danger
which I have described. But I will name some parts of the misery more
particularly again.

1. Review the second Chapter, and think what a doleful case this is to your
selves.

1. Do you not know that you are not Beasts but Men? that have reason given
them to know, and love, and serve their Maker? And how sad* is it to see a man
forget all this, and wilfully brutify himself. Were the Poets fictions true of
men turned into Trees, and Birds, and Beasts, how small were the misery in
comparison of yours. It is no sin in Bruits to lust, or to eat and drink too
much. They have not reason to restrain and rule them; but lest they should kill
themselves by excess, God has made reasonable man their Governor, and
moderateth their Appetite in the temper of their natures: But for a reasonable
Creature to subject himself to fleshly Appetite, and wilfully degrade his Soul
to the rank of Bruits, is worse than if he had been made with the Body and the
unreasonableness of Bruits. Are you capable of no better things than these?

2. And what an odious thing is it, when God has chosen you out of the World
to be members of his visible Church, and given you the great privilege of
early Entrance into his holy Covenant, and washed you in the laver of visible
Regeneration, and you are vowed to Christ, renouncing the Lusts of the Flesh,
the World and the Devil, that you might follow a Crucified Christ in the way of
holiness to everlasting Life, that you should so soon prove false, perfidious
Traitors and Rebels against him that is your only hope, and by wickedness and
Covenant breaking, make your sin greater than that of Infidels, Turks and
Heathens, that never were taken into the Church and Covenant of Christ, nor
ever broke the Vows which you have broken, nor so cast away the mercys which
you had received.

3. And what a doleful case is it, that so much of your Minds, and Love, and
Delight, which were all made for God, should be so misimployed* even in your
strength when they should be most vigorous? and all worse than cast away on
filth and folly? If your Souls be more worth than your Money, it is more folly
and loss to misimploy and abuse your Souls, your Reason, Love, and your
Delight, than to abuse or cast away your Money. And what a Traitor or Murderer
deserves, that would give his Money to hire one to kill the King, or his
Neighbor, I suppose you know; and what deserves he that will use not only his
money, but himself, his soul, his thoughts, his love, his desire and pleasure
against the most glorious God that made him. That you cannot hurt him is no
thanks to you; while you break his Laws, and deny him your Love and Duty, and
love more that one thing which only he hates, and will never be reconciled to.

4. And how doleful a case is it, that all the Care, and Love, and Labor of
your Parents, Masters, and Teachers should be lost upon you? God has made all
this their great Duty for your good; and will you despise God and them, and
wilfully for nothing reject it all? Shall all the pain of a Childbearing
Mother, and all her trouble and labor to breed you up, and all your Parents
care to provide for you, be but to breed up a slave for the Flesh, the World,
and the Devil, and a firebrand for Hell? Shall godly Parents Prayers for you,
and Teaching, and Counsel of you, and all their desire and care for your
Salvation, be despised by you, and all forgotten and cast away for a swinish
Lust?

5. And how doleful a case is it, that so much of so short a Life should be
lost, and a thousand times worse than lost; even turned into sin, to prepare
for misery, when alas the longest Life is little enough for our important work,
and quickly gone, and the Reckoning and Judge are hard at hand? All the Wealth,
Wit or Power in the World, cannot bring or buy you back one hour* of all that
precious time, which you now so basely cast away. O how glad would you be of a
little of it ere long, on the terms that now you have it, when you lie dying,
and perceive that your souls are unready to appear before a righteous God! Then
O for one year more of precious time! O that you knew how to call again the
time which you cast away on sin! You will then perceive with a terrified
Conscience, that time was not so little worth as you once thought it, nor given
you for so base a work; yea, if God in mercy bring you hereafter to true
Conversion, O how it will wound your hearts, to think how much of your Youth
was so madly cast away, while your God, your Souls, and everlasting hopes, were
all neglected and despised!

6. And alas, if you should be cut off in that unholy, miserable Estate, no
heart on earth can sufficiently bewail your case! How many thousand die young,
that promised themselves longer pleasure in sin, and Repentance after it? O
foolish sinners! Cannot you so long borrow the use of your reason, as to think
seriously whither you must go next? Do you never think when the small Pox or a
Fever has taken away one of your Companions, whither it is that his Soul is
gone? Have you your Wit for nothing but to taste the sweetness of Drink or
Lust, which is as pleasant to a Dog or Swine as to you? O little you know what
it is to die! what it is for a Soul to leave the Body, and enter into an
endless World! To come to judgment for all his sins, and all his ill spent days
and hours, and for choosing the pleasures of a Swine before Heaven, and the
pleasures of a Saint. Little know you what it is for Devils presently to take
away to Hell a wretched Soul which they have long deceived. I tell you the
thought of appearing before God, and Christ, and Angels in another World, and
entering on an endless state, is so dreadful, even to many that have spent their
lives in holy preparation, and are indeed in a safe Condition, that they have
much ado to overcome the terror of Death. Even some of Gods own faithful
Servants are almost overwhelmed, when they think of so great a change: And
though the belief of God's Love and the heavenly Glory do support them, and
should make them long to be with Christ, yet, alas, Faith is weak, and the
Change is great beyond our Comprehension, and therefore feared. O then in what
a Case is a wicked, unpardoned, unprepared Wretch, when his guilty soul must be
torn from his Body, and dragged in terror to hear its doom, and so to the
dreadful Execution? Sinners! Is this a light matter to you? Does it not concern
you? Are you not here mortal? Do you not know what Flesh is, and what a Grave
is? And are not your abused Souls immortal? Are you so mad as to forget this?
Or so bad as not to believe it? Will your not believing it make void the
Justice and the Law of God, and save you from that Hell, which only believing
could have saved you from? Will not the fire burn you, or the Sea drown you, if
you can but run into it drunk or winking? Is feeling, remediless feeling easier
than believing God in time? Alas! What should your believing Friends do to save
you? They see by Faith whither you are posting: They foresee your terror and
undone case; and fain, if possible, they would prevent it: But they cannot do
it without you. If you will not consent and help your selves, it is not the
holiest nor wisest Friends in the World that can help you. They would pull you
out of the fire in fear, and out of the mouth of the roaring Lion, but you will
not be delivered! They call and cry to you, O fear God, and turn to him while
there is hope; and you will not let Conscience and Reason be awakened; but
those that go asleep to Hell, will be past sleeping there for ever. O run not
madly into the everlasting Fire.

7. And indeed your sleepy security and presumption does make your case more
dangerous in itself, and more pitiful to all that know it. O what a sight is
it to see a man go merry and laughing toward damnation, and make a jest of
his own undoing? To see him at the brink of Hell, and will not believe it? Like
a mad man boasting of his Wit, or a drunken man of his Sobriety: Or as the
Swine is delighted when the Butcher is shaving his Throat to cut it: Or as the
fatted Lambs are skipping in the pasture, that to morrow must be killed and
eaten: Or as the Bird sits singing when the Gun is levelled to kill him: Or as
the greedy Fish runs striving which shall catch the Bait, that must presently
be snatched out of her Element, and lie dying on the Bank.

But because I touched much of this in the second Chapter, I will pass by the
rest of your own Concerns, and a little further consider how sad the case of
such wretched Youths is also unto others.

8. And if Parents be wise and godly, and understand such Childrens case, what
a grief must it needs be to their hearts, to think that they have begot and
bred up a Chlld for Sin and Hell, and cannot make him willing to prevent it? To
see their Counsel set at naught, their Teaching lost, their Tears despised, and
an obstinate Lad seem wiser to himself than all his Teachers, even when he is
swallowing the Devil's Bait, and cruelly murdering his own Soul. [Ah! thinks a
believing Father and Mother, have I brought thee into the World for this? Has
all my tender, natural Love so sad an issue? Is this the fruit of all my
sorrows, my care, and kindness, to see the Child of my Bowels, whom I dedicated
in Baptism to Christ, to make himself the Child of the Devil, the Slave of the
Flesh and World, the Enemy of God and Holiness, and his own destroyer? and all
this wilfully, obstinately and against all the Counsel, and means that I can
use. Alas! must I breed up a Child to become an Enemy to the Church of God,
into which he was baptized? and a Soldier for Satan against Christ? Must I
breed up a Child for Hell, and see him miserable for ever? and cannot persuade
him to be willing to be saved.] O what a heart breaking must this be to those,
that Nature and Grace have taught to love them, with tenderness, even as
themselves!

9. But if they be wicked Parents, and as bad themselves, the misery is far
greater, though they yet feel it not: For,

1. As the Thief on the Cross said to his Companion, Luke 23.40, 41. Thou art
in the same Condemnation, and we suffer justly; for we receive the due reward
of our deeds. Wicked Parents, and wicked Children are in the same Gall of
bitterness and Bond of Iniquity! They sinned together, and they must suffer for
ever together, if true Faith and Conversion do not prevent it.

2. And it is their wickedness which was much of the cause of their Childrens
sin and misery: And their own deep guilt will be more to them than their
Childrens suffering: God and Conscience will say to them ere long, [O cruel
Parents! that had no mercy on your Children, or your selves! What did Nature
teach you to love more, than your selves and your Children? And would you
wilfully and obstinately be the ruin of both? You would not have done as the
mad Idolaters, that offered their Children in fire to Moloch: And will you
offer them by sin to Satan and to Hell? Had a Serpent stung them, or a Bear
devoured them, they had done but according to their Nature: But was it natural
in you to further their damnation? This was work too bloody for a Cannibal, too
cruel for an Enemy, fitter for a Devil than a Father or Mother. As your Child
had from you his vicious nature, it was your part to have endeavored his
Sanctification and Recovery: You should have taught him betime to know the
corruption of his nature, and to seek and beg the Grace of Christ; to know his
God, his duty, the evil of sin, the danger of temptations, and his everlasting
hopes and fears: You should have taught him to know what man has done against
himself, by disobeying and departing from his God, and what Jesus Christ has
done for his Redemption, and what he himself must do to be saved: You should
have taught him early how to live, and how to die, and what to seek, and what
to shun: You should have given him the Example of a holy and heavenly mind and
life: You should have watched over him for his safety, and unweariedly
instructed him for his Salvation: But you led him the way to despise God's
Word, and set light by Christ, and Holiness, and Heaven, to hate Instruction
and Reproof, to spend the Lords day in idleness or worldly vanity, and to seek
first the World, and the prosperity of the Body, and glut the Flesh with sinful
pleasure. What wonder if a Serpent breed a Serpent, and quickly teach him to
hiss and sting, and if Swine teach their young to feed on dung and wallow in
the mire? This is part of the fruit of your worldliness, fleshliness,
ungodliness, and neglect of your own* Salvation and your Child's. Now he is as
you are, a slave of sin, and an heir of Hell: Was this it that you vowed him
for to God in Baptism? Was it to serve the Flesh, the World, and the Devil,
against our God, our Savior, and our sanctifier? Or did the mistake of the
Liturgy deceive you, to think that it was not you, but the Godfathers, that
were bound by Charge and Vow to bring him up in the Faith and Fear of God, and
teach him all that a Christian should know for his Soul's Health: Was it not
you that God bound to all this? The sin and misery of your Child now is so far
your curse, as you are guilty of it and will add to your misery for ever.] Such
are the sorrows that wicked Parents and wicked Children do prepare, and heap on
one another. Such miseries will come; but woe to those by whom they come, it
had been good for that man that he had never been born.

10. And it is no small grief to faithful Ministers, to see their labor so
much lost; and to see so much evil among their flocks, and such sad
Prognostics of worse to come. He is no true Minister of Christ (as to his own
acceptance and Salvation) whose heart is not set on the winning, and
sanctifying, and saving of Souls. What else do we study for, preach for, live
for, long for, suffer for in our Work? All faithful-Teachers can say with Paul,
that they are willing to spend and be spent for them, and now we live if ye
stand fast in the Lord. 2 Cor. 12.15. 1 These. 3.8. He told them weeping of
those that were Enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose God was their Belly, who
glory in their shame, and mind earthly things, instead of a Conversation in
Heaven. Phil. 3.18, 19. When God has blessed us with the comfortable enjoyment
of many ancient, holy Christians, who are the beauty and honor of the
Assemblies, and Death calls home one of them after another to Christ, and the
rest are ready to depart: Alas! Must a seed of Serpents come after them? Must
those take their places to our grief and shame, who are bred up to the World
and Flesh, in Drunkenness, Fornication, and Enmity to God and a holy Life? O
what a woeful change is this!

And if any be like to be the stain and Plague of the Church, it is such as
these: If we preach holy truth to them, Lust cannot love it: If we tell them of
Gods word, the fleshly mind does not savor it, nor can be subject to it. Romans
8.5, 6, 7. If we reprove them sharply, they smart and hate us: If we call them
to Confession and Repentance, their Pride and Carnality cannot bear it: If we
excommunicate them for Impenitency, as Christ requires, or but deny them the
Sacrament as unmeet, they rage against us as our fiercest Enemies: If we
neglect Discipline, and admit Swine to the Communion of Saints, we harden and
deceive them, and flatter them in their sin, pollute the Church, and endanger
our Souls by displeasing the chief Pastor. What then shall we do with these
self-murthering, ungodly men?

Many of them have so much Reverence of a Sacrament, or so little regard of it,
that they never seek it, but keep away themselves: Perhaps they are afraid,
left they eat and drink damnation to themselves, by the profanation of holy
things: But do they think, that it is safe to be out of the Church and
Communion of Saints, because it is dangerous to abuse it? Are Infidels safe,
because false hearted Christians perish? What if breaking your Vows and
Covenant be damnable? Is it not so to be out of the holy Covenant? What if God
be a consuming fire to those that draw near him in unrepented heinous sin? Is
it therefore wise or safe to avoid him? Neither those that come not to him, nor
those that come in their hypocrisy and reigning sin shall be saved.

And yet what to do with these self-suspenders we know not? Are they still
Members of the Churches, or are they not? If they are, we are bound to call
them to Repentance, for forsaking the Communion of Saints in Christ's commanded
Ordinance: If they are not, we should make it known, that Christians and no
Christians may not be confounded, and they themselves may understand their
case. And neither of these can they endure: But for dwelling in the Parish, and
hearing the Liturgy and Sermons, must still pass for Church Members, lest
Discipline should exasperate and further lose them. This is that Discipline
which is thought worthy the honor of Episcopal Dignity and Revennues, and is
supposed to make the Church of England the best in the world, by the same men
that would rage, were Discipline exercised on them; and must either be admitted
to the Sacrament in a life of Fornication, Drunkenness, Sensuality, and
Profaneness, without any open Confession, Repentance, and Reformation, or else
must pass for Church Members without any exercise of Discipline, while they
shun the Sacramental Communion of the Church. Such work does wickedness make
among us.

11. Indeed these are the men that are the trouble of Families, the trouble of
Neighbors, the trouble of good Magistrates, the shame of bad ones, and the
great danger of the Land. All the foreign Enemies whom we talk so much against,
and fear, are not so hurtful and dangerous to us as these: These that spring
out of your own bowels: These that are bred up with care, and tenderness, and
cost in your houses: These that should succeed godly Ancestors in Wisdom and
well doing, and be their glory. Who plot against us but home bred sinners? Who
more hate the good and persecute them? Who are more malignant Enemies of
Godliness, and scorners of a holy Life, and hinderers of the Word of God, and
Patrons of Profaneness, and of Ministers and People that are of the same mind?
If England be undone (as the Eastern Churches, and much of the Western are
undone) it will be by your own carnal, ungodly Posterity.

He that is once a slave to Satan and his fleshly Lust, is ready for
preferment, or a reward, to be a slave to the Lust of any other. He that is
false to his God and Savior, after his Baptismal Vows, is unlike to be true to
his Country, or his King, if he have but the bait of a strong temptation: And
he that will sell his Soul, his God, and Heaven for a Whore, or for to please
his Appetite, it is like will not stick to betray Church, or State, or his
dearest Friend, for provision to satisfy these Lusts. Can you expect that he
should love any man better than himself? A wicked, fleshly, worldly man is a
soil for Satan to sow the seeds in, of any sort of actual sin, and is fuel
dried or tinder for the sparks of Hell to kindle in. Will he suffer much for
God or his Country, who will sell Heaven for nothing? An evil Tree brings
forth evil Fruit. If he has the heart of an Achan, a Gehazi, an Achitophel, no
wonder if he has their Actions and their Reward. If he be a Thief and bear the
Bag, no wonder if Judas sell his Master.

12. And these wretches if they live, are like to be a Plague to their own
posterity: Woe to the Woman that has such an Husband! And how are the Children
like to be bred, that have such a Father? Does not God threaten punishment to
the third and fourth Generation of them that hate him, and to visit the
iniquity of the Fathers on the Children? Were not the Children of the old World
drowned, and those of Sodom and Gomorrah burned, and Achans stoned, and Dathans
and Abirams swallowed up, and Gehazi's struck with Leprosy, etc. for their
Fathers sins? And the Amalekites Children all destroyed, and the posterity of
the Infidel Jews forsaken* the Curse coming on them and on their Children? And
as their Children are like to speed the worse for such Parents sins, so are
such Parents like to be requited by their Children. As you shamed and grieved
the hearts of your Parents, so may your Children do by you: And by that time
it is like, if Grace convert you not, though you have no hatred to your own
sins, worldly Interest may make you dislike your Childrens. Their Lust and
Appetite does not tempt and deceive you, as your own did: Perhaps when they
shame your Family, debauch themselves with drink and Whores, and consume the
Estates which you sold your Souls for, you may perceive that sin* is an evil
and destructive thing, especially when they proceed to despise and abuse your
persons also, and to desire your Death, and be a weary of you; sooner or later
you shall know better what sin is.

CHAP. VI. The joyful State and Blessing of good Children, to themselves and
others.
1. FRom what is said Chap. 2. and 5. it is easy to gather, how joyful a case
to themselves, and what a Blessing to Parents and others it is, when Children
betime are sober, wise, and godly, and obedient. The difference does most
appear at age, and when they come to bring forth to themselves and others the
fruits of their dispositions: And the end and life to come will show the
greatest difference: But yet even here, and that betime, the difference is very
great.

2. I. As to themselves: How blessed a state is it to be quickly delivered from
the danger of damnation, and Gods displeasure, that they need not lie down and
rise in fear, lest they be in Hell whenever Death removes them from the Body?
Can one too soon be out of so dreadful a state? Can one that is in a house on
fire, or falln into the Sea, make too much haste to be delivered? If a man deep
in debt be restless till it be paid, and glad when it is discharged; If a man
in danger of sickness or a condemning Sentence of the Judge, be glad when the
fear of Death is over; How glad should you be to be safe from the great danger
of Damnation? And till you are sanctified by Grace, you are far from safety.

3. And if a man's Sickness, Pain, or Distraction be a Calamity, the cure of
which brings ease and joy; How much more ease and joy may it bring, to be cured
from all the grievous Maladies of reigning sin? Sanctification will cure your
minds of spiritual blindness and madness, that is, of damnable Ignorance,
Unbelief, and Error: It will cure your affections of idolatrous, distracting,
carnal Love; of the itch of fleshly Desires or Lusts; of the fever of
revengeful passions, and malignant hatred to goodness and good men; and of self
vexing envy and malice against others; of the greedy worm of Covetousness, and
the drunken desire of ambitious and imperious minds: It will cure your Wills of
their fleshly servitude and biass, and of that mortal Backwardness to God and
holy things, and that sluggish dullness and lothness to choose and do what you
are convinced must be done: It will make good things easy and pleasant to you;
so that you will no more think you have need to beg mirth from the Devil, or
steal it from sin, as if God, Grace and Glory had none for you: But it will be
so easy to you, to love and find pleasure in the Bible and good Books, in good
Company and good Discourse, in spiritual Meditations and thoughts, in holy
Sermons, Prayers, and Church Communion and Sacraments, even in Christ, in God,
and the forethoughts of Heaven, that you will be sorry and ashamed to think
that ever you forsook such joys for fleshly pleasure, and defiled your Souls
with filthy and forbidden things. And is not the itch of Lust better cured than
scratched? Is not the feverish and dropsy thirst after Drink, and Wealth, and
Honor, better cured than pleased to the sinners death? And is not a lazy
backwardness to Duty, better cured by spiritual health, than pleased with
idleness and sleep?

4. And certainly you cannot too soon attain the delights of Faith and Hope,
and Love, of holy Knowledge and Communion with God and Saints: You cannot too
soon have the great blessing of Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy
Ghost; and live night and day in peace of Conscience, in assurance that all
your sins are pardoned, and that you are the adopted Sons of God, and Heirs of
Heaven, sealed by his Spirit, accepted in your Prayers, welcome to God through
Christ, and when you die shall be with him: Can you make too great haste from
the folly and filth of sin, and the danger of Hell, into so safe and good a
state as this?

5. And it will be a great comfort to you, thus to find at age and use of
reason, that your baptismal Blessings ceased not with your Infancy, by your own
rejection; but that you are now by your own consent in the Bond of God's
Covenant, and have a right to all the blessings of it, which the Sacrament of
Christ's Body and Blood will confirm; as you had your Entrance by your Parents
consent and accepted Dedication: For the Covenant of Grace is our certain
Charter for Grace and Glory.

6. And is it not a joy to you to be your Parents joy? To find them love you
not only as their Children, but as Gods? Love makes it sweet to us to please
and be beloved by those whom we love. If it be not your grief to grieve your
Parents, and your pleasure to please them, you love them not, but are void of
natural affection.

7. And O what a mercy will you find it, when you come to age and business in
the World! 1. That you come with a clear Conscience, not clogged, terrified,
and shamed with the sins of your Youth. 2. And that you come not utterly
unfurnished with the knowledge, Righteousness and Virtue, which you must make
use of in every condition all your lives: when others are like Lads, that will
go to the Universities before they can so much as read or write. To live in a
Family of your own, and to trade and converse in the World* and specially to go
to Church, to hear, to pray, to communicate, in private to pray, to meditate,
in a word, to live or die like a Christian, like a man, without the furniture
of Wisdom, Faith, and serious Godliness, is more impossible and unwise, than to
go to Sea without Provision, or to War without Arms, or to become a Priest
without Book or understanding.

8. II. And you that are young men can scarce conceive, what a joy a wise and
godly Child is to his wise and godly Parents! Read but Pro. 10.1 and 13.1. and
17.2, 25. and 19.13, 26. and 27.11. and 23.15, 19, 24, etc. The Prayers and
Instructions of your Parents are comfortable to them, when they see the happy
fruit and answer. They fear not Gods Judgments upon their houses, as they would
do if you were Cains, or Chams, or Absaloms: They labor comfortably, and
comfortably leave you their Estates at death, when they see that they do not
get and leave it for those that will serve the Devil with it, and consume it on
their Lusts; but will use it for God, for the Gospel, and their Salvation: If
you fall sick and die before them, they can rejoice that you are gone to
Christ, and need not mourn as David, for Absalom, that you go to Hell. If you
overlive them, they leave the world the easier, when they leave as it were part
of themselves here behind them, who will carry on the work of God which they
lived for, and be blessings to the world when they are gone.

9. III. And O what a mercy is it to Church and State, to have our posterity
prove better than we have been, and do God more Service than we have done, and
take warning by our faults to avoid the like? Solomon tells us of one poor wise
man that saved a City: And God would have spared Sodom, had there been but ten
righteous Persons in it. Wherever yet I lived, a few persons have proved the
great blessings of the place; to be Teachers, Guides, and Exemplary to others,
as the little Leaven that leaveneth the Lump, and as the Stomach, Liver, and
other nutritive parts are to the Body. Blessed is that Church, that City, that
Country, that Kingdom, that has a wise, and just, and holy People. The nearest
good and evil are the greatest: Our Estates are not so near us as Wives and
Children, nor they so near us as our Bodies, nor they so much to us as our
Souls: It Is more to a Person, House, or Country, what they are, than what they
have, or what others do for them or against them.

It is these that are Gods Children as well as ours, that are the Blessing so
often mentioned in the Scripture, who will as the Rechabites obey their Fathers
wholesome Counsels, rather than their Lusts and carnal Companions, and God before
all: Who walk not in the Counsel of the Ungodly, nor stand in the way of
Sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful: But their Delight is in the Law
of the Lord, and in that Law they meditate day and night. Psalm. 1. Lo, such
Children are an heritage of the Lord; such fruit of the Womb is his Reward.
They are as Arrows in the hand of a mighty man; Happy is the man that has his
Quiver full of them. They shall not be ashamed; but they shall speak with the
Enemies in the gate. Psalm. 127.3, 4, 5. Were it not for wise and godly Children
to succeed us, Religion, and Peace, and all public good, would be but as we
frail mortals are, like the Grass or Flowers of a few days or years
continuance; and the difference between a Church and no Church, between a
Kingdom of Christians and of Infidels, would be but like the difference between
our waking and our sleeping time, so short, as would make it the less
considerable.

CHAP. VII. Undeniable Reasons for Repentance and speedy amendment, of those
that have lived a fleshly and ungodly Life: By way of Exhortation.
1. ANd now the Commands of God, the Love of my Country and the Church, the
Love of Piety, true Prosperity and Peace, and the Love of Mankind, even of your
own Souls and Bodies, do all command me to become once more an earnest suitor
to the Youth of this Land, especially of London, who have hitherto miscarried,
and lived a fleshly, sinful life. Thousands such as you are dead in sin, and
past our warning, and past all hope and help for ever. Thousands that laughed at
Judgment and Damnation, are now feeling that which they would not believe. By
the great mercy of God it is not yet the case of you who read these words; but
how soon it may be, if you are yet unsanctified, you little know: O that you
knew what a mercy it is to be yet alive, and after so many sins and dangers, to
have one to warn you, and offer you Salvation, and to be yet in possibility,
and in a state of hope: In the name of Christ I most earnestly entreat you, a
little while try to use your reason, and use it seriously in retired, sober
Consideration, till you have first well perused the whole course of your lives,
and remembered what you have done and how: Till you have thought what you have
got or lost by sinning, and why you did it, and whether it was justifiable
reason which led you to it, and such as you will stand to in your sober
thoughts, yea, such as you will stand to before God at last. Consider seriously
what comes next, and whither you are going, and whether your life have fitted
you for your journeys end, and how your ways will be reviewed ere long, and how
they will appear to you, and taste at death, Judgment, and in the world to come.
Hold on and think soberly a little while, what is in your Hearts, and what is
their condition, what you most love, and what you hate, and whether God or
sinful pleasure be dearer and more delightful to you, and how you stand
affected and related to the World that you are very near. Sure Reason would be
Reason if you would but use it, sure Light would come in, if you would not shut
the Windows, and draw the Curtains on you, and rather choose to sleep in
darkness. Is there nothing within you that grudgeth at your folly, and
threateneth you for being wilfully besides your selves? If you would but spend
one half hour in a day, or a week, in sober thinking whither you are going, and
what you have done, and what you are, and what you must shortly see and be; how
could you choose but be deeply offended with your selves, for living like men
quite void of Understanding, against your God, against your selves, against all
the ends and obligations of life, and this for nothing?

But it may be the distinctness of your consideration may make it the more
effectual: And if I put my Motives by way of Questions, will you consider them
till you have well answered them all.

2. Qu. 1. Are you not fully convinced, that there is a God of Infinite Power,
Knowledge, and Goodness, who is the perfect Governor of all the World? God
forbid that any of you should be so bad, so mad, as seriously to doubt of this,
which the Devils believe, while they would draw you to Unbelief. To doubt of a
perfect governing God, is to wink and doubt whether there be a Sun; to stop
your ears against the notorious testimony of Heaven and Earth, and every
Creature: You may next doubt whether there be any thing, if you doubt of God:
For Atoms and Shadows are hardlier perceived with certainty, than the Earth,
the Heavens, and Sun.

Qu. 2. And if you believe that there is a Governing God, do you not believe
that he has Governing Laws or notifications of his Will? and that we owe this
God more full, more absolute, exact Obedience, than can be due to any Prince on
Earth? And greater love than to our dearest friend, he being infinitely good
and Love it self? Can you owe more to your Flesh, or to any, than to your God,
that made you men, by whom you have Life, and Health, and time, and all the
good that ever you received? And can you give him too much Love and Obedience?
Or can you think that you need to fear being losers by him, and that your
faithful Duty should be in vain?

Qu. 3. Is it God that needs you, or you that need him? Can you give him any
thing that he wants, or do you want what he has to give? Can you live an hour
without him? Or be kept without him from pain, misery, or death? Is it not for
your own need, and your own good, that he requires your service? Do you know
what his service is? It is thankfully to receive his greatest Gifts: To take
his Medicines to save your Souls: To feast on his prepared comforts. He calls
you to far better and needfuller Obedience for your selves, than when you
command your Child to take his meat, or wear his clothes, or when he is sick,
to take a necessary remedy. And is such Obedience to be refused?

Qu. 4. Has not Nature taught you to love your selves? Surely you cannot be
willing to be damned? Nor be indifferent whether you go to Heaven or Hell? And
can you believe, that God would set you on that which would do you hurt, and
that the Devil is your Friend, and would save you from him? Can you believe
that to please your Throat and Lust till death snatch away your Souls to
judgment, is more for your own good, than to live here in holiness and the love
of God, and hereafter to* live for ever in Glory? Do you think you have lived
as if you truly loved your selves, or as self destroyers? All the Devils in
Hell, or Enemies on Earth, could never have done so much against you, as by
your sensuality, ungodliness, and sloth, you have done against your selves. O
poor sinner* as ever thou would have mercy from God in thy extremity, be
entreated to show some mercy on thy self!

Qu. 5. Has not Nature deeply taught all the World, to make a great difference
between Virtue and Vice, between Moral good and evil? If the good and bad do
not greatly differ, what makes all mankind, even the sons of pride, to be so
impatient of being called or accounted bad? and love to be accounted wise and
good? How tenderly do most men bear a reproof, or to hear that they do amiss?
To be called a wicked man, a liar, a perjured man, a knave, how ill is it taken
by all mankind? This certainly proves that the Conscience of the great
difference between the good and bad, is a common natural notice. And will not
God make a greater difference, who better knows it than man?

Qu. 6. If God had only commanded you Duty, even a holy, righteous, and sober
life, and forbidden you the contrary, and had only bid you seek everlasting
happiness, and made you no promise of it, should you not in reason seek it
cheerfully in hope? Our folly leads us to do much in vain; but God sets no
man on any vain employment: If he do but bid you resist Temptation, mortify
Lust, learn his Word, pray to him, and praise him, you may be sure it is not to
your loss: A reward you may be sure of, if you knew not what it will be. Yea,
if he set you upon the hardest work, or to pass the greatest danger, or serve
him at the dearest rate, or lose your Estate for him, and life itself, what
reason can fear being losers by obeying God? Yea, the dearest service has the
greatest reward: But when he has moreover ascertained your reward by a
Promise, a Covenant, sworn and sealed by his Miracles, by Christ's Blood, by his
Sacraments, by his Spirit, if yet you will be ungodly because you cannot trust
him, you have no excuse.

Qu. 7 Do you know the difference between a man and a Bruit? Bruits have no
capacity to think of a God, and a Savior, and a Life to come, and to know Gods
Law, and study Obedience, and fear Hell, and sin, nor reason to rule their
Appetites and Lusts, nor any hope or joy in foreseen Glory: But man is made
capable of all this: And can you think God makes such noble faculties in vain?
Or should we live like Bruits that have none such?

Qu. 8. Do you not certainly know that you must die? All the World cannot
hinder it: You must die. And is it not near, as well as sure? How swift is
time? O how quickly shall we all be at our race and Warfares end? And where
then is the pleasure of Pride, and Appetite, and Lust? Neither the dismal
Carcass, nor the dust or bones retain or taste it: And alas the unconverted
Soul must pay for it for ever. And can you think that so short a brutish
pleasure, that has so sure and sad an end, is worthy the grieving of your
Friends, the offending God, the hazard of your Souls, the loss of Heaven, and
the suffering of Gods justice in Hell for ever. O foolish sinners! I beseech
you, think in time how mad a bargain you are making. O what an Exchange! For a
filthy Lust or fleshly Pleasure, to sell a God, a Savior, a Comforter, a Soul,
a Heaven, and all your hopes?

Qu. 9, If the Devil or deceivers should make you doubt whether there be any
Judgment and Life to come, should not the mere possibility and probability of
such a day and life, be far more regarded by you than all fleshly pleasure,
which is certainly short and base. Did you ever hear a man so mad as to say, I
am sure there is no Heaven or Hell for Souls? But you are sure that your flesh
must not in a dark grave: you are sure that death will quickly put an end to
all that this world can afford you: House and Land, and all that now deceive
poor worldlings, will be nothing to you: No more than if you had never seen
them, save the terrible reckoning that the Soul must make. Sport, and Mirth,
and Meat, and Drink, and filthy Lusts are ready all to leave you to the final
Sentence of your Judge: And is not even an uncertain hope of Heaven more worth
than certain transitory Vanity? Is not an uncertain Hell to be more feared and
avoided* than the forsaking of these certain trifles and deceits? Much more
when God has so certainly revealed to us the life to come.

Qu. 10. Is it a wise and reasonable expectation, that the righteous God should
give that man everlasting Glory, who will not leave his Whores, his
Drunkenness, or the basest vanity, for all his Love, and for all his Mercies,
for the sake of Christ, nor for the hopes of all this Glory? Heaven is the
greatest reward of holiness, and of the diligent and patient seekers of it:
Heaven is the greatest gift of the great Love of God: And can you believe that
he will give it to the slaves of the Devil, and to contemning wilful Rebels?
May not you next think that the Devils may be saved? If you say that God is
merciful, it is most true; and this will be the unconverted man's damnation, that
he would for a base Lust offend so merciful a God, and sell everlasting mercy
for nothing, and abuse so much mercy all his life. Abused and refused mercy
will be the fuel to feed the flames of Hell, and torment the Conscience of the
impenitent for ever. Does not God know his own mercy better than you do? Can he
not be merciful, and yet be holy and just? Is the King unmerciful if he make
use of Jails and Gallows for Malefactors? It Is mercy to the Land to destroy
such, as would destroy others: The bosom of eternal Love is not a place for any
but the holy: The heavenly Paradise is not like Mahomet's, a place of Lust and
sensual Delights. You blaspheme the most just and holy God, if you make him
seem indifferent to the holy and the unholy, to his faithful Servants and to
the despisers of his Grace.

Qu. 11. If there were any possibility, that unsanctified Souls should be
sanctified and saved in another World, is it not a madness to cast everlasting
life upon so great uncertainty or improbability, when we have life, and time,
and helps to make our Salvation sure? God has called you to give all diligence
to make it sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. He has made infallible promises of it, to
sanctified Believers: He calls you to examine and judge your selves, 2 Cor.
13.5. And do you know the difference between certainty and uncertainty in so
great a case? O none can now sufficiently conceive what a difference there is,
between a Soul that is going out of the Body with joyful assurance that Christ
will presently receive him, and a Soul that in the guilt of sin, must say, I am
going to an endless life, and know not but it may be an endless misery! I am
here now, and know not but I may be presently with Devils that here deceived
me: Just fear of passing presently to Hell fire, is a dreadful case, to be
avoided above all earthly sufferings. Luke 12.4. and 14.33. Much more when Gods
threatenings to the impenitent are most sure.

Qu. 12. Do you think in your hearts that you have more pleasure, and sound
content, and peace with your Whores, and in your Sports, and Drink, or Riches,
than true Believers have in God, in Christ, in a holy life, and the hopes of
everlasting Glory? Judge but by the cause: Is not the Love of that God that is
the Lord of Life, and Death, and all, and the pleasure of pleasing him, and the
sense of pardon and mercy through Christ, and the firm expectation of endless
joy, by a promise of God, sealed by his Son, his Sacraments, and his Spirit; I
say, is not all this matter more worthy to rejoice a Soul, than Money, and
Meat, and Drink, and Lust? Have not you those secret gripes of Conscience, when
you think how short the sport will be, and that for all these things you must
come to judgment, which much abateth the pleasure of your sin? Had you spent
that time in seeking first the Kingdom of God and its Righteousness, and in
honest, obedient laboring in your callings, you need not have looked back on it
with the gripes of an accusing Conscience. If you see a true Believer
sorrowful, it is not for serving and obeying God, or being holy and hating sin;
but for serving God no better, and hating sin no more.

Qu. 13. Have you not often secret wishes in your hearts, that you were in the
case of those persons that you judge to be of the most holy and heavenly hearts
and conversations? Do you not think they are in a far safer and better case
than you? Unless you are forsaken to blindness of mind, it is certainly so. And
does not this show that you choose and follow that which is worse, when your
Consciences tell you it is worse? and refuse that which your Consciences tell
you is best? But it is not such sluggish wishes that will serve: To lie still
and live idle, and wish your selves as rich as the industrious, is not the way
to make you so.

Qu. 14. At least, if you have no such wishes now, do you not think that you
shall wish it at Death or Judgment? Do not your Consciences now tell you, that
you shall shortly wish, O that I had hated sinful pleasure? O that I had spent
my short life in obeying and trusting God? Will you not say with Balaam, Let me
die the death of the Righteous, and let my last end be like his? O that I were
in the case of those that mortified the Flesh, and lived to God, and laid not
up their Treasure on Earth, but in Heaven? And why choose you not now that
which you know you shall deeply wish that you had chosen?

Qu. 15. I take it for granted, that your merry, and sensual, and worldly
Tempters and Companions, deride all this, and persuade you to despise it, as if
it were but needless, melancholy, troublesome talk: But tell me, do you think in
Conscience that it is sound reason that they give you, and such as should
satisfy a sober man, that cares what becomes of his soul for ever? If it be,
I make a motion to you. Bring any of them to me, or any such man, and in your
hearing let the case be soberly debated: I will hear all that they can say
against a holy, sober life, for the World, and for their fleshly pleasure: And
you shall hear what I can say on the contrary, and then do but use the reason
of a man, and judge as you see cause. As Elias said to the Israelites, Why halt
you between two Opinions: If the Lord be God, follow him; If Baal be God,
follow him. If Money, Preferment, Drink, and Lust be best, take it: But if God,
Heaven, Christ, Faith, Hope, and Holiness be best, at your peril refuse them
not, and halt no longer. I suppose you sometime think of the case, (or else you
are dead in sin.) I pray you tell me, or tell your selves, which cause seems
best upon the deepest thoughts and consideration: But if you will take the
laughter or scorns of ignorant Sots, instead of reason, and instead of sober
consideration, you are well worthy of the damnation which you so wilfully
choose.

Qu. 16. But if you think highly of their Wit or Learning, who sin as you, and
who encourage and deceive you, I pray you answer these two questions.

1. Which side is Christ, and his Prophets, and Apostles on? Which side does
the Scripture speak for? Which way went all the Saints whose names are now
honored? Were they for the fleshly or the spiritual life? Were they for the
love of pleasures more than God? Does Christ from Heaven teach you an earthly
or a heavenly choice and life? Did he come to cherish sin, or to destroy it,
and save us from it? You can make no doubt of this, if ever you read or heard
the Bible. And

2. Which do you think were the wiser and better men, and worthy to be believed
and followed? Whether Christ and all his Apostles, and Saints, that ever were
in the world to this day, or the Drunkards, and Whoremongers, and Worldlings,
who deride the Doctrine sent from Heaven? If there be a Heaven, is Drunkenness
or Sobriety liker to be the way to it? But if indeed you will take the mocks of
a swinish Sot to be wiser than God, than Christ, than Prophets, and Apostles,
and all that ever went to Heaven, and their jears to be more credible than all
God's Word, what can a man say to convince such Wretches with any hope?

Qu. 17. I further ask you, Have you not some secret purposes hereafter to
repent? If not, alas, how far are you from it? and how forlorn is your case?
But if you have, Conscience is a Witness against you, that you choose and live
in that case and course which you know is worst: Were it not worst, you need
not purpose to repent of it: And will you wilfully choose known evil, when the
very nature of man's Will is to love good?

Qu. 18. And if you believe that the faithful are in a happier case than you,
tell me, What hinders yet but you may be like them, and yet be happy as well
as they? Has God put any exception against you in his word? Is not Mercy and
Salvation proclaimed and offered to you as freely as to them? Did any thing
make you so bad as you are, but your own choice and doing? And can any thing
yet hinder you from pardon and Salvation, if you your selves were but truly
willing? What if your Parents were bad, and bred you up amiss? God has told
you, in Ezekiel. 18. and 33. that if you will but do your own part yet, and take
warning and avoid your Parents sin, and give up your selves unfeignedly to him,
he will save you whatever your Parents were. What if Princes, or Lords, or
learned men, should be your tempters by words or example? None of them can
force you to one sin: God is greater and wiser than they, and more to be
believed and obeyed; and your Salvation is not in any of their power. What if
your old companions tempt you? They can but tempt you; they cannot constrain
you to any evil. All the Devils in Hell, or men on earth cannot damn you, no
nor make you sinners, if you do it not your selves. Refuse not Christ, and he
will not refuse you: And when he is willing, if you be but willing, truly
willing to be saved from sin and misery, and to have Christ, Grace, and Glory
in the use of the means which God has appointed you, neither Earth nor Hell
can hinder your Salvation: Who but your selves keep you from forsaking the
Company, House, or Baits which have deceived you? Who but your selves keep you
from lamenting your sin, and flying to Christ, and begging Mercy, and giving
your selves to God? If you think that serious Christians are the happiest,
refuse not to be such your selves. It will be your own doing, your own wilful
obstinacy if you perish: But of this I have already said more in my Call to the
Unconverted.

Qu. 19. Dare you deliberately resolve or bargain to take your fleshly
pleasures for your part, instead of all your hopes of Heaven? I hope none of
you are yet so mad: I think it is but few, if any, of the Witches that make so
express a bargain with the Devil: If they did, O how they would tremble when
they see their glass almost run out, and death at hand! If you dare not make
such a bargain in plain words, O do not do the same in the choice of your
hearts and the practice of your lives, and deceive your selves by thinking that
you do it not, when you do. It is God and not you that makes the conditions of
Salvation and Damnation. If you choose that life which God has told us is the
condition of Damnation, and finally refuse that life which God has made the
condition of Salvation, it will in effect be all one as to choose Damnation, and
refuse Salvation. He that chooses deadly poison, or refuses his necessary
food, chooses Death, and refuses Life in effect. God has said, If ye live
after the Flesh ye shall die, but if by the Spirit you mortify the deeds of
the Body, you shall live. Romans 8. Christ tells you that unless you are born
again and converted, you cannot enter into his Kingdom. Ioh. 3 3, 5. Matthew.
18.3. and that Without Holiness none shall see God. Refuse these, and choose
the world and sinful pleasures, and you refuse Salvation, and shall have no
better than you choose. What you judge best choose resolvedly, and do not cheat
your selves.

Qu. 20. Have you no natural love to your Parents or your Country? O what
inhumane cruelty is it, to break the hearts of those from whom you had your
Being, and who were tender of you, when you could not help your selves?
Doubtless one reason why God has put so strong a love in Parents to their
Children, and made your Birth and Breeding so costly to your Mothers, and made
the Milk which is formed in her own Body to be the first nourishment of your
lives, is to oblige you to answerable Love and Obedience: And if after all this
you prove worse than Bruits, and become the grief of their Souls, that thus
bred, and loved, and nourished you, do you think God will not at last make this
far sadder to you, than ever it was to them? If cruelty to an enemy, much more
to a stranger, to a neighbor, to a friend, be so hateful to the God of Love,
that it goes not unrevenged, O what will unnatural cruelty to Parents bring
upon you? Yea, even in this Life, as honoring Father and Mother has a special
promise of prosperity and long life, so dishonouring and grieving Parents is
usually punished with some notable calamity, as a forerunner of the great
revenge hereafter.

And you cannot but perceive that such as live in Sensuality, and Lust, and
Wickedness, are the great troublers of Church, and State: God himself has said
it, There is no peace to the wicked, Isa. 48.52. and 57 21. For the wicked are
like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt*
There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. v. 22. Isa. 59.8. The way of
peace they know not; there is no judgment in their goings: They have made them
crooked paths; whosoever goes therein shall not know peace. They give no peace
to others, and God will deny peace to themselves: Yea, the nature of their own
sin denies it them, as broken Bones, and griping sickness deny ease to the
Body. And can you think you shall become the shame of the Church, and the
troublers of the Land, and that God will not trouble you for it? If you will be
enemies of God and your Country, you will prove the sorest Enemies to your
selves.

And who is the gainer by all this? No one in the World; unless you will call
it the Devil's gain, to have his malicious, cruel Will fulfilled: And sure the
pleasing the Devil and a fleshly Lust, Fancy, or Appetite, can never compensate
all your losses, nor comfort you under the sufferings, which you wilfully bring
upon your selves.

Young Men, the reason I thus deal with you by way of question is, that I may,
if possible, engage your own thoughts in answering them: For I find most are
aptest to learn of themselves: And indeed without your selves, and your own
serious thoughts, we cannot help you to true understanding. He that reads the
wisest Lecture to Boys or Men, that take no heed to what is said, yea, or that
will not make it their own study to understand and remember, does but cast away
his labor. It Is hard saving any man from himself; but there is no saving any
man without himself, and his own consent and labor. If you will but now take
these twenty questions in secret into your serious thoughts, and consider of
them, till you can give them such an answer as reason should allow, and as you
will stand to before God, when the mouth of all iniquity shall be stopped, I
should not doubt but you will reap the benefit.

O what should a man do that pittieth blind and wilful sinners, to make them
willing of their own recovery? Here all stops: And must it stop at this? Are
you not willing? And will you not so much as consider of the reasons that
should make you willing, when Heaven or Hell must be the consequence? O what a
thing is a blind mind, and a dead and hardened heart? What a befooling thing is
fleshly Lust? O what need had mankind of a Savior? And what need have all of a
Sanctifier, and of his holy word, and of all the holy means of Grace?

Poor sinners! O let not your Teachers, and your Parents Counsel and Tears be
brought in as witnesses against you to your condemnation! O add not this to all
their griefs, that their Counsel and their Sorrows must sink you deeper into
Hell! Alas, it were sadness enough to them to see that it is all in vain! Let
not this Counsel of mine to you be rejected to the increase of your guilt and
misery: If it do you no good, it will leave you worse. Were I present with you,
I should not think it too much, would that prevail, to kneel to you, to beg,
that you would but well consider your own case and ways, and think before of
what will follow: And that you will study a wise and satisfactory answer to the
questions put to you, till you are resolved. Your case is not desperate: Mercy
is yet offered you: The day of Grace is not yet past; God is not unwilling to
receive you; Christ is not unwilling to be your Savior if you consent: No
difficulty in the world makes us afraid of your damnation, but your own
foolish choice and wicked Wills. Our care is not to make God merciful, nor to
make Christ's merits and sacrifice sufficient, nor to get God to promise you
pardon if you repent and come to him by Christ: All this is done already; but
that which is undone is to make you considerate and truly willing, and to live
as those that indeed are willing to let go the poisonous pleasures of sin, and
to take God and Heaven for your hope and port on, and to be saved and ruled by
Christ, and sanctified by his Spirit, and to receive his daily help and mercies
to this end, in the use of his appointed means, and without this you are undone
for ever. And is there any hurt in all this? If there were, is it worse than
the filth of sin, and the Plagues that follow here and for ever! Worthy is he
to bear at last, Depart from me thou worker of iniquity, and to be thrust away
from the hopes of Heaven, that after all that can be said and done, chooses sin
as more desirable than this God, this Savior, this Sanctifier, and this Glory.

CHAP. VIII. General Directions to the willing.
THough the blindness and obstinacy of fleshly Sinners too often frustrate great
endeavors, yet we may well hope, that the Prayers and tears of Parents, and
the calls of God, may prevail with many; and I may hope, that some that have
read what is before written, will say, We are willing to hear and learn that we
may be saved: tell us what it is that we must do. And on that hope, I shall
give such miscarrying Youth some General Advice, and some Counsel about their
particular cases, and all as briefly as I may. O that the Lord would make you
that read this, truly willing to practice these ten Directions following! How
happy yet may you be!

I. Set your Understandings seriously, and diligently to the work which they
are made for, and consider well what is your Interest and your Duty, till you
come to a fixed Resolution, what is for your good, and what is for your hurt,
and what that good or hurt will be.]

Should it be a hard thing to persuade a man in his wits to love himself, and
to think what is good or hurtful to himself, especially for everlasting? Why
are you Men if you will live like Dogs? What do you with Understandings if you
will not use them? What will you use them for, if not for your own good, and to
avoid misery? What good will you desire, if not everlasting Joy and Glory? and
what hurt will you avoid, if not Hell fire? Have you reason, and can you live
as if these were not worth the thinking on? Will you bestow your thoughts all
the day and year upon you know not what, nor why, and not one hour soberly
think of such important things as these? O Sirs! Will you go out of the World
before you well think whither you must go? Will you appear before the Judge of
Souls, to give up your great account before you think of it, and how it must be
done? Is he worthy of the help of Grace, that will not use his natural Reason?
I beg it of you as ever you care what becomes of you for ever, that you will
some time alone set your selves for one hour seriously to think, [Who made you,
and why; what you owe him; how much you depend on him; what you have done
against him; how you have spent your time; what case your Souls are in; what
Christ has done for you; and what he is or would be to you; whether you are
sanctified and forgiven; what Gods Spirit must do for you; and what you must be
and do if you will be saved; and if it be otherwise, whither it is that you
must go.

II. Therefore I next advise you and entreat you, that you live not as at a
great distance from Eternity, nor foolishly flatter your selves with the
deceitful promises of long Life: And were it sure to be an hundred years,
remember how quickly and certainly they will end. O Time is nothing! Therefore
think of nothing in this World as separated from the World to come. Whatever
you are doing, or saying, or thinking, the Boat is hasting to the Gulf: You are
posting to Death and Judgment: Which way ever you go, by wealth or poverty,
health or sickness, busy or idle, single or married, you are going still to
the Grave and to Eternity. Judge then of every thing as it tends to that end:
And think of nothing as not related as a means, to the near and everlasting
end: O choose and do that which Reason and Conscience tells you, that you
will at last earnestly wish that you had chosen and done; when you are tempted
to be prayerless and averse to good, or to run to Lust or sinful Pleasure, ask
your selves seriously; how will this look in the final review? What shall I
think of this at last? Will it be my comfort, or my torment? O judge as you
will judge at last.

III. My third Counsel is, If your Consciences tell you that you have foolishly
sinned against God and your Salvation, make not light of it; but presently, and
openly, go to your Parents or Masters, and penitently confess your sinful Life
in general, and your known or open sins particularly: But such secret sins
which wronged not them, and will blast your Reputation, you are not bound to
confess openly, unless the Ease or future Direction of your doubtful and
troubled Consciences require it: But when your vicious fleshly life is known,
excuse it not, hide not the evil by Lies or extenuation, when you have wronged
your Parents or Masters by disobedience, and by robbing them of part of your
Time and Service, if not also of their Money or goods, go to them with sorrow
and shame, and confess how foolishly you have served the Flesh, to the injury
of them, to the offending of God, and to the unspeakable hurt of your own
Souls: Lament your sin, and ask them forgiveness, and entreat their Prayers,
and their careful Government of you for the time to come, and sincerely promise
them Reformation and Obedience.

Yea, If you have had familiar Companions in your sin, go to them, and tell
them, [God and Reason have convinced me of my sinful folly, that for brutish,
fleshly Pleasure, have wilfully broken the Laws of my Creator and Redeemer, and
for nothing undone and lost my Soul, if Christ do not recover me by found
Repentance. O how madly have we despised our Salvation? How easily might we
have known, had we but searched and considered the word of God, that we were
displeasing God, undoing our selves, and making work for future sorrows? Should
I, when I know this, and when I know that I am going to Death and Judgment, yet
obstinately go on, and be a hardened Rebel against Christ and Grace, what can I
expect, but to be forsaken of God and lost for ever? O therefore as we have
sinned together, let us repent together! You have been a snare to me, and I to
you: We have been agents of the Devil to draw each other to sin and misery:
Certainly all this must sooner or later be repented of. O let us join together
in Sorrow, and Reformation, and a holy, obedient Life. If you will not consent,
I here declare to you before God, (for I know that he sees and hears me)
that I will be your Companion in sin no more: I beg pardon for tempting you: I
resolve by Gods Grace to prefer my Salvation and my Obedience to God, before a
base and beastly pleasure: Whatever you say against it, I will never more
forsake my Salvation to follow you, nor ever take you to be wiser than God, nor
better friends to me than my Savior, nor your Words more regardable than Gods
word, nor a Whore, or a merry Cup, or Vanity, to be better than Heaven, nor
Temperance and Holiness to be worse than Hell. If you will not be undeceived
with me, I will pray for you; but I renounce your sinful Company, and my
warning will be a Witness against you to your confusion.

Stick not at the scorn of fools, nor at the shame of such Repentance and
Confession: It may profit others: But however it is no more than in hope you
owe them, whom you have wronged and endangered by sin: And it will lay some new
obligation on your selves, to amend by doing what you have so professed: And
sure Conscience and shame will somewhat the more hinder you, from evermore
joining with them in the sin which you have so bewailed and renounced. And
think not this too much, for there is no jeasting with God, and with
everlasting joy or misery.

IV. My next Counsel is, presently, understandingly, and considerately, renew
the Covenant which you made in Baptism with God your Creator, Redeemer, and
Sanctifier.

Consider whether to be a Christian is not necessary to your Salvation; and
then consider what it is to be a Christian, and whether it be not a far higher
thing, than merely to take that name upon you, and be of that party, and to
join with the right Church, and to have the bare words and picture of
believers: And then consider whether God will be mocked with Shows, and
Ceremonies, and dead Formalities, and false Professions; and whether the
lifeless Carcass or Image of Christianity will be taken by God instead of the
life and power of it; and will ever save a Soul. Yea, whether a false
counterfeit Christian, bred up under Christian Instructions and Examples, do
not make your guilt far greater, and your case more miserable than Americans or
Indians, that never heard what you have heard: And when perhaps you have spoken
against Hypocrites your selves, whether there be any more notorious Hypocrites
than such as you, who say you are Christians, and yet live to the Flesh in the
odious sins which Christ abhors; Think what a dreadful thing it is to
profess a Religion which condemns you, and to say over that Creed which you
believe not, and those Petitions in the Lords Prayer which you desire not, and
those Commandments which you break and will condemn you: To rebel against God
while you say you believe in him: To despise Christ's Government while you say
you trust him for Salvation: To ask for his Grace when you would not have it,
to sanctify you, and save you from your sin: To beg Mercy of God, and to
reject this Mercy, and to have no Mercy on your selves. O think what a doleful
case it is to see distracted sinners such Hypocrites, playing with such
Contradictions, so near Gods Bar, and in his sight: And to make no better use
of Prayers and the name of Christians, and the Profession of the Truth, than to
give the Devil more matter to accuse you, and Conscience to torment you, and a
righteous God to say to you at last, Out of thy own mouth will I judge thee,
thou wicked Rebel. Did thou not confess, that Jesus was the Christ, and that
thou did believe the Gospel and the Life to come; and yet did live in the
wilful disobeying of Christ and the Gospel, and base contempt of God and thy
Salvation?

And when you have considered the sad case of Hypocrites, that call themselves
Christians to their own Condemnation, when they are none such, then think
seriously what the Covenant was, which was made for you in your Baptism, and
you have taken on you to own. Think what it is devotedly to trust to God as
your reconciled Father, and devotedly to trust to Christ as your Savior, your
great Teacher, Governor, and Mediator with the Father; what it is devotedly to
trust the Holy Spirit to illuminate, sanctify and quicken you in a holy Life,
and to strenthen and comfort you against, and under, all your Trials. Consider
what it is to take the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, as they are against
this holy Life and heavenly Hope, for your Enemies, and to list your selves
under Christ in a vowed War to the death against them. Think how you have
perfidiously broken this Covenant, on which all the Hope of your Salvation
lies. And then if you dare not utterly renounce all that Hope, presently and
resolvedly renew this Covenant. Lament your violation of it to God: Do it not
only in a passion, but upon serious consideration make that choice and
resolution, which you dare stand to at a dying hour, and on which you may
believe, that God for Christ's sake will accept you, and forgive you. O think
what a Mercy it is to have a Savior, who after all your heinous sins, will
bring you reconciled as Sons to God, for the merits of his Sacrifice and
Righteousness, and by his powerful Intercession, and will send from Heaven the
Spirit of God into your hearts, to renew those blind, dead, carnal minds to
God's holy Image, and will dwell in you, and carry on your Sanctification to
the end. Thankfully and joyfully accept this Covenant and Grace, and again give
up your selves to God, your Father, Savior and Sanctifier; but be sure that
you do it absolutely, without deceitful exceptions and reserves; and that you
do it resolvedly, and not only in a frightened mood; and yet that you do it as
in the strength of the Grace of Christ, not trusting the stedfastness of your
own deceitful, mutable Hearts. And when you can truly say, that you unfeignedly
consent, and renew this Covenant in your hearts, then go the next opportunity
to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and there penitently and faithfully renew
it openly in the solemn way that Christ has appointed you; thankfully profess
your Trust in Christ, and receive a sealed Pardon of your sins, and Title to
everlasting Life; and settle your Conversation in the Communion of Saints, as
you hope to live with such for ever.

V. Hence forward set your selves as the true Scholars of Christ, to learn his
Doctrine, and as his true Subjects to know his Laws, and as those that trust
their Souls into his Hand, to understand, and firmly believe his Promises for
this Life, and that which is to come: And as the blessed man, Psalm. 1, 2, 3. To
delight in the Law of the Lord, and meditate in it day and night. As you were
wont to steal some hours from God and your Masters, to go to the house of Sin
and Death, so now get such hours as lawfully you can, from your other
Employments and diversions; but especially on the Lords-days; and get alone,
and beg mercy and Grace from God, and set your selves to read the Bible, and
with it read some Catechisms, and some sound and serious Treatises of Divinity
which are most suitable to your state.

It is young men that have miscarried, and being convinced are willing to turn
to God, that I am now directing. And therefore supposing that you will ask me
what Books I would commend to you, I will answer you accordingly (supposing
still that you prefer the Bible.)

1. For the full resolving of your Hearts to a sound Repentance, and a holy
life, read Joseph Allenes Book of Conversion, Richard Allens Vindication of
Godliness, and their Book of Covenanting with God, and his Victory over the
World, Mr. Whateleys New birth, and some of the old Sermons of Repentance,
such, as Mr. Stocks, Mr. Perkins, Mr. Dikes, Mr. Marburys, Bunny's correction
of Parsons Book for Resolution, John Rogers Doctrine of Faith, William Fenners
Books, Sam. Smith on the first, and the fifty first Psalms, and his great
Assize, and on the Eunuchs Conversion, Bifields Marrow, Mr. Hows blessedness of
the Righteous, and of Delighting in God.

And if you would have any of mine, read the Call to the Unconverted, or the
Treatise of Conversion, and the Directions for sound Conversion, and Now or
Never, and a Saint or a Bruit, or which of all these Gods Providence shall
afford you.

II. If you would have help to try your hearts, lest they be deceived, read
Alleins foresaid Book of the Covenant, and Pinkes Trial of sincere Love to
Christ, many Books of marks are extant, Bifields, Rogers, Harsnets, Berries,
etc. And Mr. Chishull and Mr. Mead of being almost Christians. If you would
have any of mine, read the Right method for peace of Conscience, and Directions
for weak Christians, where are the Characters of the false, the weak, and the
strong.

III. For the daily Government of Heart and Life, read the Practice of Piety,
Scudders daily walk, Mr. Reyners directions, (three excellent Books) Mr.
Corbets small private thoughts. And if you would have any of mine, read my
Family Book, and the Divine Life, the Life of Faith, or the Saints Rest, and
for those that can read great ones, my Christian Directory.

IV. And it will not be unuseful to read some profitable History, especially
the Lives of exemplary persons, and the Funeral Sermons which characterize
them. I have prefaced to two, which are eminently worth your reading, and most
true, both young men, that is, John Ianeway's Life, and Joseph Alleins, and
given you the true exemplary Characters in their Funeral Sermons of Mr.
Ashurst, (an excellent pattern for Apprentices and Tradesmen,) Mr. Stubs, Mr.
Corbet, and of Mr. Wadsworth, and Mrs. Baker. Read Mr. Samuel Clarks Lives, and
his Martyrology, and his Mirror, Dr. Beards examples, or Fox's Book of
Martyrs. Some Church History, and History of the Reformation, and the History
of our own Country, will be useful.

V. As you grow up to more judgment you may read methodical Sums of Divinity,
especially Ames his Marrow, and his Cases of Conscience, (which are in English
translated) and Commentaries.

Great store of all sorts of good Books through the great mercy of God are
common among us: He that cannot buy, may borrow.

But take heed that you lose not your time in reading Romances, Play Books,
vain Jests, or seducing or reviling Disputes, or needless Controversies.

This course of Reading Scripture and good Books will be many ways to your
great advantage.

1. It will above all other ways increase your knowledge.

2. It will help your Resolutions and holy affections and direct your lives.

3. It will make your lives pleasant; the knowledge, the usefulness, the
variety will be a continual recreation to you, unless you are utterly besotted
or debaucht.

4. The pleasure of this will turn you from your filthy fleshly pleasure. You
will have no need to go for delight to a Playhouse, a Drinking-house or to
Beastly lusts.

5. It will keep you from the sinful loss of time, by idleness or unprofitable
employment or pastimes. You will cast away Cards and Dice when you find the
sweetness of useful Learning.

But be sure that you choose the most useful and necessary subjects, and that
you seek knowledge for the love of Holiness and Obedience.

VI. The sixth part of my advise is, forsake ill Company and converse with such
as will be helps to your Knowledge, Holiness, and Obedience, and not such as
will draw you to sin and misery.

You have found by sad experience what power ill Company has on fools, with
such a merry Tale, a Laughter, a Jest, a Scorn: a merry Cup, and a bad Example
and Persuasion, does more than Reason, or Gods Authority, or the Love of their
Souls. A Physician may go among the Sick and Mad to Cure them; and a Wiseman
that sees these will pity them, and hate sin the more. But what do you do
there, where you have already caught the infection of their disease. The mind
of a man is known much by the Company which he chooses, and if you choose ill,
no wonder if you speed ill, Pro. 13.20. He that walks with wise men shall be
wise; but a companion of fools shall be destroyed. Prove. 28.7. Whosoever keeps
the Law is a wise Son, but he that is a companion of riotous men shameth his
Father. Psalm. 119.63. David says, I am a companion of all them that fear thee,
and of them that keep thy precepts. 26.4, 5. I have not sat with vain persons.
neither will I go in with dissemblers, I have hated the Congregation of evil
doers, and will not sit with the wicked. 119.115. Depart from me ye evil doers,
for I will keep the Commandments of my God.

VII. Especially be sure that you run not wilfully upon Temptation, but keep
as far from every tempting bait, and object as you can, Fire and Gunpowder, or
Straw must be kept at a sufficient distance, no man is long safe at the very
brink of danger, especially if it be his own choice, and more especially if it
be a sin that his nature is much inclined to. No wise man will trust corrupted
nature very far, especially where he has often fallen already. The best man that
is should live in fear, when an enticing bait of sin is near him. If David that
prayed, turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, had better practiced it, O!
what heinous sin had he escaped; Had he made a Covenant with his eyes, as Job
did, what wounds had he prevented? The Feast that you see not, the Cup that is
a mile off, the person that is far distant, the words which you hear not, are
not they that you are most in danger of? But when tempting meat and drink are
before you, and the tempting person has secret familiarity with you, and
tempting or provoking words are at your ears, then alas many have need of more
Grace, Resolution, and Mortification than they have.

If you knew well what sin is, and what is the consequence, you would be more
watchful and resolved against temptations than against Thieves or Fire, or the
places infected by the Plague.

VIII. Make it the chief Study of your Lives to understand what man's
everlasting hope is, and to get a lively well settled belief of it; and to bring
your souls to take it joyfully for your true felicity and end, and thence daily
to fetch the powerful motives of your duty and your patience, and your
contenting comfort in Life and at your Death.

The end is the Life of all the means. If heavenly blessedness be not the chief
end that you live, hope and labor for in the World, your whole lives will be
but carnal, vain and the way to misery: for the means can be no better than the
End. God that is the beginning is our End; We are made and governed by Him and
for Him. Heavenly Glory is the sight of his Glory, and the Everlasting
perfection and pleasure of joyful mutual Love.

But we are not the noblest Creatures next to God in excellency and desert, yea
we are sinners who have deserved to be cast out from his Love. And therefore as
in the way we must come to him by a Savior, so at the blessed end we must
enjoy him by a Mediator, and to see Gods Glory in Christ and the Heavenly
Jerusalem, the blessed society of Saints and Angels, continually flaming in
Love, Joy and Praises to the most holy God. This, this is the felicity for
which we labor, suffer and hope.

2. And O! how great, and how needful a work it is, to search, study and pray
for so firm a belief of this unseen Glory, as may so resolve, engage, and
comfort us in some good measure, as if we had seen it with these eyes? O! what
men would one hours being in heaven make us, or one clear sight of it? Faith
has a greater work to do than a dreaming or dead opinion can perform. If it be
not well grounded first, and well exercised upon Gods Love, Promise and Glory
from day to day, you will find cause (sadly) to lament the weakness of it. For
this use you have great need of the help of such Books, as open clearly the
evident proofs of the Christian verity, which I have briefly done in the
beginning of the 2d. part of my Life of Faith, and more largely in 2 other
Books, viz. The unreasonableness of Infidelity, and the reasons of the
Christian Religion. A firm b^lief of the World to come, is it that must ^ake us
serious Christians, and over come the snares of worldly vanity.

And your Faith being well settled, set your selves daily to use it, and live by
it, dwell in the joyful hopes of the heavenly Glory. what is a man that lives
not in the use of Reason? And you must know that you have as daily use for your
Faith, as for your Reason. Without reason you can neither safely eat or drink,
nor converse with men as a man, but as a Bedlam, not do any business that
concerns you; and therefore you must Live by your Reason. And without Faith
you cannot please God, nor obtain Salvation, no nor use your Reason for any
thing higher than to serve your appetites and purvey for the flesh, and
therefore you must Live by Faith, or live like Beasts, and worse than Beasts,
and cannot otherwise live to God, nor live in the hopes of blessedness
hereafter. O! Consider that the difference between living chiefly upon and for
an Earthly fleshly felicity, or a heavenly; is the great difference between the
holy and the unholy, and the fore-goer of the difference between those in
Heaven and those in Hell.

IX. Still remember that the great Means, of all the good that here or
hereafter you can expect, is the great Mediator, the great Teacher, Ruler and
Intercessor for his people. And therefore out of him you can do nothing. All
duty that you offer to God must be by his Mediation, and so must all mercy
which you receive from God. To come to God by him, who is the Way, the Truth,
and the Life, must be your daily work of Faith. His blood must wash you from
all sin past, and from the guilt of daily failings, and infirmities. None but
he can effectually teach you to know God and your selves, your duty and your
everlasting hopes. None but he can render your persons, praises and actions
acceptable to God, because you are sinners, and unmeet for Gods acceptance
without a Mediator. All power in heaven and Earth is given him, and your Lives
and Souls are at his will; and it is he that must judge you, and with whom you
hope to live in Glory. Therefore you must so live by the Faith of the Son of
God, who has loved you and and given himself for you, that you may say it is
he that lives in you, Gal. 2.2021. This is the Fountain from whence you must
daily fetch your strength and comfort.

X. And still remember that it is by the operation of the holy Spirit, that the
Father and the Son do sanctify Souls, and Regenerate and breed them up for
Glory. It is by the Holy Ghost, that God dwells in us by Love, and Christ by
Faith. Therefore see that you rest not in corrupted nature, and trust not to
your selves, or to the Flesh. Your souls are dead to God and Holiness, and your
duties dead, till the Spirit of Christ do quicken them. You are blind to God
and mad in sin, till the spirit illuminate you, and give you understanding. You
are like Enemies out of Love with God, Heaven and Holiness, till this Spirit
reconcile you and sanctify your wills. You will have no manlike spiritual holy
pleasure, till the Holy Spirit renew your hearts, and make them fit to delight
in God. O that men knew the great necessity of the illuminating, quickening,
sanctifying, comforting influence of the Spirit of God, how far would they be
from deriding it, as some profane ones do. By this Holy Spirit the sacred
Records were written, and by miracles of Christ and his Apostles, and
Evangelists and Prophets, sealed and delivered to the Churches. And by this
Spirit the orders and Government of the Church were settled. And by him we are
enlightened to understand the Scripture, and inclined to Love them and
delightfully believe them and obey them. Study therefore obediently these
Writings of the Holy Ghost, and confidently trust them. O! be not found among
the resisters, or neglecters of the Spirits help and motions, when proud
self-confidence or fleshly lusts do rise against them.

Christ's bodily presence is taken from the Earth, he promised instead of it
(which was but in one place at once) to send his Spirit which is to the soul
more than the Sun light to the Eye, and can shine in all the world at once.
This is his Agent on Earth, by whom (in Teachers and Learners) he carries on
his saving work. This is his Advocate who pleads his cause effectually
against unbeleif and fleshly lusts, and worldly wisdom. This is the well of
living water, springing up in us to Everlasting life; the name, the mark of God
on Souls, the Divine Regenerator, the author of Gods Holy Image, and the Divine
Nature, even Divine life, and light and love, the Conqueror of the World and
Flesh, the strengthner of the weak, the confirmer of the wavering, the
comforter of the sad, and the pledge, earnest and first fruits of everlasting
life. O therefore pray earnestly for the Spirit of Grace, and carefully obey
him, and joyfully praise God, in the sense of his holy encouragement and help.

CHAP. IX. Additional Counsel to Youngmen, who are bred up to Learning, and
Public work, especially to the Sacred Ministry in the Universities and Schools.
. 1 IT was the case of the London Apprentices, who are nearest me, and I have
often to do with, which first provoked me to this work, and therefore which was
chief in my intention. But had I as near opportunity to be a Counselor to
others, There are three sorts whom I should have preferred, for the sake of the
Church and Kingdom, to which they are of greater signification.

I. Those in the Schools and Universities, who are bred up for the Sacred
Ministry.

II. Those there, and in the Inns of Court that are bred up to the knowledge of
the Law.

III. The Sons of Noblemen, Knights and others, that are bred up for some
places of Government in the Kingdom, according to their several ranks. And of
these it is the first that I shall most freely speak to.

. 2. And first I shall mention the Importance of their case, and secondly the
Danger that they are in of miscarrying, and what they should do to escape it.

. 3.I. And indeed their condition as they prove good or bad, is of unspeakable
importance.

1. To the Church and the Souls of men.

2. To the Peace of the Kingdom.

3. To themselves. And,

4. To their Parents, above the common case of others.

. 4. 1. Of how great importance the Quality of the Clergy is to the Church and
men's Salvation, many thousands have found to their Joy and Happiness, and I
fear many more thousands to their sorrow and destruction. And then of what
importance the Quality of Scholars and Young Candidates, is to the soundness of
the Clergy, I need not many words to make men of reason and experience know.

. 5. 2. God who has instituted the sacred office, and by his Spirit qualifieth
men for the work, does usually work according to the fitness of their work, and
qualifications. As he does the works of Nature according to the fitness of
Natural second causes, (giving more light by the Sun, than by a Star or Candle,
etc. so he does the works of Morality, according to the fitness of Moral
Causes. Holiness is the true Morality, and usually wrought by holy means. And
though it be so supernatural in several respects (as it is wrought by the
supernatural revelation, or doctrine, or a supernatural Teacher Christ, by the
operation of the holy Ghost, a supernatural Agent, commonly called infusion,
and raising the soul to God a supernatural object; and to a better state than
that of corrupted nature) yet we are natural recipients, and agents, and it is
our natural faculties which Grace renews, and being renewed exercise the acts
of holiness; and God works on us according to our nature, and by causes
suited to our capacities and to the work. As he uses not to give men the
knowledge of Languages, Philosophy or any Art, by the Teaching of the ignorant
and unskilful, so much as by Learned skilful Teachers, we must say the same of
our Teachers of sacred Truth: and though Grace be the gift of the holy Ghost,
experience constrains all sorts of Christians almost to acknowledge what I
here assert. Why else do they so earnestly contend, that they may live under
the Teachers which they count the best? Will Heretics teach men the Truth as
well as the Orthodox; why then is there such a stir made against Heretics in
the World? and why are the Clergy so eager to silence such as Preach down that,
which they approve. Will Papists choose Protestant Teachers, or Protestants
choose Papists.

And as men are unfit to teach others, that which they know not themselves, so
unbelieving men, and unholy men, are far less fit to persuade the hearers to
Faith and Holiness, than believing holy Teachers are. Though some of them may
be furnished with the same notions and words which serious Godly Teachers use,
yet usually, even in that, they are greatly wanting: because they have not so
thoroughly studied saving Truth, nor percieved its evidence, nor set their
hearts upon it, nor deeply recieved and retained it. For serious affection
quickneth the mind to serious consideration, and causes men speedily and
deeply to recieve that truth, which others recieve but slowly, superficially,
or not at all. How eagerly and prosperously do men study that which they
strongly love? And how hardly do they learn that, which they have no delight
in? much more which they hate, and their very natures are against?

But if an Hypocrite should have good notions and words, yet he will usually be
greatly wanting in that serious delivery, which is ordinarily needful to make
the Hearers serious Christians. It seldom reaches the heart of the Hearer,
which comes not from the heart of the Speaker. As light causes light, so heat
causes heat; And the dead are unfit to generate Life. The arrow will not go
far or deep, if both the Bow and Arm be not strong that shoot it; constant
experience tells us undeniably, of the different success of the reading or
saying of a Pulpit-lesson, or a dull, or a mere affected Speech, and of the
judicious, serious Explication, and application of well chosen matter; which
the experienced Speaker well understands, and which he utters from the
feeling of his Soul. And the Love of a Benefice, no, nor of applause neither,
will not make a man preach in that manner, as the love of God, and the lively
belief of heaven and hell, and as the desire of saving Souls will do. The means
will be chosen and used, and the work done, agreeably to the principle and the
end.

But if a Stage-Hypocrite should learn the knack, or art of preaching, with
affected fervency, and seeming zeal, yet, Art and Paint will not reach the
power and beauty of Nature: Usually affectation bewrays it self; and when it
is discerned, the Hypocrisy is loathed: And it fails ordinarily, in point of
Constancy: Will the Hypocrite pray always. Job 27.10. Art will not hold out
like Nature: (when the motives of Gain (which is their Godliness) cease, the
pleasure of applause, the means will cease. Yea, usually it turns to a
malignant reviling of the serious piety which they counterfeited before, or of
the persons, whose applause they did affect: For where the Hypocrisy of the
Preacher is discovered, by his contrary self-condemning words, or life; and the
people accordingly judge of him as he is, his proud heart cannot bear it, but he
turns a malicious reproacher of those, whose applause he sought, thinking by
disgraceing them, to defend his own esteem, by making their censure of him
incredible, or contemptible.

And if the Hypocrite should hold on his Stage affectation, with plausible art,
yet it will not reach to an answerable discharge of the rest of his ministerial
work: It is from men, that he expects his reward, and in the sight of men, on
the public Stage that he appears in his borrowed Glory. But in his Family,
or his Conversation, or his ministerial Duty to men in private, he answers
not his public show. He will not set himself to instruct, and win the ignorant
and impenitent, and zealously to save men from their sins, and to raise men's
earthly minds to Heaven, by praying with them, and by heavenly discourse, and
by a heavenly Conversation: nor will he be at much cost, or labor to do good.

. 6. But alas, the far greatest part of bad unexperienced Clergy men, do prove
so hurtful to the Church, that they have not so much as the Hypocrites seeming
Zeal and Holiness to cloak their sin, or profit their people with. The sad case
of the Christian World proclaims this; not only in the Southern and Eastern
Churches ( Abassia, Egypt, Syria, Armenia, the Greeks, and Moscovites, etc. nor
only the Papists Priests in the West, but too great a number in the Reformed
Churches. And it is more lamentable than wonderful: For there goes so much to
the general planting of a worthy faithful Ministry, that it is the great Mercy
of God, that such are not more rare.

1. If they have not Natural Capacity, there is not matter for Art and Ordinary
Grace to elevate.

2. And if this Capacity be not improved by diligent and long study (which most
will not undergo) it is no wonder if it be useless, or much worse.

3. And if it be not directed by a sound and skilful Teacher, but fall into the
hands of an erroneous, or bad Guide; you may conjecture what the Fruits will be.

4. And if that good parts and studies be not kept from the mischievous enmity
of a Worldly Mind, and Fleshly Lusts, how easily are they corrupted, and turned
against their use and end, to the great hurt of the Church, and of themselves.

5. And if those that choose Prelates, or Church Governors should be either of
corrupted Judgments, wicked Hearts, or vicious Lives, how probable is it, that
they will choose such as themselves, or at least, such as will not much cross
their Lusts.

6. And if such worldly and wicked Prelates be the Ordainers, Examiners,
Judges, and Institutors of the Inferior Clergy, or be their Rulers, it is easy
to know what sort of men they will Introduce and Countenance, and what sort
they will silence, and discourage.

7. And if Lay-Patrons have the choice of Parish Pastors, and most, or many of
them should be such, as Christ tells us the Rich most usually are, a worldly,
and sensual sort of men, or such as have no lively sense of Heavenly things, we
may easily conjecture, what men such are likely to present.

8. And if the people have any where, (as anciently) the Choice when most of
them are bad, what men will they choose. Or if they have not the choice, yet
they are so considerable, that their Consent, or Dissent, Love, or Hatred, will
sway much with those that much live among them. But I must afterward say more
of these Impediments.

. 7. And as all these Impediments are like to make worthy Pastors to be rare,
so its certain that their naughtiness of such is like to make them exceeding
hurtful, which is easily gathered from 1. What they will be. 2. What they will
do. 3. In what manner they will do it. In all which, the effects may be
probably foreseen. And,


1. It is supposed that they will be worldly minded men, that will take Gain
for Godliness, and will judge that to be the best cause, and those the best
persons, who most befriend their worldly Interest. They will love the Fleece
more than the safety of the Flock, and their Benefices, more than the benefit
of the people's Souls; they will serve their Bellies more than Christ, Phil.
3.18. Romans 16.17. and being Lovers of the world, they will be real enemies to
God. The Love of Money, in them, will be the root of all Evil. As Achan, and
Gehezi, they will think they have reason for what they do; and if tempted, will
with Judas betray their Master.

2. And their fleshly desires will have little restraints, but what one sin
does put upon another, or Gods controuling Providence give them. Their
Reputation may make them avoid that which would be their disgrace: But
secretly, they will serve their Appetites, and Fleshly Lusts. For they will not
have Gods effectual Grace, nor much tenderness of Conscience to restrain them.

3. And Pride will be their very Nature. Esteem and applause will be taken for
their due, and seem as necessary to them, almost as the Air, and as Water to a
Fish. Ambition will be their Complexion; and will actuate their thoughts: And
all these Vices will so corrupt their judgments, that there will want little
more, than worldly Interest and temptations, to turn them to any Heresy, or
ill Design.

And it is much to be feared, that their profanation of Holy things will make
them worse, and more impenitent than other men. Partly, by the Righteous
Judgment of God forsaking them; and partly, by the hardening of their own
hearts, by long abuse of that truth which should have sanctified them: For when
they have imprisoned it in unrighteousness, and long played, as Hypocrites, with
that, which they preached and professed to believe, custom will so harden them,
that their knowledge will have little power on their Hearts.

. 2ly. And no wonder if the Fruit be like the Tree These Vices will not be
idle, nor bring forth Holy, or Just Effects.

1. It Is likely they will make it the chief care of their minds, to get that,
which they most love. And that they will study preferment (which is the
Clergie-mans nearest way to wealth.)

2. And then they must be Flatterers of those that can prefer them. Or at
least, must not seriously call them to repentance, or tell them of their sin.

3. In all differences, of what Consequence soever, they will usually pass
their judgment on the side of such as can prefer, or hurt them.

4. In Religious controversies they will usually be on the side, that is for
their wordly Interest, be it right, or wrong.

5. They will harden great men in their sins, by flattering them.

6. They will harden the profane, by pleasing them in their ignorance and
ungodliness, to get them on their side.

7. They will be Enemies to the serious Religious people, because they discern
the Vice and Hypocrisy, which they would conceal, and because they honor such
as fear the Lord, while vile Persons are contemned in their Eyes, Psalm. 15.4.

8. They will turn their preaching against such, partly to vent their malignant
Spleen, and partly to overcome them as their Enemies. Hereupon they will
describe their serious piety, as Faction, Self Opinion, and Hypocrisy, and
will raise jealousies against them in the minds of Rulers, and increase the
Rabbles malignity and rage, and will extenuate the sin and danger of the most
ungodly sort, that take their own part.

9. They will shame their Office and Profession, by base mutability, turning
with the Time and Tide, as Temptations from their worldly Interest lead them.

10. They will by their making light of Godliness, and by the scandal, or
unholyness of their own Conversations, make the vulgar believe that Godliness
is either a cheat, or a matter of mere words, and outward observances, and to
be of the Religion of their Rulers, and a thing to keep men in some awe and
order in a worldly Life.

11. Their ignorance often makes them unfit for hard Controversies, and yet their
pride and malignity will make them forward to talk of what they understand not,
and to take thence an occasion to revile those whom they dislike, and speaking
evil of what they never knew, they will make up their want of knowledge, with
outward Titles, pretended Authority, confident Affirmation, censorious
Reproach, and violently oppressing by power the Gainsayers.

12. If any man's Conscience be awakned to call him to true Repentance, they
will either tell him it is needless melancholy trouble, and give him an opiate
of some flattering false comfort, or preach him asleep again, with unsuitable
things, or a cold, dull, formal kind of managing holy things.

. 9. And such are too often the plagues of the Church and State, as well as
injurious to individual Souls.

1. Their Ignorance, or scandalous Ambition, Covetousness, and other sins, do
render them so contemptible in the Eyes of many, that it tends to make the
Church, and all Religion so. And when Nobles, Gentlemen, and People think
basely of the Ministry, Church, and Religion for their sakes, how sad is the
case of such a people. The Gospel is half taken away from a Nation, when it is
taken out of their esteem, and brought under their reproach and scorn: And a
scorned Clergy will prepare for the scorning of Religion: And an ignorant, or
worldly ambitious, fleshly, scandalous Clergy, will be a scorned Clergy with
two many. Erasmus much disgraced the Germane Protestants, when he described
some of them, as having a Bottle of Wine at their Girdle, and his Translation
of the New Testament in their hands, ready to dispute for it with blows: And so
do many that tell the world how many of the Lutheran Ministers are given to
excess of Drink, and unpeaceable reviling of Dissenters. And the same Erasmus
much depreciated either Bishops, or Scotists, when speaking of the Scotist
Bishop of London, who was Dr. Collets Adversary, he says, I have known some
such whom I would not call Knaves, but never one, whom I could call a
Christian. Not only Drunkenness and brutish sins, but factitiousness, envy,
unpeaceableness, Contentiousness, and especially a proud and wordly mind, will
be in most men's Eeyes, more ugly in a Minister, than others: For where there is
a double Dedication to God, that which is Common, will seem Unclean, and when
there should be a double Holiness, sin will appear to be double sin.

2. And indeed a carnal wordly Clergy are often the most powerful and obstinate
hinderers of the Peace, and quietness of Church and State.

1. By fitting themselves to the humors of those, in whose power their
preferments are, be it never so much to the injury of men's Souls, Bodies, or
Estates, or against the public good and safety! Or else, leading the people
into error for popular applause.

2. By a domineering humor, in matters of Religion: taking themselves
Lawgivers to others, and taking their wits and wills for uncontrollable;
laying Heaven and Hell upon their own Inventions or Conceits, and the
Controversies which they endlesly make, but understand not, and hereticating,
or anathematizing such as take them not for Oracles, or Rabbi's, that must not
be gainsay'd.

3. And by Corrupting the Christian Religion, and Church, by departing from the
Christian simplicity, and purity; and forming Doctrine, Worship, and
Government, according to their own carnal worldly minds and interest.

4. And than militating against the best that contradict them, or stoop not to
them, though it be to the distraction and division of the Churches. And usually
they are the hardest to be brought to peace, and reconciliation, and do most
against it, when ever it is attempted by Peacemakers, who pity the woeful
case of such a self-disturbing people.

. 10. All this has been so long manifested to the sad Experience of mankind,
in most Nations, and Ages of the Christian World, that it is not to be denied,
or concealed. And should we pretend the Honor of the Church and Clergy, for
the denying, or the hiding of such grievous Sins, it would but make us
partakers of the guilt, and displease the most Holy God, who will have sin in
whomsoever shamed, and harden others who are ready to imitate them. The Holy
Scriptures open and shame the sins even of Adam, of Noe, of Lot, of David, of
Solomon, of Peter, and of Gods chosen people the Jews: and this was not a
faulty uncovering of their nakedness, but a necessary disgrace of sin, and
manifestation of the Holiness and Justice of God, and a warning to others that
we should not sin with such Examples before our Eyes. 1 Cor. 10.6, 7, 8.

I have written the History of the Bishops, and Councils of former Ages, in
which, with their virtues, I have opened their miscarriages: some blame it, as
if it were uncovering their nakedness. But I have said nothing but what is
openly proclaimed of them long ago, by their own greatest flatterers; and it
was Christ himself that said Remember Lot 's Wife: The Pit which so many have
fallen into, must be uncovered, and God, and Holiness must be honored, rather
than those that dishonor them by sin: Sin confessed and forsaken, is not so
dangerous, as sin denied, and extenuated: He that hides it, shall not prosper.
Sin is a reproach to any people, Pro. 14.34. and 6.33. Even God that forgiveth
it to the penitent, will shame it, to keep others from committing it. He that
minceth, or hides it, tempts others to imitate it.

Alas, what work have a worldly, proud, and ignorant Clergy made in most
Christian Nations, these thirteen hundred years. Athanasius, Chrysostoms,
Isidore-Pelusiota, etc. but especially, excellent Gregory Nazianzene have told
it us, even of their flourishing times, more plainly than I now intend to do:
They have loved this present world: some set themselves by venting new and odd
opinions, to draw Disciples after them for applause; some furiously
hereticating them that differed from them by ambiguous words; and making
themselves Lords of the Faith of others, and making their ignorant Dictates the
Oracles of the Church: striving who should be thought wisest and best, but
especially who should be greatest, as if Christ had never judged in that
Controversy: Flattering Emperors and Princes, till they got Wealth and Power
by them, and then over-topping them, and troubling the World by Rebellious, and
Bloody Wars. Tearing the Churches in pieces, on pretense of Union, and
killing, and burning men on pretense of Faith and Charity, and Cursing from
Christ his faithful Servants, on pretense of using the Keys of Christ's
Kingdom; setting up themselves, and a worldly Kingdom, on pretense of the
Spiritual Government of Christ; making Merchandise of Souls, on pretense of
feeding, and ruling them, cherishing the people in Ignorance, and sloth, and
carnality, that they might be more obedient to their Tyranny, and less capable
of opposing it; hating, and destroying the most conscionable Christians, as
Heretics, or Schismatics, because they are the greatest Enemies to their Sin,
and desires of Reformation; provoking Princes to become the bloody Persecutors
of such, for the upholding of their worldly State and Dignity, yea, making them
their Lictors or Executioners, to destroy such as they condemn.

Such work as this, has destroyed the Greeks, or Eastern Churches, set up
Turkish Tyranny, by dividing Christians, weakening, and ruining the Emperors,
making Religion a mere Image of lifeless formality, and Ceremony, and a
powerless dying thing. Such a Clergy has darkened, and lamentably brought low
the Christian Churches in Moscovie, Armenia, Georgia, Mengrelia, Syria,
Abassia, and extirpated them in Nubia, and brought them in Italy, Poland,
Hungary, Spain, France, and most of Germany to what they are: Such a Clergy
have brought Ireland from the laudable State which it was in, in the days of
Malachias, as Bernard described it, into the barbarous, briutish, ignorance and
bloody inhumanity at which it is now arrived; and had the chief hand in the
murder of two hundred thousand persons in the late Rebellious insurrection;
such a Clergy had a chief hand in the civil wars in England in the reign of
William Rufus, King Stephen, Hen. 3. King John, etc. the subject of Pryns
History of the Treasons of Prelates: And alas such a corrupt sort of Ministers
keeps up the division of the German Protestants, under the name of Lutherans
and Calvinists, about Consubstantiation, Church-Images, and doctrines of
Predestination not understood. And had the Low Countries ever had the stirs
between Remonstrants and Contra-remonstrants, or England and Scotland ever had
the miserable contentions, wars and cruelties between the former Episcopal
parties, and the Laudians, or between them and the Presbyterians and
Independents, and all the silencings, and woeful contentions and Schisms that
have thence followed, if the vices of the Clergy had not been the cause. And
had we continued in this case these twenty years last, silencing, reviling and
prosecuting about two thousand conscionable Preachers, and writing and
preaching still for executing the Laws against them, and the prosecuted people
flying from such a Clergy as ravening Wolves, And some censuring the innocent
with the guilty, could all this have been done by a wise, holy, and peaceable
Clergy, that served God in selfdenyal, and knew what it is to seek the good of
Church and souls? When we yet continue under the same distractions and
convulsions, and all cry out that a flood of misery is breaking in on the Land,
and like to overwhelm us all, and still it is the Clergy that cannot or will
not be reconciled, but animate Rulers and people against each other, and cannot
or will not find the way of peace; yea all would be soon healed in probability,
could the Nation but procure the Clergy to consent; certainly there is some
grievous disease in our selves, which is like to pove mortal to such a Kingdom,
and that while so many pray and strive for peace. Those men that have no more
skill or will to heal the wounds, and stop the blood of a fainting Church and
State, nor will by any reason or humble importunity be entreated to consent to
the cheap and necessary cure, no nor to hold their hands from continued tearing
of us, do tell all the world that they are sadly wanting in fitness for their
sacred office, and that this unfitness is like to cost an endangered Nation
dear.

Woe, woe, woe, to that Church, that has Hypocrites, Ungodly, Unexperienced,
Proud, Worldly, Fleshly, Unskilful, unfaithful and Malignant Pastors, and that
has Wolves instead of Shepherds; woe to the Land that has such. Woe to the
Prince and States that have and follow such Counselors, and to the Souls that
are subverted by them. Alas! from a bad Clergy has sprung the greatest
calamities of the Churches, in all places to this very day.

. 11. But will such men's sins prove less woeful to themselves than others.

No. 1. It is the sin and guilt it self, which is the greatest evil.

2. They aggravate their sin and guilt by a perfidious violating a double vow,
their Baptismal Vow of Christianity, and their Ordination Vow to be Faithful
Ministers of Christ.

3. They aggravate their guilt by their nearness to God in their Office, and
Works, as Aarons two Sons that were struck dead, Lev. 10.2, 3. For God will be
sanctified in them, that come nigh him, and before all the people he will be
glorified. The examples of the Beth-shemites, Vzza, Vzziah, the bad Priests and
False Prophets of old are terrible.

4. And it greatly adds to the guilt to do all this or much of it as in the
Name of God, or by his Commission. This is a dreadful taking of Gods Name in
vain, for which he will not hold them guiltless. To pretend, that it is by Gods
command, that they set up that which he abhors; that they corrupt his
Doctrine, or Worship, or Church Order that they set up their own wills and
sinful Laws instead of and against his Laws; that they tear his Church by proud
Impositions, and wicked Anathema's, and Interdicts of whole Kingdoms,
Excommunicating and Deposing Kings, Absolving men from their Oaths of
Allegiance, Tormenting and Murdering Godly men as Heretics, Silencing Faithful
Ministers, Smiting the Shepherds and scattering the Flocks, and then reviling
them as Schismatics, and all this to uphold a worldly Kingdom of their own,
and keep up their Pride, Domination and self-will, and to have Riches for
provision for fleshly Lusts; I say to do all this as in the Name of Christ,
with a sic dicit Dominus, and as for the Church and Truth, and Souls, is a most
heinous aggravation.

5. Indeed while a poor blind Clergy man as his Trade, for applause and gain,
does Study and Preach that Word of God which is against him, how dreadful is it
to think, how all that he does and says is self-condemnation, and that out of
his own mouth he must be judged, and that all the woes which he pronounces
against Hypocrites, and impenitent carnal worldly men, his own Tongue
pronounces them against himself.

. 12. And when Satan has once got such Instruments, how great an advantage
has he for the success against themselves, against the Flock, and against the
Church and Cause of Christ, above what he might expect by other Servants.

1. They are far hardlier brought to Repentance than others.

(1.) Because they have by Wit and Study, bended that Doctrine to defend their
sin, which should be used to bring them to Repentance.

(2.) And because their aggravated sin against Light, does most forfeit that
help of Grace which should work Repentance in them.

(3.) And because being taken for Wise Learned men, and Preachers of Truth, and
Teachers of others, and reprovers of Errors, their Reputation is much concerned
in it, and their unhumbled Souls, which look all others should Assent and
Consent to their prescripts, will hardly be brought to confess sin and Error;
but will sooner (as Papists) plead-infallibility, or conclude as some Councils
have done that a Lay man must not accuse a Clergy man, be he never so bad.
Repentance is hard to all men of carnal interest, but to few more than to an
unhumbled Clergy man.

And 2. Whoever accuses or reproves them of sin, will be represented as an
Enemy to the Church, and a dishonourer of his Ghostly Fathers, and one that
opens their nakedness which he should Cover: and so their Ulcers are as a
noli me tangere; and fret as a Gangreen unremedied.

3. And their Place, Office, Titles, and Learning with many will give sin
Reputation and Advantage. If a Drunkard in the Alehouse deride Godly men, as
Heretics, Schismatics, Hypocrites, or Puritanes, Sober men will not much
regard it: But they think they owe more belief and reverence, to a Learned
Reverend Preacher in the Pulpit, even when he preaches against preaching, and
against those that practice what he teaches them at other times. O how much of
his work has Satan done in the World by corrupting Sacred Offices, and by
getting HIS SERVANTS INTO RVLE and MINISTRY, TO DO HIS WORK AS FOR CHRIST, and
his Church, and by his authority and in his name. Our natural enmity with the
Serpent disswadeth him from speaking or sending to us in his own name. Should
one say in the Pulpit [ Thus says the Devil, hate Christ's servants; silence
his Ministers, call serious Godliness Hypocrisy,] (which is the contrary to
Hypocrisy) I should not much fear his success with any. but if he be a lying
Spirit in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets, and can get a Prophet to smite Michaiah
for pretending to more of the Spirit than he had; or if he can get men in the
Sacred Office to say (Thus says the Lord) when they speak for sin or against
the Lord, this is the Devils prosperous way.

. 13. II. I have told you what Plagues bad Clergy men will be, and still have
been to themselves, to the souls of men, and to the public State of Churches
and Kingdoms; and were it not lest my Writing should be too large, I should
tell you what Blessings on the contrary Able and Faithful Ministers are.

Briefly 1. Christ makes them the chief instruments for the propagating of his
Truth and Kingdom in the World, for the gathering of Churches, and preserving
and defending contradicted Truth. They are the Lights of the World, and the
Salt of the Earth. All Christians are bound to teach or help each others in
charity; but Christ's Ministers are set in his Church (as Parents in Families)
to do it by Office. And therefore must be qualified above others for it, and be
wholly dedicated to it, and attend continually on it; as a Physician differs
from every Neighbor, who may help you in your sores or sickness as they can,
so do the Pastors of the Church differ from private helpers of your Souls. The
Scripture is preserved and delivered down by the private means of all the
Faithful, but eminently by the public Office of the Pastors. It may be
expounded and applied privately by any able Christian, but the Pastors do it
eminently by Office; and to them especially (though to all Christians commonly)
are committed the Oracles of God. The Priests lips must preserve knowledge, and
men should enquire of the Law at his mouth; for he is the messenger of the Lord
of Hosts, Mal. 2.7. Never yet was the Gospel well propagated nor continued in
any Country in the World, but by the means of the Ministers of Christ: And O!
what difference has there been in their successes as they differed in ability,
piety and diligence! And how great an honor is it to be such blessed
instruments of building up the house of God, and propagating the Gospel and the
Kingdom of Christ, and the Christian Faith and Godliness in the World.

2. And thus God uses them as his special instruments for the Convincing,
Converting, Edifying, Comforting and Saving of Souls. Others may be blessed
herein: But the special blessing goes along with those that are specially
obliged to the work; which is Parents in Families, and Pastors in the Church. O
how many thousand Souls in Heaven, will for ever rejoice in the effects of the
Labors of Faithful Ministers, and bless God for them. And what an honor, what
a comfort is it to have a hand in such a work. He that Converteth a sinner from
the Error of his way, does save a Soul from death and cover a multitude of
sins, Jam. last.

3. And in this they are Co-workers with Jesus Christ the great Savior of
Souls, and with the Holy Spirit, the Regenerator and Sanctifier. Yea Christ
does very much of the work of his Salvation by them, when he ascended on high
he gave gifts to men, for the edifying of his body, till they come to a perfect
man; Ephesians. 4.6. to 16. and when the Chief Shephard shall appear, they shall
receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4. and shall hear well
done good and faithful Servant. Hence are the Streams of Consolation, that make
glad the City of God, and daily refresh many thousand precious Souls. For how
shall men believe without a Preacher, and how shall they Preach unless they be
sent (qualified, obliged and authorized by Christ) Romans 10.

4. In a word Churches, States and Christian Kingdoms are chiefly blessed and
preserved by the Labor of the faithful part of the Ministry: For (1) If we
have the rare blessing of a wise and holy and loving Magistracy, it is usually
by the success of the labors of the Ministry. (2) And there is no better means
to bring the Subjects to the Conscionable performance of their Duty to
Superiors. (3) And by the blessing of their Labor the sins of a Nation are
prevented or healed, which would else bring down Gods heavy Judgments. (4) They
teach people to live in Love and Peace with one another, and to abhor
Contention, Cruelty, Oppression, Injury, and Revenge, and all to do their
several duties to promote the common Good. (5) When the ignorant and slothful
and scandalous sort of bad Ministers betray Souls and would bring the Ministry
and Religion into contempt, it is a wise and holy Ministry that counter-worketh
them by laboring while others are idle, and doing that wisely which others do
foolishly, and showing in their lives the power of that truth which others
disgrace, and the reality of that Holiness, Love, Justice, Peace and Concord,
which others would banish out of the World, by making it seem but a name or
Image. (6) When proud men tear the Church by the Engines of their domineering
Wits and Wills, these humble Pastors as the servants of all, will labor to
heal it, by Christian meekness and condescension: When malignant Priests seek
to strengthen themselves by the multitude of the ungodly, and to bring serious
piety into contempt which does molest them, these faithful Pastors open the
just disgrace of sin, and the great necessity and honor of holiness,
endeavoring that vile persons may be contemned, and those may be honored that
fear the Lord, Psalm. 15.4. and distinguishing the precious from the vile, the
righteous from the wicked, and him that swears from him that fears an Oath,
and him that serves God from him that serves him not, God says, They are as
his mouth, Jer. 15.19. Mal. 3.17, 18. Eccl. 9.2.

To be short, as An Ignorant, Worldly, Carnal, Proud, Unholy sort of Prelates
and Priests, are and have been the great Plague of the Churches these 1300
years at least, so the Skilful, Holy, Humble, Faithful, Laborious, Patient
Ministers of Christ, have been and still are, the great blessings of the World;
for saving Souls, promoting Knowledge, Faith, Holiness, Love and Peace,
opposing Error, Pride, Oppression, VVorldliness, Sensuality and Contention:
diverting Gods Judgments by Faith and Prayer; forsaking all for Christ, and
patiently suffering for well doing, and by Doctrine and Example teaching men to
difference the Creator from the Creature, Holiness from Sin, Heaven from Earth,
Soul from the Body, the Spirit from the Flesh, and helping men to prepare by a
mortified heavenly heart and life, for a comfortable death and endless
happiness. Of such vast importance is it to the world whether the Clergy be
good or bad, skilful or unskilful, holy or worldly; and he is not a true
Christian that is insensible of the difference, or thinks it small.

And now do I need to say any more, to show young men designed for the Ministry
of what importance it is that they be well prepared and qualified for it: God
can and sometime does turn Wolves into faithful Shepherds, and convert those,
that being unconverted, undertake the work that should convert others, and give
wisdom and grace to ignorant and graceless Preachers of wisdom and grace. But
this is not ordinarily to be expected. But as youth is trained up and disposed,
they commonly prove when they come to age: Their first notions lie deepest, and
make way for their like; and resist all that is contrary be it never so true
and good and necessary: Experience tells this to all the world: Those that in
youth are trained in Heathenism, Mahometanism, Popery, or any distinct sect of
Christians, they commonly continue such especially if they live among those who
are for it, and so make it their Interest in reputation or wealth. And if the
Rulers and Times should be but Erroneous, Heretical or Malignant, at enmity to
Truth and serious holiness, alas, how hard is it for ill-taught youth, to
resist the Stream! How hard is it to unteach them the Errors which they first
learnt! A Vomit may easily bring up that which was but lately eaten, but the
yellow and the green humors that lie deep, must cost heart-gripes, before they
will be cast up. False Opinions as well as Truths are usually linkt together;
and the chain is neither easily cast off nor broken. And they that have
received Errors, have received their defensatives: These are like the
Shellfish that carry their house about them. They have studied what to say for
it, but not what can be said against it: or which is worse, by a slight and
false consideration of the arguments for Truth they have disabled them from
doing them any good.

And if they had never so true Notions in their Memories, if they come not in
power on their hearts, and make them not new, spiritual, holy men, these will
not master fleshly Lusts, nor overcome ambitious and worldly Inclinations, nor
make men fit to propagate that Faith and Holiness which they never had.

And it is now that you must get those eminent qualifications of Knowledge and
Holiness which you must after use. And how will you use, that which you have
not?

And yet proud hearts, how empty soever, will be desirous of esteem and
reputation, and will hardly bear vilifying, contempt or disregard. When as
though some few prudent hearers will encourage such young men as they think are
hopeful, yet most will judge of things and persons as they find them; The
ignorant, dry and lifeless Orations of unexperienced, carnal Preachers, will
not be magnified by such as know what Judgment and holy Seriousness that place
and sacred work require. Few will much praise or feed on unsavory or insippid
Food, merely to flatter and please the Cook.

And then when you find that you are slighted for your slight and unskilful
work, your stomachs will rise against those that slight you, and so by
selfishness you will turn malignant, and become Enemies to those that you take
for Enemies to you, because they are not contented with your unholy trifling:
And all your enmity will turn against your self, and be like Satan's against the
members of Christ's which is but his own self-tormenting.

. 15. II. The Case being so important I shall briefly conjoyn your Danger and
your Remedy, beseeching you as you have any care for your Souls, your Country,
or the Church of God, or any thing which Faith or reason should regard, that
you will soberly weigh the Counsel that I give you.

I. The first of your dangers which I shall mention lies in a too hasty
resolving for the Sacred Ministry. Pious and prudent desires and purposes I
would not discourage: But two sorts of Parents in this prove greatly injurious
to the Church: First, Worldly men, that set their Sons to the Universities in
order to their worldly Maintenance and Preferment, looking at the Ministry
merely as a Profession or Trade to live by; Secondly, and many honest, godly
Parents ignorantly think it a good work to design their Children to the
Ministry, and call it a devoting them to God, without due considering whether
they are like to be fit for it or not. And when they have bin some years at the
University, they think a Parsonage or Vicarage is their due; Ordained they must
be; what have they else studied for: Its too late now to change their purposes,
when they have been at seven years cost and labor, to prepare for the
Ministry: They are too old and too proud to go Apprentices or Servants.
Husbandmen they cannot be. They are used to an idler kind of Life. To be
Lawyers will cost them more time and study than they can now afford having lost
so much: and there are more already than can have practice. Physicians are
already so many that the younger sort know not how to live, though they would
for money venture on their Neighbors lives to their greater danger than I am
willing to express. So that there is no way left but for a Benefice to become
Church Mountebanks and Quacks, and undertake the Pastoral care of Souls: before
they well know what Souls are, or what they are made for, or whither they are
going, or how they must be conducted and prepared for their endless state. And
it seems to some, the glory of a Nation, to have many thousand such Lads at the
Universities more than there be Cures or Churches in the Land* all expecting
that their Friends should procure them Benefices. And they must be very
ignorant and bad indeed that cannot find some Ministers so bad as to certify
that they are sober and of good lives, and some Patrons so bad as to like such
as they, and for favor or somewhat worse to present them; and some Bishops
Chaplain bad enough to be favorable in examining them, and then some Bishop
bad enough to ordain and institute them. And by that time nine Thousand such
youths have got Benefices, alas, what a case will the Churches and the poor
peoples Souls be in.

. 16. I. And what remedy is there for this? That which I have now to propose
is, first to tell you, who they be, that should be devoted to the Ministry, and
next what both Parents and you should do.

1. The work is so high, and requires such qualifications, and miscarrying in
it is of such dreadful consequence, that no youth should be resolvedly devoted
to the Ministry, that has not all these following endowments?

(1.) He must have a good natural Wit and Capacity; it should be somewhat above
the ordinary degree; but it must needs be of the better rank of ordinary wits,
for Grace supposes nature; and by sanctifying it turns it the right way; but
does not use to make wise Teachers of natural drones or weak headed lads, that
have not wit enough to Learn. How many and how great things have they to learn
and teach.

(2.) They must have some competent readiness of speech, to utter the knowledge
they have got. One that cannot readily speak his mind in common things, is not
like to come to that ready utterance which will be necessary to a Preacher.

(3.) He must be one that is so far hopeful for Godliness.

1. As to be captivated by no gross sin.

2. To have a love not only to Learning, but to Religion, to the Word of God,
and good Company, and Prayer, and good Books; and a settled dislike of the
things, words and persons that are against these.

(3.) And he must show some sense of the concerns or his soul, and regard of
the Life to come, and that his Conscience is under some effectual convictions
of the evil of sin, and the goodness and necessity of a godly Life. The youth
that has not these three qualifications, should not be intended or devoted to
the Ministry. To devote an incapable person, an ungodly person, to such a holy
state and work is worse than of old to have offered God the unclean which he
abhorred for a sacrifice. And to design a graceless Lad for the Ministry on
pretense of hoping that he may have Grace hereafter is a presumptious
profanation, and worse than to design a Coward to be a Soldier, a wicked
unsuitable person to be a Husband or Wife, in hope they may be fit hereafter.

. 17. II. Therefore if your Parents have been so unwise as to devote that to
God which was unfit for his acceptance, it concerns you quickly to look
better to your selves, and not to run into the consuming fire. You should be
conscious of your own condition; If you may know that you want.

1. A competency of natural capacity and ingenuity.

2. Or of ready speech.

3. Or of serious piety, love to godliness, and heart devotedness to God, do
not meddle with that calling which requires all these.

. 18. Obj. But (you may say) What shall we do, we have gone so far that we
are fit for nothing else.

Answ. You are less fit for the Ministry than for any thing. That which
requires the highest qualifications, will most shame you and condemn you if
you want them. If you are not fit for Physic or Law, be some great man's
Servant; if not that, its better that you turn to the basest Trade or laborious
employment, than to run into the sad case of Hophni, and Phinehas, or Nadab and
Abihu! to the utter undoing of your selves and the loss and danger of many
others. But if your unfitness be not in your disability but your ungodliness,
whether you be Ministers or not, you will be for ever miserable unless you
consider well the great things that should change your Hearts and Lives, and
turn unfeignedly to God: and when that is done, I am no discourager of you. But
believe, it it is far better to be a Cobbler, or Chimney sweeper, or to beg
your bread, than to be an ungodly Clergy man, with the greatest preferments,
riches and applause.

. 19. Obj. But (Parents may say) If we devote none to the Ministry till
Godliness appear in them, how few will be so devoted, Children seldom show much
savor of Religion, and some that seem young Saints prove old Devils.

Answ. 1. At the present we have so many supernumeraries, that we need not fear
a want of number.

2. Children cannot be expected to show that understanding in Religion which
men must have. But if they show not a Love to it, and a Conscience regardful of
Gods authority and the Life to come, and a dislike of ungodliness and sin, you
have no reason to presume that they will be fit for the Ministry. If they had
never been baptized, you ought not to baptize them in such a state. They must
credibly profess Faith and Repentance before they can be adult Christians, and
so dedicated to God in baptism, much more before they are dedicated to him as
the Guides of the Christian Churches.

3. And you can judge but according to probabilities, if they prove bad after a
probable profession, it will not be charged upon you; but we all know that a
hopeful youth is a great preparation to an honest age.

. 20. II. My next advise to you is, abhor sloth and idleness, when you are at
Country Schools, your Masters drive you on by fear, but when you are in the
Universities and at riper age, you are more trusted with your selves: and then
all the diligence which fear constrained, will be left off, and if you be not
carried on with constant pleasure and love of knowledge, the flesh will
prefer its ease, and unwillingness, and weariness will go so slow a pace, as
will bring you to no high degree of Wisdom. And when you have spent your
appointed time, and are void of that, which you should have attained, your
emptiness and ignorance will presently appear, when you are called out to the
use of that knowledge which you have not. And it is not your Canonical Habit,
nor seven or seventeen years spent in the University, nor the Title of Master
of Arts, Bachelor of Divinity, or Doctor, no nor Bishop, that will pass with
men, in their right wits, instead of Knowledge, Diligence, Humility, Patience,
and Charity; nor that without these will do the work to which you are devoted.
And then when you find that other men discern that weakness and badness, which
you are loath to know your selves, it will be like to exasperate you into
diabolical malignity. Believe it, the high and needful accomplishments of a
true Divine, are not easily or speedily attained.

. 21. III. My next warning is, Fear and fly from sensuality, and Fleshly lusts,
and all the baits and Temptations, that may endanger you therein.

Sense and Appetite is born with us, and it is inordinate in our corrupted
nature, and the reason and will, that should resist and rule it, are weakened
and depraved; laboring poor Country men are not in such danger in this as you
are: your bodies are not tired and tamed with labors nor your thoughts taken
up with Wants and Cares. While your bodies are at ease, and your Studies are
Arbitrary, fleshly lust and appetite has time and room to solicit your
fantasies, and incline you to interrupt your Studies, and think of the matters
of sensual delight, either with what to please your Appetite in eating, or of
strong drinks or wine that also exhilarates, or of some needless or hurtful
pastime called Recreation, Cards, Dice, Gaming, etc. or to think of Women and
filthy Lusts, or to read Romances, Play-Books or other corrupting vanities.
More idle Scholars far, are strongly haunted with Temptations to
self-pollution, and other filthy lusts, than the poor and afflicted sort of men.

And if these should prevail, alas! you are undone, they will offend God,
expel his Grace, either wound or sear your Consciences, destroy all spiritual
affections and delights, turn down your hearts from Heaven and Holiness, to
filth and folly; and Beasts will be unfit for the pleasures or the work of
Saints.

. 22. Away therefore from idleness, pamper not the Flesh with fullness or
delights; abhor all time wasting, needless Recreations; away from the baits
of fleshly lust; be no more indifferent herein and unresolved, than you would
be about drinking poison, or leaping into a Coal-pit, or wilfully going among
Murderers or Theives. Presume not on your own strength: he is safest that is
furthest from the danger. Gunpowder must not stand near the fire.

. 23. IV. Be sure to make a prudent choice of your Companions, especially of
your bosom Friends.

It is supposed that a man loves the Company which he chooses, (though not
which he constrainedly is cast upon.) And love and familiarity will give them
great advantage over you. If they be wise they will teach you wisdom, if they
be Holy and Spiritual, they will be drawing you toward God, and settling you in
the resolved hatred of sin, and love of Holiness. But if they be Worldly and
Ambitious, they will be filling your heads with ambitious worldly projects; and
if they be ungodly Hypocrites that have but the dead image and name of
Christians, they will be opposing or deriding serious Godliness, and pleading
for the carcass and formalities of piety as better than serious spiritual
devotion: and if they be hardened malignants, they will be trying to make you
such as they by lies, revilings or plausible cavils, against the things and
persons that are spiritually contrary to their fleshly minds and interests. And
while you hear not what can be said on the other side, it will possess your
minds (if God preserve you not) with false thoughts of Gods Servants, and with
scorn or contempt of such as you hear described falsely; as Papists think of
Protestants as Heretics, you will take serious Godliness, for Fanatical
self-conceit, and think of the best Christians as you do of Quakers or others,
that are mad with fear or pride.

Wise and Religious Companions and bosom Friends are an unspeakable blessing,
but the merciful Providence of God does usually choose them for us, yet so as
that usually we must also be faithful choosers for our selves. Ill company is a
dangerous snare, and God often tries us by casting us where such are, but if
we choose it not, and love it not, God will provide us of an antidote, and we
may converse with him even in the presence of the ungodly, and he will teach us
by the experience of their folly, and sin, to dislike it more than if we had
never seen it.

. 24. V. Especially be most careful in the choice of your Tutors and
Instructors.

Though it be first your Parents part to choose them for you, it is yours to do
your best herein, to save your selves if your Parents by ignorance or malignity
do mischoose. And the Rulers that allow not men to choose their own Pastors,
yet hitherto allow the Parents or the Sons to choose their own Tutors, and
Domestic Instructors.

But this is the grand danger and misery of mankind, that the ignorant know not
what Teachers to choose: Yea the more they need the help of the best, the less
they know who those are; but i will tell you are far as you are capable of
discerning.

1. Usually the common report of men that are sober and impartial commends
worthy men above others, for Knowledge and Goodness is like Light, a self
discovering thing.

2. Choose not a Teacher that prefers humane Wisdom before Divine, but one
that makes it his business to expound the Scripture, and teach you what is the
Will of God, and how to please him and to be saved.

3. Choose not one that is of a worldly and ambitions mind; and will teach you
that which most conduces to get preferment and worldly wealth, and not that
which best helps you to Heaven.

4, Choose not one that is Factious and uncharitable, violent for a Party,
either because it is uppermost, or because it stands for some odd opinion or
causeless singularity; but one that is of a Christian Catholic charity, and
loves a godly man as such, even as himself, and is for wronging none. but
doing good to all, and maintaining Unity and Peace.

. 25. VI, Watch with great fear against Pride, Ambition and Worldly ends, in
your own hearts and lives.

The roots of these mortal sins, are born in us, and lie very deep. And they
not only live, but damnably reign where they are little discerned, bewailed or
suspected; but woe to him that is conquered by them. Ye cannot serve God and
Mammon. The love of the World is enmity to God, if any man love the world, the
love of the Father is not in him, Paul spoke weeping of such whose God was
their Belly, who gloried in their shame, who minded earthly things, being
Enemies to the cross of Christ, when their Conversation should have been in
Heaven, Phil. 3.18, 19, 20. A surprise in passion even of an ugly sin, is less
dangerous than such an habit of worldliness and pride. And alas how many that
have escaped the Temptations of sloth and sensuality, have been flattered and
overcome by this. Those that have had better wits than others, and got more
Learning, have thought now that preferment is their due. And if they fall into
times (which have not been rare) when the malignity of Church or State
Governors, it has made it the way to preferment to declaim against some
Truth, or the most Religious men, that are against a carnal sinful interest,
and to revile Gods best Servants, and cry up some notion or error of their
own, and magnify the worst that promote their worldly ends and hopes, alas!
how does this stream usually carry down the pregnantest wits into the Gulf of
perdition:

Yea some that seemed very humble and mortified when they had no great
Temptation; when wealth and honor have been set before them, have lost virtue
and wit before they were well aware. And worldly interest has secretly bribed
and biased their understandings, to take the greatest Truth for Error, Duty
for Sin, and Error for Truth, and Sin for Duty, and they have talked, and
preached, and wrote for it, and seem to believe that indeed they are in the
right; and cannot discern that they are perverted by interest, when an
impartial stander by, may easily see the bias, by the current of their course.
And if you be servants of the flesh and the world, woe to you when your Masters
turn you off, and you must receive your wages.

. 26. VII. Above all therefore choose like real Christians, and take God and
Heaven for your hope, your all.

If you do not so you are not Christians indeed, nor stand to your baptismal
Covenant, and if you be here fixed by the Grace of God, and your sober
consideration and belief, you will then know what to choose and do. It will
teach you to refer all worldly things to spiritual and heavenly ends and
uses; and to count all things loss and dung for Christ, and to choose the one
thing needful, which shall never be taken from you; even that which will guide
you in just and safe ways, and save you from the greatest evil, and give your
minds continual peace, even that which passes understanding, and will be best
at last, when sinners are forsaken.

. 27. VIII. My next Counsel therefore is for the order of your Studies; Begin
then with your Catechism and practical Divinity, to settle your own Souls in a
safe condition for Life or Death. And deal not so foolishly as to wast many
years in inferior Arts and Sciences, before you have Studied how to please God
and to be saved. I unfeignedly thank God that by sickness and his Grace, he
called me early to learn how to Die, and therefore to Learn what I must be and
how to live, and thereby drew me to Study the Sacred Scriptures, and abundance
of practical spiritual English Books, till I had somewhat settled the
resolution, and the peace of my own Soul, before I had gone far in humane
Learning: and then I found more leisure and more capacity to take in
subservient knowledge in its proper time and place. And indeed I had lost most
of my Studies of Philosophy and difficult controversies in Theology; if I had
fallen on them too young, before I came to due capacity, and so had been
prepossessed with crude or unsound notions, for they had kept out that which
required a riper judgment to recieve it. Such Books as I before commended to
the Apprentices contain the Essentials of Religion, plainly, affectionately,
and practically delivered, in a manner tending to deep impression, renovation
of the Soul and spiritual experience, without which you will be but like
sounding brass or a tinkling Cymbal. The Art of Theology without the POWER,
consisting in Holy Life, and Light, and Love, is the make of the Hypocrite.

Yet before you come to lay exact Systems of Theology in due Method in your
minds, much help of subservient Arts and Sciences is necessary. How ever a
Council of ancient Bishops once forbad the Reading of the Gentiles Books.

. 28. IX. And here next I advise you, Thoroughly to Study the Evidences and
nature of the Christian Faith, but not to hasten too soon over confidently on
hard controversies, as if your judgment of them at maturity, must have no
change; but still suppose that greater light by longer Study may cause in you
much different thoughts of such difficulties.

. 29. Lastly, I advise you, that you begin not the exercise of your Ministry
too boldly, in public, great or judicious Auditories. Over much confidence
signifies Pride and Ignorance of your imperfection, and of the greatness of
the work, and the dreadfulness of the most Holy Majesty. But (if you can) at
first settle a competent time in the house with some ancient experienced
Pastor, that has some small Country Chapel, that needs your help. And

1. There you may Learn as well as Teach, and learn by his practice that which
you must practice, which in a great house as a Chaplain you will hardly do, but
must cast your self into a far different mould.

2. By Preaching some years to a small ignorant people where you fear not
critical judgments, you will get boldness of speech, and freedom of utterance,
without that servile Study of words, and learning your written notes without
Book, which will be tiresome, time-wasting and lifeless. And when freedom and
use has brought you to a habit of ready speaking of the great and necessary
things, and acquaintance with ignorant Country people has taught you to
understand their case, you will have a better preparation for more public
places (when you are clearly called to them) than you were ever like to get
either in Universities, among Scholars, or in great men's Houses.

Compassion to the Church that is plagued with bad Ministers, and by the weak
undergo exceeding great loss, and the sense of the grand importance of the
Pastors qualifications to the happiness or misery of Souls and Kingdoms, have
drawn me to say more to young Students that intend the Ministry than I at first
intended. And therefore with the other two sorts I shall be very brief.

One earnest warning to you, and all young men, I add, [know that one of the
most common and pernicious maladies of mankind,] is an unhumbled understanding,
rashly confident of its own apprehensions, though false, hasty judging and
presidence, the brat of Ignorance and Pride; Of a multitude of persons
differing, how few are not obstinately confident that they are in the right.
even Lads that are past twenty years of age; O! dread this Vice, and suspect
your understanding: Be humble, take time and try, and hear before you judge:
Labor for knowledge, but take not on you to be sure where you are not, but
doubt and try till you are sure.

CHAP. X. Counsel to Young Students in Physic.
SUpposing what is said to others, which equally concerns you, I briefly add.

I. Make not the getting of Money, and your own worldly prosperity, so much of
your end as the doing good in the world, by the preservation of men's health and
lives, and the pleasing of God thereby. Selfish low ends show a selfish mind,
that lives not to God or public good.

II. Undertake not the practice of Physic without all these qualifications.

1. A special sagacity, or natural searching conjecturing judgment. For almost
all your work lies in the dark, and is manageed by Conjecture.

2. Much Reading, especially of Observators, that you may know what has been
the experience of all ages, and eminent men before you.

3. The experience of other men's practice: And therefore if possible, stay some
time first in the house with some eminent Practitioner, whose experiences you
may see, and hear his counsel.

III. Begin with plain and easy cases, and meddle only with safe and harmless
remedies; And think not your selves Physicians indeed, till you have got
considerable experience your selves, there is no satisfactory trusting to other
men's experiences alone.

IV. In cases too hard for you, send your Patients to abler Physicians, and
prefer not your reputation or gain before their lives.

V. Study simples thoroughly, especially the most powerful; and affect not such
compositions, as by the mixture of the less powerful, do frustrate the
ingredients, which would else be more effectual.

VI. Forget not the Poverty of most Patients, who have not Money to pay large
chargeable Bills of the Apothecary, nor give large Fees to a Physician;
multitudes neglect Physic and venture without it, because Physicians require
so much, and are so much for their Apothecaries gain, that they have it not to
pay.

VII. Take heed of self conceitedness and rash confidence, and too hasty
judging. Most of your work is hard; many things, which you think not on, may
occasion your mistake. Causes and Diseases have mavelous diversities. Most
that are quick judges, and suddenly confident that all their first
apprehensions are true, do prove but proud self-ignorant fools, and kill more
by ignorances and temerity, than highway robbers or designing Murderers do.
And though the Grave hide you mistakes, they are known to God.

VIII. Give not too much Physic nor too often, or without need, nor venture on
things dangerous; Man's life is precious, and nature is the chief Physician,
which Art must but help. The Body is tender and easily distempered, rather do
too little than too much. Often tampering uses to kill at last. As he that daily
washes a glass, at last breaks it; and as Seamen are bold because they have
often escaped, but many, if not most, are drowned at last; and as Soldiers that
have often escaped are bold to venture, but killed at last. Its usually so with
them that often take Physic except from a very cautelous skillful man. Therefore
were I a Woman I would not marry a Physician, lest his nearness and kindness
should cause him to be tampering with me so often, till a mistake did kill me:
All your Neighbors may mistake your Disease without your hurt, but your
Physicians mistake may be your present Death.

IX. Direct men first as faithful Friends, to the things which may prevent the
need of Physic. viz.

1. A temperate and wholesome Diet, avoiding fullness and hurtful things.

2. Sufficient labor to suscitate natural heat, keep pure the humors, and
expel excrements; avoiding Idleness.

3. Keeping warm, and avoiding occasions of Cold, especially cold Drink, cold
Places, and cold Clothing, either when they are hot, or in Winter when nature
needs help.

4. Contentedness and quietness of mind, and cheerful converse.

5. Direct them to such familiar remedies at home, in their Drinks and Diet as
is suitable to their distempers, for preservation, and are safe and harmless,
and put them not to a needless dependence on your frequent help, make not use
of weak Women's fears, to make them miserable by needless Medicining, and so to
make them as Tenants to you, to pay you a constant Rent to quiet them.

X. Give them good Counsel for their Souls that need it; flatter them not with
false hopes of life, when it tends to hinder their preparations for Death.
They and you are hasting to so great a change, as requires great and careful
forethoughts: Its sad to go out of the World, and not at all to know whither,
and what will be their next habitation; much more to be in a certain state of
misery. Those will hear a Physician that will not send for a Divine, and it is
not a work unbeseeming your Profession, but such as Christian Faith and Charity
bespeaks.

CHAP. XI. Counsel to Young Students of the Law in London.
GOD has made much use of honest Lawyers, as the instruments of our safety,
and of the just and orderly Government of the Land.

1. They are not bred up in mere idleness and Luxury, as too many are of higher
Birth, but in such diligent Study as improveth their understandings, and
keeps them from that debauchery which Idleness and fullness cherish.

2. And their Studies and Callings make it their interest, as to know, so also
to maintain the Laws; and that is to maintain propriety, just Liberty and
Order, and so to preserve justice and the common peace (except in Countries
that have pernicious Laws) Injustice in Judges and Lawyers is like Heresy,
ungodliness and persecution in Pastors of the Church; clean contrary to their
very Calling and Profession; but more easily and commonly seen and hated,
because it is against the well known interest of mankind. Shame therefore and
common hatred of the unjust, is here a great restraint of evil.

But bad men, for all this, will do badly, and turn even the Rules of Justice
to Oppression, to serve the Wills and Lusts of those that can promote them,
that by them they may serve their own. Therefore that Young men, that Study the
Law, may prove wise and honest, is of great importance to the common good, as
well as to their own.

I. And here first I warn all such to take heed of the sins of sensuality.
Alas! London does so abound with Temptations, that without Grace and wise
Resolution you are unsafe. There are so many sensual, proud, and ungodly young
men ready to entice you, so many Play Houses, Taverns, and Filthy Houses to
entertain you, that if you go without Grace and Wit, the Flesh and the Devil,
will soon precipitate you into the slavery of brutish Flesh. And then you
forfeit Gods favor and protection, and he may leave you to more sin and
misery, or to grow up to be the Servants of Oppression, the Enemies of Piety,
and the Plagues of the Commonwealth.

II. Study hard; for Idleness never made good Lawyers, nor very useful men.

III. Abhor and avoid ill Company, especially of two sorts.

1. Those that would entice you to the places, and practices, aforesaid, of
voluptuousness.

2. Those that being themselves deceived would deceive you, against Religion
and your Salvation. Its too well known that such persons in London are not
rare, though the danger by them is not known enough. Even those that are so
unchristian and inhumane, as to prate against the Christian Faith, the Truth,
the Authority or sufficiency of the Sacred Scripture, the Life to come, the
Souls immortality, if not also against the Government and Providence of God,
will yet talk as confidently, as if they were in their wits, yea and were the
greatest wits among us. For my part I could never yet get one man of them
soberly to join with me in a fair disquisition of the Truth, and follow it on
till we came to see the just conclusion: Commonly they will fly from me, and
refuse disputes, or turn all to some rambling rant or jest, or when they are
stated, be gone and go no further, and come no more.

Young unfurnished heads are unfit to dispute with the Devil or any such
Messengers of his. A Pest house is not more dangerous to you. But if they have
perplexed you, desire some well studied Minister of Christ, either to meet
them, or to resolve your doubts. And if you will read what I have written on
that subject, you may find enough to resolve, if it be justly received, viz. 1.
In my Reasons for the Christian Religion. 2. In my Unreasonableness of
Infidelity. 3. In my Life of Faith. 4. In More Reasons for the Christian
Religion.


And avoid also the snares of those that would draw you into uncharitable
Factions, on pretense of right Religion, to hate, or censure, or fly from all
that are not just of their Sect and way; especially the proud faction of
Church-Tyrants, that on pretense of Order and Piety, would set up a lifeless
Image of Formality, and burn, banish, silence, or persecute all that are not
for Domination, and Usurpation, and Worldly interest.

IV. Let not rising and riches be the chief end of your Studies, but to serve
God in the just service of your King and Country, to promote justice, and do
good in the World.

V. Live in the familiarity of the most useful men of your Profession, that is,
the wise and the most conscionable; and choose those Pastors for your best
helpers in Religion, who keep closest to Gods word, and warp not after any
dangerous singularities, or worldly preferments, or unpeaceable tearing
impositions on their Brethren; and that live as they Preach in Love, Peace and
Holiness, as men that set their Hearts and Hopes on future Blessedness; and
labor for the Churches Edification and Concord, and the saving men's Souls.

CHAP. XII. Counsel to the Sons of the Nobility and Magistrates.
THough men of your rank, are furthest out of the hearing of such as I, and
usually the greatest contemners of our Counsel, yet will not that excuse us
from due compassion to the Land our of Nativity, nor from Love and Pity to your
selves, nor from any probable Ministerial attempt to do you good.

Your dangers are much greater than other men's; or else Christ had never so
often told us, how hard it is for Rich men to be saved; and how few such escape
the Idolatrous damning Love of the World, and become sincere believers and
followers of a Crucified Savior, Luke 12. and 16. etc.

I. One part of your great danger is, that you are commonly bred up among the
baits of sensuality. It is not for nothing that fullness of bread is made one of
the sins of Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.49. and that he that after lay in the flames of
Hell is described, as richly clothed and faring sumptuously every day. Not
that all rich Clothes or sumptuous seasonable Feasting is a sin, but that
these use both to signify sensuality and to cherish it. Its the sure brand of
the ungodly, to be Lovers of Pleasure more than of God. They that but seldom
come where tempting plenty is, of delicious meats and drinks are too often
overcome: But they that are bred up, where plenty of both these is daily before
them, are in greater danger, lest their Table and their Drink become a snare.

Feast not therefore without fear, remember that flesh-pleasing sensuality is
as damnable in the rich as in the poor, and that the greatest wealth will not
allow you to take any more for quantity or quality, than stands with
Temperance, and truly tends to fit you for your duty, your riches are given
you in trust as God's Stewards, to serve your Country, and relieve the poor,
and to promote good uses, but not to serve your fleshly lusts, nor to be abused
to excess or cherish sin. To be sober and temperate is the interest of your own
Souls and Bodies, and under your great Temptations the more laudable.

II. Another of your dangers is the ill examples of too many persons of your
rank. You are apt to think that their wealth and Pomp and Power makes them more
imitable than others, as being more Honorable. And if they wallow in
drunkenness or filthy lust, or talk profanely, you may think that such sins
are the less disgraceful.

But can you dream that they are the less Dangerous and Damnable. Will God fear
them or spare them. Must they not die and be judged as well as the lowest. Is
it not an aggravation of their sin, that its done by men that had the greatest
Mercies, and were put in trust and honor purposely to suppress sin in the
World. As their places signify more than others, so do their sins; and
accordingly shall they be punished: Does the quondam Wealth, Honor or
Pleasures of a Dives, a Pharaoh, an Ahab, a Herod, a Pilate, a Nero, ease a
lost tormented Soul.

III. Another of your Temptations will be Pride, and overvaluing of your
selves, because of wealth and worldly honor. But this is so foolish a sin and
against such notorious humbling evidence, that as it is the Devils Image, it is
natures shame. Is not your flesh as corruptible as a Beggars. Do you not think
what is within that skin? And how a Leprosy, or the Small Pox, would make you
look, and how you must shortly leave all your glory, and your bodies become
unpleasant spectacles? Do you not think what it is to lie rotting in a Grave
and turn to Earth? And do you not know how much more loathsome a thing all the
Vice and Unholiness of your Souls is; And what it is to have to do with a Holy
God, and to be near to judgment and an endless State. He is mad in sin that
such considerations will not humble.

IV. Another of your dangers is from flatterers, that will be pleasing and
praising you, but never tell you of that which should humble you and awake you,
to the sense of your Everlasting concerns. But none here are so dangerous as a
Flattering Clergy, who being themselves carnal worldlings would serve that flesh
which is their Master, by your Favor and Beneficence. Ahab had such Prophets
that said go and prosper; in whose mouths the Devil was a lying Spirit. How
many sincere men have been undone by such.

Remember then what it is to be a sinful man, and what need you have of
vigilant Friends and Pastors, that will deal faithfully with you, as if it were
on your death Bed: And encourage such, and abhor worldly flatterers. Your
Souls have need of as strong Physic, and as plain dealing as the poorest men's,
and therefore bear it, and thankfully accept it.

V. And one of your greatest dangers here will be, that your own fleshly minds
and this worldly sort of men, especially if of the Clergy, will be drawing you
to false contemptuous thoughts of serious Godliness, and of serious godly men.
When as if you be not such your selves you are undone for ever, and all your
flatterers, your big Names, Wealth and Honor will neither save you nor ease
your pains in Hell. As ever you believe there is a God, believe that you owe
him the utmost reverence, obedience and love, that your faculties can perform.
And as ever you care what becomes of you for ever, pay him this great due, and
hate all that would divert you; and much more all those diabolical suggestions,
which would draw you to think that a needless thing which must be your life and
all.

VI. But above all I beseech you fear and watch, lest you be drawn to espouse
any thing as your interest, which is against the interest, and command of
Christ, and against his Kingdom, or the good of his Church, or the
Commonwealth. As the Devil first undid the World, by making deceived Eve
believe, that Gods command was against her interest, so does he to this day,
but with none so much as with Nobles and Rich men. God has commanded you
nothing but what is for your own good, nor forbidden you any thing but what is
for your own and others hurt. He needs not you or any; but you must allow him
to be God, and therefore to be wiser and better than you, and to know better
what is best and fittest for you and others: But Satan will slander to you Gods
Laws, Ways and Servants; for he is for your enmity and separation from God, and
therefore would draw you to believe, that that he and his ways are Enemies to
you, and against your pleasure, honor, domination, commodity or ease. O how
many Princes and Great Men have been utterly undone, by believing the Flesh,
the Devil and his Ministers, that Christianity is against their power, honor
or other interests, and that the Scripture is too precise, and that Conscience,
obeying God before them, is against their power and prerogative, and so have
set them as Enemies to keep under Conscience and serious godliness, lest
obedience to their wills be thereby hindered.

Yea how many also so dote, as to think that the interest of Head, Heart,
Stomach and Members, of Rulers and Subjects, stand not in Union, but in
contrariety and victory against each other. Woe to the Land that has such
Rulers, and to the poor Tenants that have such Landlords. But much more woe to
such selfish oppressors, that had rather be feared than loved, and take it for
their honor to be free and able to do mischief, and destroy those, whose
common welfare should be more pleasant to them than their own. And to them
especially that take serious godliness, and godly men to be against them, and
therefore bend their wit and power to suppress them; as if they said as Luke
19.27. We will not have this man reign over us, whom Christ will destroy as his
unthankful Enemies, and will break them with his Iron rod, and dash in pieces
as a potters vessel, Psalm. 2.

VII. As you love your selves and the common good, get good men about you, read
Ps. 101.15, 16. Especially faithful teachers, and next godly Friends and
Servants, and Companions, and read much the Histories of the Lives of wise and
Godly men, such as K. Edw. 6th. and the Lord Harrington, young men, imitate
such excellent persons as Scripture and other History justly commend to your
imitation. It will be profitable to read the Lives of worthy men, such as are
gathered by Mr. Clerk, Dr. Fuller, Thuanus, Beza, yea of the Martyrs; and of
such Christian Princes as Constantine M. Theodosius, etc. Maximilian 2d.
Emperor, John Frederick of Saxony, Philip of Hassia, Ludov. Pius of France, yea
such Heathens as Titus, Trajan, Adrian, but especially M. Aurel. Antonine and
Alex. Severus: Yea and such Lawyers, Philosophers, Physicians, but especially
Divines, as Melchior Adamus in Four Volums has recorded; and of such Bishops
as Cyprian, Nazianzene, Ambrose Austin, Basil, Chrysostom, and our Usher and
such others.

VIII. Live not in Idleness (as the Sons of rich men too often do) for that will
rust and corrupt your minds, and cherish besotting, damning lusts, and render
you worthless and useless in the world, and consequently the greatest plagues
of your Country, to which you should be the greatest helps and blessings. Make
as much Conscience of improving your hours, as if you were the poorest men: you
have most wages, and should do God most work. Let holy and useful studies one
part of the day, and doing good to others another part, and necessary
refreshment and exercise another, take up your time; you have none allowed you
for any thing unprofitable, much less hurtful.

O what a blessing to the world are wise Godly Magistrates, and what a curse
are the Foolish and Ungodly.

IX. Remember that the grand design of the Devil and all deceivers is to delude
and corrupt the rulers of the people, knowing how much they signify by their
Laws, Power and Examples: and how sad it will be to be judged as a Persecutor
or a Captain of iniquity. And therefore you must have a greater self-suspicion,
and fear of seduction and sin than others; and must watch more carefully
against wicked Counsel and example, but especially the Temptations of your own
flesh, and corrupted nature, and of your Wealth and place.

CHAP. XIII. Counsel to Parents (and Tutors of Youth.)
SHould I now say, to Parents and Teachers, what on their parts is necessary,
to their great duty, and the good of Youth, it would be more than all that I
have said already; but that is not the present work, and you may see much of it
done in my Christian Directory. But because so much lies on their hands, I
beseech all such that read these lines, to remember.

I. How near their relation to their Children is, and that for a Parent to
betray their Souls to Sin and Hell, by neglect or by ill means, seems more
unexcusable cruelty, than for the Devil a known Enemy to do it.

II. How very much their welfare is entrusted to your care, you have the
Teaching of them before the Ministers, and have them always nearer with you,
and have greater power over them. O! that you knew what holy instructions, and
heavenly excitations and good example God requires of you for their good: And
how much of the hopes of the Church and World lie on the Holy skill and
fidelity of Parents, in the right education of youth.

III. O feed not their sinful desires and lusts; use them not to pride, to
idleness, to too much fullness or pleasing of the appetite; but teach them the
reasons of Temperance, and Mortification, and the sin and mischief of all
sensuality.

IV. Yet use them with tender fatherly Love, and make them perceive that it is
for their own good, and cherish their profitable delights; study how to make
all good delightful to them, encourage and reward them. Tell them of the wisdom
and goodness of Gods word, and let them read the Lives of Holy men.

V. Choose them both Callings, Habitations and Relations which make most for
the common good, and for the advantage of their Souls, and not those that most
serve Covetousness, Pride or Slothfulness.

VI. Know their particular inclinations, corruptions and temptations, and
accordingly watch and keep them, as you would do against death.

VII. Settle them under wise and godly Pastors, and in the familiar Company of
godly persons, especially of their age and usual converse.

VIII. Keep them as much as possible from Temptations at home and abroad,
especially those that tend to sensuality and to impiety or corrupting their
judgments against Religion. Thrust them not beyond Sea or elsewhere unfortified
among deceivers, for a mere Ornament, as some cruelly do.

IX. Remember how you dedicated them to Christ in Baptism, and what was
promised, and what renounced, and what you bound yourselves to do.

X. Remember still how much the happiness or misery of Church, and Kingdoms,
and of the World, does lie on the right or wrong educating of Youth by Parents;
much more than our Universities or Schools.

XI. Remember that your own comfort or sorrow in them, lies most on your own
duty or neglect; if they prove wicked and Plagues of the World, and you are the
cause, it may tear your hearts, but what a joy is it to be the means of their
Salvation, and of their public service in the World.

XII. Disgrace sin to them, and commend holiness by word and practice, and be
your selves what you would have them be. And pray daily for them and your
selves. The Lord bless this Counsel to them and you.

CHAP. XIV. What are men's Duties to each other as ELDER and YOUNGER.
. 1. IT is most clear in Scripture and Reason that there are many special
duties, which the Elder and Younger, as such, owe to each other. The Elder are
bound.

1. To be wiser than the Younger, as having longer time, and so to be their
instructers in their several places.

2. And especially to deliver down to them the Sacred Scripture which they
received, and the Memorials of Gods works, done for his Church in their days,
and which they received from their Fathers.

3. And to go before them in the example of a holy and heavenly Life, Job 32.4,
and 8.8. Heb. 5.14. Tit. 2.2.3. 1 Io. 2.13, 14. Judge. 6.13. Psalm. 44.1. and
78.3, 5. Deuteronomy. 1. 21. Exodus 12.26. Deuteronomy. 11.19. Ios. 4.6.21, 22. Joel. 1.3.

. 2. And nature and Scripture tell us that the Younger owe much Duty to the
Elder sum'd up, 1 Pet. 5.5. Ye Younger submit your selves to the Elder; this
submission includes especially, a reverence to their judgments, preferring
them before their own, and supposing that ordinarily they are wiser than the
younger, and therefore living toward their Elders in a humble Learning
disposition, and not proudly setting their unfurnished wits against their
greater experience without very evident reason. For the understanding of which
note.

. 3. 1. That it is certain that mere Age does not make men wise or good, none
are more sottishly and uncurably ignorant than the aged ignorants; and few so
bad as the old obstinate sinners. For they grow worse deceiving and being
deceived, and more and more abuse Gods mercy, and are still going further from
him, as the faithful are growing better and nearer to him.

2. And it is certain that God greatly blesses some young men's understandings,
and makes them wiser than the aged and their Teachers.

3. And such a one is not bound to think that he knows not what he knows;
nor to believe that every old man is wiser than he; all this we grant.

. 4. But though, Eccl. 4.13, Better is a poor and a wise Child, than an old and
foolish King who will no more be admonished. Yet,

1. It is certain that knowledge comes much by experience; and long experience
and use, is far more powerful than the short: And Time and Converse is
necessary to it; naturally or ordinarily long learning and use increases
knowledge. Do not all take it for granted that usually the boys who have been
many years at School are better who Scholars than beginners; and so in all
other acquisitions. Therefore it was the Elders that were commonly the Rulers
of the people in Church and Commonwealth, and the Pastors and Rulers are thence
called Elders: And if they were not ordinarily the wisest, why did not God make
the Children the ordinary Teachers and Rulers of their Parents, but the Parents
of the Children? Old men may be Ignorant and Erroneous as well as wicked: but
young men cannot be ripe in wisdom without a miracle; we are not therefore now
to suppose unusual things to be usual. Ordinarily youth is ignorant and raw;
their conceptions undigested, not well fixed or improved: It is but few things
that they know, and their ignorance of the rest, makes them liable to many
Errors, Heb. 5.11, 12. For the Time ye ought to have been Teachers, fitness to
teach supposes Time, the young cannot digest strong meats, A Novice must not
be a Bishop, the reason may seem strange, Lest he be lift up with Pride, and
fall into the condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3.6. One would think youth
should be most humble as conscious of defectiveness. But because the Ignorant
know not that more is to be known than ever they attained, therefore they know
not their own Ignorance.

2. And this PROUD IGNORANCE is so odious a sin, and the nurse of so many more,
and so great an Enemy to wisdom and all good, that it is no wonder that it is
the way to the condemnation of the Devil.

. 5. Therefore though young men should not receive any Falsehood, Heresy, or
ill example from the aged, yet they should still reber that caeteris paribus,
Age has the great advantage for knowledge, and youth must needs live in an
humble teachable sense of Ignorance; other, men's abuse of Time, and aged folly
will not prove them miraculously wise. The aged are always the wisest if they
equally improve their time and helps.

. 6. It is so odious a sin for Lads and young Students to be self-conceited,
and unteachable; and set up their apprehensions with ungrounded confidence
against their Elders, that all should be very fearful of that guilt, and have
such humble thoughts of their own understandings, as to be jealous of their
conceptions; for all these Vices make up their self-conceited prefidence.

1. It is both great ignorance of the darkness of men's understanding, and great
ignorance of themselves, to be ignorant that they are ignorant, and to think
they are sure of that which they know not.

2. It is an odious sort of Pride, to overvalue an ignorant understanding, and
to be proudly confident of that which they have not.

3. It is folly to think that Truth can be known, without sufficient time and
trial; and contrary to the Worlds continual experience.

4. It is an absurd, an inhumane, a subverting of the order of World, for Lads
to set up their Wits by groundless self-conceitedness against their Elders, as
for Subjects to set their Wills against Rulers.

5. It is a continual unrighteousness; there is a justice required in our
common private judging, as well as in Judges public judgment. And all should
be heard and tried before we peremptorily judge.

6. It is a nest of continual Error in the mind, which is the Souls deformity,
and contrary to natures love of Truth.

. 7. And it has abundance of mischievous effects.

1. It keeps out that Truth or Knowledge which should be received. It
obstinately resists necessary teaching, whereas the willingest entertainment
is little enough to get true knowledge, even by slow degrees. As God gives
birds an instinct to feed their young, so the young ones by instinct hunger,
and open their mouths. But if they abhorred their meat and must be crammed, they
would commonly perish, that knowledge, that such get, must be from themselves,
in their own thinking and observation only: Where their minds are yet
unfurnished with those Truths that must let in more, and daily objects will
occasion error or confusion in their minds that are unprepared to improve
them, and their own lusts will pervert them, and one error draw in more,
whereas the help of those that by long and successful Study, have rightly
ordered and digested their conceptions, might be an exceeding help to willing
Learners.

2. And such by Pride do forfeit the Grace of God, which he gives to the
humble, and resists the proud; and are often given up to the self-conceitedness
which they so defend, till their own Counsels and ways be their confusion.

3. And the Devil has advantage to set in, and even possess such proud,
prepared ignorant minds, and become their Teacher, and lead them almost to what
he will, against Truth, and the Church, and themselves, and God.

4. And self-conceit, and hasty confidence makes them continual liars; even
while they rage for what they say as true: For being usually mistaken for want
of patient trial, they say what they think, and are not to be much believed in
their prefidence.

. 8. But seeing many old men are ignorant and erroneous, and some young men
have sounder understandings, how shall I know when I am guilty of proud,
self-conceit, and prefidence, and refusing others judgment. Answ. 1. When you
rashly neglect their judgment and Counsel, who have had as good helps and
parts as you, and far longer time and experience, without so much as hearing
what they have to say, and taking time to try the cause according to its
weight, especially if they be such as nature or relation obliged you to learn
of. 2. When you easilier suspect such than your own understandings. 3. When
your confidence of your understandings is so unproportionable to your Time and
Studies, that you must suppose you know by a miracle or some rare capacity and
wit; as if you had got more in a few years than the rest of mankind does in
many. 4. When you judge suddenly before you take time to think, and may know
that you never heard what may be said against you.

5. When you talk most in a bold asserting or a Teaching way, as if you were
Oracles to be heard and reverenced, and not in a humble enquiring way, with
that necessary doubting which beseems Learners; except ye become as Little
Children in teachable humility, you are not fit for the School of Christ,
Matthew. 18.3. Even he that is a Teacher must be a Learner still; as conscious of
his remaining ignorance, and not think himself above it, nor set himself to
dispute against all that he understands not, but continue humbly to search and
try. 6. When those Reasons of your own seem good and cogent, which are
sufficiently confuted, and you cannot see it, or which men of the most approved
Learning and fitness to judge do judge to be but folly; and when other men's
soundest reasons seem light to you, because you judge by a proud and selfish
understanding, confident and tenacious of all that is your own, and contemning
that which is against you.

7. When you can too easily without certain cogent reason dissent from the
judgment, not only of those whose Light and Integrity, has by
self-manifestation convinced the World, but also from the generality of such as
are commonly known to be the wise, godly and impartial; yea perhaps from all
the Church of Christ.

8. When the most and wisest men that know you, think you not so wise as you
think your selves, nor your reason so good; but pity your self-conceitedness,
and yet this brings you not to suspect and try.

9. When you are hardly and rarely brought to an humble confession of your
errors, but in all debates you seem still, what ever the cause be, to be in
the right, and when you have once said it you will stand to it, and justify
untruths, or extenuate and excuse them.

10. When you too much affect the esteem of wisdom, and love to have your
judgments a Rule to others, and are unfit for true subjection.

In a word when instead of being swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to
wrath, you are swift to speak and dictate, slow to hear and learn, and swift to
wrathful censure of Dissenters.

. 9. So common and hurtful is this sin in mankind, that you should still be
duly fearful of it; Error I fear takes up the greater half of the thoughts
of men, and most are rather deceived than in the right, and man's mind in flesh
is in great darkness, and therefore PROUD IGNORANCE is a monstrous and
pernicious vice; and most of the confusions and miseries of the World, of
Kingdoms, Churches and all Societies come from it. Yea though it seems most
contrary to Skepticism, it tends at last to Infidelity or Atheism. For when
experience has convinced such, that their most confident rage, was but a
mistake, they turn to think that there is nothing certain, and deny the
greatest Truths. It is by this one sin of proud self-conceitedness in false
thoughts, that Kingdoms, Churches and the World by obstinacy seems remediless,
and the wisest men that would cure them can do no good, but on themselves and
few.

. 10. But it is no where more unnatural than in Children against their Parents
Counsel, and Scholars against their Tutors, and Ignorant persons, against the
common consent of the most able Godly Pastors. What an odious thing is it to
see an ignorant Lad run against all his Fathers words, and think that he is
wiser and always in the right; and to hear ignorant persons magisterially judge
and despise their wise and faithful Teachers, before they are capable to
understand them, or the matter of which they talk? Oh! how happily might
Parents, and Pastors, and wise men promote knowledge and goodness in the world,
were it not, for this selfish prefidence which shuts the door against their
necessary helps.

CHAP. XV. The Conclusion, to Ministers.
THere is another sort of Helpers, on whom the welfare of Youth much depends;
even the Ministers of Christ. But I presume not here to teach them: In my
Reformed Pastor, I have spoken somewhat freely when I had leave. I cannot
expect that those that silence me should hear me; nor will I think that able
faithful Ministers need my Counsel. But all that I will now say is, humbly to
entreat those who take no great pains with the young persons in their Parishes,
and will not be admonished by such as I, but to read Martin Bucer (who had so
great a hand in counselling our Reformers that made the Liturgy) his Book de
Regno Dei, his Censure of the Liturgy, especially of Baptism, Confirmation,
Ordination and Discipline, and his vehement pressing the necessity of
Congregational Discipline, and denying the Sacrament to the unmeet, and the
necessity of keeping Baptized Youths among the Catechumens, till at age they
come to true understanding of the Covenant, which they made and must renew, and
till they give credible signs of real Godlyness by a Godly Life, and of what
mischievous effects it is to confirm them, and admit them to the Lords Supper,
on their bare saying the words of the Catechism, the Creeds, Lords Prayer and
Decalogue, without tried Understanding and serious Piety; And what a wrong it
is to the Christian Church and Religion, to confound and corrupt our Communion
for want of Parish Discipline and distinctions. And how little good all Canons
or Laws for Reformation or Religious duty will do, if the Ministry be ignorant,
worldly and ungodly, and the Churches be not taught and guided by able godly,
humble, self-denying and loving Pastors.

I beseech you read him diligently, he was no violent man, and his books here
mentioned were purposely written for K. Edward, and the Bishops, and Church of
England, and accepted kindly by them. His burnt bones were honorably
vindicated by the public praise, and his memory by many in Cambridge solemnly
commended to posterity: I beseech you let his Counsel in these Books be
revived, and true Reformation be tried by their Light. I hope they will hear
that great and moderate Reformer that will not hear me, or such as I. And if
you will add the Reading of old Salvian, and of Nic. Clemangis, it may do you
good, and excite you to do good to others, and promote the ends of this Advise
to Youth.

March 25. 1681.
FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of Mr. Baxter's Books, to satisfy some Foreigners. And are to be
Sold by B. Simmons at the Three Golden Cocks at the West End of St. Paul's.
I. Doctrinal.
1. A Phorisms of the Covenants and Justification (suspended for some
imperfections.) 12 mo. 2. The Reasons of the Christian Religion. 4 to. 3. The
Unreasonableness of Infidelity; How the Spirit is Christ's Witness: Of the sin
against the Holy Ghost. 8 vo. 4. More Reasons for the Christian Religion,
confuting the Ld. Herbert de Veritate. 12 mo. 5. A Confession of his Faith
against Antinomians. 4 to. 6. The Vindication of Gods goodness against some
melancholy Exceptions. 12 mo. 7. How far Holiness is the design of
Christianity. 4 to. 8. A Latin Methodus Theologiae Christianae, (which with
the Body of Practical Divinity makes an entire System,) It consists of 73
Tables or Methodical Schemes, pretending to a juster Methodizing of Christian
Verities, according to the Matter and Scripture, than is yet extant; furnishing
men with necessary distinctions on every Subject; showing that Trinity in Unity
is imprinted on the whole Creation, and that Trichotomising is the just
distribution in Naturals and Morals. The 1st Part, of the Kingdom of Nature.
The 2d of the Kingdom of Grace before Christ's Incarnation. The 3d of the
Kingdom of Grace and the Spirit since the Incarnation. The 4th of the Kingdom
of Glory. All in the Political Method, in the Efficience, Constition, and
Administration, viz. Legislation, Judgment, and Execution. The first Part
mostly Philosophical, with a full Scheme of Philosophy, or Ontology. The
Doctrine de Anima most largely handled; with above 200 select Disputations,
Prolixe ones of the Trinity, Predetermination, the Faculties of the Soul,
Original Sin: And a multitude of Controversies briefly decided. in Fol.
II. Practicals for all sorts.
9. A Christian Directory, or Body of practical Divinity. 1. Christian Ethics.
2. Oeconomicks. 3. Ecclesiastics. 4. Politics: Resolving multitudes of Cases
on each Subject. Fol. 10. The Saints everlasting Rest. 4 to. 11. A Treatise of
Self-Denial. 4 to. 12. The crucifying of the World by the Cross of Christ. 4
to. 13. The mischiefs of Self-Ignorance. 8 vo 14. A Sermon of Repentance
preached to the Commons the day before they voted the King's Return. 4 to. 15.
Right Rejoicing, A Thanksgiving Sermon at St. Paul's: foretelling the danger of
their turning all into greater Calamity. 4 to. 16. The vain Religion of the
formal Hypocrite: And the Fools prosperity. 12 mo. 17. A Sermon of Faith,
before the King* 4 to. 18. The poor man's Family Book, (for them that cannot buy
many:) A familiar Dialogue, showing the Unconverted how to become true
Christians, and the Converted how to live and die as such: With a Catechism,
Prayers, and Psalms. 8 vo.
III. Practicals for the Unconverted.
19. A Call to the Unconverted to Turn and Live. 12 mo. 20. Directions and
Persuasions to a sound Conversion. 8 vo. 21. Now or Never. 12 mo. 22. A
Treatise of Conversion. 4 to. 23. A Saint or a Bruit. 4 to. 24. A Sermon of
making Light of Christ. 8 vo. 25. A Treatise of Judgment. 8 vo. 26. True
Christianity: Christ's absolute Dominion, and Man's Subjection. Assize Sermons.
12 mo. 27. Catholic Unity: How to be all of one Religion: Ungodliness the
great Divider, 12 mo.
IV. Practicals for the Faithful.
28. The right Method for settled Peace of Conscience, and Spiritual Comfort. 8
vo. 29. The weak Christian, strong Christian, and Hypocrite characterized. 8
vo. 30. The Divine Life. 1. A Treatise of the Knowledge of God and use of his
Attributes. 2. Of Walking with God. 3. Conversing with God in solitude. 4 to
31. The Life of Faith in every State. 4 to. 32. Mrs. Bakers Funeral Sermon:
Death the last Enemy. 8 vo. 33. Mr. Hen. Stubs Funeral Sermon. 12 mo. 34. Mrs.
Coxes Funeral Sermon. 4 to. 35. Alderman Ashursts Funeral Sermon. 4 to. 36. Mr.
Io. Corbets Funeral Sermon. 4 to. 37. Mrs. Baxters Life, and her Mothers
Funeral Sermon: The last work of a Believer. 4 to. 38. Poetical Fragments:
Partly Thanksgiving, partly the groans of the afflicted. 8 vo.
V. Controversies against Popery.
39. The safe Religion: Three Disputations. 8 vo. 40. One Sheet of Reasons
against Popery. 8 vo. 41. A Key for Catholics to open the juglings of the
Jesuits: The first part answering all their common Sophisms: The second against
the Sovereignty and necessity of General Councils. 4 to. 42. The certainty of
Christianity without Popery. 8 vo. 43. Full and easy satisfaction, which is
the true Religion: Transubstantiation shamed. 8 vo. 44. Naked Popery: Answering
Mr. Hutchinson. 4 to. 45. The true Catholic Church: A popular Sermon of its
Unity. 12 mo. 46. The successive Visibility of the Church, where it has been
in all Ages: An Answer to W. Johnson alias Terret. 8 vo. 47. Which is the true
Church: A full Answer to his Reply: proving that the General Councils and the
Popes Primacy were but in one Empire. 4 to. 48. The Grotian Religion
discovered. 12 mo. 49. The History of Bishops and their Councils abridged, and
of the Popes. 4 to.
VI. English Church Controversies.
50. Gildas Salvianus: The Reformed Pastor, showing the Nature of the Pastoral
Office, especially of personal Instruction. 8 vo. 51. Christian Concord: The
Agreement of the associated Pastors, and Churches of Worcestershire. 4 to. 52.
Their Agreement for Catechizing and personal Instructing their Parishes. 8 vo.
53. Disputations of Right to Sacraments. 4 to. 54. Disputations of Church
Government, Liturgies, and Ceremonies. 4 to. 55. Of Confirmation rightly used:
Its great use to our Reformation. 8 vo. 56. A Worcestershire Petition for the
Ministry defended against Quakers. 4 to. 57. The Quakers Catechized. 4 to. 58.
One Sheet against the Quakers. 8 vo. 59. Short Advice to some Parliament Men. 4
to. 60. A Letter of pacification to Mr. Dury. 4 to. 61. Universal Concord,
(imperfect.) 8 vo. 62. The Magistrates and Pastors Offices distinguished
against Erastians: To Lud. Moulin. 4 to. 63. The Cure of Church Divisions 8 vo.
64. The Defense of it against Edw. Bagshaw. 8 vo. 65. A 2d Admonition to Mr.
Bagshaw. 8 vo. 66. Plain Scripture proof of Infants Church Membership and
Baptism; with a Defense of it against Mr. Tombs. 4 to. 67. More Reasons for
Infants Church Membership, etc. against Mr. Tombs, and Mr. Danvers. 8 vo. 68.
The Nonconformists Papers 1660, and 1661, with the Bishops in their (fruitless)
Treaty for Concord: (Some are yet unprinted.) 4 to. 69. The Nonconformists
Judgment of the Interest of Reason in Religion. 4 to. 70. The Nonconformists
Plea for Peace: naming the things which they dare not Conform to. 4 to. 71.
Their 2d Plea for Peace, fully opening their Judgment for the Power of Kings,
and the Obedience of Subjects; of Church Power, of Scandal, of Morality and
Grace, etc. 4 to. 72. A Defense of the first Plea against Mr. Cheny. 8 vo. 73.
A further Defense in Answer to Mr. Hinkly, (about the causers of the late War;)
Mr. Cheny the impleader, the Reflecter, etc. 8 vo. 74. Sacrilegious Desertion
of the Ministry rebuked, and our Preaching justified. 8 vo. 75. An Answer to
Dr. Stillingfleet's Sermon, accusing him of Separation. 4 to. 76. A Reply to
Dr. Stillingfleet in a 2d Defense. 4 to. 77. The true and only Terms of Concord
of all the Churches: A full Treatise, confuting all false Terms, especially Mr.
Dodwell's. 8 vo. 78. A full Treatise of Episcopacy, showing what Episcopacy we
own, and what is in the English Diocesan frame, for which we dare not swear
never to endeavor any alteration of it; in our places. 4 to. 79. A Moral
Prognostication of the future State of the Church. 4 to. 80. An Apology for the
Nonconformists Preaching, though forbidden: With an Answer to the Accusations
of Bishop Morley, Bp. Gunning, H. Fowlis, Dr. Parker, the Debate maker, Durell,
Saywell, Dodwell, Asheton, and abundance more such Accusers. 4 to. 81. A search
for the English Schismatic; comparing the Canoneers and Nonconformists. 4 to.
82. An Answer to Mr. Dodwell, and Dr. Sherloke, confuting an Vniversal-humane
Church Sovereignty, Aristocratical and Monarchical, as Church Tyranny and
Popery: and defending Dr. Iz. Barrows excellent Treatise. 4 to. 82. Universal
Church Sovereignty, and foreign Jurisdiction, the great points of the late
differences in the Church of England: Who were for it. This Church against it:
Reasons proving it Tyranny and Popery, (not yet published.) 4 to.
VII. Doctrinal Controversies.
84. Disputations of Justification. 4 to 85. Of saving Faith, whether it differ
from common Faith in degree or kind: against Dr. Barlow. 86. An Apology against
the Exceptions of Mr. Crandon, Mr. Eyres, Dr. Kendall, and others. 4 to. 87. An
Account of his present Thoughts about Perseverance and falling away. 4 to. 88.
The Divine appointment of the Lords day, and cessation of the 7 th day Sabbath
proved. 8 vo. 89. An Answer to Mr. Firmins Accusation of his urging men to
Meditation. 4 to. 90. Two Disputations of Original Sin: One of the prime
original, the other of the additional by the sin of nearer Parents. 12 mo. 91.
A Treatise of Justification, Imputation of Righteousness, and Imputation of our
Parents sins: against the Accusations of Dr. Tully. 8 vo. 92. Catholic
Theology; for reconciling the Controversies about Prescience, Predestination,
Redemption, Grace, Free Will, Perseverance, and Justification: First stating
the reconciling Truths; and then by way of Dialogue applying them, and proving
their Ignorance who have aggravated the differences about these, on both sides.
fol. 93. Reconciling Truths epitomized, to end these and many other
Controversies, (not yet Printed.) 94. Short Counsel to Corporation Justices. A
sheet. 95. This compassionate Counsel to young men, especially, Apprentices,
Students, and rich men's Sons, belongs to the 3d Classis* 8 vo. 96. The
Political Aphorisms, or Principles, of Government Divine and Humane, etc. are
suspended. Called a Holy Commonwealth.
More Treatises not yet printed.
97. A Treatise of Knowledge and Love: Or against Presidence, and for necessary
Doubting: showing that hasty Judging, and self-conceitedness of Knowing what we
know not, is one of the most calamitous diseases of man's Soul. 98. A short
Solution of all the Controversies about Justification. 99. A Collection of some
Histories of Appaparitions and Witches. 100. Troublesome Neednots reprehended:
Sermons on Luke 10.42. An Addition to a Saint or a Bruit. 101. On Iud. 10.
Speaking evil of the things they know not. 102. On Genesis 45.75. Gods use of sin.
103. Repent O England. 104. Universal Concord: A breviate of the just terms of
Christian Concord. 105. How far all sober parties in England are agreed in
Church matters. 106. The Catechizing of Families: A Teacher of Householders how
to teach their Households: Useful also to Tutors. Being a full and familiar
Exposition of the Creed, Lords Prayer and Commandments, Baptism, and the Lords
Supper: By Question and Answer. 107. R. B's Dying Thoughts: preparatory to his
approaching Change.
FINIS.

