THE Crucifying of the world, BY THE Cross of Christ. With a Preface to the
Nobles, Gentlemen, and all the Rich, directing them how they may be Richer.

By Richard Baxter.

1 JOHN 2. 15. Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world: If any
man Love the world, the Love of the Father is not in him. LONDON, Printed by R.
W. for Nevill Simmons Bookseller in Kederminster, and are to be sold by him
there; and by Nathaniel Ekins at the Gun in Paul's Churchyard. Anno Dom. 1658.

To my Worthy FRIEND, THOMAS FOLEY, Esquire.
SIR,
UPON a double account I have thought it meet to direct this Treatise first to
you: First because the first Embrio of it was an Assize Sermon preached at your
desire, when you were high Sheriff of this County, which drew me to add more,
till it swelled to this, which some of my Brethren have persuaded to venture
into the open world. Secondly, because God has given you a heart to be
exemplary in Practicing the Doctrine here delivered: And I think I shall teach
men the more successfully when I can show them a Living Lesson for their
imitation. I never knew that you refused a work of Charity that was motioned to
you; but often have you offered me that for the Churches service, which I was not
ready to accept and improve. I would not do you the displeasure as to mention
this, but that forward Charity is grown so rare in many places, that some may
grow shortly to think that we preach to them of a Chimaera, a non-existent
thing, if we do not tell them where it is to be seen: Especially now Infidelity
is grown up to that strength, that Seeing is taken by many for the only true
informer of their Reason, and Believing for an unreasonable thing. And I take
my self to owe much thankfulness to God, when I see him choose a faithful
Steward, for any of his Gifts. Its a sign he means Good by it to his Church.

Some Rich men sacrifice all they have to to their Bellies which are their
Gods, even to an ^picurian momentany delight; and cast all into the filthy sink
of their sensuality: These are worse then Infidels, defrauding their posterity;
and swine alive, but worse then swine when they are dead. Some Rich men are
provident, but its only for their posterity. The ravenous bruits are greedy for
their young. Some will begin to be bountiful at death, and give that to God
which they can keep no longer, as if he would be thus bribed to receive their
souls, and forgive their worldly hearts and lives. Some will give in their life
time; but it is but part of their sinful gains; like the Thief that would pay
Tithes* of all that he had stolen. Some give a part of their more lawful
increase; but it is against their will; it being forced from them by Law, for
Church and Poor; and therefore properly it is no gift. Some will give freely;
but it is on some corrupt design; to strengthen a party or a carnal Interest,
or make their way to some preferment: Some give, but only to those of their own
Opinion; and not to a Disciple in the name of a Disciple. Some give in
Contention, as the troublers of the Church of Corin^h preached, to add
affliction to our bonds. As many of the Papists, that think by their works of
Charity, they are warranted uncharitably to slander almost all besides
themselves; as if we were all enemies to Good works, or solifidians that took
them for indifferent things; or made them not our business. Yea the best work
that the Jesuits ever did, even the preaching of the Gospel to the Heathens,
they would not endure us to join with them in, where they could hinder us,
unless we would do it in their Papal way. Some will do Good, to stop the cries
of a guilty Conscience, for some secret odious sin which they live in. Some
will be Liberal with the Hypocrite for applause. And some will give with a
Pharisaicall conceit of merit (even ex condigno, from the Proportion of their
work to the Reward, as the greatest Popish Doctors teach.) Some through mere
fears of being damned, will be liberal, especially out of their superfluities;
choosing rather to forsake their money then their sin. Some do pretend the
highest ends, and that it is Christ himself to whom they do devote it: but they
will part with no more then the flesh can spare: And that they may yet seem to
be true Christians, they will not believe that any thing is a duty, which
requires much self-denial, and stands not with their prosperity in the
world. And some will give much out of a mere natural kindness of disposition,
or upon mere natural motives; though not as to Christ, nor from the Love of
God, nor from that Spirit of Christian special Love, by which the members of
Christ have their Communion. What excellent Precepts of Clemency and
Beneficence has Seneca? Yea what abundance of selfdenyal does he seem to join
with them. And yet so strange was this highest naturalist, to the truest
Charity or self-denial, that it is self that is his principle, end and all: For
a man to be sufficient for himself and happy in himself, without troubling God
by prayer, or needing man, was the sum of his Religion. Pride was their master
virtue, which with us is the greatest vice. And for all his seeming contempt of
Riches and Pleasures, yet Seneca keeps up in such a height of riches and
greatness, as that he was like to have been Emperor. And sometime to be
Drunken he commends, to drive away cares and raise the mind; pleading the
example of Solon and Arcesilaus; confessing that Drunkenness was objected even
to Cato, their highest pattern of virtue; affirming that the objectors may
sooner make the crime honest, then Cato dishonest.

Among all this seeming Charity and Selfdenyal, that proves not a sanctified
heart, how excellent (but too rare) is the true self-denial and charity of the
Christian; who has quit all pretense of Title to himself, or any thing that he
has, and has consecrated himself and all to God; resolving to employ himself
and it entirely for him; studying only to be well informed, which way it is
that God would have him lay it out. And among these Saints themselves, how rare
is that excellent man, that is Covetous and Laborious for God, and for the
Church, and for his Brethren: And that does as providently get and keep, and as
Painfully Labor, (how rich soever he be) and as much pinch his flesh (in
prudent moderation) that he may have the more to Give and to do good with, and
make the best of his Masters stock; as other men do in making Provision for the
flesh, and laying up for their posterity.

Sir, as far you have proceeded in this Christian art, you are yet in the
world, among the snares and lime-twigs of the Devil; in a station that makes
salvation difficult; and therefore have need of daily watchfulness, and to
proceed and persevere in an enmity to the world, and a Believing Crucifixion of
it, if you will be saved from it, and restore it to its proper use, and
captivate it, that captivateth so many. As some help hereunto, I crave your
Perusal of this Treatise. And that it may do you good, and the many Blessings
promised to the charitable may rest upon you, and on your Yoakfellow, (that
has learned this Crucifying of the world) and upon your posterity, shall be
the prayers of

Feb. 20. 165^/^. Your fellow soldiour against the flesh and world, Rich.
Baxter.

The Preface: To the Nobilty and Gentry, and all that have the Riches of this
world.
Honorable, Worshipful, etc.
HAving written here of a subject that nearly concerns you, I have thought it
my duty to give you a place, and according to your Dignity, the first place in
the Application of it. Of which I shall first tender you my Reasons, and then
set before you the matter of this address.

1. You are among us the most eminent and honored persons, and therefore not
to be neglected and past by: you are first, and therefore should first be
served. You hold your selves most worthy of any temporal honor that is to be
had; and therefore I shall honor you so much more, as to judge you fit, to be
first spoken to by the Ministers of Christ, in a case that does much more
concern you: As you have and would have the precedence in worldly matters, here
also you shall have the precedence: Its pity that you shall be first in Hell,
that are first in a Christian State on earth; or that you should be least in
the Kingdom of Heaven, that are Greatest in that which is esteemed in the
world. 2. You are Pillars in the Commonwealth: and the stakes that bear up the
rest of the hedge. Your influence is great in lower bodies: You sin not to your
selves only; nor are you Gracious only to your selves. The spots in the Moon
are seen by more, and its Ecclipses felt by more, then the blemishes or changes
of many of us inferior wights. You are our first figures, that stand for more
in matters of public concernment, then all that follow. You are the Copies
that the rest write after, and they are more prone to Copy out your vices then
your graces. You are the first sheets in the Press; you are the Stewards of
God, who are entrusted with his talents for the use of many. You are the noble
members of the Body Politic, whose health or sickness is communicated to the
rest: If you be ungodly, the whole body languisheth: If you live and prosper,
it will go the better with us all: For your Wisdom, and Holiness, and Justice,
will be operative; and your station allows them great advantage, to work upon
many, and to emulate a kind of universal Causality. Interest is the worlds
byas; and all Power has respect to use: You that have possession of the
Treasure that is so commonly and highly esteemed, may do much to lead the
sensual world by it, which way you please: Be it better or be it worse; they
will follow him that bears the purse. If money can do wonders, you may do
wonders. As money can persuade the blind, to part with God and life
everlasting, and to renounce Religion and Reason it self, so no doubt but it
might do something were it faithfully used, though not directly to sanctify
the heart, yet somewhat to incline it to the means by which it may be
sanctified. You that have Power to Help or Hurt, to make it Summer or Winter to
your subjects, and to promote or cross the interest of the flesh, are hereby
become a kind of Gods, in the eyes of them that mind this Interest, (as in
higher respects you are unto Believers.) Especially seeing they want that eye
of faith, by which they should know the Sovereign Majesty, who at his pleasure
does dispose both of you and them, these purblind sinners can reach no further*
but are contented to be Ruled by you, as terrestrial Deities: They see you, but
they see not God: they know you, and perceive the effects of your favor and
displeasure: but being dead to God, and savouring only fleshly things, they
scarce observe his smiles or frowns. They see that which is visible to the eye
which they have the use of; but the Objects of faith are to them as Nothing,
because they have no eye to see them. And seeing you have such public interest
and influence, it is our duty first to look after your souls, and to see that
you receive the heavenly impress. 3. To which I may add, that no men have
usually more need of advice and help then you. For your temptations are the
strongest: The world kills by its flatteries: It is not the having it, but
the Loving it that undoes men: And he is much liker to over-love it, that has
what he would have, and lives in plentiful provisions for his flesh, then he
that has nothing from it but trouble and vexation. It is not poverty, and
prisons, and sickness that are the flattering pandors of the world* but
prosperity and content to the flesh. Though I know that many of the poor, do
most of all overvalue the world, because they never tried so much of its
vanity, but standing at a distance from prosperity, do think it a greater
felicity then it is: For those are most in Love with the world that least know
it; as those that least know him are least in Love with God and eternal glory.
But yet it is pleasing and not displeasing, flattering rather then buffeting,
that is the means of deceiving filly souls, and stealing their hearts from God
to the world. Your mountains lie open to stronger winds then our valleys do:
And your gulfs and greater streams are not so foordable as our more shallow
waters. He never studied God and Heaven; nor his own heart, that knows not
that it is a very difficult thing, to have an heavenly mind in earthly
prosperity, and to live in the desires of another world, while we feel all seem
to go well with us in this. How hard to be weaned from the world, till we
suffer in it; yea till we are plunged into an utter despair, of ever receiving
here the satisfaction of our desires. 4. And truly we have too much sad
experience, of the sensuality and ungodliness of most of the Rich, to suffer us
to think that you have least need of our admonitions: Which leads me up to
the Matter of my Address, which is first to complain of you to your selves, and
then to Admonish you, and lastly to Direct you.

1. I know I speak to those (for the most part) that profess to believe a Life
to come; but O that you had the honesty to live as you do profess! You durst
not put it into your Creed, that you believe that earth is more desirable then
Heaven, and that its better seek first after Carnal prosperity and delight,
then for the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof. You would be
ashamed to say that it is the wisest course first to make provision for the
flesh, and to put off God and your salvation with the leavings of the world.
And do you think it is not as bad and as dangerous to do so, as to say so?
Would it bring you to your journeys end, to be of the Opinion that you should
be up and going, as long as you sit still? Right Opinions in Religion are so
unlikely to save a man that crosses them in his practice, that such shall be
beaten with many stripes. I had rather be in the case of many a Popish Friar,
that renounceth the world, though in a way that has many errors, then in the
case of many an Orthodox Gentleman that is drowned in the cares and pleasures
of this life: Yea I think it will be easier for a Socrates, a Plato, in the day
of Judgment, then for such. Christianity is a practical Religion: It is a
devoted seeking for another life, by the improvement and contempt of this: Put
not that into your Life, that you are ashamed to put into your Profession or
Belief. If you Do as Infidels, you will be as miserable as if you Believed but
as Infidels. And Practicing a while against your Conscience, may cause God to
for sake your judgment also, and give you over to Believe as you Live, because
you would not Live as you Believed. And I fear that this is the case of some of
you: Nay I have too much reason to know it, that some of our Gentry, even
persons of note and honor among us, have for saken Christ and are turned
Infidels; and by the Love of this world, have carnally adhered to it so long,
till they are so far forsaken of God, as to think that there is no other Life
for them hereafter. God has an eye on these wretches; and men have an eye on
some of them. I shall now leave them in their slippery station, till a fitter
opportunity. Some we have of our Nobility and Gentry that are Learned, Studious
and Pious, and an honor and blessing to this unworthy Land; or else it were
not like to be so well with us as it is. But Oh how numerous are the sensual
and profane which provoked that heavenly Poet, of Noble extract (Mr. G.
Herbet, Chapter porch) to say,

O England full of sin, but most of sloth,
Spit out thy phlegm, and fill thy breast with glory:
Thy Gentry bleats, as if thy native cloth,
Transfused a sheepiness into thy story:
Not that they all are so; but that the most,
Are gone to grass and in the pasture lost.
Gentlemen, I have no mind to dishonor you, but compassion on your souls and
on the Nation, commands me to complain, in order to reform you: And yet if you
sinned and perished alone, we were the less unexcusable if we let you alone.
What abundance of you are fitter to swill in a buttery, or gorge your selves at
a feast, orride over poor men's corn in hawking and hunting, then to govern the
Commonwealth, and by Judgment and Example to lead the people in the ways of
life! What abundance of you waste your precious hours in feasting, and sports,
and idleness, and complementing, and things impertinent to your great business
in the world, as if you had no greater things to mind? Had you been by another
commanded to a Dung-cart, or like a Carryer to follow pack-horses, (an honester
and more honorable life then yours) you would think your selves enslaved and
dishonored: And yet when God has set before you an Eternal Glory, you debase
your own souls by wilful drenching them in the pleasures, and cares, and
vanities of the world, and have no mind of that high and noble work, which God
appointed you. So that when many poor men are ^nnobled by an Heavenly
Disposition, and an Heavenly Conversation, you enslave your selves to that
which they tread under-feet, and refuse the only noble life: That which they
account as loss, and dross, and dung, that they may win Christ and be found in
him, (Phil. 3. 7, 8.) that do you delight in and live upon as your treasure.
When once you know whether God or your money be better, whether heaven or
earth, whether eternity or time be better, you will then know which is the
noblest life.

Nay what abandance are there among you, that make a very trade of sensuality,
and turn your sumptuous houses into sties, and your gorgeous apparel into
hansom trappings, if the appurtenances may receive their names from the
possessors: That never knew what it was to spend one day or hour of your lives
in a diligent search of your hearts and ways, and heartbreaking lamentation
of your sin and misery, and in serious thoughts of the life to come: but go on
from feast to feast, and company to company, and from one pleasure to another,
as if you must never hear of this again; and as if you were so drunken and
besotted with the world, that you had forgotten that you are men, or that you
have a God to please, and a soul to save or lose for ever. Nay how many of you
hate a faithful Preacher, and an holy life, and make them the ordinary matter
of your scorn; and cheat your souls with a few ceremonies and formalities, as
if by such a Carnal Religiousnes, you could make all whole, when you have lived
to the flesh, and loathed the Spiritual worship of God that is a Spirit, and
the heavenly lives of his sanctified ones, and consequently the Law that
commands such a life, and the God that is the Maker of that Law. I call not
your Civil Controversies your Malignity; but it is the proper title of your
Enmity to Holiness: And is it not enough that man in Honor will be without
understanding, and make himself like the beasts that perish, Psalm. 44. 20. but
you must also take up the Serpentine nature, and hissing and stinging must be
the requital that you return to Christ for all your Honors. Think, if you have
yet a thinking faculty, whether this be kindly, or honestly, or wisely done,
and what its like to be to your selves in the end. Your Riches and Honors do
now hide a great deal of your shame; but will it not appear when these rags
are torn from your backs, and your souls are left in naked guilt? Says
Chrysostom, [If it were possible to do Justice on the Rich, as commonly on the
poor, we should have all the Prisons filled with them: but Riches with their
other evils have also this evil, that they save men from the punishment of
their evil.] (O but how long will they do so?) This was plain dealing of an
Holy Father: and is it not such as is as needful now as then? Is it not
Greatness more then Innocence that saves abundance of you from shame and
punishment?

Nay many of you think that because you are rich, it is Lawful for you to be
Idle, and Lawful voluptuously to give up your selves to pleasures and
recreations, and you think that you may do with your own as you list; as if it
had been given you to gratify the flesh: The words that converted Austin,
never su^k yet into your hearts, Romans 13. 13, 14. [Let us walk honestly as in
the day: not in rioting and drunkenness* not in chambering and wantonness, not
in strife and envying, but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.] You never felt the
meaning of those words, Romans 8. 13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die:
but if by the Spirit ye mortify the deeds of the body ye shall live.]

But to turn my Complaint into an Admonition, I beseech you consider what you
are, and what you do. 1. How unlike are you to Jesus Christ your pattern, that
denied himself all the Honors, and Riches, and Carnal delights of the world.
Read over his Life, and Read your own, and judge whether any man on earth, be
more unlike to Christ, then a voluptuous, worldly Gentleman? Especially if
Malignity be added to his sensuality.

2. How unlike are you to the holy Laws of Christ. Are his precepts of
Mortification and Self-denial imprinted in your hearts, and predominant in your
lives? Is a beast any more unlike a man, then your hearts and lives are unlike
Christ's Laws?

3. How unlike are you to the Ancient Christians, that forsook all and followed
Christ, and lived in a Community of Charity? And how unlike to every gracious
soul, that is dead to the world, and has mortified his members upon earth, and
has his conversation in another world. Are you not such as Paul wept over,
Phil. 3. 18. Whose God is their belly, who glory in their shame, and who mind
earthly things, and that are enemies to the Cross of Christ.] though perhaps
you are no enemies to his Name. Believe it, Gentlemen, whatever your thoughts
of your selves may be, you will find that no Religion will save you, that
stoopeth to the world, and is but an underling to your fleshly interest.

4. How unlike are you to your Profession and your Covenant with God? and to
your Confessions, and Prayers to him? Did you not renounce the flesh, the world
and the Devil in your Baptism? Do you not still Profess that heaven is best,
and God is to be preferred, and yet will you not do it, but let your own
Professions condemn you? Do you not ordinarily confess that the world is vain,
and yet will you show your selves such Dissemblers, as to love and seek it more
then God? As if there were no more Power in the Spirit of Christianity, then in
the Opinion of Zeno the Philosopher, who having often said that Poverty and
Riches were neithe^ good nor bad, but things indifferent, was yet dismaye* when
he heard that his farms were seized on by the enemies, the Prince having sent
one with the report to try him; telling him when he had done, that Now Riches
and Poverty were not things indifferent. How often have you prayed to be saved
from Temptation? and yet will you still date upon your snares and fetters; and
show your selves such hypocrites as to love the temptations which you pray
against.

5. You are guilty of a double injury to God; in that you are obliged to him as
his Created subjects, and yet more obliged by your Riches and Honors, which he
has given you for your Masters use* [To whom men give much, from them will
they expect the more, Luke 12. 48.] For a servant that has double wages to
abuse you; for a friend that has received double kindness to prove false to
you; for a Commander in the Army to betray his General, is sure an aggravation
of the crime. Must God advance you highest, and will you thrust him lowest in
your heart? Must he feed you with the best, and cloth you with the best, and
will you put him off with the worst? Have you ten times, or an hundred times
more wealth from him, then many an honest heavenly Believer; and yet will you
Love and Serve him less?

6. Is it not pity and shame, that you should thus turn Mercies themselves
into sin, and draw your bane from that which might have been a blessing? Will
you be the worse, because God is so good to you? Must he give you health and
time for his service, and give you such plentiful provision and assistance, and
will you be worse in health then others are in sickness, and worse in Plenty
then others are in want? Is not this the way to dry up the streams of Mercy,
when the more you have, the worse you are?

7. You exceedingly wrong the Church and Commonwealth: For it is for the
public good that you are advanced; and you should be a blessing to the Land:
And will you cast away that time and wealth upon the flesh, which you have
received for such noble ends. Rob not the Church and Common wealth, of what you
owe it; by engrossing it to your selves, or consuming it on your lusts.

8. Great men have a great account to make: You shall shortly hear, [Give
account of thy Steward-ship, for thou shall be no longer Stewar^.] If God have
entrusted you you with a thousand pound a year, it is not the same reckoning
that must serve your turn, as would serve his turn that had but an hundred.
Your improvement must be somewhat answerable to your receivings. Do you need to
be told, how sad a reckoning it will then be, to say, [Lord, I employed most of
it in maintaining the Pomp and Pleasure of my self and family, even that Pomp
of the world, and those sinful lusts of the flesh, which in my Baptism I
forswore; and the rest I left to my children, to maintain them in the same pomp
and pleasure, except a few scraps of my Revenews which I gave to the Church, or
poor.]

9. Your wealth and greatness do afford you great opportunities to do good, and
to further the salvation of your selves and others: and worldliness and
sensuality will rob you of these opportunities. O how many good works might you
have done, to the honor of your Lord, and the benefit of others and your
selves, if you had made the best of your Interest and Estates? The loss of the
Reward will shortly appear to you a greater loss, then that which you now
account the loss of your estates.

10. Your worldliness and sensuality is a sin against your own experience, and
the experience of all the world. You have long tried the world; and what has
it done for you, that you should so overvalue it. You know that it is the
common vote of all that ever tried it, sooner or later, that it is vanity and
vexation. And have you not the wit or grace, to learn from so plain a teacher
as Experience, yea your own experience, yea and all the worlds experience.

11. You sin also against your very Reason it self, and against your certain
knowledge. You know most certainly that the world will serve you but a little
while. You know the day is hard at hand when it will turn you off; and you
shall say, I have now had all that the world can do for me: Naked you came into
it, and naked you must go out of it. Haud ullas portabis opes Acherontis ad
undas. And then you shall more sensibly know what you now so overvalued* and
what you preferred before God and your salvation, then now I am able to make
you know. O what low thoughts will every one of you have of all your pomp and
pleasure, your vainglory and all your fleshly accommodations, when you
perceive that they are gone, and leave your souls to the justice of that God,
whom for the love of them you wilfully neglected? If poor men of mean and low
education, were so so^^ish as not to know these things, me thinks it should not
be ^ith you, that are bred to more understanding then they.

12. Lastly, you sin against the most plain and terrible passages of Scripture,
seconded with dreadful judgments of God, inflicted either upon your selves, or
at least on others of your rank before your eyes. You have read or heard the
words of Christ, Luk* 9. 25. [For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the
whole world, and lose himself, and be cast away.] And Luke 12. 33, 34. Sell all
that you have, and give alms: provide your selves baggs which wax not ^ld, a
treasure in the heavens that fails not, where no thief approaches neither
moth corrupts. For where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also.]
You have heard there the terrible Parable of the Rich man, Luke 12. 16, 17, 18,
19, 20. which ends with [Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of
thee, and then whose shall those things be which thou have provided] with this
general application, [So is he that lays up treasure for himself, and is not
Rich toward God.] And you have heard that more dreadful Parable, Luke 16. of
the Rich man that was clothed in purple and fared sumptuously, and what was
his endless end. You have heard the difficulty of the salvation of the Rich.
Luke 18. 24, 25. [How hardly shall they that have Riches enter into the Kingdom
of God?] Because they are so hardly kept from loving them inordinately, and
trusting in them. You have heard how fully Christ is resolved that no man can
be his Disciple that forsakes not all that he has for him, Luke 14. 33, 26,
27. And if you go never so far in your Obedience, and yet lack this one thing,
to part with all (in affection, and resolution, and practice when he requires
it) and follow Christ in sufferings and wants in hope of a treasure in heaven,
its certain that Christ and you must part. Luke 18. 22. You have heard the
terrible passages in Jam. 5. 1, 2, etc. and abundance such in the word of God:
And yet are you not afraid of worldliness or sensuality? You have seen in
England the Riches of abundance quickly scattered, that were long in gathering;
and God knows how many lost their souls, to build that which a few years wars
pulled down. And yet when you have but a little breathing time, you are at it
again as eagerly as ever; as men that knew no greater good, and are acquainted
with no better and more gainful an employment.

Gentlemen, do you know indeed, what it is that you make so great a stir for?
which you value at so high a rate? which you hold so fast? which you enjoy so
delightfully? You do not know: I dare say by your using of it that you do not
know it. Or else you would soon have other thoughts of it, and use it in
another manner. Come nearer, and see it through: and look into the inside.
Consult not with blind and partial sense; but put on a while the spectacles of
faith: go into the Sanctuary, and see the end. Nay Reason it self may t^ll you
much of it. When you must part with it, you will wish it hanged loose from you,
and not been so glued to you, as to tear your hearts. You feel not what the
Devils lime-twigs have done, till you are about to take wing, either by an
heavenly contemplation, or by death; and then you^l find your selves entangled.
The world is like to bad Physicians, quo^um successus Sol intuetur, errores
autem Tellus operit. The earth bears yet all the good it does you, but Hell
has hidden from you the mischief that it has done to millions of your
Ancestors: and therefore though this their way was their folly, yet do their
posterity approve their sayings, Psalm. 19. 13. Dic mi^i, says Bernard, ubi
sunt amatores mundi, qui ante pau^a t^n p^nobiscum fuerunt? Nihil ex ej^
rema^sit, nisi cin^^^s and vermes. Attend diligenter, qui sunt and suerunt,
si^ru, commederunt and biberunt, riserunt, duxerunt in bonis dies suos, and in
puncto ad inferna descenderunt. Hic caro eorum vermibus; illic anima eorum
slammis deputatur, donec* rursus infelici collegio colligati sempiternis
ignibus in volvantur. Who would so value that which he must eternally complain
of, and not only say, It has done me no good, but also say; It has deceived
me and undone me? I would not thank you to make me the Owner of all your Lands
and Honors to day, and take it from me all to morrow. What the better now are
your Grand fathers, and great Grandfathers, for living in those houses and
possessing those lands, and honors and pleasures, that you possess? Unless
they used them spiritually, and holily for God, and heaven, and the common
good, they are now in hell for their sensuality upon earth, and are reaping as
they have sown, (Gal. 6* 7, 8.) and paying dear for all their pleasures. Their
bones and dust do give you no notice of any remnants of their honors or
delights; and if you saw their souls, you would be further satisfied. It may be
there stands agilded Monument, over their rottenness and dust; and it may be
they have left an honorable name with those that follow them in their deceit,
(and so might the tormented Rich man with his Brethren, Luke 16. who were
following him toward that place of torment.) A just judgment of God it is, to
to give up men that choose deceit, to be thus befooled. That they should not
only despise the durable Riches, and choose a dream of honor, wealth and
pleasure here; but also, that their end may answer their beginning, they should
also take up with a picture of honor and felicity when they are dead; That
their deceived posterity may see a gilded Image bearing an honorable mention
of their names, and hear them named with applause, and so may be allured thee
more boldly to go after them. And so a shadow of wisdom and virtue, has a
shadow of surviving Honor for its Reward; which alas, neither soul nor body is
the better for. You see that all your wealth and honor will not preserve your
Honorable Corpse from loathsome putrefaction. How much less will it keep your
guilty souls, from the place that you have here been purchasing by your Mammon?

Sic metit Orcus
Grandia cum parvis non exorabilis auro.
If this be your Wealth, and Honor, and Delight, the Lord deliver me from such
a selicity --

Haec alii capiunt; liceat mihi paupere cu^u
Securo, charo numine posse frui.
For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he has gained, ( or scraped
together, as the Hebrew may be turned) when God shall take ( or pull) away his
soul? Job 27. 8. [The triumphing ( or praise) of the wicked is short, ( or but
at hand) and the joy of the hypocrite is but for a moment, Job 20. 5.

Yea one would think that the very troubles and smart that in this life
accompanyeth your wealth and honor, in the getting and keeping, and the gripes
of conscience, that the fore-thoughts of the parting hour, and your heavy
reckoning, must needs mix with all your pleasure and vain glory, unless you
have laid asleep your wits; besides your experience of the emptiness and deceit
of all that you have overvalued; I say, one would think that this much should
somewhat allay your thirst, and calm your minds, and make you think of a better
treasure. Sure I am that God would do ten thousand fold more for you, and be
better to you; and yet because of some fleshly arguments, you are turned away
from him. He cannot be thus loved, and delighted in, and sought, and yet he
offers more for you then the world does. Says Augustine, Ecce mundus turbat,
and amatur* quid si, tranquil us esset? formoso quomodo haereres, qui sic
amplecteris foedum: Flores ejus quomodo colligeres, quia spinis non revocas
manum?] And it is just that they should* have a bed of thorns, that wilfully
make choice of it. Seneca thus justifies God, that though he give men such
perplexities and vexations, it is nullis nisi optantibus, only to them that
will needs have it ^o, and are choosers of their own distructions: Choosers do
I say? Yea and will compass Sea and Land for it? Stretch conscience for it till
it tear or can stretch no further? Oppress and defraud for it (some of them):
break Vows and Covenants for it* sell God and Heaven for it: scrambling with
such distracted violence for the smoaky honors, the nominal wealth, the
intoxicating pleasures of a few hasty days, that they care not what they part
with for them, nor who they bear down that stands in their way. Quid non
mortalia pectora cogit, Auri Sacre fames --. And is Christ worth no more, then
to be sold with Judas for so base a price? Is our heavenly birthright a thing
so base, or the promise of our immortal Crown so uncertain, as to be parted
with on Esau's terms? Is God and Endless Glory worth no more, then this comes
to! Propter nummos Deum contemnere, says Hierom, to despise and cast off God,
for a thing so base, is the basest kind of despising him. The Idolators that
villified him by making images of him, were asked, To whom will you liken me,
says the holy One, Isa. 40. 18, 25. And these sensual and covetous idolators
must be asked, [Whom will you match with God? or set up against him, and prefer
before him? What will you choose, if you choose not him? What shall be your
portion instead of heaven?] Does it excuse you that the world has so lovely an
aspect? Yes, if God be not more amiable then it, and if his face and favor be
not more desirable. Does it excuse you that the Baits of the world are pleasant
and that it offered you fair: Yes if God had not out-bid it, and offered you
ten thousand times more, Does it excuse you that the world is near and certain,
and heaven uncertain or out of sight? Yes, if you are beasts that have no
Reason to know what will be, but only sense to feel what is; or if God have not
given you an infallible promise, befriended by Reason, sealed by multitudes of
uncontroled Miracles, and transcribed on his servants hearts; and if the
Greatness of the Glory promised were not sufficient to do more at a distance
with a man of faith and reason, then childish trifles near at hand; as the Sun
at a distance gives us more light then a glowworm that is hard by. Yea and if
the world which you think so certain, were not certainly transitory and vain;
so that he that gets it, is certain shortly to be no gainer, and he that
loses it, to be no looser. You look on a poor praying self-denying Believer,
but you look before you on a Saint that shall reign with Christ, and judge the
world, when he comes to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them
that believe, 2 These. 1. 10. You see them sow their seed in tears, but see it
not springing up, nor do you foresee the joyful harvest. You see them following
Christ through tribulations, bearing his Cross and despising the shame; but you
see them not yet set down with him on their thrones. The sight you see, but the
triumph you see not. You see them tossed at Sea, but you know not how sure a
Pilot they have; nor do you see the riches of their freight. You see sickness
or persecution unpinning their corruptible rags, and death undressing them, but
you see not the clothes which they are putting on. You see them laid asleep by
death; but you see not their awaking; nor the rising of their Sun, when the
Righteous shall have dominion in the morning. The man that is dead to the world
you see; but you see not the life that is hid with Christ in God, nor their
appearing with him in Glory, when Christ who is their life appears. Your
unbelieving souls imagine there will be no May or harvest, because it is now
Winter with us: You think the Rose and beauteous flowers which are promised us
in that Spring, are but delusions, because you know not the virtue of that life
that's in the root, nor the Powerful influence of that Sun of the Believers. You
see the dead body, but you see not the soul alive with Christ, retired into its
Root. You see the Candle put out, and know not whether the flame is gone, and
think not how small a touch of the yet living soul will light it again.

And so on the other side, you look on the swaggering Gallant, but you look not
on the ulcerous soul; you hear them laughing and jesting in their jovialty; but
you hear them not yet groaning in their pains: you see them clambering into the
seat of honor, but see them not cast into the grave: you see them run and ride
in pomp and pleasure, following the delights of the flesh, attended by their
followers that honor and applaud them; but you see them not yet gasping under
the pangs of death, nor laid in the dust as still as stones. You see their
beauty and glittering attire, but you see not the pale and ghastly face that
death will give them, nor the skulls that are stripped of all those ornaments;
you smell their perfumes, but you smell not their putrefaction; you see their
lands and spacious houses and sumptuous furniture; but you see not how narrow a
room will serve them in the grave; nor how little there they differ from the
most contemptible of men. Nay more; you see them with Ahab going forth to
battle, and leaving the Prophets with the bread and water of affliction; but
you see them not yet returning with the mortal blow; you see them in their
honors and abundance, but see them not on Christ's left hand in judgment: you
see them clothed richly and fa^ing deliciously every day; but you see them not
in bell torments, wishing in vain for a drop of water to abate their flames:
you hear them honored, and hear their words of pride and ostentation; but you
hear them not yet crying out of their folly, and bewailing their loss of
present time, and lamenting in vain the unhappy choice that now they make.
Sirs, believe it, future things are as sure as present: These things are no
fables, because they are not visible yet: You see not God, and yet he is the
Principal Intelligible object: you see not your own Intellectual souls; and yet
you know you have them, by the Intellection of other things. You see not your
own eyesight; and yet you know that an eyesight you have, by the seeing of
other things. If there were not an Invisible God, there would have been no
visible creatures. Visibles are more vile, and are for I visibles that are more
noble. Our visible Bodies, are for our Invisible Souls. This visible life, is
the womb of everlasting life that is Invisible: we are hatched by the Spirit in
this shell, till we are ready to pass forth into that glorious light that here
we see not. I beseech you Gentlemen awake, and be not so lamentably deceived,
as to think that your honorable Pleasant Dreams, are the only Realities. O no!
it is the last awaking hour, that will show you the now unconceivable
Realities. You are now but as in jest in your pomp and pleasure; but you shall
then be in good sadness in your pains and loss; if Sanctifying Grace do not
prevent it, by putting you out of your feasting vein, and making you in good
sadness to be men of Real Faith and Holiness, and lay about you for the Real
Ioies. Believe it Sirs, the life of Christianity is not a bare Opinion: It is a
living by faith upon a life invisible: and so serious resolving a Belief of the
Truth of the everlasting blessedness (as purchased and given b^ Jesus Christ to
persevering Saints) as effectually* turns the affections and endeavors of
the man to the Loving and seeking it above all this world. Its one thing to
take God and heaven for your portion, as Believers do; and another thing to be
desirous of it as a reserve* when you can keep the world no longer. Its one
thing to submit to Heaven as a Lesser evil then hell; and another thing to
desire it as a greater Good then earth. Its one thing to lay up your Treasure
and Hopes in heaven, and to seek it first; and another thing to be contented
with it in your Necessity, and to seek the world before it, and give God that
the flesh can spare. Thus differs the Religion of serious Christians, and of
Carnal worldly hypocrites* But I shall break off my Admonition, and end with
some Advice.

Direct. 1. Look upon this world and all things in it, with the foreseeing eye
of Faith and Reason, and vallue it but as it deserves: And then you will
neither be eager after it, nor too much delighted in it, nor puffed up by it, nor
will it so prevalently entice you to venture or neglect eternal things. Did you
know and well consider but what an empty fading thing it is, you could never be
satisfied with so poor a portion, nor quiet your souls till you had assurance
or sound hopes of better things: Nor would you take such pleasure in childish
trifles; nor debase your selves, to be so inordinately employed, about such low
and sordid matters, while God and your eternal happiness are laid by. You take
not your selves for the basest of men, much less for bruits or idiots: O then
do not make your selves the basest, and do not unman your selves, and brutifie
your immortal souls. A heathen could say, [Nemo alius est Deo dignus, nisi qui
opes contempsit.] If you would be Rich, choose that which will make you Rich
indeed: make sure of his favor that is the absolute Lord of all, and then you
can want nothing, whatever you may be without. And if yet you thirst for
worldly Riches, or inordinately Love them, and tenaciously keep them from your
Masters use, remember that this discovers your disease; and therefore should
mind you rather to cure it then to feed it. It is not money nor any thing in
this world, that will cure such an empty depraved soul. As Seneca says, If a
sick man be carried about, whether in a bed of gold or a bed of wood, his
disease is carried with him. It is not a golden bed that will cure a diseased
man: Nor is it all the gold or honor in the world, that will help such a
deluded soul, as thinks this world will make him happy. Get but the cure of
your Carnal minds, and a little will serve you. For it is your sinful fancy
that would have much, and not your nature that needs much. Says Seneca, Si ad
naturam vives, nunquam eris pauper; si ad opinionem, nunquam eris dives:
Exiguum natura desiderat; Opinio immensum.] He is not the poor man that has
but little; but he that would have more: Nor is he the Rich man that has much,
but he that is content with what he has. If you pray but for your daily bread,
be not such hypocrites as by the bent of your desires to cross your prayers.
The nearest way to Riches, says the Moralist, is the contempt of Riches; and
says the Christian, to be Rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom which God
has promised all that Love him, Jam. 2. 5. The greatest Riches are got
(proportionably) on the easiest terms* Loving the world will not procure it:
but Loving God will procure the everlasting fruition of his Love. Millions love
the world that miss of it: but no man misseth of God that Loves him, above the
world. Buy not these gawds then at a dearer rate, then you may have the
Kingdom. If you have not enough, make sure of heaven and that will be enough
for you: and get a cure for your diseased minds, which is easier and more
profitable then to fulfill them. No man, says Seneca, can have all the world:
but he may have a mind that can contemn all the world. No man can have all that
he will* but he may be content to be without it. The disease is within you, and
there must be the Cure.

Direct. 2. Be sure to fix with a serious faith upon the Inivsible glory as
your portion: and then look at all things in this world, as good or bad, as
they respect your end: and judge of them as they help or hinder you in the
main. Nothing but a truly heavenly mind, is the saving cure of an earthly mind.
No man will rightly let go earth, till he have the powerful Light that has
showed him the greater good, and given him a taste of the world to come. Had
you not been strangers to God and heaven (in heart, whatever you were in tongue
and fancy) you could never have so fallen in love with earth. None are so much
disposed to travail into other Countries, as they that are fallen out with
their own. Remember that you have not one penny or pennies worth in the world,
but what you had from God, and must be accountable to God for; and must employ
with an eye upon his will, and your salvation. I do not call you to cast away
your Riches, but to see that you use all that ever you have, as will be most
comfortable to you in your last review. I know, as Seneca says, He is a wise
man that can make use of earthen vessels, as if they were all silver: and he is
wise too, that can make use of silver vessels as if they were but earth.
Infirmi est animi pati non posse divitias: but its one thing to Bear Riches,
and Use them for God, and another thing to Enjoy them with delight. I neither
take the Monasticks to be the only or the highest in perfection; nor yet do I
condemn necessitated retirements. For I know it is hard to most to converse
with God in tumults, and to hear the still voice of his Spirit, in the
murmuring noise of a crowd: I know that the commons are usually more barren and
fruitless then enclosures: and that the fruit-tree that grows by the highway
side, shall have many a stone and cudgel thrown at it, which those that* are in
your Orchard escape. But still look to your end, and secure the main: Dream not
that you have any full Propriety: Remember that you are Gods Stewards. Set
therefore your Masters name and not your own upon every pennyworth you
possess: Let Holiness to the Lord be written upon all. Possess nothing but what
is Devoted to him, to be used as he would have you. Put him not off with scraps
and leavings, that gave you all. So much as you save from him, you lose, and
worse then lose; and so much as you lose for him, and surrender to him, and
improve for him, you save and more then save. For Godliness with content is
great gain. And he that is faithful in a little, shall be made ruler over much.
Its thus that all things are sanctified with the Saints.

Direct. 3. Think not that your Riches are given you to fulfill the least
inordinate desire of the flesh: Or that you may take ever the more sensual ease
or pleasure, if you had all the world: But remember that better wages obliges
you to more work: And therefore rise as early, and labor as hard in your own
employment (the more for the common good, the better) yea and deny your flesh
a^ much, as if you had but food and raiment. If you have much, give the more,
and use the more, but enjoy never the more; and let not your sensual desires
find ever the more provision: A rich man that is wise, and a faithful Steward;
may live in as much self-denial, and labor as hard, and humble his flesh as
much, as he hat has but his daily bread. God sent you not in provision for his
enemy: All that is made the food of sin, or that does not help you up to God,
is employed contrary to the end that you received it for.

Direct. 4. Be sure that you deal with the world as a Deceiver: Be very
suspicious of all your Riches, and Honors, and Delights. Feed not on these
luscious summerfruits too boldly, or without fear. Remember how many millions
the world has deceived before you. None come to Hell but those that are
cheated thither by the flesh and the world. With what exceeding vigilance then
have you need to deal with such a dangerous deceiver; when all your happiness,
and all your hopes is at the stake? and if you be deceived, you are undone: Its
force is nothing so perilous as its fraud. -- Ubi vincere aperte,
Non datur, insidias armaque recta parat.


They that have to do with such a cheater in a case of such everlasting
consequence, should be suspicious of every thing, and trust the world as little
as is possible, when, Qui cavet ne decipiatur, vix cavet, cum etiam cavet.

Et cum cavisse ratus est, saepe is cautor captus est (ut Plaut.)

As Bucholcer was went to say when his friends extolled him, terreri se etiam
laudationibus illis, ut fulminibus; So should you possess your Honors and
Riches in the world. And as the same Bucholcer said to Hubner when he went to
be a Courtier: Fidem diabolorum tibi commendo: credere and contremiscere: viz.
promissionibus aulicis credere sed caute, sed timide: So should you be affected
to the world: Trust and tremble; or rather Trust it not all: Nay, have you not
been deceived by it already? And will you be more foolish then the silly fish,
that will scarcely take the hook that he was once pricked by; or then the silly
fowls that will be afraid of the net that once they have escaped from, and of
the Kite that once has had them in her claws: Tranquillas etiam naufragus
horret aquas. Nay at the present, if you take any heed of your souls, you may
easily perceive what a clog the world is: We are commonly better when we have
least of it, or are leaving it, then when we have it at our will. A man may see
the utmost visible part of the earth, and the Horizon at once; but if he look
on the earth that is near him, he cannot see the heavens at that time, much
less the Zenith. Our Own Riches, our Present Riches, our Nearest and Dearest
temporal good, is the greatest averter of the mind from heaven. We are commonly
like Antigonus sick soldier, that fought well because he looked to die: but
grew a Coward as soon as he was cured. So that most of us have need of the
counsel which the Bishop of Colen gave the Emperor Sigismund that asked him,
What he should do to be happy? [Live, says he, as you promised to do, when you
were last sick of the stone and gowt.] Even the most notorious sinners seem
Saints when they see the world is leaving them. And does not common reason tell
us that that which will so move us then, should prevail with us as much before,
when we are certain all our life time that this parting time will come? Indeed
the creature as it is annexed unto God and subservient to him, may have an
answerable trust and love: The smallest twig that is fast to the tree, may help
you out of the water if you lay hold of it; But if it be broken from the tree,
it will deceive you, though you hold it never so fast. O therefore look for
surer footing: A handful of water will not save you from being drowned. Build
on the Rock of ages, that never fails them that trust him; though yet the
blind unbelieving world, be more distrustful of him, then of that which they
have tried is not to be trusted. A wise man should know him to be trusty that
he trusts in a case that concerns his salvation. And true Believers and
none but they may say with Paul, I know whom I have trusted, 2 Timothy 1. 12.

Direct. 5. Let it be your daily care to keep clear accounts between God and
you, of your Receivings and Disbursements. Its time to bewail the expense of
that, if it be but a groat, that you cannot give a comfortable account of. When
ever you have several ways before you; for the laying out of your money or
your time, let the Question be seriously put to your heart, Which of these
ways shall I wish at death and judgment that I had expended it? and let that
be chosen as the way.

Direct* 6. Be sure to watch those thieves that would rob you of your Masters
talents that should be employed for his use. And will you give me leave to be
plain with you in instancing in a few of them.

1. How many ungodly Gentlemen do wast that in a thing that they call, Great
Housekeeping, (that is, the inordinate provisions for the flesh, and a freedom
for men to play the gluttons or drunkards in their houses) which might have
been expended to their greater honor and commodity?

2. How many be there that spend that in unnecessary* feasting of their friends
that might have been far more advantagiously improved?

3. How many be there that spend more in the excess of one or two suits of
apparel, then would have sufficed to the relief of a distressed family for a
twelve months space?

4. How many be there that lay out more in needless buildings, walks and
gardens, then would save the lives of an hundred or a thousand of the poor,
that perish by hunger, (or by diseases bred by want:) They will not spare from
their own superfluities, to supply the necessities of their Brethren? Is this
loving their neighbors as themselves, and doing as they would be done by?

5. How many be there that spend more needlessly on horses; dogs, or hawks, and
cast away more at one game at Dice, or at a Cock-fight, or an Horse-race, then
would keep a poor Scholar at the University. (But I hope the Parliament has
cured this.)

6. But the principal and least lamented abuse of Riches, is Childrens
excessive portions; For children are as a surviving self: Men think themselves
but half dead, while their children live: And therefore as self is that Idol of
the wicked, to whom all the creatures of God are sacrificed, so they employ all
one way or other for themselves as long as they live, and then leave it when
they die, to themselves in their posterity. When they have like unfaithful
Stewards, detained Gods due from him, as long as they live, they leave it to
their children to detain it after them. Mistake me not: I persuade you not to
be unnatural. Your children must be provided for if you be not worse then
Infidels. But I tell you by what Rules I should proceed, were it my case. 1. If
I had never such ungodly children, I should provide for them, if I could, their
daily bread, and leave them enough for food and raiment, unless they were such
as ought not to live, or be maintained. 2. If I had better children, that were
likely to use what they had for God* I should leave them all that could be
spared from more necessary uses, that their lives might be more free from care,
and they might be serviceable to God with their wealth when I am dead: And the
more confident I were that they would be faithful Stewards of it, the more I
should commit to their trust. 3. I should not take it to be my Duty to level
my posterity with the poorer sort, unless some special Call of God, or
extraordinary public exigence did require it. So much for the Affirmative,
What I should do for them. But (for the Negative, What I should not do for
them) 1. I should think that in a case of some extraordinary Necessities to the
Church or Commonwealth, I were bound to alienate all from my posterity, at
least, except their food and raiment. 2. I should still in the General conclude
that all must be for God, as he is the Owner of me and all; and therefore I
should enquire which way it is his will that I should dispose of it. And where
my conscience tells me he would have me use it, I should do it, though to the
denial of my self or my posterity. 3. I should always prefer the Public Good of
Church or Commonwealth, before the personal wealth of my posterity, and
therefore should provide for them in a subserviency to the greater good, and
not prefer their wealth before it. 4. I should think my self bound to expend
all that I had, in that way as might most promote the principal Interest of my
Lord, unless in cases where he had tied me by any special Obligation to a more
private expense of it. 5. I should judge that the ordinary Necessities of the
Church and poor are so great, as should command me very much to abate of full
provisions for my posterity. And for the proportion, I should labor to
discern, whether the times were such, and my posterity such, as that the stock
of my estate would be more serviceable to God in their hands, or otherwise laid
out. For the times and quality of children may make a great alteration in the
case. 6. Had I an only son that were notoriously ungodly, I would leave him no
more then food and raiment, if I had ten thousand pound a year, but would give
it to God for the works in which I might promote his interest. My Reasons are
many, which I have touched upon in another discourse. As, 1* Such as forfeit
their very daily bread, should not have any more then their daily bread: But
such notorious wicked ones forfeit their daily bread. He that will not labor,
says Paul, let him not eat, 2 These. 3. much more in such greater cases. 2.
According to Gods ancient Law, Deuteronomy. 21. they forfeit their lives, and the
parents there were to cause them to be put to death, that were obstinately
unreformed. And is the case so altered think you now, as that you are bound to
make such children rich, that parents then were bound to put to death? 3. I am
not bound to give unnecessary provisions to an enemy of God, to mis-employ it,
and strengthen him to do mischief, and be more able to oppress Gods servants,
or oppose his Truth, or serve the Devil.

I for bear to mention the proportions of men's estates, that I think they are
ordinarily bound to alineate, but shall leave you to Prudence and the General
Rules, lest I seem to you to go beyond my line. But in general I must say, that
it is a selfish and an heinous error, to think that men should lay up all that
they can gather for their posterity, and all to leave them rich and honorable,
and put off God, and all charitable uses, with the crumbs that fall from their
Tables, or with some inconsiderable driblets. If the Rich man in Luke 18. might
have followed Christ on such terms as these, he would hardly have gone
sorrowfully from him.

1. By this men show that they prefer their children before God. 2. And that
they prefer them before the Church, and Gospel, and the Commonwealth: When an
her^ick Heathen would have confessed that his estate and children, and his life
were not too good to be sacrificed to his Country; as the case of the Decii
and many other Romans that gave their lives for their Country witnesses. 3.
These men prefer the worldly riches of their children before the souls of men:
When they have so many Calls to employ their wealth to the furthering of men's
salvation, and put by all that their children may be rich. 4. They prefer their
childrens Riches before their own everlasting good: Or else they would not deny
themselves the Reward of an holy improvement of their talents, and cast
themselves upon the terrible sentence that is past upon unprofitable servants,
and all to leave their children wealthy. 5. They prefer the bodily prosperity
of their children before their spiritual: Or else they would not be so eager to
leave them that Riches, which Christ has told them is such a snare, and
hindrance to men's salvation. 6. They would teach all the world the easy art of
never doing good in life or death. For if all must follow their principles,
then the Parents must keep almost all for their children, and the children must
do the like by their children, and so it must run on to all generations, that
their posterity may be kept as rich as their predecessors. 7. How unlike is
this to the ancient Saints; and how unlike to the general precepts of
self-denial, and doing good to all while we have time, etc. which Christ has
left us in the Gospel. Enable your children to be serviceable in the Church and
Commonwealth, as far as you may; but prefer them not before the Church or
Commonwealth. Wrong not God, nor your own souls, nor the souls or bodies of
other men, to procure your children to be rich. It will not ease your pains in
hell, to think that you have left your children Rich on earth. Its few of the
great and noble that are Called. They will have an easier way to heaven in a
mean estate. Their Nurses milk contented them when first they lived in the
world: and will nothing but Lands, and Lordships, and superlative matters now
content them? when they have a shorter time to use it? Poor men can sing as
merrily as the Rich, and sleep as quietly, and live as comfortably, and die as
easily: Cantabit vacuus -- They are free from abundance of your cares and
fears. The Philosopher that had received a great gift of Gold from a Prince,
sent it back to him the next morning, and told him that he loved no such gifts
as would not let him take his sleep (for thinking what to do with it.)

Direct. 7. Lastly, Study the Art of doing Good, and making your selves friends
of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when you go hence you may be received
into the everlasting habitations. Remember how much of your Religion does
consist in the Devoting of your selves and all to God, and improving his stock,
and being Rich in good works, ready to distribute and communicate, 1 Timothy 6.
18. And how much will be laid upon this at Judgment, Matthew. 25. God does not
call upon you for your charity, as if he would be beholden to you, or needed
any thing that you can give him; but because he will thus difference his hearty
followers from complementing hypocrites. The poor you shall have always with
you: and the Church shall always want your help, and Christ will be still
distressed in his members, to try the reality of men's professions, whether they
love him above all, or else dissemble with him, and wheeher they have any thing
that they think too good for him. It is a certain mark of an hypocrite, to have
any thing in this world, so dear to you that you cannot spare it for Christ.

Remember then that it is your own concernment: If you would be ever the better
for all your wealth, nay if you would not be undone by it, study how you may be
most serviceable to God with it. Cicero could say, that to be Rich is not to
possess much, but to use much. And Seneca could rebuke them that so study to
increase their wealth, that they forget to use it. If really you be Christians
heaven is your portion and your end: And if so, you can love nothing else, nor
use any thing else, rationally, but as a means to attain that end. See
therefore in all your expenses, how you attain or promote your end. Alas men
are so busily building in their way, that they show us that they take not
themselves for travelers: They are so familiar with the world, that they show
us they are not strangers, but at home. They make their garments so fine, and
lay such mountains on their backs, that we see they mean not to be serious
Runners in the Christian race. The thorny cares that choke Christ's seed, do
show that they are barren, and nigh to burning. If you gather Riches for your
selves, (Luke 12. 21.) you are standing pits: If you are Rich to God, you will
be running springs, or cisterns. There is a blessed Art of sending all your
Riches to Heaven before you, if you could learn it, and were willing to be
happy at those rates: It is not for your Riches that God will either condemn or
save you; but for the Abasing or improving them. Though Lazarus was a beggar,
yet Abraham had been rich, whose bosom he was in. Rich men must know, says
Ambrose, that the fault is not in Riches, but in them that know not how to use
them, Nam divitiae ut impedimenta sunt improbis, ita bonis sunt adjumenta
virtutum. O that you could but be sensible of the difference, betwixt them that
can say at last, [We have used our stock for the service of our Lord: We
studied his Will and Interest, and accordingly employed all that we had in the
world] and them that must say, [We gave now and then an alms to the poor; but
for the substance of our estates, we spent it carnally for the flesh, to bear
up our pomp and greatness in the world, and then we left it to our children to
do the like when we were dead.] There is as wide a difference between the end
of these two ways, as there is betwixt Heaven and Hell: And surely the way is
connexed to the end. Think not either that you can serve God and Mammon, or
that you may live to the world, and die to God. When one was asked whether he
had rather be Craesus or Socrates, he answered that he had rather be Craesus
while he lived, and Socrates when he came to die: But dream not you of such a
choice. Gal. 6. 7, 8. Be not deceived; God is not mocked: Whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he also reap: If you sow to the flesh, of the flesh you
shall reap corruption: but if you sow to the Spirit, of the Spirit you shall
reap everlasting life.]

And this much more let me add, that if you intend your wealth for God, you
must not think of evil getting it: For God will not accept a sacrifice, that is
got by falsehood, rapine or injustice. Nay if you intended it indeed for God,
you would not dare to procure it by sin. For God needs not fraud,
perfidiousness or injustice, to promote his service. Pietas sua federa servat.
As Austin ^aith, Ream linguam non faci^, nisi rea men's: So I say here. Your
mind is first guilty of denying God, whatever you pretend, when you dare thus
by your deeds deny him.

Yea let me add, that so far should you be from yielding to any temptation to
be covetous, for God, for your family, or any good end that may be offered you,
that you should make an advantage of such temptations, to watch the world and
your deceitful hearts the more narrowly hereafter. And if in all temptations to
worldliness, you could turn them to a gain and duty, and over-shoot the tempter
in his bow, it were a point of singular zeal and Prudence. When he would put
any covetous motion into your mind, or work it into your hands, give then more
liberally, or do more good then you did before. Let this be all that the
deceitful flesh, and world shall get by you: Fallite, fallentes -- Et in
laqueos, quos posuere cadant.

I know that flesh and blood will stand in your way with abundance of
disswasives, and make you believe, that this so plain and great a duty, is no
duty. In the verbal part of godliness it would allow God but little: but in the
more costly practical part, much less. Sometime it will tell you that men are
so naught that they deserve not your charity: But Christ deserves it: give it
therefore to him Sometime it will tell you of men's unthankfulness: but satis
est dedisse; you have done your duty: God accepts it: Other men's
thankfulness, is not your Reward. You are more unthankful your selves to God.
You are called to imitate him that causes his Sun to shine and his rain to
fall on the just and on the unjust, and that daily bestows his mercies on the
unthankful. Sometime it will tell you of the uncertainty of reaching the end of
your Charity: That if you maintain Scholars to Learning they may prove
ungodly: if you leave any considerable gift to pious uses, sacriledgious and
rapacious hands may alienate it. But you are sure of succeeding in your
ultimate end, which is the pleasing of God and your own salvation: It is not
lost to you if it be to others. Cast your bread upon the waters; if you cannot
trust God, you cannot obey him, Do your part, and leave his part to himself.
Its your part to Give; and its Gods part to succeed it for the attainment of
the end He that is worst is likest to fail: And whether think you is better,
God or you? and which should be more suspected. He is unworthy the name of a
servant of God, that will run no hazard for him. Venture your charity in a way
of duty, or pretend not to be charitable. Will you not sow your Masters corn,
till you are certain of a plentious increase? And do you think that he will
take this for a good account? This is the foolish excuse that Christ has told
you shall have a terrible sentence: you will hide Gods talent for fear of
losing it; but woe to such unprofitable servants.

Sometime the flesh will tell you that you may want your selves, or your
posterity at least; and that you were best gather till your stock arise to so
much or so much, and then God shall have some. A fair bargain! Just like
ungodly men by their Repentance and Conversion; they will sin till they are
old, and then they will turn. But few turn that delay with such resolutions. If
God have not right to all, he has right to none. If he have right to all, will
you give him none but your leavings. A swine will let another eat when his
belly is full. What if you are never richer, will you never do good therefore
with what you have?

And for the impoverishing of your self, if you fear being a loser by God, you
may keep your Riches as long as you can, and try how you can save your self and
them. A man's life consists not in the abundance that he possesses. Do not
imagine that you need more then you do. If Monasticks think it their perfection
to be wilfully poor, and Seneca thought it the Cynicks wisdom, quod effecit
nequid sibi eripi posset; you may much more rejoice in such an estate if God
bring you to it, by or for well-doing. You live in dangerous times: Wars and
thieves may soon level your estates; Can there be greater wisdom then to send
it all to heaven, and lay it up with God, and put it into the surest hands; and
put it to the only usury? Aut ego fallor, aut regnum est, inter avaros,
circumscriptores, latrones, plagiarios, unum esse, cui noceri non possit.
Cannot a man live think you without wealth and honor. Siquis de talium
faelicitate dubitat, potest idem dubitare, and de deorum immortalium statu, an
parum bear degant, quod illis non praedia, nec horti sint, etc. Sen. As it is
the honor of God the first mover, omnia movere ipse non motus; So it is the
honor of the greatest Benefactors, omnia dare nihil habentes; He that has it
to Give, has it more transcendently, then he that has it but to Use. He that
has most, has most care, and trouble, and envy, and danger, and the greatest
reckoning. Neither Poverty nor Riches, was the wise man's wish, but Convenient
food. Optimus pecuniae modus est, qui nec in paupertatem cadit, nec procul a
paupertate discedit. Sen. No man does dissemble, lie, oppress, defraud for love
of Poverty; but thousands do it for love of Riches. Neminem vidi tyrannidem
gerere propter Paupertatem, plurimos vero propter divitias, says the Cynick,
citante Stob. Poverty is one of the cheapest medicines for the mind, and Riches
a dear deceit. A Philosopher calls Poverty a self-taught virtue, and Riches a
vice to be acquired with great labor and diligence: Poverty is a Natural
Philosophy: an effectual doctrine of temperance: and Riches a Nursery of Pride,
voluptuousness and every vice. And Paul comes near it, and speaks more
cautelously, yet home enough, that The love of money is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10. and therefore is it self a transcendent evil.

Sweet healthful Temperance is cheap, and may be maintained without any great
revenews: it is killing luxury, excess and pride that are so dear, and require
so much for their maintenance. Our journey is not of such small moment, nor our
way so fair, nor our day so long nor our strength and patience so great, as to
encourage us to lo^d our selves with things unnecessary. Christian living is
daily sighting; And we use not to fight with our Riches on our backs, but for
them. He that swimmeth with the greatest load, is likelyest to sink. Men fancy
that evil in a low estate which else they would not feel; and when they have
picked a causless quarrel with it, and undeservedly fallen out with it, they
speak abusively of it, and of God himself for casting it upon them. Men love
Riches so well, because they love sin so well. Did poverty accommodate men's
vices, and feed and satisfy their sinful lusts as well as Riches, it would be
loved as well. And if Riches did starve up luxury and voluptuousness as much as
Poverty, they would be as much abhorred. Few men speak highly of Honors, or
Riches, or Pleasures at the last; nor hardly of a low or suffering state. And
the last judgment is commonly the wisest.

Let not therefore the fear of Poverty deter you from good works. Yea rather
give speedily, and do good while you have it, before all be gone and you be
disabled. Says Nazianzen (Orat. de Amor. Pauper.) Deo great tudinis ergo
aliquid tribue, quod ex eorum numero sis, qui de aliis been mereri possunt, non
qui aliorum beneficentia opus habeant: quod in alienas manus non oculos
conjectos habeas, sed alii in tuas: Da operam, ut non solum opibus, sed etiam
pietate, non solum auro, sed etiam virtute ^is locuples. Cura ut proximo tuo
idcirco praestan ior sis, quia benignior. Fac calamitoso sis Deus, Dei
miserecordiam imitando. Nihil enim tam Divinum homo habet, quam de aliis been
mereri.] If you have no pity on others, have some on your souls. Give not all
your Lands and wealth to your flesh and your posterity: Give some of it to your
souls, by giving it to God. Shall your bodies have it, and your souls have
none, or but a little? [Hoc solum quod in opibus bonum est, lucremur; nempe ut
animas nostras in eleemosynis acquiramus, facultates nostras pauperibus
impertiamus, ut coelestibus ditemur. Animae quoque partem da; non carni
duntaxat: Deo quoque partem da, non mundo tantum: Ex ventre aliquid subtrahe,
and spiritui consecra: Ex igne aliquid eripe, ac procul a depascente flamma
reconde, a tyranno eripe, ac Domino commit -- Da exiguum ei a quo multa
habes: Da etiam omnia ei, qui omnia donavit: Nunquam Dei munificentiam vinces,
etiamsi omnia tua bona proijcias, etiamsi te etiam ipsum bonis tuis adjungas.
Nam hoc quoque ipsum Accipere est, nempe Deo donare] says Gregory Nazianz. ubi
sup.

Of any kind of covetousness, there is none more plausibly pretended against
works of Charity, then that of some Ministers, that can spare no money, because
their Libraries are yet unfurnished with many Books which they would fain have.
Yet here we must see, that greater works be not for this omitted. Says Seneca
(de Tranquil.) Studiorum quoque quae liberalissima impensa est, tamdiu rationem
habebo, quamdiu modum. Quo mihi innumerabiles libros and bibliothecas, quorum
Dominus vix tota vita sua indices perlegit? Onerat discentem turba, non
instruit: multoque saitius est paucis te authoribus tradere, quam errare per
multos. -- Studiosa haec luxuria; imo ne studiosa quidem, quoniam non in
studium, sed in spectaculum. -- Paretur librorum quantum satis sit; nihil in
apparatum -- Vitiosum est, ubique quod nimium est.]

Yea more, let me tell you all, and beseech you to consider it: It is your duty
even to pinch your flesh, and spare it from your back and belly, that you may
have wherewithal to do good. Its no thanks to you to relieve others out of
that which you need not your selves: and to give God that which your flesh can
spare. Such liberality may stand with little suffering or self-denial; and
therefore will be but a poor proof of your grace. Had I ten thousand pound a
year, I should think it my duty for all that, to pinch my flesh, that I might
spare as much of it as is possible for God. David would not offer that to God
which cost him nothing, 2 Samuel 24. 24. If you fare the hardlyer, and go the
plainer in your attire, and deny your selves that which is for any needless
pomp or ostentation, or splendour in the world; that you may have so much the
more to do good with; you deal then like good husbands for God and your souls,
and faithful Stewards. Why should a covetous Miser pinch his flesh more to
gather Riches for himself and his posterity, then you should do to gather it
for God, and to expend it on the Church and poor? Be as frugal as they; but not
to the same end; so you use it for God and your poor Brethren, an honest
parsimonie and gathering is a duty; and such an holy covetousness is so far
from condemnable, that it is the truest Charity, which God and all wise men
will most applaud. I do not mean only to deny your flesh in gross excesses, but
to pinch it by a just frugality and abstinence: And yet you shall not say that
I am drawing you to extremes. I would not have you so far pinch your flesh as
to disable it for duty, but to deny it whatsoever does not some way help it for
duty, that we may not feed our own unnecessary delights, though with a seeming
decorum and moderation, while so many about us are pinched with the want of
necessaries, and so many public excellent works are calling for our help. The
flesh is to be tamed, and humbled, and brought in subjection, and scanted when
greater things require it, but not to be destroyed and made unserviceable.
[Infid^ huic corp ri quomodo conjunctus sim, haud equidem scio: quoque pacto
simul and imago Dei sim, and cum coeno voluter: quod and cum pulchra valetudine
est, bello me lacessit, and cum bello premitur, maerore me afficit: quod, and
ut conservum amo, and ut in^micum odi atque aversor: quod, and ut vinculum
fugio, and ut cohaeres vereor. Si debilitare illud and conficere studeo, jam
non habeo quo socio and opitulatore ad res praeclarissimas ut^r; nimirum haud
ignorans quam ob causam procreatus sim, quodque me per actiones ad Deum
ascendere oporteat. Sin contra ut cum socio and adjutore m^tius agam, nulla jam
ratio occurrit, qua rebellantis impetum fugiam, atque a Deo non excidam,
compedibus degravatus, vel in terram detrahentibus, vel in ea detinentibus.
Hostis est blandus and placidus: invidiosus amicus. O miram conjunctionem and
alienationem! Quod metuo amplector, quod amo pertimesco. Antequam bellum
gesserim in gratiam redeo: Antequam pace fruar, ab eo dissideo.] Greg. Naz. ubi
sup. And for Delight, at least learn of an Heathen how to esteem of it. Sen. de
vita beata. Tu voluptatem complecteris; ego compesco: Tu voluptate frueris, ego
utor. Tu illam summum bonum putas: ego nec bonum. Tu omnia voluptatis causa
facis: ego nihil.]

What remains now Gentlemen, but that you be up and doing, and look about you
where you may have the best bargain to lay out your money on for God and for
your souls? Stay not till the Market is over, till thieves have robbed you, till
God in judgment have impoverished you; till mere necessity do constrain you to
part with that which you cannot keep; or till the souls or bodies that need
your help are removed from your sight. Seek after an object for your Alms as
diligently as beggars seek the Alms; you have more cause; for you get more by
Giving, then they do by Receiving: If you believe not this, you believe not
Christ; and so are Infidels.

The sum of my Advice is, that as men that are drawing near to their account,
and love Christ in his members, and believe the promise of Reward, you would
Devote your selves and your estates to Christ, and study to do good, and make
it your daily trade and business, as men that are zealous of Good works, and
created to walk in them, (Tit. 2. 14. Ephesians. 2. 10.) and not as dropping a little
upon the by. Say not that you have not wealth, or interest, or opportunity; The
Rich have full opportunities: The poor have their two mites, or their cup of
cold water to give to a Disciple. And he that has neither, may have a Will to
give thousands a year: And this is our comfort that have but little, that [if
there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and
not according to that he has not.] 2 Cor. 8. 12. But where [there is a
readiness to will, there will also be a performance out of that which you have]
if you be sincere, Verse. 11. Et Nunquam usque eo interclusa sunt omnia, ut
nulli actioni honestae locus sit. -- Nunquam inutilis est opera civis boni:
Au^itu enim, visu, vultu, nutu, obstinatione tacita, incessuque ipso prodest.
Ut salutaria quaedam citra gustum tactumque odore proficiunt; ita virtus
utilitatem etiam ex longinquo and latens fundit, sive spargitur, and se utitur
suo jure; sive precarios habet excessus, cogiturque vela contrahere: sive
otiosa mutaque est, and angusto circumscripta; sive adaperta: in quocunque
habitu est, prodest. Seneca de Tranq. (I give you not these passages of
strangers to Christ, as if his Doctrine needed any such patches; but as
imagining that the temper of those I speak to, may need such a double
testimony, and to see the Book of Nature as well as of Grace: and to let you
understand, how unexcusable a Professed Christian is that is worse then an
Infidel.)

I have been long, and yet I would I had done. I have taught you, and yet I
fear lest you have not learned. I have told you what you knew before, (unless
it be because you will not know it;) and yet have more need to hear it, then a
thousand things that you never knew. I have set you an easy Lesson, hard to be
Learned. Were but your senses Rational, or were your Will but dis-engaged and
morally Free, the work were done, and that would be learnt in an hour, that the
Church and Commonwealth might rejoice in till the Sun shall be no more. O had
we but such Princes, Nobles and Gentlemen, as were thus Zealous and Studious of
Good works, and wholly Devoted and Dedicated unto God, what a Resemblance
should we have of Heaven or Earth? How then would our Princes and Nobles be
both Loved and Honored, when their Addictedness to God did make them so
Divine? How Honorable then would our Parliaments be, and how cheerfully should
we flock together for their Election? How dear would our Judges and country
Magistrates be to all that have any thing of piety or humanity in them. Kings
then would reign in Righteousness, and Princes Rule in judgment; and a man
should be as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as
rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land:
And the eyes of them that see should not be dim, and the ears of them that hear
should hearken; the heart also of the rash should understand knowledge, and the
tongue of the stammerers should be ready to speak elegantly.] Isa. 32. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5. what help then should Ministers have in their work, and the souls of all
the people for their happiness! and what a shaking would Satan's Kingdom feel?
Then neither seducers should have this pretense, nor the seduced this
temptation as now they have* to call their various Modells of Republics, by
such splendid names, and to think Christ Reigns when they Reign; or that it is
the only Government, to have all to be Governors, or to have the greatest
Liberty to be bad. No forms will reform us and heal our maladies, till we are
healed and reformed within. Lead will not be Gold, what form soever you mold it
into. And though some ways may be more effectual to restrain the evil, and
improve the good, that is among them, yet still the wicked will do wickedly.
The The Swordfish and the Thresher would be the Tormentors of Leviathan, and
God himself would be impatient of his Tyranny. And his Brother would mend the
matter, who by giving the Power to the vast tumultuous Ocean it self, may find
that his Republic is not only inconsistent with a Clergy (an high
commendation) but may possibly be as injurious to his Moral Honesty, as any
other sort of Tyranny: and might have learned of his chiefest Master, Seneca,
(de Tranquil. Anim.) that the free City of Athens could less endure Socrates
then the Tyrants, and did put him to death, whom they had tolerated. [Nunquid
potes invenire urbem miseriorem quam Atheniensium fuit cum illam triginta
tyranni divellerent? Mill trecentos ci^es, optimum quemque occiderant. --
Socrates tamen in medio erat -- Et imitari volentibus, magnum circumferebat
exemplar cum inter triginta dominos liber incederet. Hunc tamen Athenae ipse in
carcere occiderunt: Et qui tuto insultaverat agmini tyrannorum, ejus Libertatem
libera civitas non tulit. -- ]

Gentlemen, for the Lords sake, for your souls sake, for the Churches and the
Gospels sake, for your Countries sake, and the spritual and corporal good of
thousands, awake now from your sloth and selfishness, from your Ambition,
Voluptuousness and sordid Worldliness, and give up your selves and all that you
have to God by Christ, and to the Common Good, and make the best of all your
faculties and interest, for the high and noble Ends of Christians: And convince
all self-conceited founders or troublers of the Commonwealth, that you have
hit the way of a true Reformation, without any alteration of the form, by
correcting your selves the principal Materials. And let them see by your
seeking the weal of all, that your form is as truly a Commonweal as theirs,
and that they absurdly appropriate the Title to their own. If you deny us this,
on you shall lie the blame and shame, and not on our want of a Popular form.

But because I have gone so far with you by persuasion, (though yet I doubt
whether indeed you will be perswaded^* I shall not leave you till I have added
the ^^st part of my task, which is to set some Rules and Matter for Good works
before you, that if you are but willing, you may set your money to the happyest
usury, and that upon the best security.

1. (For General Rules) Aim at no lower an ultimate End in your Charity, then
the Pleasing of God, and move from no lower a first moral Principle then the
Love of God within you. Seek not self while you seem to Deny it. Give and do
good to Christ in his servants.

2. Consider therefore of men's Relations to Christ, and understand where his
Interest lies in the world. Avoid both their extremes, that would have you do
Good to none but Saints, and that would have you do it to all alike. As God
has a special Love to his children, and yet does Good to all, his mercy being
over all his works; and as he is the Savior of all men, but especially of them
that Believe; so must you Love all men as men, and Saints as Saints; and do
Good to all men, but especially to them of the household of faith, Gal. 6. 10.
The New command of special Love, must not be thought to abrogate, the old
Commandment of common Love, even of Loving our neighbor as our selves. You
must do Good to a Disciple in the name of a Disciple: and to a Prophet in the
name of a Prophet, Mat. 10. 42. and yet take the wounded man for your
neighbor, that you see lie in your way, Luke 10. 30. I know the Serpentine
seed, had rather you would kick against the Pricks, and tread down Christ's
interest, then there to lay out your greatest Charity. But its God that you
have to reckon with, who judges not as they. The Philosopher being asked, Why
all men were more ready to give to the halt and blind, then to Philosophers,
answered, that They thought they might come to be halt and blind themselves,
but were never like to be Philosophers: So I may say of many that would be
content that you feed the common poor with bread, but the Disciples of Christ
with stones. They think they may be poor themselves, but they are never like to
be Christ's Disciples: Nay some of them (such as Clem. writes in his mock* fides
divina) will persuade you that its a sottish thing to conceive that any have
Christ's Spirit now, that work not Miracles, and that he has no Church,
Ministry or Saints, that is, that Christianity is not the right Religion,
unless it had present Miracles to warrant it. And then you might be excused
rather for your uncharitableness to it, then for your Charity. But wisdom is
justified of all her children: And the mouths of her enemies will be quickly
stopped: and they shall then know that Christ is Lord and Judge, without either
faith or further Miracles.

3. When you have two Good works before you, prefer the Greater, and choose not
the less.

4. Caeteris Paribus, let Works of Spiritual and everlasting concernment, be
preferred, to those that are merely temporal.

5. And let Works for the Public Good, of Church or Commonwealth* be
preferred before private Works.

6. Let God have All in one way or other: even that which your selves and
families receive: Take it but as your daily bread to support you in his
service. Do not limit God, or tie him to any part. Take heed of Reserving any
thing from him, or of halving with him, as Ananias and Saphira. He deserves
and he expects all. That which he has not, you have not, but Satan has it.
You lose it, if you return it not to him.

And now in the Conclusion, I shall presume (though I foresee I may incurr a
censure for it) to give you a Catalogue of some of those good works which are
seasonable in our days, by which you may make your reckoning comfortable. And
do not think that God is beholden to you for it, if you perform them all: but
take it as the happyest bargain that you can make: and thankfully take the
opportunity while it is offered you, remembering that there is no such security
nor advantage, to be made of your money, in any way as for God: and that it is
more blessed to Give then to Receive: Say not another day but that you had a
price in your hands: if you have not an Heart, you must suffer with the
unfaithful. A Catalogue of seasonable Good Works, presented to them that are
sanctified to God, and dare trust him with their Riches, expecting the
everlasting Riches which he has promised, and are zealous of Good Works, and
take it for a precious Mercy that they may be exercised therein.
1. ENquire what persons, burdened with children, or sickness, or on any such
occasion labor under necessities, and relieve them, as you are able, and find
them fit. And still make advantage of it for the benefit of their souls,
instructing, admonishing and exhorting them, as they have need. If you give
them any annual gift of clothes, bread or money, engage them to learn some
Catechism withal, and to go to the Minister and give him an account of it.
Some I know that set up a monthly Lecture to be fitted to the poor, and give
six pence or twelve pence to a certain Number of poor that hear it.

2. As far as Law will enable you, bind all your Tenants in their Leases to
learn a Catechism, and read the Scripture, and be once a year at least
accountable to the Minister, of their Profiting. If you cannot do this, at
least, use your Interest in every Tenant you have to do it, and to seek God and
worship him in their families (in which let your own families be eminently
exemplary.) It is very much that Landlords might do for God if they had hearts.
Discountenance the ungodly. Encourage the good: Give them back some little,
when they pay their Rent, to hire them to some duty. And think not too much to
go to their houses for such ends.

3. Buy some plain and rowzing Books, that tend to Conversion and are fittest
for their Condition, and give them to the families that most need them, getting
them to promise you to read them twice over, at least, and then to give their
Teachers an account of the effect, and receive Instructions from them for their
further profit. Many have this way received much good. Or you may buy the
Books, and trust the Ministers to distribute them, and engage the receivers to
read them, or to hear them read.

4. Take the children of the poor, and set them Apprentices to some honest
trade, and be sure you choose them Godly Masters, that may take care of their
souls as well as of their bodies: Or if you are able, settle a perpetual
allowance for this use, entrusting the Minister with the choice of a Godly
Master for them, and whom you see meet with the choice of the boys.

5. In very great Congregations that have but one Minister, nor are able and
willing to maintain another, it is a very good work to settle some maintenance
for an Assistant* without whom the flock must needs be much neglected:
Impropriations may be bought in to that use.

6. To settle Schools in the more rude parts of the Country, where they use
not to teach their children to read, or in Market Towns where people are
numerous, is a very good work.

7. It is one of the best works I know within the reach of a mean man's purse,
to maintain Scholars (in Sizers places) at about 10. l. per annum charge, till
they are capable either of the Ministry, or of some other station in order to
it, where they can maintain themselves. As also to maintain some of the
choiceest parts for some special studies. There is an Intent of some to
propound this work in a method fit for the whole Nation to concur in. T^ll that
be done, any Rich man that is willing to do Good, may entrust some able Godly
Ministers with the choice of the fittest youths (which is the greatest matter)
and may allow them necessary maintenance. How many souls may be saved by the
Ministry of one of these? And how can money be better husbanded?

8. It will be a very Good work also conjunctly to encourage Manufactures or
other trades, and Piety too, if in Cities and Corporations, some yearly rents
be given on these terms: That several of the honestest tradesmen, may have 5.
l. or 10. l. a piece yearly of this Rent, lent them freely for four or five
years to trade with, putting in security to repay it: And so the stock will
increase, and more Land may be bought by it after certain years, to go on to
the same use: (only let the Trustees have power to remit all or part where
there is an extraordinary unexpected failing) And that the fittest men may
still receive it, some godly Trustees may be chosen, who may choose their
successors; the Minister being one, as likest to choose the fittest subjects of
this beneficence. If Honest men be kept up, they will better relieve the poor,
then if it were left to their own hands.

9. It would be a blessed Work for our Rulers and some Rich men to erect a
College (at Salop, I think the only fit place, for many Reasons) for the
education of Scholars for the use of Wales; a Country, whose present misery,
and ancient honor, and readiness to receive the Gospel, and zealous profession
of what they know, should encourage all good men to help them. Too few will
send their sons to our present Universities, and too few of those that come
thither are willing to return. But if this may not be done, the next way, will
be to add some Charitable help for them in Oxford, obliging them to return to
the service of their Country.

10. Were I to speak to Princes, or men so Rich and Potent as to be able to do
so good a Work, I would provoke them to do as much as the Jesuits have done,
in seeking the Conversion of some of the vast Nations of Infidels, that are
possessed of so great a part of the world: viz. To erect a College for those
whom the Spirit of God shall animate for so great a Work, and to procure one or
two of the Natives out of the Countries whose Conversion you design, to Teach
the Students in this College their language (which its like might be
effected.) And when they have learned the Tongues, to Devote themselves to the
Work, where by the Countenance of Ambassadors, Merchants, Plantations or any
other means, they may procure access and liberty of speech. Doubtless God would
stir up some among us, to venture on the labor and apparent danger, for so
great a work: If we be not better principled, disposed and resolved to do or
suffer in so good a cause, then the Jesuits are, we are much to blame. And
where we can but have opportunity, we are like to do mu^^ more good then they.
1. Because they are so importunate every where for the Interest of the Pope,
that the People presently smell it to be but a selfish secular design. 2.
Because when they have taken them from their Heathenish Idolatry, and taken
down their Images, they set up the Divine Worship of the Host, and the Cross,
and the Religious worship of the Virgin Mary and the Saints, with prayers to
them, in the stead, with such abundance of Ceremonious additions, that the
people think it is as good be where they are; as if it were but the taking down
one Daimon or Divus to set up another in a kind of emulation and they think
that every Country should continue the worship of their ancient Patrons or
Daimons. Whereas if we went among them, with the plain and pure Gospel, not
sophisticated by these superstitions, with a simple intention of their
spiritual good, without any designs of advantage to our selves, its like we
might do much more, and might expect a greater blessing from God; as Mr. Eliot
and his helpers find of their Blessed labors in New England, where if the
languages, and remote habitations (or rather no habitations but dispersions) of
the inhabitants did not deny them opportunity of speech, much more might be
effected. And though the Mahometans are more cruel then the Heathens against
any that openly speak against their superstition and deceit, yet God would
persuade some, its like, to think it worth the loss of their lives to make some
prudent attempt in some of those vast Tartarian or Indian Countries, where
Christianity has had least access and audience. As difficult works as these
are, the Christian Princes and people are exceedingly too blame, that they have
done no more in attempting them; and have not turned their private quarrels,
into a common agreement for the good of the poor uncalled world.



I have told you of diverse ways, in which you may secure your wealth from
loss, and make an everlasting advantage of it. Those that have Power and not a
Will, shall lose the Reward, and have the condemnation of unfaithful Stewaras.
Those that have Power and an envious evil Will, that desires not the Churches
good, shall moreover have the Punishment of Malignant enemies. Those that have
neither Power nor Will, or are both Impotent and Malignant, shall be judged
according to what they would have done, if they had been able. Those that have
an unfeigned Will, but not Power shall be accounted as if they had done the
works: for God accepts the will for the deed: All these Good Works are yours,
poor Christians, that never did them, if certainly you would have done them,
notwithstanding the difficulty, cost and suffering if you had been able. But it
is the godly Rich, that are both Able and Willing, and actually perform them,
that will profit both themselves and others, that both their own and others
souls may have the comfort of it. I shall lay some of the words of God himself
before your eyes, and heartily pray for the sake of your own souls, and the
public Good, that you may excel Papists as far in Works of Charity, as you do
in the soundness of Doctrine, Discipline and Worship.

Gentlemen, excuse the necessary Freedom of speech, and Accept the Seasonable,
Honorable, Gainful Motion, propounded to you from the Word of God, by

Feb. 20. 1657/8 Your faithful Monitor, Rich. Baxter.

Sophronius Bishop of Jerusalem (Prat. spir. c. 195. referente Baronio ad an.
411.) delivers this History following to posterity, as a most certain thing:
THAT Leontius Apamiensis a most faithful Religious man that had lived many
years at Cyrene assured them, that Synesius (who of a Philosopher became a
Bishop) found at Cyrene one Evagrius a Philosopher, who had been his old
acquaintance, fellow-student and intimate friend, but an obstinate Heathen: and
Synesius was earnest with him to become a Christian, but all in vain: Yet did
he still follow him with those Arguments that might satisfy him of the
Christian verity; and at last the Philosopher told him, that to him it seemed
but a mere fable and deceit that the Christian Religion teaches men, that this
world shall have an end, and that all men shall rise again in these bodies, and
their flesh be made immortal and incorruptible, and that they shall so live for
ever, and receive the Reward of all that they have done in the body, and that
he that has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord, and he that gives to the
poor and needy shall have Treasures in heaven, and shall receive an
hundredfold from Christ, together with eternal life. These things he derided.
Synesius by many arguments assured him that all these things were certainly
true: and at last the Philosopher and his children were Baptized. A while after
he comes to Synesius, and brings him three hundred pound of Gold for the poor,
and bid him Take it, but give him a Bill under his hand that Christ should
repay it him in another world. Synesius took the money for the poor, and gave
him under his hand such a Bill as he desired. Not long after the Philosopher
being near to death, commanded his sons that when they buried him, they should
put Synesius Bill in his hand in the Grave; which they did: And the third day
after, the Philosopher seemed to appear to Synesius in the night, and said to
him, [Come to my Sepulcher, where I lie, and take thy Bill, for I have received
the Debt and am saified; which for thy assurance I have subscribed with my own
hand.] The Bishop knew not that the Bill was buried with him, but sent to his
sons, who told him all; and taking them and the chief men of the City, he went
to the Grave, and found the Paper in the hands of the Corpse, thus subscribed,
[EGO EVAGRIUS PHILOSOPHUS, TIBI SANCTISSIMO DOMINO SYNESIO EPISCOPO SALUTEM:
ACCEPI DEBITUM IN HIS LITERIS MANU TUA CONSCRIPTUM, SATISFACTUMQUE MIHI EST; ET
NULLUM CONTRA TE HABEO JUS PROPTER AURUM QUOD DEDI TIBI, ET PER TE CHRISTO DEO
ET SALVATORI NOSTRO.] that is, I Evagrius the Philosopher, to thee most Holy
Sir, Bishop Synesius greeting: I have received the Debt which in this Paper is
written with thy hands, and I am satisfied, and I have no Law (or Action)
against thee for the Gold which I gave to thee, and by thee to Christ our God
and Savior.] They that see the thing admired, and glorified God that gave such
wonderful evidence of his promises to his servants: And, says Leontius, this
Bill subscribed thus by the Philosopher, is kept at Cyrene most carefully in
the Church to this day, to be seen of such as d^ desire it.

Though we have a sure Word of Promise, sufficient for us to build our Hopes
on, yet I thought it not wholely unprofitable, to cite this one History from so
credible Antiquity, that the Works of God may be had in remembrance. Though if
any be causlesly incredulous, there are surer Arguments that we have ready at
hand to convince him by.

BLessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain Mercy, Mat. 5. 7.

Read Mat. 6. 19. to the end of the Chapter.

Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 7. 21.

Whosoever hears these sayings of mine and does them, I will liken him to a
wise man that built his house upon a Rock, etc. Mat. 7. 24.

Let your Light so shine before men, that they may see your Good Works, and
Glorify your Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5. 16.

I have showed you all things, how that so Laboring ye ought to support the
weak? and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, it is more
blessed to give then to receive, Act. 20. 35.

Give to him that asks thee, and of him that would borrow of thee, tu^^ thou
not away Mat. 5. 42.

All these have ^ kept from my youth up -- yet lackest thou one thing: Sell all
that thou have, and distribute to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in
heaven; and come, follow me. And when he heard this he was very sorrowful, for
he was very Rich. And when Jesus saw that he was very sorrowful, he said, How
hardly shall they that have Riches enter into the Kingdom of God? Luke 18. 21,
22, 23, 24.

Read and consider Luke 12. 15. to 49. And Luke 16. 19* to the end.

Luke 14. 33, 26, 27, 28. So likewise whosoever he be of you, that forsakes
not all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple.

Ephesians. 2. 10. We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus to Good Works,
which God has before ordained that we should walk in them.

Jam. 2. 14. What profits it my brethren, if a man say he has faith, and
have not works? Can faith save him?

Tit. 2. 14 Who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity
and sanctify to himself a peculiar people zealous of Good Works.

1 Timothy 6* 17, 18, 19. Charge them that are Rich in this world, that they be
not high minded, nor trust in uncertainty of Riches, but in the living God, who
gives us richly all things to enjoy: that they do Good: that they be rich in
Good Works; ready to distribute; willing to communicate: Laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold
on eternal life.]

Heb. 13. 16. But to do Good and to Communicate forget not; for with such
sacrifice God is well pleased.

Luke 16. 9, 13. I say unto you, Make you friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness that when ye fail they may receive you into everlasting
habitations. If ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who will
commit to your trust the true Riches? ye cannot serve God and Mammon.

Psalm. 41. 1, 2, etc. Blessed is he that considers the poor: the Lord will
deliver him in the time of trouble, etc.

Read Deuteronomy. 15. 7, 8, 9, etc. 2 Cor. 9. 8, 9, etc. Dan. 4. 27. Lev. 23. 22.
Prove. 22. 9.

Prove. 28. 27. He that gives to the poor shall not lack: but he that hides
his eyes shall have many a curse.

Read Isa. 58. throughout.

Jam. 1. 27. Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this; To
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted of the world.

Jam. 5. 1, 2, 3, 5. Go to now ye Rich men, weep and howl for your miseries
that shall come upon you: your Riches are corrupted and your Garments
moatheaten: your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a
witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire: Ye have heaped
treasure together for the last days. -- Ye have lived in pleasure on earth,
and been wanton; you have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter --

1 John 3. 16, 17, 18. We ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren: but
whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need and shuts up
his bowels from him, how dwells the Love of God in him? My little children,
let us not love in word, nor in tongue, but in deed and in truth.

Gal. 6. 6, 7, 9, 10. Let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him
that teaches in all his goods (or good things.) Be not deceived; God is not
mocked: for whatsoever a man sows that shall he also reap -- Let us not be
we^y in well-doing: for in due season we shall reap if we faint not. As we have
therefore Opportunity, let us do Good unto all men: especially to them who are
of the household of faith.

Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him Labor, working with his hands the thing which is good,
that he may have to give to him that needs.

Mat. 10. 41, 42. He that Receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall
receive a Prophets reward: and he that receives a righteous man in the name of
a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward. And whoever shall give
to drink to one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a
Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward.]

Read 1 Cor. 9. 4, 5. to 16.

Mat. 25. 40, 45. Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye have done it unto one
of the least of those my Brethren, ye have done it unto me -- Verily I say unto
you, in as much as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to
me.

Mat. 6. 3, 4. But when thou do alms, let not thy left hand know what thy
right hand does; That thy alms may be in secret: And thy father which sees in
secret, himself shall reward thee openly.

But this I say Brethren; the time is short: it remains that both they that
have wives be as though they had none -- and they that buy as though they
possessed not; and they that use this world as not abusing it; for the fashion
of this world passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Text opened: Doctrines deduced: and Method propounded. page 1. to 5 What
is not this Crucifying of the world: by way of Caution to avoid extremes, Sect.
2. p. 5 In what respects the world must be Crucified to us: 1. As the creature
would be man's felicity, or any part of it, Sect. 3. p. 10 2. As it is set in
competition with God, or in the least degree of coordination with him, p. 11.
3. As it stands at enmity to God and his ways. 4. As it is the matter of our
flesh pleasing and fuel of conscupiscence. 5. As an Independent or separated
good, without its due Relations to God. p. 14. 15 Ephesians. 2. 12. Psalm. 39. 6. and
73. 20. considered, p. 18, 19 The different successes of sanctified and
unsanctified studies and knowledge, p. 17, 21 The creatures Aptitude to tempt
us is inseparable, p. 22 Wherein the world's Crucifixion consists as to our
acts? We must use the world as it (...) Christ, Sect. 4. p. 24 More
particularly, 1. To esteem the world as an enemy to God and us, Sect. 5. p. 31
How this enmity may be apprehended, p. 32 2. A deep habituate apprehension of
its worthlesness and insufficiency, p. 33 3. A kind of Annihilation of it to
our selves, p. 35 How we must be Crucified to it. The difference between this
and Natural Death, Sect. 6. p. 36 1. Our undue Estimation of the world must be
Crucified, p. 37 2. And our inordinate cogitations. 3. And affections, p. 39 1.
Our Love. 2. Desire. 3. Expectations. 4. Our Delight, p. 43. So in the
Irascible, 1. Displacency and hatred, etc. p. 43 4. Our inordinate Seeking and
Labor, p. 47 Diverse Objections and Questions answered, Sect. 7. p. 48 How the
Cross of Christ does Crucify the world. And 1. How it is done by the Cross as
suffered by Christ, Sect. 8. p. 50 2. How by the same Cross believed in and
considered, p. 54 3. How by the Cross which we suffer in Obedience and
Conformity to Christ, p. 57 The point proved by experience, Sect. 9. p. 59
Reasons of the absolute necessity of being Crucified to the world, and it to
us. 1. From Gods interest, which it contradicts, Sect. 10. p. 60 2. From our
own interest, Sect. 11. p. 64 The Uses. 1. To inform us, 1. That it is the use
of the Cross of Christ to Crucify the world, Proved. p. 68. How his doctrine
does it, p 72. And his works, p. 73 2. Wherever the Cross of Christ is
effectual, the world is Crucified, Sect. 13. p. 74 Use 2. What it is to be a
Christian indeed, and what a distance such are at from the world, Sect. 14. p.
77 Trial whether we are dead to the world. Eight signs by which we may know
whether the world or God be our End, Sect. 15. p* 80, 81 Ac^oser Application
for Conviction of worldly hypocrites, Sect. 16. p. 88 Further Application for
Conviction of worldlings, Sect. 17. p. 94 Convincing Evidences produced, p. 98
Specially to the greater sort. Ten Articles of Aggravation of the worldlings
sin, p. 105 Further pressed for conviction, p. 115 Use of Exhortation, to
Crucify the world, Sect. 18. p. 120. Specially to Gentlemen, Yet closelyer
urged, p. 124 Twelve Questions to evince the folly of worldlings, p. 128 etc.
The duty further charged home, Sect. 19. p 138 The Living world will be your
own tormentor, p. 139 An instance in point of Reputation and Honor, p. 141,
etc. Directions for successful Crucifying the world, p. 148 Direct. 1. Make use
of the Cross of Christ hereto, p. 149 Direct. 2. Receive not a false picture of
the world into your minds, but think of the creature truly as it is, p. 152
Direct 3. Crucify the flesh, which is the Master Idol, p. 154 Direct. 4. Keep
your minds intent on the greater things of everlasting life, p. 157 Direct. 5.
Understand the right use and end of the creatures, and make it your business to
employ them accordingly, p. 158 Direct. 6. Keep sensible of its enmity and your
danger, p. 161 Direct. 7. Be much in the house of mourning, and see the end of
all the living. Direct. 8. Study to improve afflictions, p. 162 Direct. 9. Be
very suspicious of prosperity, and fear more the smiling then the frowning
world, p. 163 Direct. 10. Be sure to keep off the means of its livelihood, and
keep it under mortifying means, p. 171 Conclusion of that Use, p. 175 Use to
the sanctified, to use the world as a Crucified thing, Sect. 21. p. 176 1. Seek
it but as a means to higher things, and not for it self, p. 178 2. Be not too
eager for it, p. 180 3. Suffer it not to Crucify you with cares and sorrows,
p. 181 4. Let it not thrust out Gods service, nor be made an excuse for
negligence in Religion, p. 182 5. Use no unlawful means to get it, p. 185 6.
Employ it for the flesh (...) improve all for God: uncharitableness reproved,
p. 187 A full answer to the common reproach, that Professors of godliness are
the most covetous of all, p. 191 Use of Consolation. The Benefits of being
Crucified to the world, p. 202. to 220
The second PART. Of the Christians Glorying.
Doct. TRue Christians must with abhorrency renounce all carnal glorying, and
must glory only in the Cross of Christ, by ^om the world is Crucified to them,
and they to the world, p. 220. Particularly, 1. True Christians that are
Crucified to the world and the world to them by the Cross of Christ, may and
must glory therein. How far, and how far not, p. 221 Proved by Scripture and
fourteen Reasons, p. 222 Use 1. To confute the Antinomian mistake, that tells
men they must not glory nor fetch their comfort from any thing in themselves.
The case opened. Ten more reasons to prove the point asserted, p. 226, etc. Use
2. To discover the error of too many Christians, that can glory in a state of
Exaltation, but not of Crucifixion, or Mortification, p. 231 Observe. 2. When
Believers glory in their own Mortification, it must be as it is the fruit of
the Cross of Christ, that so all their Glorying may be principally and
ultimately in Christ, and not in themselves, p. 235. Twelve Reasons against
Glorying in our selves. Use: to condemn self-exalting, and provoke to Humility,
p. 241 Observe. 3. To Glory in any thing save the Cross of Christ, and our
Crucifixion thereby, is a thing that the soul of a Christian should abhor. What
is not here excluded from our lawful Glorying, p. 243 What is excluded. Glory
not, 1. In dignities and honors, p. 245 2. Nor in Riches, p. 246. Nor in
comeliness or strength 5. Nor in Apparel, p. 247. 6. Nor in Health. 7. Nor in
Noble Birth, p. 248. 8. Nor in friends. 9. Nor in meat, drink, dwellings, ease,
company, recreation, etc. p. 249. 10. Nor in men's good word: though they be
Learned, Godly, etc. p. 250. 11. Nor in Learning, Parts, etc. 12. Take heed in
what respect you glory in Spiritual Mercies, 1. In Ministers, Ordinances,
Church, communion, etc. 2. In knowledge. 3. In good works. 4. In experiments of
mercy or feelings of comfort. 5. In holy Graces, (whose nature is against
carnal glorying.)
Errata.
Page 3. l. ult. for they r. theirs: p. 7. l. 28. for then r. there; p. 14. l.
31. r. communion with him; p. 28. l. 24. for not r. no; l. 27. r. (...); p. 36.
l. 3. for be r. do; p. 4. l. 30. after expected add and this by an heavenly
Light and Love; p. 48. l. 18. r. heterogeneous; p. 69. l. 15. for means r.
names or terms; p. 74. l. 19. blot out them; p. 85. l. 4. for what r. which; p.
143. l. 11. r. themselves; p. 145. l. 3. r. stoliditatem; p. 146. l. 17. blot
out in; p. 187. l. 13. r. seipsum; p. 228. l. 27. for father r. faith; p. 250.
l. 25. blot out men.

These Books following of the same Authors, are also Printed for Nevil Simmons
Bookseller in Kederminster.
TRue Christianity, or Christ's Absolute dominion, and man's necessary
self-resignation and Subjection, in two Assize Sermons, preached at Worcester,
in 12o.

A Sermon of Judgment preached at Paul's, before the Honorable Lord Major and
Aldermen of the City of London, December. 17. 1654* and now enlarged, in 12o.

Making light of Christ and Salvation too often the Issue of Gospel Invitations,
manifest in a Sermon preached at Lawrence Jury in London, 8o.

The Agreement of diverse Ministers of Christ in the County of Worcester for
Catechizing or personal Instructing all in their several Parishes that will
Consent thereunto, containing 1. The Articles of our agreement. 2. An
Exhortation to the people to submit to this necessary work. 3. The Profession
of Faith and Catechism, in 8o.

Gildas Salvianus, the Reformed Pastor, showing the nature of the Pastoral
work, especially in private instruction and Catechizing, 8o.

Certain Disputations of Right to Sacraments, and the True Nature of Visible
Christianity, 4o.

Of Justification: four Disputations clearing and amicably defending the Truth,
against the unnecessary Oppositions of diverse Learned and Reverend Brethren, 4o.

One sheet for the Ministry, against the Malignants of all sorts.

A winding sheet for Popery.

One sheet against the Quakers.

A second sheet for the Ministry, Justifying our Calling against Quakers,
Seekers and Papists, and all that deny us to be the Ministers of Christ.

Directions to Justices of Peace, especially in Corporations, to the discharge
of their duty to God, written at the request of a Magistrate, and Published for
the use of others that need it.

The Crucifying of the world, BY The Cross of CHRIST.
GAL. 6. 14. But God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ; by whom the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world.
SECT. I.
EVER since mankind had a being upon earth, the malicious apostate spirits have
been their enemies: If it was the will of our Creator that we should be
Militaries in our Innocence, and keep our standing, and attain our Confirmation
and Glory by a Victory, or else come short of it if we lost the day: No wonder
then that our lapsed condition must be militant, and that by conquest we must
obtain the Crown. But there is a great deal of difference between these
combats. In our first state we were the sole Combatants against the Enemy our
selves, and we fought in that sufficient strength of our own which was then
given us, and by our wilful yielding we were overcome. But since our fall we
fight under the banner of another, who having first conquered for us, will
afterward conquer in us and by us. All the great transactions and bus^es of the
world, which our Fathers have reported to us, which have filled all the
Histories of ages, and which our eyes have seen, or our ears have heard of, are
nothing but the various actions and successes of this great war, and all the
persons in the world are the soldiers of these two Armies, whereof the Lord of
Life, and the Prince of Darkness are the Generals: The whole Inhabited world is
the field. The great onset of the Enemy was made upon the person of our Lord
himself. And as often as he was assaulted or did assault, so often did he overcome.
In the wilderness he had that first appointed confl^ct with Satan himself hand
to hand: Through his whole life after, he was assaulted by the inferior sort
of enemies: And a leader in his own Army; even Peter himself is once seduced to
become a Satan, Mat. 16. 22. and a Traitor Judas is the means of his
apprehension, and then the blinded Jews and Rulers of his Crucifixion, and
there had he the last and greatest Conflict; in which when he seemed conquered
he did overcome, and so his personal war was finished. When the Captain of our
salvation was thus made perfect through sufferings, Heb. 2. 10. that he might
bring many sons to glory, his next work was to form his Army; which he did, by
giving first Commission to his Officers, and appointing them to gather the
common soldiers, and to fill his bands. No sooner did they set themselves upon
the work, but Satan sends forth his bands against them: Persecutors assault
them openly: and Heretics are Traitors in their own Societies, and make
mutinies among the soldiers of Christ, and do them more mischief by
perfidiousness, then the rest could do by open hostility. The first sort of
them took advantage, 1. By the reputation of Moses Law, and the zeal of the
blinded Jews for its defense. And 2. from the dangers, sufferings and fleshly
tenderness of many professors of the Christian faith, which made them too ready
to listen to any Doctrine that promised them peace and safety in the world; and
as they were themselves a Carnal Generation, that looked after worldly glory
and felicity, and could not bear persecution for Christ, and so were enemies to
his Cross, while they professed themselves to be his Disciples, so would they
have persuaded the Churches to be of th^^^^me mind, and to take the same course
as they; that so they might not be noted for carnal and cowardly professors
themselves, while they brought others to believe the justness of their way; but
rather might have matter of glorying in their followers, instead of being
either sufferers with the true Christians, or rejected by them whose profession
they had undertaken.

These were the persons that Paul had here to deal with, against whom having
opposed many arguments through the Epistle, in the words of my Text he opposes
his own Resolution, [ God forbid that I should glory, etc. -- ]

The words contain Paul's renouncing the carnal disposition and practice of the
false Apostles, and his professed Resolution of the contrary. Where you have,
1. The terms of Detestation and Renunciation [ God forbid] or, [ be it far from
me.] 2. The things Detested and Renounced, viz. To glory in any thing save the
Cross of Christ. His own positive profession contains, 1. His Resolution to
Glory in the Cross of Christ. 2. The effects of the Cross of Christ upon his
soul; which being contrary to the disposition, and doctrine, and endeavor of
the false Teachers, is added as a Reason of his abhorring their ways, and as
the ground and principle of his contrary course. [ Hereby the world was
crucified to him, and he to the world.]

The difficulties in the words being not great, I shall take leave to be the
briefer in their explication. The verb (...) signifies not only external
bo^sting, but first internal confidence and acquiescence. By [ the Cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ] we are to understand both his Cross as suffered by him,
and as considered by us, and as imitated by us, or the Cross we suffer in
conformity to him: For I see no reason to take it in a more restrained sense.

By [ the world] is meant, the whole inferior Creation, or all that is
objected to our sense, or is the bait or provision for the flesh, or by the
tempter is put in competition with God: both the things and the men of the
world.

To have [ the world crucified to him] does signify, 1. That it is killed and
so disabled from doing him any deadly harm, or from being able to steal away
his affections, as it does they that are unsanctified. 2. That he esteems it
but as a dead and contemptible thing. So that this phrase expresses both its
disabling, and his positive contempt of it.

The other phrase that Paul was [ crucified to the world] does signify on the
other side, 1. That his estimation and affections were as dead to it; that is,
he had no more esteem of it, or love to it; nor did he further mind or regard
it, (so far as he was sanctified) then a dead man would do. 2. It signifies
that he was also contemned by worldly men, and looked on as his Crucified Lord
was, whom he preached.

This is said to be done [ by Christ] or [ by his Cross:] For the relative may
relate to either antecedent. But I should rather refer it to the later, though
in sense the difference is small* because the one is employed in the other.

The further explication of the Nature of this Crucifixion, and the influence
that Christ and his Cross have thereinto, and how they are the Causes of it,
must be further spoke to in the handling of the Doctrines, which are as
follows.

SECT. II.
Doct. 1. THE carnal Glorying of worldly professors, is a thing detested and
renounced by the Saints.

Doct. 2. A Crucified Christ, or Christ and his Cross, is the Glorying of the
Saints.

Doct. 3. The world is Crucified to the Saints, and they to the world.

Doct. 4. It is by a Crucified Christ, or by Christ and his Cross that this is
done.

But because our limited time will not allow us to handle each of these
distinctly, I shall reduce them all to one General Doctrine, which is the
sense of the Text.

Doct.
THE world is Crucified to the Saints, and the Saints are Crucified to the
world, by the Cross of Christ; and therefore in it alone must they Glory,
abhorring the Glorying of carnal men.

THE Method which I shall observe as fittest for your Edification in handling
this Doctrine is this. 1. I shall more fully show you Negatively what it is
not, and Affirmatively what it is, to have the world Crucified to us, and to be
Crucified to the world. 2. I shall show you, How this is wrought by the Cross
of Christ. 3. I shall give you the Reasons, which prove that so it is. 4. I
shall give you the Reasons why it must be so. 5. I shall make application of
this first part of the Doctrine. And then handle the latter part as time shall
permit.

I. THere are few Doctrines of faith, or ways of holiness, but have their
extremes, which men will reel into from side to side, when few will consist in
the Sacred mean. The purblind world cannot cut by so small a thread, as the word
of God directs them to do, and as all must do that will be conducted into
Truth. We have much ado to take men off these vanities; but yet when many of
them are convinced, and see that the world must be cast aside, they mistake the
nature of holy mortification, and embrace instead of it some superstitious and
cynicall conceits; in which they are as fast bemired almost as they were
before. I shall therefore first tell you what is not the Crucifixion which we
are to treat of.

1. It is not to think that the world is indeed Nothing; and that in a proper
sense our life is but a dream: Nor yet sceptically to take the being and modes
of all things as uncertain: Nor to imagine that sense is so far fallible, that
a man of sound sense, and understanding, may not be sure of the objects
conveniently presented to his sense. There still remains one Argument which
the Scepticks were never able to confute, but will make them at any time to
yield the cause; Even to scourge them, as fools, till they are sure they feel
it. But we have few of these to deal with; the Skepticism of our times being
restrained to those things which closelyer concern the matter of salvation.

2. Nor is it any part of the meaning of this Text, that we should entertain a
low and base esteem of the world or any thing therein, as in its Natural state
considered, it is the work of God. For though man be eminently created in his
image, yet all his works are like him in their measure, and therefore have all
an excellency to be admired. It cannot be that infinite wisdom can make any
thing which shall not have some impressions and demonstrations thereof. Nor can
Goodness make any thing but what is Good. And never did the Almighty make any
thing that is absolutely contemptible; Nor any thing so mean, which can be done
by any other without him; so far unimitable is he in the smallest of his works.
Nor did he ever make any thing in vain; but those things which seem small and
useless to us, have an unsearchable excellency and usefulness which we know not
of. If the unskilful have the modesty to believe, that the smallest string in
an Instrument of Music, and the smallest pin in a Watch, have their use,
though he know not of it, we have great reason to think as modestly of the
frame of all the works of God. And those things that in themselves considered
are small, yet respectively and virtually may be very great. The heart may do
more to the preservation of life then a part much bigger; and the eye may see
more then all the rest of the body besides. And the order, location and
respects of several parts, does give them such an admirable usefulness and
excellency, which none can know that sees not the whole frame.

Yea our own selves, souls or bodies considered as the workmanship of God, must
not be thought or spoke contemptibly of. For so by all that we say against the
work, we do but reproach and dishonor the workman. In all our
self-accusations and condemnations, we must take heed of accusing or condemning
our Creator. Our Naturals therefore must be honored, while our Corrupt Morals
are vilified. We must disgrace nothing that is of God, but only that which may
be truly called our own: Nor in the accusation of our Own, must we by
reflections and consequences accuse that which is Gods, as if the fault in the
Original were his. By giving us our Natural free will, which is a
selfdetermining power, he made us capable of having somewhat in Morality which
we may too justly call our own: And our loss and want of Moral freedom, (which
is but our right Dispositions and Inclinations) were not to be charged
ultimately on our selves, if the foresaid Natural freedom did not make us
capable of such a culpability. Its a strange way that some men have devised, of
magnifying the Creator by v^^ifying his works: and its a strange conceit that
all the praise that is given to the creature is taken from God; They would not
do so by man: The praise of an House is taken to be no dishonor to the
Carpenter: Nor the commendation of a watch a dishonor to the watch-maker. God
did not dishonor himself, when he said, his works in the beginning were all
Good* He would never have been a Creator, if all the Good which he made and
Communicated had been to his dishonor: When there was nothing but himself in
being, there was nothing but himself to be commended: but doubtless God
intended his Glory by his Works; and all that is in them proceeding from
himself* the praise of them redoundeth to himself. In a word, we must be very
careful of Gods interest in his creatures, and take heed of any such contempt
or vilifying of them, which may reflect upon himself.

3. The Crucifying of the world to us* does not consist in our looking upon it
as an useless thing, or laying it aside as to all spiritual improvement. No; so
far is this from being any part of our duty, that it is none of the least of
our sins: The creature was the first book that ever God did make for us, in
which we might read his blessed perfections; And the perverting it to another
use, with the neglect of this, was man's first sin. As it was the great work of
the Redeemer, to bring us back to God that made us, and restore us to his
favor, so also to restore us to a capacity of serving him, even in that
employment which he appointed to us in our innocence; which was to see God in
the face of his creatures, and then to love and honor him, and by them to
serve him. Though this be not our highest felicity, yet is it the way thereto:
Till we come to see face to face, we must be glad to see the face of God in the
glass of his works. But of this we have more to say anon in the application.

4. Our Crucifying of, or to the world, requires not any secession from the
world, nor a withdrawing our selves from the society of men, nor the casting
away the propriety or possession of the necessaries which we possess. It is an
easier thing to throw away our Masters Talents, then faithfully to improve
them. The Papists glory in the holiness of their Church, because they have many
among them that have vowed never to marry, and have no propriety in Lands or
Houses, and have separated themselves into a Monastical society. A^^high
commendation to their Church, when men must be Sainted with them, if they will
do no mischief, though they make themselves useless to the rest of the world*
The servant that hid his Talent in a Napkin, was condemned by Christ as wicked
and sloathful; and shall he be commended by us for extraordinarily devout? Will
you reward that servant that will lock up himself in his chamber, or hide his
head in a hole when he should be busy at your work? Or will you reward that
soldier that will withdraw from the Army into a corner, when he should be
fighting? The world swarms on every side with multitudes of ignorant and
impenitent sinners, whose miserable condition cries loud for some relief, to
all that are any way able to relieve them. And these Religious Monks make haste
from among them, and leave them to themselves to sink or swim, and they think
this cruelty to be the top of piety. Unworthy is that man to live on the earth,
that lives only to himself, and communicates not the gifts of God to others.
And yet do these idle unprofitable droans, esteem their course, the life of
perfection. When we must charge through the thickest of our enemies, and bear
all the unthankful requitals of the world, and undergo their scorns and
persecutions, these wary soldiers can look to their skin, and get out of the
reach of such encounters; and when they have done, imagine that they have got
the victory. To live to our selves, were it never so spiritually, is far unlike
the life of a Christian: A good man is a common good; and compassionate to the
miserable, and desirous to bring others to the participation of his felicity.
To withdraw from the world to do God service, is to get out of the Vineyard or
Shop, that we may do our Masters work.

If you have riches, it is not casting them away that shall excuse you, instead
of an holy improving them for God. If you have possessions, it is not a
renouncing of propriety, that shall excuse you from the prudent and charitable
use of them. The same I say also of Relations, of Offices in the Church and
Commonwealth. God calls you not to renounce them: To crucify the world is
not to disclaim all the relations, possessions, or honors of the world. These
are not yours but Gods: And as he put them into your hands, and commanded you
faithfully to use them as his Stewards, so you must do it; and not think it a
good account of your Stewardship, ^o tell God that you threw away the talents
that he trusted you with, because they were temptations to you, or because he
was austere. I should have no great need to speak of this, were there not such
a multitude of deluded souls that have lately received the Popish dotages
herein. Its one thing to creep into a Monks Cell, or an Anchorets Cave, or an
Hermits Wilderness, or Diogenes Tub; and another thing truly to be Crucified to
the world; and in the midst of the creatures to live above them unto God; as we
are anon to show.

5. To be Crucified to the world, is not to forbear our lawful trades and
labors in the world. He that bids us eat our bread in the sweat of our brows,
and would not have him eat, that will not labor, Genesis 3. 19. 2 These. 3. 6, 10,
12. did never call men to be begging Friars, nor licentious Prodigals, nor idle
Gentlemen, nor lazy unprofitable burdens of the earth. All idleness that is
wilful, is sinful; but that which is cloaked with the pretense of Religion, is
a double sin. When some servants grow lazy, they will pretend piety for it, and
accuse their Masters of worldliness for setting them to work. And some that
have families will neglect their duty for them, and all upon pretenses of a
contempt of the world. But he that bid us use the world as not abusing it, 1
Cor. 7. 31. did never mean to forbid us the use of it. While such Hypocrites
will needs be more then Christians, they become in Paul's judgment worse then
Infidels, 1 Timothy 5. 8. They should not labor with a desire to be rich, yet
must they labor to give to him that needs, Ephesians. 4. 28. Idleness is not
Mortification.

6. To be crucified to the world or the world to us, contains not an
unthankful undervaluing of our Mercies. It will not warrant us to say, Health,
and Riches, and Honors are contemptible; and therefore I owe God but little
thanks for them; nor will it excuse any ungrateful insensibility of our
deliverances.

7. To Crucify the world, is not to take away the lives of the men of the
world, nor actually to use them as they used Christ. Though the Magistrate must
bring a false Prophet to Capital Punishment that sought to turn the People from
God, yet every one might not do so: nor is that any part of the sense of this
Text; nor was it thus that Paul did crucify the world.

8. Much less may it encourage any poor Melancholy tempted souls to be weary
of their lives, and to seek to make away themselves. This horrid sin is far
from the duty here required: To be crucified to the world, is not to rid our
selves out of the world; nor to do that to our selves, which were so heinous a
sin if we did it to another, as not here to be lightlyer punished then with
death.

And thus I have showed you Negatively, What it is, not to have the world
crucified to us; which I do both to prevent extremes, and to prevent your
unjust censures of the Doctrine which I must next deliver, that you may see
that I am not leading you into extremes, but insisting on a plain and needful
truth.

SECT. III.
I Am next Affirmatively to show what this Crucifixion is. And first of the
former branch: What it is to have the world to be Crucified to us. Where we
shall speak of the object, and then of the acts.

Qu. 1. In what respects is it that the world must be Crucified to us?

Answ. In general. 1. In those respects in which men fell to the world from
God. The state of man's Apostasy is an adhesion to the creature, and a departure
from God; and the state of his recovery must be a departing from the creature,
and an adhering unto God. 2. In those respects in which Christ himself has
opposed and overcome the world, in those must his people oppose and overcome it.

More particularly; though it be but one and the same thing which they all
import, yet I think it may the better insinuate into your understandings, if I
present it to you in these various notions.

1. As the creature would be man's felicity, or any part of his true felicity,
so is it to be hated, resisted and crucified. If the world would know its own
place, it might be esteemed and used in its place; but if it will needs pretend
to be what it is not, and will promise to do what it cannot, and so would not
only be used but enjoyed, we must take it for a deceiver, and rise up against
it with the greatest detestation. For else it will be the certain damnation of
our souls. For he that has a wrong End, is wrong in all the means; and does
much worse then lose his labor in every step of his way. It is the greatest
and most pernicious error in the world, to mistake in our very end, and about
our chiefest good. When once the world would seem to be your home, and
promises you content and satisfaction, and is indeed the condition that you
would have; so that you do not heartily and desirously look any further, but
would with all your heart take this for your portion, if you knew but how to
keep it when you have it, and begin to say, It is good to be here; and with
that stigmatized fool [ soul take thy rest] then has the world perniciously
deceived you, and if you be not effectually recovered, will be your everlasting
ruin. Whatever it be that presents it self to you (of this world) as your
felicity, is to be hated, opposed and crucified.

Yea if it would but share in this office and honor, and would seem to be some
part of your happiness, thus also must it die to you, or your souls must die:
You can have but one ultimate principal end and happiness. If you take the
world for it, you can expect no more. The Covetousness of such is said to be
Idolatry, Col. 3. 5. and their bellies to be their God, Phil. 3. 18, 19. and
their gain to be their Godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 5. and their portion is in this
life, Psalm. 17. 14. and so they are called, Men of the world; Here they lay up
a treasure to themselves, and therefore here is their hearts, Mat. 6. 19, 20,
21. and verily they have their reward, Mat. 6. 5.

2. As the creature is set in competition with God, or in the least degree of
Co-ordination with God, so is it to be hated, rejected and crucified. It is
Gods prerogative to have Sovereign Interest in the soul: To be esteemed and
loved as our chiefest good, and to be depended on as the principal cause of our
well-being. The heart he made for himself, and the heart he will have; or else
whoever has it shall have it to its woe. He will be its Rest, or it shall
never have Rest: and he will be its Happines^, or it shall be miserable
everlastingly. If now the presumptuous world will play the Traitor, and seek to
dispossess the Sovereign of your souls, its time to use it as a Traitor should
be used. If it will needs usurp the place of God, down with that Idol, and deal
with it as it deserves. O with what indignation and scorn may the Lord of glory
look down upon the dirty worth-less creature, when he sees it in his throne!
What! an earthen God! an aerie God! Is gold, and honor, and fleshly pleasures,
fit matter to become your God! And with what indignation and scorn should a
gracious soul once hear the motion of entertaining such a God! It should be
odious to us once to hear a comparison between the living God and the world! as
if it would be to us, what he would be or could procure our safety and felicity
in his stead. As the Jews would not endure to hear of Christ being their King,
but cried out, Away with him, Crucify him, we have no King but Caesar. So must
we think and speak of the world when it would be our King; Away with it,
crucify it, we have no King but God in Christ. And as the rebellious world
says of Christ, Luke 19. 27. We will not have this man to rule over us; so
must we say of the flesh and the world, we will not have them to rule over us.
As the churlish Israelite asked Moses (the Prophet like Christ) so must we do
the flesh and world; Who made thee a Ruler over us? We may value a very
dunghill for the manuring of our Land: but if any man will say, This dunghill
is the Sun, which gives light to the world; the assertion would rather cause
derision then belief: Or if you would persuade a man to put it in his bosom or
his bed, he would cast it away with abhorrence and disdain, who would not have
refused it if you had laid it in his field. The poorest beggar may be regarded
in his place; but if he will proclaim himself King, you will either laugh at
him as a fool, or abhor him as a Traitor; subjects do owe much honor and
obedience to their Princes; but if Caligula will needs be Jupiter, or if they
must hear as the Pope, Dominus Deus noster Papa, or if they will usurp Gods
prerogatives, and undertake his proper work, or will set themselves against his
truth and interest, and grow jealous of his power on which they must depend,
and of his Gospel and spiritual Administrations and Discipline, lest it should
eclipse their glory or cross their wills, this is the ready way to make them
become base, and lay both them and their glory in the dust. The Jews ought to
reverence Herod their King, but if once they begin to say, [ It is the voice of
a God, and not of a man.] No wonder if he be smitten by the hand of Divine
vengeance, and he that would be a God, become the food of worms; and God show
them what a God they had magnified, that cannot keep the lice or worms from
eating him alive. God uses to pour contempt upon Princes, when they will not
know and submit to the everlasting King. He takes himself as engaged to break
down all that would usurp his honor, and tumble down the Idols of the world;
therefore has he always so abhorred the two grand abominations, Pride and
Idolatry, above other sins: For he will not give his glory to another: He will
not with patience hear it spoken of an Idol, [ These are thy Gods O Israel,
that brought thee out of Egypt:] The first Commandment is not merely a precept
for some particular act of obedience, as are the rest: but it is the
fundamental Law of God, establishing the very Relations of Sovereign and
Subject: And as this is the first and great command, and that which virtually
contains all, [ Thou shall have no other Gods before me] or, [ Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart.] So he that breaks this is guilty
of all. When the Parent of the world would needs become as God, he made himself
the slave of the Devil.

You see then I hope sufficient reason why the world must be abhorred and
crucified, when it is made an Idol, and would become our God; and why this
Crucifixion of it is of absolute indispensable necessity to salvation. If it
had kept its place and distance, and would have been only a stream from the
infinite power, and wisdom, and goodness, and a Messenger to bring us the
report of his excellencies, and a book in which we might read his name, and a
glass in which we might see his face, then might we have esteemed and magnified
it: But when the Devil and the flesh will make it their bait to draw away our
hearts from God, and to steal that love, desire, and care, which is due to him,
and begin to tell us of Rest, or Satisfaction, or Felicity here, its time to
cry out, Crucify it, crucify it. When it would insinuate it self into our
bosom, and get next our hearts, and have our most delightful and frequent
thoughts, and become so dear to us, that we cannot be without it; when it is
the very thing that our minds are bent upon, and that lifts us up when we have
it, and casts us down when we want it; and thus disposes of our affections and
endeavors, its time to lay such an Idol in the dust, and to cast out such a
Traitor with the greatest detestation. As we our selves shall be exalted if we
humble our selves, and brought low if we exalt our selves; so must we cast down
the world when it would exalt it self in our esteem, and the right exaltation
of it is by the lowest subjecting of it unto God. For whoever has to deal with
Infinite Power, must think of no other way of exaltation.

3. The world must be abhorred, and crucified by us, as it stands at enmity
to God and his holy ways. It is become, through man's corruption, the great
seducer, and an impediment to our entertainment of heavenly Doctrine, and a
means of keeping the soul from God. Yea it is become the Interest of the flesh,
and is set in fullest opposition to our spiritual Interest. In what degree
soever the world would turn your hearts from God, or stop your ears against his
word, or take you off from the duty which he prescribes you, in that measure
must you seek to crucify it to your selves. If Father or Mother would draw us
away from Christ, though as parents they must be honored still, yet as enemies
to Christ they must be contemned. When your honors would hinder you from
honoring God, and your credit does contend against your conscience, and your
worldly business contradicts your heavenly business, and your gain is pleaded
against your obedience; it is time then to use the world as an enemy, and to
vilify those honors, and businesses, and commodities. A tender conscience
that is acquainted with a course of universal obedience, will take notice when
these worldly interpositions and a vocations would interrupt his course; and a
soul acquainted with an holy dependence upon God and Communion, can feel when
these enticing and deluding things would interrupt his Communion, and turn his
eye from the face of God: and therefore he can feel by the advantage of his
holy experience, when the world becomes his enemy, and calls him to the
conflict.

4. The world is to be crucified, as it is the matter of our fleshpleasing, or
the food of our carnal affections, and the fuel of our concupiscence. The grand
Idol that is exalted against the Lord, is Carnal Self: This is the God of all
the unregenerate: This has their hearts, their care, their labors. The
pleasing of this flesh is the end of the unsanctified, and therefore the
summary capital sin, which virtually contains all the rest; Even as the
Pleasing of God is the End of every Saint, and therefore the summary capital
duty which virtually contains all other duties: The world is an Idol
subservient to the flesh, as being the matter of its delight, and the means by
which its End is attained; as in the contrary state, the Mediator is
subservient to the Father, as being the matter of his delight, in whom he is
well-pleased, and the means by whom he obtains his Ends, in making his people
also well-pleasing in his eyes. The Devil also is an Idol of the ungodly; but
that is in a suberviency to the world and to the flesh, as by the bait of
worldly things he pleases the flesh: as in the contrary state the Holy Ghost
is in office subordinate to the Son and to the Father, in that he brings us
to Christ, by whom we must have access to the Father. In the Carnal Trinity
then you may see, that as the flesh is the Principal and Ultimate End, and
has the first place, so the world is the nearest means to that End, and has
the second place: and as there is no coming to the Father or Pleasing him but
by the Son, so is there no way of Pleasing the flesh but by the world. So that
by this you may perceive in what relation we stand to the sensual seducing
world, and on what grounds, and how far it is necessary that we crucify it:
The fixed determination of our Sovereign is, that if we live after the flesh we
shall die, but if by the Spirit we mortify the deeds of the body, we shall
live, Romans 8. 13. To live after the flesh, is by loving the world, and enjoying
it as our felicity; and to mortify the deeds of it by the Spirit, is by
withdrawing this fuel and food that does maintain them, and by crucifying and
killing the world as to such ends. Our work is to put on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13. 14.
It is the world that is this provision for the fulfilling of our fleshly lusts.
So far therefore as the flesh must be mortified, the world also must be
mortified.

5. Moreover the world must be Crucified to us, as far as it is presented to us
as an independent or separated Good, without its due relations unto God. It is
God only who is the Absolute, Necessary* Independent Being; and all creatures
are but secondary, contingent, dependant Beings, (whether Univocally or
Equivocally, or Analogically so called, with God, let the Schools debate.) To
look on the creature as a separated or simple Being or Good, is to look upon it
as God. And here came in the first Idolatry of the world. When Adam had all his
felicity in God, and had the creature only as a stream and means, and when all
his affections should have been centred in God, and he should not have viewed
one line in the volume of nature, without the joint observance of the Center
where it was terminated; Contrarily he withdraws his eye from God, and fixes
it on the creature as a separated Good; and desiring to know Good in this
separated sense, he made it an Evil to him, and knew it to his sorrow: And so
forsaking the true and All-sufficient Good, he turned to a Good which indeed as
conceived of by him was no Good, and knew it by a knowledge, which as to the
Truth of it was not Knowing, but Erring. And in this course which our first
progenitors have led us into, the carnal world proceeds to this day. The
creature is near them, but God is far off: A little they know of the creature,
but they are utter strangers to God: And therefore think on the creature as an
independent separated Good. And you must carefully note, that the dependence of
the creature on God, is not to be fully manifest by the dependence of any
creature upon another. The line is locally distant from the Center; and the
streams are locally distant from the spring, though they are contiguous, and
have the dependancy of an effect: But God is not local, and so not locally
distant from us. The nearest similitude is that of the bodies dependence upon
the soul (which yet does fall exceeding short.) In God both we and every
creature do live, and move, and have our being. As no man of reason will talk
to a corpse, nor dwell and converse with any man merely as corporeal, without
respect to the soul that does animate him, nor will he fall in love with a
corpse; so no man that is spiritually wise (so far as he is so) will once look
upon any creature, much less converse with it, or fall in love with it, barely
as a creature, conceiving of it as a thing that is separated from God, or not
positively conceiving of God as animating it, and as being its Alpha and Omega,
its Beginning and End, its principal efficient, and ultimate Final cause, at
least: For this were to imagine the carkaise of a creature, and to conceive of
it as such a thing as is not in being. For out of the God of Nature the
creature is Nothing, nor can do an^ thing* for there is no such thing; even as
out of Christ the Lord of spiritual Life and Grace, the new creature is
nothing, and we can do nothing; for there is no such new creature.

You have here the very difference between a Carnal and a Spiritual life. The
Carnal man does see only the carkaise of the world, and is blind to God, and
sees not him, when he sees that which is animated by him. But the Spiritual
man sees God in and by the creature, and the creature is nothing to him but in
God. As an illiterate man does look upon a Book, and sees only the le^ters,
and takes pleasure in their shape and order, and falls a playing with it as
children do; but he sees not, nor understands the sense; and therefore if it
contained the noblest mysteries or the greatest promises, even such as his life
did depend upon, he loves it not in any such respect, nor does he for that
delight in it: but let a learned man have the perusing of the same Book, and
though he may commend the clearness of the character, yet it is the sense that
he principally observes, and the sense that he loves, and the sense that he
delights in: and therefore as the sense is incomparably more excellent then
the character simply considered, so is it an higher and more excellent kind of
knowledge and delight which he has in the Book, then that which the illiterate
has* And indeed it is an imaginary annihilation of the Book, and of every
character of it formally considered, to conceive of it as separated from the
sense: for the very essence of it, is to be a sign of that sense: and therefore
as the illiterate cannot see the sense for words and letters, the wood for
trees, so the literate can see no such thing as words without sense, nor would
regard the materials but for this signifying use.

I have expressed the similitude in more words then I use in such cases,
because it much illustrateth our present matter. It was never the mind of God
to make the great body of this world to stand as a separated thing, or to be an
Idol. He made all this for himself: The whole Creation is one entire volume,
and the sense of every line is God. His name is legible on every creature; and
he that sees not God in all, understands not the sense of the Creation. As
it is Eternal Life to know God, so this God is the Life of the creature which
we know, and the knowing of him in it is the Life of all our knowledge. The
illiterate world does gaze upon the creatures, and fall in love with the
outside and materials, and play with it, but understands not a creature. By
separating it in their apprehensions from God, the sense, they do annihilate
the world to themselves, as to its principal use and signification.

There are two Texts of Scripture among many others, of which I have often
thought as notable descriptions of a carnal man's life: the one as to the
privative part, and the other as to the positive. One is, Ephesians. 2. 12. which
calls them [ Atheists, or without God in the world.] They see and know
somewhat of the world, but God they neither see not know: They converse with
the world, but not with God: All their affections are let out upon the world,
but God has none of them: All their business is about the world, but they live
as if they had nothing to do with God. As a Scholar, if his Master should
stand in a corner of the School to watch what he will do, will behave himself
while he sees him not, as if he were not there; he will play with his fellows
and talk to them, as if there were no Master in the School; So do the ungodly
live in the world, as if there were no God in the world; they think, and speak,
and deal with the world, as if there were nothing but the world for them to
converse with. As for God they know him not, but carry themselves as if they
had nothing to do with him; and ask in their hearts as Pharaoh once did, Who is
the Lord that I should serve him? And perhaps this made David say, Psalm. 14. 1.
[ The fool has said in his heart there is no God.] Though he speak it not
positively, yet there is a privative Atheism, which is interpretatively to say,
[ There is no God.] For he sees him not, nor takes any great notice of him;
but lives as without him in the world: Not without him efficiently considered;
for so nothing can subsist without him, but without him objectively considered:
For God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4, 5. and his judgments are far
above, out of his sight. God looks down upon the children of men, to see if
there be any that will understand and seek after God: but they are gone aside,
and are become filthy, and observe not him that observes them, Psalm. 14. 2, 3.
This is the case of poor worldlings from the highest Prince to the lowest
beggar: A great deal of business they have in the world, some in seeking what
they want, and others in holding and enjoying what they have; but they all live
as without God in the world. [ Now consider this ye that forget God, lest he
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you, Psalm. 50. 22. For the
wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the Nations that forget God, Psalm 9.
17.]

The other Text that describes the life of a mere natural man, is, Psalm 39.
6. to which you may join, Psalm 73. 20. The former says, [ Surely every man
walks in a vain show; surely they are disquieted, or make a tumult and stir
in vain.] Though the brevity of life it self may be something here intended,
yet that seems not to be all: but also the vanity of it as it is a worldly
life, and employed merely about transitory creatures: For even on earth our
Spiritual life of Grace, and Communion with God in Christ by the Spirit, is not
vain. The word which we translate a vain show, signifies the image, or shadow,
or appearance, or figure of a thing: a thing that is nothing, or not the thing
it seems to be, but the show of it; or as the Prophet himself expounds it, a
dream: Men do but seem to live, that live only on and to the creature; they do
but seem to be Rich, that have no other Riches; and seem to have Pleasure, that
have no higher Pleasures; and seem to be Honorable, that have but the Honor
that comes from man. A great stir they make in the world, to little purpose.
They thrust themselves into tumults, and quarrel, and fight, and some are
conquered, and others conquerors, and some lament, and others rejoice, some
walk dejectedly, and others domineer; and all is but a vain show or thing of
naught. Its but like childrens games, where all is done in jest, and wise men
account it not worthy their observance. Its but like the acting of a Comedy,
wheregreat persons and actions are personated and counterfeited; and a pompous
stir there is for a while, to please the foolish spectators, that themselves
may be pleased by their applause; and then they come down and the sport is
ended, and they are as they were. The life of a worldling is but like a
Poppet-play, where there is great doings to little purpose: Or like the busy
gadding of the laborious Ants, to gather together a little sticks and straw,
which the spurn of a man's foot will soon disperse. Thus do all worldly sensual
men, walk in a vain show. By separating the creature from God, they make it
nothing: and then they study it, and dispute of it, and seek, and run, and
labor for it, when they have in a sort annihilated it. I speak still of their
Objective separation in esse cognito and volito: for a real separation is
impossible, but as a real annihilation may be so called. When they have
separated the characters of the great Book of Nature from God who is their
sense, and made nothing of it, as to the form of a Book, then do they fall a
playing with it, who could not endure to learn on it. But when their Master
comes to take an account of their Learning the play will be at an end* and the
sorrow begins: and then they must remember and feel that their Book was given
them to another use.

And this seems to be the sense of that other Text, Psalm. 73. 20. [ As a dream
when one awaketh, so O Lord when thou awakest, (or in awaking) thou shall
despise their image.] Though our Translators apply it to Gods awaking, that is,
to Judgment, yet many learned interpreters rather apply the word [ in awaking]
to the sinners awaking at Judgment, out of the foresaid dream of a sensual
life. They do but labor, and care, and gather as in a dream: They fight, and
conquer, and possess, but as in a dream. They dream that they are rich, and
honorable, and happy, and how proudly do they carry it out in this dream? One
dreameth that he is a great man, and he is lifted up: another dreameth that he
is poor and undone, and he is troubled: But when God awaketh the dreaming
world, he will show them the vanity and despicableness of this image or show
that here they walked in: They shall see that as in a game at Chess, though one
was imaginarily a King, and another a Queen; yet it was but imaginary: and when
the tedious game is ended, they have labored hard to do nothing, and are all
alike; so will it be with them. The meaning is not only that God himself will
despise this their show or imaginary employments and enjoyments: but that he
will make them appear despicable to themselves and all the world.

Truly Brethren, all that we have to do with the world in a separated sense, as
without God, is such a game, a dream, a show. When Scholars are thus studying
their Physics or Mathematics, or any thing of the creature, as separated from
God, yea, or as not studying God in that creature, they are but playing the
children and fools: they are like a Printer that cannot read, (if there were
such a man) that studyeth how to shape his letters, when he knows not what a
letter means. When they are disputing in the Schools about Gods works, in
this separated sort, as without God, they are busily playing the idiots, and
taking the name of God in vain, and making a learned stir about nothing.

And here I pray you mark the different successes of a sensual, and of a
sanctified study and knowledge. The first sinner by seeking to know and enjoy
the creature in a separated sort, did lose God who was his All, and made the
creature his All, and thereby as to its signification and principal use, did to
himself annihilate it. And in this path do all his posterity walk, till faith
recover them; and this is their vain show, and their living without God in the
world. But when faith has opened a man's eyes, and showed him God in every
creature, who was hid from him before, then is the creature who was before his
All, annihilated to him in that separated sense, and God becomes his All again:
and this annihilation of the creature, is indeed its restoration, objectively
to its primitive nature and use; and it was not indeed known or respected as a
creature till now. So that sensual men, by making the creature an imaginary
God, or chiefest Good, or All, do make it indeed objectively to become Nothing:
and so their All, their God, their felicity is Nothing; and so all their life
is a Nothing. When as the faithful by Crucifying or Annihilating the creature,
as it would appear a felicity to us, or any Good, as separated from God, do
restore it to its true objective being and use, by returning to God who is
truly All; and in whom the creature is a Derived Imperfect something, and out
of whom it is indeed a Nothing.

I will further illustrate it by one other similitude. God gave the Ceremonial
Law by Moses to the Israelites, to be an obscure Gospel, and to lead them unto
Christ. The sacrifices, and other typical Ceremonies were the Letters of the
Law, and Christ was the sense. The true Believers thus understood and used
them; but the Carnal Jews looked only on the letter and lost the sense: and thus
separating the bare Letter from the sense, that is, the Legal works from
Christ, they thought to be justified by those works, and by the Law, in that
separated sense. But the Apostle Paul does plead against thi^ error, and tells
them that Christ is the end of the Law to all Believers, and that he is the
fulfilling of it, and that through him it is fulfilled in those that walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit; and that by the dee^s of the Law, in
this separated sense, no flesh can be justified; and that the Letter separated
from the sense of it kills: but Christ by his Spirit, who is the sense of it,
gives life. If these Jews had taken and used the Law as God intended it, and
had taken the sense and spirit with the letter, and had understood that Christ
was the very life, and end, and all of the Law. Paul would never have cried
down the Law, nor Justification by it, in this sense: for that had been to cry
down Justification by Christ. But it was Justification by the Letter, or the
Law as separated from Christ who was the meaning of it. So is it in our present
case. The creature is the letter, and God the sense; and Carnal men do
understand only the Letter of the creature, and fall in love with it: and thus
God cries down the world, and vilifieth, and speaks contemptuously of the
world; When as if it had not been for the separation, he would never have cried
it down, nor spoken an hard word of it. As the Law had never been so hardly
spoken of, if the misunderstanding Jew had not separated it from Christ. So
the world had never been so often called, Vanity, and a Lie, and Nothing, and a
Dream, and that which is not bread, and that which profits not, a Shadow, a
Deceiver, with abundance of the like contemptuous terms, if carnal sinners had
not in their minds and affections separated it from God.

And thus I have showed you in what Respects the World must be Crucified.

AND let me add in the Conclusion, as most necessary for your observation, that
there is in the world an inseparable aptitude to tempt us dangerously to the
foresaid abuse: and therefore when we have done all that we can in Crucifying
and sublimating it, we must never imagine that we can make it so wholesome or
harmless a thing, as that we may feed upon it without great caution and
suspicion, or ever return to friendship with it again, till fire have refined
it, and grace has perfectly refined us. And yet this is not long of the
creature without us, but of us, and the tempter. The world is in it self Good,
as being the work of God; and it cannot be the proper efficient culpable cause
of our sin: For it has no sin in it self. (I mean the world as distinct from
the men of the world;) and therefore cannot be the direct cause of sin. But yet
there is that in it, which is apt to be the Matter of our temptation; and so
apt, as that all that perish do perish by the world. As there is no salvation
but by the whole Trinity Conjunct, who have each person his several office for
our recovery; so there is no damnation but by the whole Infernal Trinity, the
flesh, the world and the Devil: Even to Innocent Adam the world must be the
bait, and Satan found somewhat in it, that made it apt for such an office,
though nothing but what was very good. But now that the flesh is become the
Predominant part and power in us, as it is in all till the Spirit overcome it,
the case is much worse, and the world is incomparably a more dangerous enemy
then to Adam it could be. For though still the creature is good in it self, yet
we are so bad, that the better the creature is, the worse it becomes to us: For
we are naturally propense to it, in its separated capacity, and all men till
regeneration, are fond of it as their felicity, and hug it as their dearest
good, and Sacrifice to it as their Idol. So that an enemy it is, and an enemy
it will be, when we have done our best, as long as we are on earth. For while
we have a flesh that would fain be pleased, by that which God forbids, and
there is a Devil to offer us the bait, and tempt us to this flesh-pleasing, the
world which is the bait will still be the matter and occasion of our danger.
The consideration of this may cut the throat of licentious principles, and
hence we may answer the most of their vain pretended reasons, who under the
Cloak of Christian liberty, would again indulge the flesh, and be reconciled to
the world. But certainly it will never lay by its enmity, till we lay by our
flesh: and therefore there is no thoughts to be entertained of closing with it
any more: but we must be killing it, and dying to it, to the last.

SECT. IV.
HAving thus showed you in what Respect the world must be Crucified, and so
resolved the question as to the Object, I am next to resolve it as to the Act,
and show you wherein the Crucifying it does consist.

The Apostle follows on the Allegory, which he took occasion of from the
mention of the Cross of Christ. From thence therefore we must also fetch the
proper sense. As the world did use Christ, or would have used him, so we must
use the world. Not actually murder the sons of death, as they did murder the
Lord of Life: but what Christ was on the Cross in their eye, that must the
world be esteemed in our eyes.

To take it in order. 1. The predictions of the Prophets before Christ's coming,
were not regarded by the unbelieving Jews, but the Prophets themselves
persecuted.

So those that would persuade us of the felicity of any worldly enjoyments, and
by extolling sensual pleasures, or profits, or honors, would draw our hearts to
them, should be despised and esteemed as deceivers by us. No man is more
serviceable to the Devil for our destruction, then they that applaud any
sensual vanity, and would make us believe what great matters are to be expected
from the world, and so would be the Pandors of it to entice us to its unchaste
embracements. Remember this, when any would persuade you what a fine thing it
is to be rich and great, and somebody in the world: what a merry life it is to
drink, and sport away your time: These are the Prophets and Apostles of the
Devil and the world; and let them be regarded by you accordingly.

2. As soon as Christ was born into the world, his best place of entertainment
was a common Inn; and there he could have room but in a stable and in a manger;
the world would allow him no better accommodation: and this was the welcome that
it first afforded him.

Here you have two notable directions for your usage of the world. 1. Begin to
renounce it betime, as it did Christ. As the world rejected Christ an Infant,
so we in our Infancy must reject the world. This is to be solemnly performed in
Baptism: where as we are engaged to the saving Trinity, and Baptized into the
name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, so must we solemnly Renounce the
damning Trinity, even the flesh, the world and the Devil: For so the Church
has ever done, and the nature of the thing does manifestly require it: for the
motus must have its Terminus a quo, as well as ad quem. Its a sad thing that so
many well-meaning men should deny our Infant-capacity of this engagement; but
much sadder that they should do it with such violent Church dividing zeal, as
if the Kingdom of God lay in the exclusion of the seed of Believers out of it!
If it be true that all our Infant Seed are excluded from the Church, I am sure
it is so sad a truth, that me thinks men should not so eagerly lay hold of it,
before they have better evidence to evince it. It was once a mercy for Infants
to be in Covenant with God, and members of his Church; and I do not think that
it is now a mercy to be out; or that the Kingdom of the Devil is the more
desirable state; (and all men are in one of these.) Sure I am, they were once
members of the Church by Gods appointment, and they that say they are cast out
must prove it, and better then any that yet have attempted it, if they would
have judicious, considerate, impartial men believe them. Whoever cast them out,
sure Christ would not, that did so much to enlarge the Church and better its
state, and manifest more abundant mercy, and chide his Disciples that kept such
from him, and proclaimed that his Kingdom was of such. I am not easily
persuaded to believe that the Head and King of the Church has actually
gathered a Society of a false Constitution so long and that he that is so
tender of his Church, and has bought it so dearly, and ruled it so faithfully,
had never a true constituted visible Church till about two hundred years ago,
among a few such as I have no mind to describe, and that we must now have a new
and true Church-frame to begin, when the world is almost at an end; and that
this glory reserved for our last days, consists in casting out our
Infant Seed, and leaving them in the visible Kingdom of the Devil till they
come to age. I am more out of doubt then ever I was, that God would have our
Infants renounce the world, and be Dedicated unto him, as the world did
renounce Christ an Infant. If an Infant-Christ must be the Head of the Church,
I know not why an Infant-sinner may not be a member of it: And as the world
without reason through malice rejected our Infant Head; so God will find both
Reason and Love to receive and entertain his Infant-members. And as long as we
have Gods express approbation in his Word, for parents entering their children
into his Covenant, and have the examples of all Nations by the Law of Nature,
allowing parents to enter their children into Covenants which are apparently
for their good, and to put their names into their Leases with their own, we
shall not think our Infants incapable of Covenanting with God, nor of making
this early Abrenunciation of the world.

2. From hence also you may learn what room it is that the world should be
allowed by you, even the stable and the manger, as it allowed Christ. This is a
point of most necessary consideration. The soul of man has its several
faculties: As vegitative, it has its natural parts, and spirits, and powers,
and a natural Appetite after the creature. This is the stable and the manger,
where the creature as a natural good may be entertained: It has also as
sensitive, its power of sensation, and sensitive Appetite. This also may
entertain the creature; but not for it self, nor by its own conduct; but under
the guidance of Reason to an higher end. But the high and noble faculty of
Reason, and the Rational Appetite, may not allow it the least entertainment in
its separated capacity, as we are now discoursing of it. It belongs not to
the Natural or sensitive Powers to see and Love God in the creature; and
therefore it cannot be required of them; and therefore they may receive their
objects, (moderated by reason) upon lower terms. But its the office of Reason,
as to moderate the senses, so to behold God in all the objects of sense; and no
otherwise should it have to do with sensual objects, of which more anon.

3. It was not long that Christ had been in the world before Herod sought his
Life, and caused him to fly into Egypt. And as soon as we are capable of
assaulting the world, we must actually fall upon it, and seek the extirpation
of all its Interest from our hearts, where Christ sets up his throne.

It was for fear of losing his Crown that Herod sought the death of Christ. It
must be for fear lest Christ should be dethroned in our hearts, and lose his
regal Interest, and lest we should lose the Crown of glory, that we must
endeavor the crucifying of the world.

When Angels and wise men did worship Christ, yet Herod did seek his death, and
the more seek it, because of their acclamations, as being brought into
jealousies of him by the Titles which they gave him. So when the Princes and
great ones of the earth do extol the world, and magnify its glory, we must be
raised hereby into the greater suspicion of it, and the more resolvedly set
against it.

As Herod did put to death even the innocent children, lest Christ should
escape, that so he might make sure work for his Crown. So must we subdue our
sensual desires, by denying them sometimes even in lawful things, lest we
should be carried to that which is unlawful before we are aware; and we must
avoid the very occasions and appearances of evil, and restrain our selves in
the liberty that we might take, and not go as near the brink of danger as we
dare: For it concerns us to make sure work where the Reign of Christ and our
own salvation is so much concerned, as in our victory over the world it is.

4. The whole life of Christ on earth was one continued conflict with the
world. They believed not on him even when they saw his Miracles. They hated him
even while he did them good. They afforded him not a settled habitation. So in
the height of its Glory, the world must not be trusted by us. Though it afford
us sustenance for our outward man, yet must we hate it; and we must allow it no
settled entertainment in our hearts.

Christ was in the world, and the world was made by him, and yet it knew him
not, John 1. 10. We converse in the world, and our outward man must live by it,
as in it we received our life, and yet we must not know it in its separated
capacity: The world could not hate them that were of the world, but Christ it
hated, because he was not of it, John 7. 7. and 15. 18, 19. and 17. 14. So must
we hate the world, because it is not of that nature, nor for that Interest as
the New creature is, though worldlings that are of it cannot hate it.

The nearer Christ was to the end of his life, the more cruelly and maliciously
did the world use him. And the nearer we are to our parting with the world, the
more must we contemn and hate it.

5. The world did arraign and condemn Christ as a Malefactor; they charged him
to be a Deceiver, and one that did his mighty works by the power of Beelzebub.
So must we justly charge the world to be a Deceiver, and work its strange
stupendous delusions by the power of Satan the great deceiver, and as a
Malefactor must we attach, arraign and condemn it. They came out against Christ
as a thief with swords and staves, Mat. 26. 55. we must come out against the
world as that great thief that would rob God of his honor and interest, Christ
of his Kingdom, and us of our salvation, and by the sword of the Spirit must
disarm and conquer it.

The world judged Christ to be a blasphemer and guilty of death, because he
said that he was the Son of God, and should sit at his right hand. We must
condemn the world of Blasphemous usurpation, that would needs become our God,
and usurp the Divine prerogatives and honors.

They spit upon Christ in token of hatred and contempt. And we must as it were
spit at the pleasures, and profits, and honors of the world, and manifest our
defiance, and hatred, and contempt of them.

They buffeted Christ in manifestation of their malicious enmity. And the world
and our flesh must not escape our hands, though our war be but defensive, yet
must we offend that we may defend. [ So fight I, (says Paul, 1 Cor. 9. 26,
27.) not at one that beats the air, (that makes a show of enmity when there
is none, as children in sport, or sencers that have not intent to kill) but I
keep under my body, and bring it into subjection; lest that by any means when I
have preached to others, I my self should be a cast-away] [(...)] The first
verb signifies to buffet and beat black and blew, as we say, Et valid is
ictibus subjicere reluctantem, as Beza speaks: and the second verb signifies,
to bring into servitude, or into the state of a servant, which is indeed the
very work that we have to do with the flesh, and the world.

They reproached Christ when they had smote him, and tauntingly bid him,
Prophecy who smote him. And the world and all the Idols of it deserve no
better of us, when they will usurp the place of God; and we may well scorn such
a God as Elias did Baal, and as God uses to do by the Idols of the heathen.
Fine gods indeed, that can neither save themselves nor us.

The world did strip Christ and put on him a robe and a Crown of thorns, and a
reed into his hand, and again spit upon him and mocked him. And this contempt
in our apprehensions must we cast upon the arrogant world; we must strip it of
its vain show, and give it the honor of a reed for levity, and of thorns for
unprofitableness and vexation; for as thorns it vexes when it promises
felicity, and as thorns it choaketh that word of truth, and as a reed it is
shaken with every wind.

No backwardness of the Judge, and no intercession of his wife, could rescue
Christ from the malice of the Jews, but the more is said for him, the more they
cry, Crucify him. And as resolvedly-must we persecute the world. No
intercession of our flesh, or backwardness of carnal Reason, must take us off;
but we must be content with nothing but its Crucifying.

When Pilate drew back, they knocked all dead with this malicious voice, John
19. 12. [ If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend: whosoever
makes himself a King speaks against Caesar:] So must we quicken and provoke
our Reason by arguments drawn from our fidelity to Christ, and say, If we
favor this world, we are not ^lse friend of Christ; for whatsoever would make
it self our King, and our felicity, and would steal away our hearts, is not
Christ's friend.

When Pilate says, [ Shall I crucify your King?] they cry out, [ we have no
King but Caesar.] And when the flesh or carnal Reason says, [ Will you cast
away your comforts, your peace, your happiness, your lives? We must say, [ We
have no comfort but Christ, no peace but Christ, no happiness, no life but
what is in Christ.]

The world crucified Christ between two thieves. And we must crucify the world
between two thieves; viz. the flesh on the one hand, and the Devil on the
other; which would both have robbed God and us; Though through the power of a
Crucified Christ, the one of these* even the flesh, may be so refined as to be
admitted into Paradise.

The world writ over the head of Christ as the cause of his death [ King of
the Jews.] And we must write this over the Crucified world, [ This is it that
would have been our King, and God, and Happiness* so let all thine enmies
perish O Lord.] We must pierce the very sides of it, and let out its
heart-blood. We must nail its hands and feet, the very instruments or means by
which it executed its deceits. We must give it the Gall and Vinegar of
penitent tears, and threatened judgments. The world thus despised and rejected
Christ, making him a man of sorrows, and acquainted with our griefs; they hid
their faces and esteemed him not, Isa. 53. 3. He had no form or comeliness in
their eyes, and when they saw-him, there was no beauty that they should desire
him, Verse. 2. So must we despise and reject the world, and hide our faces from
it, and not esteem it, disdaining even to look upon its pomp and vanity, and to
observe its gaudy alluring dress, or once to regard its enticing charms. We
must think it all into a loathsome vanity, till there appear to us no form or
comeliness in it, nor any beauty for which we should desire it, and wonder what
they can see in it that so far dote upon it; as to part with Christ and
salvation to enjoy it.

The world did even triumph over a crucified Christ, and shake their heads at
him, and say, He saved others, but himself he cannot save.] And we must triumph
through Christ over the crucified world, and say, This is it that promised such
great matters to its deceived followers; that men esteemed before God and
glory; and now, as it cannot save them from the dust, or the wrath of God, so
neither can it save it self from this contempt that Christ does cast upon it.
Cast down this Idol out of your hearts, and say, If he be a God let him help
himself.

Lastly, the world when they had crucified Christ did bury him, and roll a
stone on his Sepulcbre, and seal it up, and watch it with soldiers to secure
him from rising again, if they could. And we must even bury the crucified
world, and be buried to the world, and lay upon it those weighty considerations
and resolutions, and seal thereto with Sacramental obligations, and follow all
this with persevering watchfulness, that may never permit it to revive and rise
again.

And thus must we learn from the Cross of Christ, how the world is to be
crucified; as it used Christ, we must use it. For it is the whole course of
Christ's humiliation that is meant here by his Cross, the rest being denominated
from the most eminent part; and therefore from the whole must we fetch our
pattern and instructions, by the direction of the Allegory in my Text.

SECT. V.
BUT it will not be unprofitable if we more particularly and orderly acquaint
you with those Acts which the crucifying of the world to our selves does
comprehend; over-passing those by which Christ did it for us on the Cross, till
anon in the due place.

1. The first act is, To esteem the world as an enemy to God and us, and so as
a Malefactor that deserves to be crucified. And this must not be only by a
speculative-conception, but by a true confirmed practical judgment, which will
set all the powers of the soul on work. It is the want of this that makes the
world to Live and Reign in the hearts of so many, yea even of thousands that
think they have mortified it. A speculative Book-knowledge that will only make
a man talk* is taken instead of a practical knowledge. Almost every man will
say, The world is a great enemy to God and us; but did they soundly and
heartily esteem it to be such, they would use it as such. Never tell me that
that man takes the world for his deadly enemy, who uses it as his dearest
friend. Enmity and deadly enmity will be seen. Here is no room to plead the
command of loving our enemies; at least, no man can think that he must love it
with a Love of friendship, and therefore with no love but what is consistent
with the hatred of a deadly enemy. This serious deep apprehension of Enmity, is
the very spring and poise of all our opposition. We cannot heartily fight with
our friend, or seek his death. There must be some anger and falling out before
we will make the first assault: and a settled enmity before we will make a
deadly war of it. This apprehension of enmity consists in an apprehension of
the hurtfulness of the world to us, and of the opposition it makes against God
and our salvation, and of the danger that we are in continually by reason of
this opposition. So far as men conceive of the world as Good for them, so far
they take it for their friend, and love it. For no man can choose but love that
which he seriously conceives to be Good for him. This complacency is clean
contrary to the Christian hostility. But when we conceive of it as that which
we stand in continual danger of being everlastingly undone by, this will turn
our hearts against it. It undoes men that they have not these apprehensions of
the world, and that deeply fixed and habituated in their minds. For it is the
Apprehension or Judgment of things that carries about the whole man, and
sets awork all the other faculties.

Quest. But what should we do to be so habitually apprehensive that the world
is our enemy?

Answ. 1. You must be sure that you lay up your treasure in heaven: That you
are so convinced by Faith of the Glory to come, and of the true felicity that
consists in the fruition of God, as that you take it for your Portion, and
make it your very End. And when once you have laid up your Hopes in heaven, and
see that there or no where you must be happy, this will presently teach you to
judge of all things else as they either help or hinder the attainment of that
end. For it is the Nature of the End to put a due estimate upon all things
else: And it is the property of the chief Good, to denominate all other things
either Good or Evil, and that in a greater or lesser measure, according as they
respect that chiefest Good. For there can be no Goodness in any thing else, but
the Goodness of a Means: And the means is so far Good, as it is apt and useful
for the attainment of the End. If once therefore you unfeignedly take God and
Glory for your end and felicity, you will presently fall upon enquiry and
observation, what it is that the world will do to help or h^nder that felicity.

2. And then you need but one thing more to the discovery of the Enmity; and
that is, the Constant experience of your souls. A real living Christian does
live for God, and is upon the motion to his eternal home: There is his heart;
and that way his affections daily work: When he finds his soul down, he
windeth it up again, and straineth the spring of faith and love. And therefore
his life and business being for heaven, he cannot but be sensible of the rubs
that are in his way, and take notice of those things that would stop him in
this course. Whereupon he must needs find by constant experience that the world
is that great Impediment, and so must be apprehensive of the enmity of the
world. For as he that Loves God and waits for the sight of his face in
Glory, must needs take all that to be against him, and naught for him, that
would keep him from God, and deprive him of that beatificall vision, so he that
knows what it is to love God, must needs know by constant sad experience,
that the world is the great with-drawer or hinderer of that love. When he sets
himself in any holy employment to mount his soul into a more heavenly frame,
and to get a little nearer God, he feels himself too much entangled with
inferior objects; these are the weight that presses down, and the water that
quenches the sacred ^lames; and were it not for these, O how much higher might
our souls attain, and how much freer might we be for God. For it is a thing
most certain to us by our constant experience, that the more of the world is
upon our hearts, the less is there of God; and the more of God, the less of the
world. So that these two means alone, The sincere Intending of God, and Glory
as our End, and daily observation of our own hearts, will easily convince us
that the world is our great enemy. And when we thoroughly apprehend it to be our
enemy, we have begun to crucify it.

2. The next act by which the world is crucified, is, A deep habituated
apprehension of its worthlesness and insufficiency. As the opposing world must
be taken for an enemy, so the Promising alluring world must be taken, as it is,
for an empty thing. The Life and Reign of the world in the unsanctified, lies
first in their too high estimation of it. They think of it as Good, and Good to
them, and as a matter of some considerable worth, and though they will say with
their tongues that heaven is better, yet all things considered, they take the
world to be more suitable to them, and therefore they desire it more. For
Heaven is out of sight, and beyond their apprehension and affection, and as
they imagine, it is not so certain as the things which they see, and feel, and
possess. And therefore they resolve to grasp as much of the creature as they
can, and take that which they can get in hand, and then if there be an heaven,
they hope they may have their part in it, as well as others. But saving
Illumination does put men into another mind. It makes them see, that the
Invisible things are of greater Certainty then the visible; and that a promise
without possession, is better security then possession without a promise; and
that for the Worth and Goodness, between Eternal things and Temporal, there can
be no comparison. If the world would have been content to have kept its place,
and to have borrowed all its honor and esteem from God and Glory, as the end
for which it must be used and regarded, it might then have had the honor of
being serviceable to our salvation, and to our Masters work: But seeing it will
needs be a competitor with heaven, it thereby dis^obeth it self of its glory,
and becomes a vile contemptible thing: And so must it be esteemed by all the
friends of God. A sound Believer looks on the world, as the world looked on
Christ when he hanged on the Cross; not only as a Malefactor, but as a
contemptible thing: And as the world esteems the Saints themselves to be
hypocrites, deceivers, fools, weak, despised, a spectacle to the world, yea as
the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things: So must the
Believer esteem of the world, as seeming to be what it is not, as a weak and
insufficient thing, as the (...), 1 Cor. 4. 11, 12, 13. the very filth of the
streets that is swept away or cast upon the dunghill: or as a thing devoted to
death for the averting of an imminent judgment. Paul's judgment is in a
prevalent degree, the judgment of every gracious soul, Phil. 3. 7, 8. What
things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ: Yea doubtless and I
count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus
my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but
dung, that I may win Christ.] Were the world but thus conceived of by a
practical judgment, it were half crucified already. If men did verily think
that the world is their Loss, they would love it less, and less greedily seek
after it, then now most do. Gehezi would not have run after Naaman for his
money, if he had thought that it had been his loss: Achan would not have hid
the forbidden gold, as a treasure, if he had thought it had been his loss. Who
would be at so much care and pains, for their loss, as worldlings and
sensualists are for their delights. And if the judgment did once esteem the
world as dung, they would not be so greedy for it, nor put it into their
bosoms. Who would fall in love with dung, or dote upon filth or dogs-meat? As
the judgment does esteem it, the affections will be toward it. And they that
know not of a better condition, will value this as the best, though common
reason will call it vanity. But they that by faith have found out the true
felicity, have low and contemptuous thoughts of the world. O what a carkaise,
what a shadow is it in their eyes? What a poor low thing is it which the sons
of men do tire themselves in seeking after? What a dunghill do they wallow in,
as if it were a bed of Roses? What deformities do they dote upon, as if they
were the most real beauties? A toad abhors not the company of a toad; but
shall not a man abhor it? But we shall have occasion of saying more to this in
the Application.

3. The third act by which we Crucify the world, is a kind of Annihilation of
it to our selves; in our conceptions taking it as a very Nothing, so far as it
would be something separated from God, or coordinate with him. How often does
the Scripture call it vanity, a dream, a vain show, a shadow, yea nothing, yea
and less then nothing before God, and lighter then vanity it self, Isa. 40. 17.
Psalm. 62. 9. Job 6. 21. The Princes of the earth, who are something in the eyes
of themselves and others, appear as Nothing when God lets out his wrath upon
them, Isa. 34. 12. Even as the straw when the fire has consumed it, or the
fairest buildings when it has turned them to ashes. For though the world be
really something, yet, 1. In regard of the effects which it promises to
seduced worldlings, it may be called Nothing. For that which can do Nothing for
us in our extremity, which has no Power to relieve or satisfy us, which
leaves the soul empty, and deceives them that trust it, may well be called
Nothing in effect: In genere boni, that which can do us no good, is Nothing to
us. Let a needy soul betake himself to the world for comfort under the burden
of sin, for quiet and true peace to a wounded conscience, and you will find it
can do Nothing. Seek to it for grace or strength against corruptions and
temptations, and you will find it can do Nothing. Cry to it for succor in the
depth of your affliction, and at the hour of death, and try whether it will
present you acceptable unto God, and bring your departed souls with boldness to
his presence, and you will find that it can do Nothing! Whatever it promises,
and what ever it seems to deluded sinners, when you look for any real good
from it, you will find it can do Nothing. And therefore you may well take it as
a mere Nothing to you. 2. And in esse objectivo we may make Nothing of it, by
excluding it from any room in our souls, as to those acts that do not belong to
it. 3. And as a separated being, independent as to God, so it is indeed
Nothing: for there is no such thing: Much less as it is a separated Good, or
felicity to man* Annihilate then the world to your selves. When it would appear
to you to be what it is not, and would promise you to be what it cannot, let it
be as Nothing to you. Conceive of it as of a shadow, or a thing that seems to
Be and is not. Could you once make Nothing of it, it would have no power over
you, nor any unhappy effects upon you. You would not dote upon a known Nothing,
nor change your God and Glory for Nothing. As Job says of the wicked, Job 27.
19. [ he opens his eyes, and he is not:] so we may say of the world: when we
open our eyes we shall see that it is not: that which before seemed Nothing to
us, will appear to be All things; and the world that seemed all things will be
Nothing.

The sum of all that has been said is this. The opposing world must be
apprehended as an enemy to God and us, and so far Hated: The glozing world
appearing as our felicity, or a competitor with God, must be conceived of as
Worthless, and Contemned: And the world as it would appear as a separated Good,
being any thing to us, or having any thing for us, out of God, must be
annihilated in our conceptions, and taken as Nothing.

SECT. VI.
WE are next briefly to show you how it is that we are Crucified to the world;
having showed you how the world is Crucified to us. And in general the meaning
is, that we are as Dead or Crucified men to it, in regard of those
forementioned unjust respects in which the tempter would present it to us. So
that [ Crucified] here is put for the absence of that Action and worldly
Disposition, which carnal men are guilty of. So that it is a Moral, and not a
Natural death that is here mentioned; and observably differs from a Natural
in these respects.

1. A Natural death destroys the very Powers or Faculties of Acting: But a
Moral Death only destroys the Disposition and Action it self; but not any
Natural Power.

2. A Natural death is Involuntary, and in it self is neither a virtue nor a
vice; neither Morally Good or Evil. But a Moral death is principally in the
Will it self, and nothing is more voluntary, and so it is the principal virtue
or vice: To be dead in sin and to God, is the sum of all Evil: And to be dead
to sin and the world, in Christ, is the sum of Moral Good.

3. Natural death has no degree of life remaining (saving of the separated
soul.) But Moral death may consist with much of the contrary life. For it is
denominated from the predominant habits of the soul; which may stand with much
of the contrary habit, though subdued. We cannot therefore gather that Paul was
absolutely free from all sin, because he was dead to it, or crucified to the
world. For this is a Moral death consisting in a conquest of the enemy; who may
be said to be dead, because he is overcome; and consisting in the prevalent
Habits of the soul, which yet may have too much of the remnants of their
contraries.

More particularly, 1. If we are Crucified to the world, our undue estimation
of the world is Crucified. We have no Idolizing over valuing regard to it, (in
that measure as we are dead to it.) As the world do not Regard the works of the
Lord, Psalm. 28. 5. Isa. 5. 12. So the Saints do not Regard the things of the
world. The life of faith does so elevate their spirits, that they are mounted
up above the creature, and look not upon the world; or look upon it as a
despicable thing. They are above that which is the delight and employment of
others; and that which the sensual call Felicity, they still call Vanity: And
as a man's stomach abhors that which a dog or a swine will greedily devour;
so the soul of a Believer does despise and abhor the delights of the ungodly.
As Pride makes the Rich look contemptuously and disregardfully upon the poor:
So the holy elevation of Believing souls, does make them look contemptuously
and disregardfully upon all the glory of the world. As faith does bring them up
to God, and make him their Object and their All; So does it make them somewhat
like him, and minded as he is minded. And as God regards not persons, Deuteronomy.
10. 17. nor accepts the persons of Princes, nor regards the rich more then
the poor, Job 34. 19. but is pleased more in the least of his image on the
humble faithful soul, then with all the glittering glory of the world, so is it
in their measure with his people. Where they see nothing of God, they feel no
substance; but so far as God appears to them in any creature, or action, or
any means or benefit which they possess, so far they perceive some substance in
it. As the natural man Receives not the things of the Spirit, nor can know
them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. So the Spiritual
man has shut up his senses to the world, and lost his perception of them,
because they are carnally so discerned. The carnal man has his senses quick in
discerning and savouring the things of the flesh, but to the things of the
Spirit he is dead and senseless. And contrarily the Spiritual man is dead and
senseless to the things of the flesh, and has no savor in those things that
are other men's delights, Romans 8. 10, 5, 6. He tastes no more sweetness in
their pleasures then in a chip. He wonders what they can see or taste in the
things of the world, that they so run after it. To be Rich or Poor do but
little differ in his eyes; To be high or low is all one to him, considering
these things as accomodations of the flesh; though still he valueth any
condition according to the respect it has to God; and so that is the best
condition to him that best accommodateth and advantageth him for Gods service.
He takes the fleshes Interest to be none of his Interest; and therefore that
which only concerns the flesh concerns not him. And therefore he looks in
this regard upon an high estate or a low, as Nothing to him. Let God dispose of
him as he please; that is Gods work and not his. He has learned in whatever
estate he is, therewith to be content: [He knows how to be abased, and he knows
how to abound; every where and in all things he is instructed, both to be full
and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need,] Phil. 4. 11, 12. If you
applaud and honor him, he takes it but as if you breathed on him; at the best
it is but a sweeter kind of breath: And if you vilify, and reproach, and
unjustly condemn him, he takes it for no great hurt. For [ with him it is a
very small thing to be judged of man, and at man's bar; for he that judges him
is the Lord,] 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4. Nay what if I said that if you imprison him,
threaten him, torment him, yea put him to death, he does not much regard it,
nor make any great matter of it; so far as he is Crucified to the world. How
joyfully could Paul and Silas sing in the stocks, when their bodies were sore
with scourging? Act. 16. What a rapture of joyful praises did the Apostles
break forth into, when they were threatened by the Priests and Elders Acts 4.
21, 24. I will add but two more instances, Dan. 3. The three Jews that were
threatened with a furnace of fire, are accused for not regarding the King, verse.
12. and their own answer is, verse. 16, 17. [ We are not careful to answer thee
in this matter: If it be so, the God whom we serve is able to deliver us from
the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand, O King. But
if not, be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy Gods.] And
sure they that would not accept of deliverance when they were tortured, Heb.
11. 35. did set little by it, in comparison of that better Resurrection which
they hoped for. As Christ said of Satan, The Prince of this world has nothing
in me, John 14. 30. So in our measure, so far as we are dead with Christ, the
world has nothing in us, no interest, no carnal life to work upon, and
therefore is unable to do any thing with us. Our undue estimation of the world
is Crucified. This is the first part.

2. If we are Crucified to the world, our inordinate cogitations of the world
are Crucified. We must not give it that room in our fancies or power over them,
as they have with other men. We should not indeed allow the creature one
thought either for it self, and terminated finally in it self, nor as separated
from God. Much less should we have so frequent and so pleasant or passionate
thoughts of it as most have. But of this more in the Application.

3. To be Crucified to the world, is to have Affections dead about worldly
things. That which is vile in our estimation, will be uneffectual in our
Affections. I shall briefly instance in some particulars.

1. Our Love to the world is Crucified, if we be Crucified to the world. As
this is the great Affection which God claims for himself, and which he makes
the seat of his most excellent grace; so is it that which he is most jealous
of, and will least allow the creature to partake of; and the mis-imployment of
it is the greatest sin, as the right employment of it is the greatest duty. 1
John 2. 15. [ Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world.]
This is a plain and flat command. If the world be not apprehended by the
understanding to be our Good, it will not be embraced by the will, nor be
Loved. Perhaps you will say, Though it be not our chief Good, yet it is Good,
and therefore may be loved, though not ch^^s^^ loved. To which I answer, that
in the senses before disclaimed it is none of our Good at all. It has no
Goodness to us in it, but the Good of a Means, which is respective to the End;
and therefore we must have no Love to it but that which is due to the Means:
God therefore being our End, we must Love the world only for his sake, as it
comes from him and leads to him. The least love to the world for it self, is
Idolatrous. As you may not allow another woman the least Conjugal affection,
though you allow your wife more, without some guilt of unchastity; so you may
not in the least measure love the creature for it self without some guilt of
spiritual unchastity. If God must be loved with All the heart, and soul, and
strength, then there is none lest for any co-partner whatsoever. When we love
any thing but as a Means, it is more properly the End that we love in that very
act (And therefore some Philosophical Divines affirm that Nothing but the
ultimate End is properly loved) so that the Love which we give the world in a
due subordination to God, is not so properly a Love to the world as to God, and
therefore it takes not from God the least part of that which is due to him.
But if we love it in the least measure for it self, or with any coordinate
Love, so much as we allow it, is robbed from God.

2. Hence it follows (when our love to the world is crucified) that our
Desires after it is crucified also. Before we thirsted after Pleasures, or
Honors, or Riches, but now this thirst is abated; for when we obey the Call of
Christ, Isa. 55. 1. and have freely drunk of the living waters, we thirst our
former thirst no more, (according to the measure in which we partake of him)
but his Spirit will be a well of water in us, springing up to everlasting life,
John 4. 13, 14. The distempered appetite of a Carnal man is so eager after
worldly things, that his heart is set upon them: which Romans 8. 5. is called his
minding the things of the flesh: But the mortified Christian, as such, has no
mind of them: His appetite to them is dead and gone. He cares not for them. Now
he perceives that they are not Good for him, his heart is turned against them.

3. When we are Crucified to the world, our expectations of Good from the world
are Crucified. Before we looked for much from it; we thought if we had this
Pleasure, or that Honor, if we had such lands, buildings, friends, or
provision, then we were well, or at least much better then now we are! O how
Good did we think that these were for us! And therefore we still lived in Hope
of more. But when we are Crucified to the world, we give up these Hopes. We see
then that we were deceived: we did but hope for nourishment from a stone: The
breasts are dry which we thought would have refreshed and satisfied us. When we
see that the world is an empty thing, a cask, a picture, a dream, a shadow; we
turn away from it, and look no more after it, but look for content in something
else. As a child that sees a painted Apple may be eager of it till he try that
it is favourless, and then he cares for it no more; or if a beautiful crab
deceive him, when he has set his teeth in it he casts it away. So when a
Christian finds the folly of his former expectations, and tastes the
vexation of the creature which he was so greedy of, and withal is acquainted
by a lively faith, where he may be better; away go all his expectations from
the world; and he promises himself no more content or satisfaction in it. This
is a notable part of Mortification. As it is the Hopes of some Good, that sets
men awork in all endeavors; so take down their Hopes, and all the wheels of
the soul stand still. If it were not for Hope, we say, the heart would break.
And therefore when all our Hopes from the world are dead, the very Heart of the
old man is broken, and all his worldly motions cease. Then he says, Its as
good sit still as labor for nothing. I despair of ever having contentment in
the creature: I see it will not pacify my conscience: it will not save me from
the wrath to come: it will do nothing for me that is worthy my regard: and
therefore let it go; I will follow it no further; It shall have my heart no
more. Before he had many a promising delightful thought of the creatures, which
he could not reach: He thought with himself, If I were but thus placed and
settled once: if I had but this or that which I want: if I were but here or
there where I would be: if I had but the favor of such or such an one, how
happy were I? how well should I be? I would then be content and seek no more.
But when faith has mortified us to the world, we see that all these were
foolish dreams: we knew not what it was that we Hoped for! and then we give up
all such Hopes for ever. Such pleasing thoughts of any worldly thing while you
want it, or of any place or Condition which you are absent from, and such
promises and hopes from any worldly state, or person, or thing, does manifest
that so far you are alive to the world, and is a folly of the same nature with
theirs that Idolize the world when they do enjoy it. For one man to say, [ If I
had this or that I were well] and for another that has it, to say, [ Now I am
well, Soul take thy Rest] do both show the same Estimation, and Idolatrous Love
to the world in their hearts; though one of them have the thing which he loves,
and the other has it not: And to be so pleased with the very fancy and
conceits of those worldly things which they never had, seems worse then to be
pleased with it when they have it. I pray you lay this well to heart that I say
to you: Despair, utter Despair of ever being contented or well in the world, or
made happy by the world in whole or in part, is the very life of Christian
Mortification. It is the nature of a Carnal heart, to keep up his worldly Hopes
as long as possibly he can. If you beat him from one thing, he runs to another:
and if he despair of that, he looks after a third, and thus he will wander from
creature to creature, till Grace convert him, or Judgment condemn him. If he
find that one friend fails him, he hopes another will prove more faithful;
and if that prove a broken reed, he will rest upon a third: If he have been
crossed in his Hopes of worldly contentment once, or twice, or ten times, or an
hundred times, yet he is in Hope that some other way may hit, and some more
comfort he may find at last: But when God has opened a man's eyes to see that
the whole world is Vanity and Vexation, and that if he had it all it would do
him no Good at all, and that it is a mere deceitful empty thing: and when a man
is brought to a full and final Desparation of ever finding in the world, the
Good that he expected; then, and not till then is he Crucified to the world;
and then he can let it go, and care not: and then he will betake himself in
good earnest to look after that which will not deceive him.

When a worldling is in utmost poverty or in prison, he may part with all his
worldly contentment at the present; but this is not to be Crucified to the
world: For still he keeps up his former estimation of it, and Love to it, and
some Hope perhaps that yet it may be better with him. Yea, if he should Despair
of ever being Happy in the world, if this proceed not from his Disesteem of it,
and the change of his Affections, but merely because he would have the world,
but sees he cannot, this is far from the nature of true mortification.

4. If we are Crucified to the world, our Delight in it is Crucified. It
seems not to us a matter of such worth, as to be fit for our Delight:
Children are glad of toys, which a wise man has no pleasure in. To have too
sweet contentful thoughts in the creature, and to apprehend it as our Good, and
to be rejoiced in it, is a sign that so far we are not Crucified to it. It is
not able to Glad a mortified heart, so far as it is mortified; though the Love
of God that is manifested by it, may make him glad. And this is it that Paul
disclaimeth in my Text [ God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of
Christ.] If he were the Lord of all the honors or wealth of the world, he
would not Glory in them. If he had all the Pleasures that the flesh can desire,
he would not glory in them. If he had the common applause of all men, and every
one spoke well of him; if he had all things about him suited to a carnal hearts
content, yet would he not glory in it: No more then a grave and learned man
would glory that he had found a counter or a pin. Ier. 9 23. [ Let not the wise
man glory in his wisdom, nor the mighty man glory in his might, let not the
rich man glory in his riches; but let him that gloryeth, glory in this, that he
understands and knows me, that I am the Lord that exercise loving kindness,
judgment, and righteousness on the earth; for in these things I delight says
the Lord. Jer. 4. 2. [ The Nations shall bless themselves in him, and in him
shall they glory.] Isa. 41. 16. [ Thou shall rejoice in the Lord, and glory in
the holy one of Israel.] Isa. 45. 25. [ In the Lord shall all the seed of
Israel be justified, and shall glory.] The world is too low to be the joy of a
Believer: His higher Hopes do cloud and disgrace such things.

And as these forementioned Passions in the Concupiscible, so also their
contraries in the Irascible, must be Crucified. E. G. 1. A man that is Dead to
the world, will not Hate or be much Displeased with those that hinder him from
the Riches, or Honors, or Pleasures of the world. He makes no great matter of
it, and takes it for no great hurt or loss. And therefore rather then study
revenge, he can patiently bear it: when they have taken away his coat, if they
take away his cloak also. He does not swell with malice against them that stand
in the way of his advancement, or hinder his rising or riches in the world. He
will not envy the precedence of others: nor seek the disgrace or ruin of them
that keep him low: No more then a wise man will hate or seek to be revenged of
him that would hinder him from climbing up to the top of a steeple, or that
will take a stone or ^ bush of thorns out of his way.

2. A man that is Crucified to the world, will not avoid or fly from any Duty,
though the performance of it cross his worldly commodity, or hazard all his
worldly interest. He sees not reason enough in worldly losses, to draw him to
the committing of sin to avoid them. An unmortified man will be swayed by his
worldly Interest. That must be no Duty to him, which casts him upon
sufferings: and that is no Good to him which would deprive him of his sensual
Good: And that shall be no sin to him, which seems to be a matter of Necessity,
for the securing of his hopes and happiness in the world. Whatever is a man's
end, he puts a Must upon the obtaining it, and upon all the Means without which
it will not be attained. I Must have God and Glory, says the Believer,
whatever I want: and therefore I Must have Christ, I Must have faith, and love,
and obedience, whatever I do. And so says the sensualist, my life, and credit,
and safety in the world Must be secured, whatever I miss of: and therefore I
Must avoid all that would hazard or lose them, and I Must do that which will
preserve them, whatever I do. The worldling thinks there is a Necessity of
his being sensually happy: or at least, of preserving his life and hopes on
earth. But the mortified Christian sees no Necessity of Living, much less of
any of the sensual provisions, which to others seem such considerable things.
And hence it is that the same Argument from Necessity, draws one man to sin,
and keeps another most effectually from sin. He that has carnal Ends, does
plead a Necessity of the sinful means, by which he may attain them. And he that
has the Ends of a true Believer, does plead a Necessity of avoiding the same
sins, which the other thought he must needs commit. For Heavenly Ends are as
much croft by them, as earthly Ends are promoted by them. We find a rich man in
Luke 18. 23. that had a great mind to have been a Christian: And if he had
lived in our days, when the door is set a little wider open then Christ did
set it, there are some that would not have denied him Baptism, but would have
let him in. But when he heateth that the world must be renounced, and Christ
tells him of selling all, and looking for a reward in another world, [ he goes
away sorrowful, for he was very rich.] The man would have had pardon and
salvation, but he must needs be Rich, or at least keep something. And they that
are so set upon it that they must and [ will be rich, do fall into temptation
and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in
destruction and perdition.] 1 Timothy 6. 9. And [ he that makes have to be rich,
shall not be innocent,] Prove. 28. 20. But the Crucified world is a dead and
ineffectual thing. It cannot draw a man from Christ or duty. It cannot draw a
man into any known sin (so far as it is Crucified.) It is as Sampson when his
hair was cut: its power is gone. Thousands whose hearts were changed by grace,
could sell all and lay the price at the Apostles seet, and could forsake all
and take up their Cross and follow a Crucified Christ to the death, and could
rejoice in tribulation, and glory that they were counted worthy to suffer;
though he that was unmortified do go away sorrowful. Worldly Interest does
command the Religion and life of the unmortified man, because it is the
predominant Interest in his heart; But its contrary with the mortified
Believer: His spiritual Interest being predominant, does Rule him as to all the
matters of this world.

3. If you are Crucified to the world, your care for worldly things is
Crucified. It is not in vain that Christ expressly commands his Disciples, [
Take no thought for your life, What ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor
yet for your body what you shall put on,] Mat. 6. 25, 31. And Phil. 4. 6. [ Be
careful for nothing.] And 1 Pet. 5. 7. [ Casting all your care on him, for he
cares for you.] I know this is a hard saying to flesh and blood, and therefore
they study evasions by perverting the plain Text, and would null and evacuate
the express commands of Christ, by squaring them to that carnal interest and
reason which they are purposely given to destroy. But you will say. Must we
indeed give over caring? I answer, 1. You must be in care about your own duty,
both in matters of the first and second Table, and how to manage your worldly
affairs most innocently and spiritually, and to attain the Ends propounded in
them by God. But this is none of the care that is now in Question, 1 Cor. 7.
32. There is a necessary [ caring for the things that belong to the Lord, how
to please the Lord;] and that even in your worldly business. But 2. You may not
care for the creature for it self, nor for the mere pleasing of the flesh. As
it may not be Loved for it self, so neither may it be cared for, for it self.
And 3. When you have used your utmost care or forecast to do your own duty, you
may not be Anxious or Careful about the issue which is Gods part to determine
of. As God himself appears in Prosperity or Adversity you may and must have
regard unto the issue. But for the thing it self you must not, when you have
done your own duty, be any further careful about it. God knows best what is
good for you, and how much of the creature you are fit to manage, and what
condition of body is most suitable to the condition of your soul: And therefore
to him must the whole business be committed. When you have committed your seed
to the ground, and done your duty about it, you must have no further care at
all, which intimates fears, anxiety or distrust; though as care is largely
taken for Regard; You may care and pray for the blessing of God on it, and for
your daily bread.

4. So far as you are Crucified to the world, your worldly sorrows also will be
Crucified. If you miss of it, you will not be grieved for that miss. For the
displeasure of God which an affliction may manifest, you ought to be grieved;
but not for the mere loss of the creature for it self. As God in the creature
must be Loved and Delighted in, and not the creature for it self; so it is Gods
displeasure manifested in the creature that must be our Grief. If a man's flesh
be dead, you may cut it off, and he never feels you; you may cut it, or prick
it, and he will not smart. And if you be dead to the world, you will not feel
it as others do, when worldly things are taken from you. You will make no great
matter of it.

Obj. But Grace does not make men stocks or stupid, and therefore how can we
choose but feel?

Answ. There is a feeling that is merely natural, and not subject to the
command of Reason and Will: and there is a feeling which is under Reason, and
is voluntary. The later only is it that I speak of, which Grace commands. The
most gracious man may feel heat and cold, pain and weariness, hunger and
thirst, as much as the worst. But the Passions of his soul, so far as they are
under the command of Reason and Will, do not feel them as evils to the soul,
(so far as he is sanctified.) Still observe that I speak of worldly things, as
separated from God, in whom only they are good, and in respect to him only the
absence of them is evil to the soul. And there is somewhat of the Passions that
bodily sense can force, perhaps in an innocent Adam; But I speak only of that
passion which Reason should command. And so, it is not enough that our Care and
Grief for worldly things be less then that for the things of God. Though that
much may prove our sincerity (of which more anon) yet that is not all that is
our duty. But we should have no care or Rational voluntary grief for any
creature, but only as it is a Means to God, and stands in a due subordination
to him: and so we may have both.

4. Having showed you what Affections are Crucified to the world, in the last
place I add, that Our inordinate labor for it, must be Crucified. Christ is as
plain and peremptory in this, as in the former, not only commanding us to [
Seek first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness,] Mat. 6. 33. but also, [
Not to labor for the meat that perishes, but for the meat that endures to
everlasting life, which the Son will give us,] John 6 27. which is not only to
be understood that our Labor for earth should be less then our Labor for
heaven, and so comparatively none at all; but further, that as we must have no
Love or Desire to the creature for it self, but ultimately for God, so we
should not at all Seek or Labor for the creature for it self, but ultimately
for God; and therefore Seek and Labor for it no further then the End
requires; that is, no further then it is necessary to the Pleasing of God, or
to our fruition of him. This is the true and plain meaning of such Texts.

A man that is truly Dead to the world, does Labor for God and not for the
world (according to the measure of his mortification) in all that he does. If
he be plowing, or sowing, or reaping, or threshing; if he be working at his
trade in his shop, it is God that he is seeking and laboring for. He does not
stop or take up in the creature. He seeks it still but as a Means to God. But
an unsanctified man does never truly seek God for himself at all, no not in his
worship, much less in his trade and calling in the world. For God is not his
ultimate End; and therefore he cannot Love him or Seek him for himself. It is
flesh-pleasing or carnal felicity that is his End, and therefore he seeks God
for the flesh: When he prays to him, when he Loves him it is but as he is a
Means to this his Carnal felicity, and not as he is himself his chiefest Good.
Thus you may see what it is to be Crucified to the world, and wherein true
Mortification does consist.

SECT. VII.
A Few Objections are here to be answered, that we may the more profitably
proceed.

Obj. 1. A man may have hunger or thirst in his very sleep, when he cannot
refer the creature to God.

Answ. 1. We speak only of Humane, that is, Moral acts, and such Desires as are
under the command of the Will. 2. A man may Habitually refer things to God,
when he does not Actually.

Obj. 2. How can a man seek God in plowing or working in his shop, when these
actions are so heterogeus?

Answ. God made no creature, nor appointed any employment for man, which may
not fitly be a Means to himself. As all came from God, so all have something of
God upon them; and all tend to him from whom they came. There are some Means
that stand nearer the End, and some are further from it; and yet the most
remote are truly Means. A man that is but cutting down a tree, or hewing stones
out of the Quarry, does as much intend them for the building of his house, as
he that is erecting the frame, or placing them in the building. We cannot
attain the End without the remotest Means, as well as the nearest.

Obj. We are taught to Pray for our Daily bread; therefore we may Desire it,
and Labor for it.

Answ. No doubt of it. But we are taught to Pray for it, but as a Means to the
Hallowing of Gods Name, the Coming of his Kingdom, and the Doing of his Will:
and therefore only as a Means must we desire it, and labor for it; and that
for these, and no lower ultimate ends. And therefore the words are such as
express only things Necessary, [ Our daily bread;] that we may perceive it is
but as a Means to God that we desire it. If our Being be not maintained, we are
not capable of Well-being, nor of serving God: And if the Means of our Being be
not continued, our Being will not be continued in Gods appointed ordinary way.
And therefore we pray for the Means of our sustentation, that we may be kept in
a capacity of the Ends of our Being.

Obj. But a man cannot be always thinking on God, and therefore not always
intending him as our End, and therefore cannot do all for him.

Answ. 1. If sin disable us, that is no excuse. 2. A man may Habitually Intend
an End, which he does not Actually think of: Yea he may have an Actual
Intention, which yet he does not observe, because of other more sensible
thoughts that are upon his mind. And yet his foresaid Intentions may be still
effectual to cause him to use the Means as Means.

For example: A man that has a journey to go, is not always thinking of the
End of it, by an actual observed Intention, in every step of his way: but
perhaps may be much of the way taken up with thoughts and discourse of other
things. And yet he does truly Intend his journeys End, in every step of his
way, and use every step as a Means to that End. And so is it with a true
Christian in the work of God, and the way to heaven.

Obj. But may we not use the creatures for Delight, as well as for Necessity?
and is it not so commonly resolved?

Answ. The word [ Necessity] is taken either strictly for that which we cannot
be without; and so there is no doubt of it. Or largely, for that which is useful
to the End: And for Delights, some of them are Necessary, that is, Useful Means
to our ultimate End; and these must not be opposed to things Necessary; but may
be used because Necessary. As any thing which truly tends to recreate,
revive, or cheer the spirits for the service of our Master. But no other
Delight is lawful. To esteem our fleshly Delight for it self; and the creature
for that Delight, and so to use it, is mere sensuality, and the great sin which
sanctification cures in the soul. If Delight it self be desired truly but as a
Means to God, then the creature, the more remote Means, may be used for that
Delight, as its next End; but not else.

Obj. But what man living is such as you here describe? Is there any that are
thus Crucified to the world, as to have no separated esteem of it, or thoughts
or care of it; or Love, or Desire, or the rest of these Affections?

Answ. It is one thing to enquire what we are, and another what we ought to be,
and should be if we were perfect: We ought to be such as I have mentioned, but
we are not such in perfection yet; but only in sincerity. And how that
sincerity may be known, I have elsewhere explained. In a word, In a perfect
soul there is no Interest but Gods: In a sincere soul Gods Interest is the
highest and greatest: In a perfect man God has the whole heart: and in an
upright man he is nearer to the heart then any thing else. In a perfect man
there is a perfect subjection to God: and in an upright man there is none has
Dominion but God: he is highest, and his Rule prevails in the main, though
some things that rebel are not perfectly subdued.

Obj. But I find that most of my Passions are stirred more sensibly about
earthly, then heavenly things. How then can I say that I am crucified to the
world?

Answ. In point of Duty all that Passion that is to be commanded by Reason,
should be mortified, as is abovesaid. But when you go to the trial of your
states, in the point of sincerity, it is hard trying by the Passions; and you
must rather do it by your Estimation and your Will, as I have discovered more
fully in a Treatise of Peace of Conscience.

SECT. VIII.
II. HAving showed you what it is to have the world Crucified to us, and to be
Crucified to the world: I am next to show you how this is done by the Cross of
Christ. And here I must distinctly show you, 1. What the Cross, as suffered by
Christ himself has done to the Crucifying of the world to us. 2. What the same
Cross, as Believed on and Considered by us does toward it. 3. And what the
Cross of Christ which we our selves bear in conformity to his sufferings does
toward it. Of all which briefly.

1. It is not only his Crucifixion, but the whole Humiliation of Christ which
is in this and other Scriptures called his Cross: the whole being denominated
from the most eminent part, as was touched before. And there are five notable
blows that the world has received by the suffered Cross of Christ. 1. One is,
that Christ himself in his own person has perfectly crucified and conquered
the world, so that we have a victorious Head, and the world is now a conquered
thing. It assaulted him from his birth to his death, and still he overcame. It
assaulted him by fair means and by foul, by frowns and smiles, by alluring
baits and persecuting storms, and still it was overcome. The threatenings and
persecutions could never draw him to the committing of a sin: The enticing
offers of it could never bring him to an inordinate esteem of it, nor abate the
least of his love to God. In his great combat in the wilderness he was
assaulted both ways. Hunger could not make him tempt God or distrust. The
Kingdoms and Glory of the world, were despised by him when they were the matter
of his temptation. He would not have so much as a settled habitation, nor any
worldly pomp or splendour, that so he might show that he contemned it by his
actions. If he had set by it, he could soon have mended his condition. When the
people would have made him a King, he past away from them; for he would not be
a King of the peoples making, nor have any Power or Dignity which they could
give. He came not to Receive honor of men, but to Give salvation to men. When
Peter would have persuaded him to favor himself, as favoring the things of
Man, and not of God, Christ calls him Satan, and bids him get behind him: If
he will do the work of Satan, he shall have the name of Satan, and the same
words of rebuke that Satan had. Even in their hour* and the power of darkness,
Luke 22. 53. they could do nothing that might make the least breach in his
perfection: And when they boasted of their power to crucify him or release
him, John 19. 10. they could not boast of their power to draw him to the
smallest sin. Yea upon the Cross did he consummate his conquest of the world,
when it seemed to have conquered him: and he crucified the world, when it was
crucifying him; and gave it then the deadly wound. And there did he openly make
a show of the principalities and powers which he had spoiled, and there did he
triumph over them, while they mistakingly triumphed over him, Col. 2. 14, 15.

If you say, What is all this to us? I answer, When the world is once
conquered, the heart of it is broken: And when our Head has overcome it, there
is a great preparation made for our victory. Else would he not have said to his
Disciples, John 16. ^3. In the world ye shall have tribulation, but be of good
cheer, I have overcome the world.] For as the consequence is good, [ Because I
live, ye shall live also], John 14. 19. So it will hold, [ Because I have
overcome the world, ye shall overcome it also.] Yea as it is said of his Works,
[ Greater works then these shall ye do.] John 14. 12. So is it said of our
conquest, [ In all these things we are supervictors, or more then Conquerors
through him that has loved us, Romans 8. 37.]

2. Another wound that the world has received by the Cross of Christ by him
suffered, is this: By it satisfaction is made to God for the sin that the world
had enticed man to commit, and so quoad pretium, the victory which the world
had formerly obtained over us, is nulled, and its Captives rescued, and we are
cured of the deadly wounds which it had given us: For he heals all our
diseases, Psalm. 103. 3. and his stripes are the remedy by which we are healed,
Isa. 53 5. So that it is a vanquishing of the world, when Christ does thus
nullisie its former victories: For thus he began to lead captivity it self
captive, which at his Resurrection and Ascension he did more fully accomplish,
Psalm 68. 18. Ephesians. 4. 8.

3. Another most mortal wound which the world received by the Cross of Christ,
was this. By his Cross did Christ purchase that Glorious Kingdom, which being
revealed and propounded to the sons of men, does abundantly disgrace the world
as a Competitor. If there had been no greater good revealed to us, or the
revelation had been obscure and insufficient, or no Assurance of it given us,
then might the world have easily prevailed. For he that has no hopes of
greater, will take up with this: And he that looks not for another life, will
make as much of the present as he can. When the will of a man is the fort that
is contended for, the assault must be made by Allurement and not by force. The
competition therefore is between Good and Good: and that which appears the
Greater Good to us, will carry it, and have admittance. If God had not set a
Greater Good against the world, it would have been every man's wisdom and duty
to have been worldlings. But when he reveals to us another world of infinite
value, yea when he offers us the fruition of himself, this turns the scales
with wise men in a moment, and shameth all competitors whatsoever. Now it is
the Cross of Christ that opened the Kingdom of heaven to all true Believers,
which sin had before shut up against all mankind. This marrs the markets of the
world: Its nothing worth to them that have tasted of the blessedness of this
Kingdom. Were it not for this, the temptations of the world and flesh might
prevail. What should we say to them? or how should we repulse them? Reason
would say, Its better have a small and unsatisfactory Good, then none. But now
we have enough to say against any such temptation. One argument from the
everlasting Kingdom is sufficient (where grace causes a right apprehension of
it) to confound all the temptations, by which the enemies of our happiness can
assault us. What I Shall we prefer a molehill before a Kingdom? a shadow
before the substance? an hour before eternity? Nothing before all things?
Vanity and Vexation before Felicity? The world is now silenced: It has nothing
to say, which may take with right Reason. It must now creep in at the back door
of sense, and bribe our brutish part to befriend it, and to entertain it
first, and so to betray our reason, and lead it into the inner rooms. The Cross
of Christ has set up such a Sun, as quite darkeneth the light of worldly
glory. Who will now play so low a game, that has an Immortal Crown propounded
to him? Though earth were Something, if there were no better to be had, yet it
is Nothing when Heaven stands by. This therefore is the deadly blow by which
the world is Crucified by the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.

4. Another mortal wound that the Cross of Christ has given it, is this. The
Cross has purchased for us that Spirit of Power, and all those Ordinances and
Helps of Grace, by which we our selves in our own persons may Actually Conquer
and Crucify the world, as Christ did before us. His Cross is the meritorious
cause of his following Grace. And as he has there procured our Justification,
so also our Sanctification, by which the world is renounced by us and
contemned. There shall a virtue flow from the Cross of Christ, that shall give
strength to all his chosen ones, to go on and conquer, and tread the world and
all its glory under their feet, and by the leaves of this Tree, which seems
dead to a carnal eye* the Nations shall be healed. And thus by it the world is
Crucified.

5. Lastly, by the Cross of Christ, a Pattern is given us for our Imitation; by
which we may learn how to contemn and so Crucify the world, [ If when ye do
well and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is accceptable with God. For
even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us
an example, that ye should follow his steps: who did no sin, neither was guile
found in his mouth: who when he was reviled, reviled not again: when he
suffered he threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously. 1 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23. [ Let this mind be in you that was in
Christ Jesus -- that made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form
of a servant -- and humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the
death of the Cross,] Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7. [ Let us therefore lay aside every
weight, and the sin that does so easily beset us, and let us run with patience
the race that is set before us; looking to Jesus, the author and finisher of
our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross,
despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of God, Heb. 12. 2. This
leads us to the next.

2. HAving showed you how the Cross, as suffered by Christ, does crucify the
world, we are next to show you, how that same Cross as Believed in and
considered does Crucisie it to us.

They that look only to the Merit of the Cross, and overlook the Objective use
of it to the soul, do deceive themselves, and deprive themselves of the full
efficacy of it; and deal like a foolish patient, that thinks to be cured by
commending the Medicine, or by believing that it has virtue to cure his
disease; when in the mean time he lets it lie by him in the box, and never
takes it, or applies it to himself. The Believing Meditation of the Cross of
Christ, does give the world these deadly wounds.

1. It brings us under the actual promise of the Spirit: For though there be
a work of the Spirit, which causes us to Believe, before our actual faith in
nature, yet the further gift of the Spirit for Mortification, is promised upon
Condition of our faith. And upon the performance of that Condition, we have
right to the thing promised. It is by faith that we fetch strength from Christ
for the conquest of this and all other enemies. If we could believe, these
mountains would be cast into the Sea; and all things are possible to us, if we
could believe, Mark 9. 23.

2. The believing Meditation of the Cross of Christ, does make us apprehensive
of the Vanity and Enmity of the world, and so does kill our esteem of it, and
affection to it. For when we consider how little Christ did set by it, and how
he made it his work professedly to contemn it, this will tell us how to think
of it our selves. For doubtless the judgment of Christ was true: He was able
to discern between good and evil: If it had been valuable, he would have valued
it. He would not have contemned it, if it had not been contemptible. He could
have had better usage in the world, if he had desired it, and thought it meet.
But he would show us by his Example as well as by his Doctrine, how to judge of
it, and what to expect from it. If you saw the wisest man in the world tread a
thing under feet in the dirt, or throw it away, you would think it were a thing
of no great worth.

When you are tempted to set too much by your credit, and to sin against God
for the esteem of men, remember that Christ Made himself of no reputation,
Phil. 2. 7. And can your reputation be less then none? How did he value his
honor with men, that gave his cheeks to be smitten, his face to be spit upon,
his head to be Crowned with thorn^, and his body to ^e arrayed contemptuously
like a fool, and at last to be hanged as a contemned thing among malefactors on
the Cross; to be reviled by those that passed by* and by him that suffered with
him? Learn here of him, that all of us must learn of, how far to set by your
honor in the world.

Are you tempted to set by the riches and full provision or possessions of the
world? Remember how Christ set by them; When he might have had all things, and
refused to have a place to lay his head. When [ he was rich, yet for your sakes
he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich, 2 Cor. 8. 9. And the
best of his servants have followed him in this course, to whom he would have
given more of the world, if he had seen it best for them. For when they had [
dishonor, they had honor with it and by it; when they had evil report, they
had also good; when they were poor, they made many rich; and having nothing,
possessed all things* ^] 2 Cor. 6. 8, 10.

When your flesh would have its pleasure, remember him that pleased nor his
flesh; but submitted it to hunger, and thirst, and weariness, to fasting, and
watching, and praying whole nights; and at last to scourgings, and buffeting,
and crucifying. When your appetites must needs be pleased in meats and drinks,
remember him that had Gall and Vinegar given him to drink. When your bodies
would be set out with such apparel, as may make you seem comelyest in the eyes
of others, remember him that wore a seamless coat, and was hanged naked on the
Cross for your sakes. When you are tender of every little hurt or suffering of
your flesh, though in a way of duty, remember him that gave his hands and feet
to be nailed, and his side to be pierced to death for you. When you are ashamed
to be reviled for well-doing, remember him that despised the shame, Heb. 12. 2.
And thus as the sight of the Brazen Serpent did cure them that were stung in
the Wilderness, so the Believing views of a Crucified Christ, may get out the
poison of worldly delusions from your souls.

3. The Believing thoughts of the Cross of Christ, will make us apprehensive
also of our duty, in contemning the world in conformity to Christ. For though
we are not bound to be Crucified as Christ was, unless God specially put us
upon it; nor bound to live without house or home in voluntary chosen poverty,
as Christ did (because there were some special Reasons for his sufferings, that
are not for ours) yet are we all bound to mortify the flesh, and contemn the
world in imitation of him, and to submit to what suffering God shall impose on
us. And in the example of Christ's Cross, this Duty must be observed.

3. THE next thing to be declared is, How the Cross which we our selves do
suffer in obedience and conformity to Christ, and for his sake, does crucify
the world to us, and us to the world. That the bearing of this Cross is
necessary to all that will be Christ's Disciples; yea the daily bearing of it is
plain, Luke 9. 23. and 14. 27. Mat. 10. 38. Two ways does this tend to the
crucifying of us to the world.

1. It does more sensibly convince us of the Vanity and Enmity of the world,
then any mere doctrine or distant examples and observations could have done. I
confess we see so much of the worlds deceit of others, that might satisfy a
reasonable man that it is vain. But the flesh does draw us into a participation
of its bruitishness: and reason will not see the light. But the Cross does
convince even the flesh it self, the grand deceiver. When the malice of wicked
men lets fly at us, and the world do spit in our faces as they did in Christ's;
when we are made a common byword and derision, and become as the filth of the
world to them, and the offscouring of all things; when we have fears within
and troubles without; and the sorrows of death lay hold upon us, and enemies
compass us round about; O how effectually will this convince us that the world
is vain, and worse then vain! Who will look for Happiness from a known Enemy
and Tormentor? When we have Jobs Messengers of sad tidings* and troubles are
multiplied: When pain and anguish seiseth upon our bodies, and grief has taken
up its dwelling in our very flesh and bones* who then will admire or dote upon
the world? Who will not then cry out against it as Vanity and Vexation? When
friends abuse one another, they will fall out for the time, though they turn
not enemies. And even the wicked when they suffer in the world, will speak
hardly of it, though the friendship of it still dwell in their sensual
dispositions. How much more will the Enmity be increased in the Saints, when
the world does use them as its enemies, and spit out the bitterest of their
malice against them? If we have any thoughts of reconciliation with the world,
God uses to suffer it to buffet and abuse us, that strokes and smart may
maintain the Enmity, if nothing else will serve to do it.

Believe it Christians, God does not permit your sufferings in vain. He sees
how apt you are to dote upon the world, and how dangerous it will prove to you,
if you be not delivered from the snares of this deceiver: and therefore he had
rather that the world should make you smart awhile, then undo you for ever: and
that it should buffet you, then befool you out of your felicity. The blows
which the world gives you do light upon it self; As it Crucified it self in
Crucifying Christ, so does it in Crucifying his people. It kills it self by
your calamities: And if it deprive you of your lives, you will then begin to
Live: but the death which it brings on it self, is such as has no
Resurrection. If it kill you, you shall live again, yea live by that death: but
thereby it will so kill it self, as never to live again in you. The Cross is an
happy Teacher of many excellent truths: But of nothing more effectually, then
of the contemptibleness of the world. If it turn our breath into groans, we
shall groan against it, and groan to be delivered, desiring to be clothed upon
with our house which is from heaven, 2 Cor. 5. 2. We shall cry to heaven
against this Task-master, and our cries will come before God, and procure our
deliverance. The world gets nothing by its hard usage of the Saints: It makes
a Cross for the Crucifying of it self, and turns their hearts more
effectually against it.

2. And as it thus declares it self contemptible, and crucifyeth it self to
us, so does it exercise us in Patience, and awaken us to deeper considerations
of its own Vanity, and drive us to look after better things: It forces us also
to seek out to God, and to see that all our dependence is on him, and draws
forth our holy desires and other graces: And thus it does Crucify us also to
the world. It makes us go into the Sanctuary, and consider of the End: how the
wicked are set in slippery places, and that at last it will go well with the
just: It teaches us to consider, that while [ the Lord is our Portion, we have
ground enough of hope: For he is good to them that wait for him, to the soul
that seeks him: It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for
the salvation of the Lord: It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his
youth: He sits alone, and keeps silence, because he has born it upon him;
he puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be Hope: He gives his
check to him that smites him; he is filled full with reproach: For the Lord
will not cast off for ever: but though he cause grief, yet will he have
compassion, according to the multitude of his Mercies] Lam. 3. 24. to 33. [ And
not only so, but we glory in tribulations also; knowing that tribulation
works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes
not ashamed] Romans 5. 3, 4, 5. [ For if we suffer with Christ, we shall also be
glorified together: and the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to
be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us.] And [ we our selves
do groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, the redemption of our
body.] Romans 8. 17, 18, 23. [ When Paul suffered for Christ the loss of all
things, he accounted them dung that he might win Christ.] [That he might know
the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, and be
made conformable to his death] Phil. 3. 8, 10. [ He rejoiced in his sufferings,
and filled up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in his flesh,
for his bodies sake, which is the Church] Col. 1. 24. [ And thus was he
Crucified with Christ, and yet lived; yet not he, but Christ lived in him; and
the life which he lived in the flesh, he lived by faith in the Son of God, who
loved him and gave himself for him, Gal. 2. 20.

SECT. IX.
III. HAving thus showed you how the Cross of Christ does Crucify the world to
us, and us to the world, I am next to give you the Proofs of the point, that
thus it is with true Believers. But because the Text it self is so plain, and
it is so fully proved on the by in what is said already, and I have been
somewhat long on the Explication, I shall refer the rest of the
Scripture-proofs to the Application, where we shall have further occasion to
produce it: And I shall now only add the Argument from experience. To the
Saints themselves I need not prove it; for they feel it in their own hearts: In
their several measures, they feel in themselves a low esteem of all things in
this world, and an high esteem of God in Christ. They would count it an happy
exchange to become more poor and afflicted in the world, and to have more of
Christ and his Spirit, and of the hopes of a better world: To have more of Gods
savor, though more of man's displeasure: It is God that they secretly long for,
and groan after from day to day! It is God that they must have, or nothing will
content them. They can spare you all things else, if they might have him.

And for those that never felt such a thing in themselves, they may yet
perceive that it is in others.

1. You see that there are a people that seek more diligently after Heaven then
Earth, that are hearing the Word of God, which instructs them in the matters
of salvation, and are praying for the things of Eternal Life, when you are
laboring for the world: You see that there are a people that seek first the
Kingdom of God and his righteousness; and labor most for the food that
perishes not, and are about the one thing Necessary, which shows that they
have chosen the better part.

2. And you see that there is a people that can let go the things of the world
when God calls for them: That can be liberal according to their power to any
pious or charitable uses. That will rather suffer in body or estate, even the
loss of all, then they will wilfully sin against God, and hazard his favor.

3. You have read or heard of multitudes that have suffered Martyrdom for
Christ, undergoing many kind of torments, and death it self, because they would
not sin against him. All these examples, together with the frequent
affirmations of the Scriptures, may assure you that thus it is with true
Christians. The world is Crucified to them, and they to the world.

SECT. X.
IV. I Am next to give you the Reasons of the Necessity of this Crucifixion,
the most of which also, for brevity sake, I shall reserve to the Application,
and at present only lay down these two or three briefly.

1. The world is every carnal man's Idol, and God cannot endure Idolatry: To see
his creature set up in his stead, and rob him of his Esteem and Interest, and
be loved, honored and served before him: and to see such contemptible things
be taken as Gods, while God himself stands by neglected, he will not, he cannot
endure this. Either Grace shall take down the Idol, or Judgment and Hell shall
plague the Idolator, for he has Resolved that he will not give his glory to
another, Isa. 42. 8. and 48. 11. All sin is hateful to God, and none but the
cleansed perfect soul shall stand before him, in the presence of his glory; nor
any in whom iniquity has dominion shall stand accepted in the presence of his
Grace: But yet no particular sin is so hateful to him as Idolatry is. For this
is not only a trespassing against his Laws, but a disclaiming or rejecting his
very Sovereignty it self. To give a Prince unreverent language, and to break
his Laws, is punishable; but to pull him out of his throne, and set up a
scullion in it, and give him the honor and obedience of a King, this is
another kind of matter, and much more intolerable. The first Commandment is
not like the rest, which require only obedience to particular Laws in a
particular action; but it establishes the very Relations of Sovereign and
Subject, and requires a constant acknowledgment of these relations, and makes
it high Treason against the God of heaven in any that shall violate that
command. Every Crime is not Treason: Its one thing to miscarry in a particular
case, and another thing to have other Gods before and besides the Lord, the
only God. Now this is the sin of every worldling: He has taken down God from
the throne in his own soul, and set up the flesh and the world in his stead:
These he valueth, and magnifieth, and delights in: These have his very heart,
while God that made it and redeemed him, is set light by. And do you think that
this is a sin to be endured? It is a more horrid thing to wish that God were
not God, then to wish that Heaven and Earth were destroyed or turned again to
Nothing. He that would kill a man deserves death; What then deserves he that
would destroy all the world? that would pull the Sun out of the firmament, or
set all the world on fire, if it were in his power? Yet is not all this so bad
as to wish that God should lose his Godhead: And what less does that man do
that would have his prerogative given to the creature? and so would have the
creature to be God? If God be not the chief Good, he is not God. And if he be
not chiefly to be esteemed and loved, he is not the chief Good. What then does
that man do, but deny God to be God, that denies him his highest esteem and
love? And certainly he that gives it to any creature, denies it to God. For
there can be but one Chief, and but one God. They take him down therefore as
much as in them lies, that set up another. So also, if God be not the
Sovereign Ruler of all, he is not God. And there can be but one Sovereign. What
less then do they do, that deny him his sovereignty, then deny him to be God.
And he that makes the flesh or world his sovereign, denies God to be his
sovereign; because there can be but one, especially seeing also that their
commands are contrary. I beseech you therefore Sirs be not so unwise as to
think that this Mortification or Crucifying of the world, is only the
perfection, or higher pitch of some Believers, and not the common state of all.
Do not imagine that your selves, or any other can be true Christians without
it. You may as well think that that man should be saved that is a flat Atheist,
and denies God, and renounceth him, as that a worldling should be saved: And
he that is not dead to the world, is a worldling. If any one piece of
Reformation be essential to a true Christian, it is this. It is as possible for
a Turk, or an Insidel to be saved, as one that is not dead to the world; Yea
the case of these is more desperate, if more can be: for they have not the like
means of information (ordinarily) as our worldly Professors have: what can any
Persecutor or Idolater do more, then set against God, and set up his enemies?
And so does every worldling, while he denies God his esteem and chiefest Love,
and gives it to the pleasures and profits of this life. I beseech you be not
so weak as to dream, that God is nothing but a bare name or title, or that you
deny not God, if you refuse not to call him God; or that none are Atheists that
speak God fair, and give him all his titles. Or that none are impious that give
him good words. It is the thing, and not the bare words, the description of God
(such as we are capable of) and not bare names, that we must enquire of. If you
will call your Prince by all his Royal Titles, but will set another in the
throne, and give him the rule over you, and obey him alone, which of these is
it that you take indeed for your Prince? [ If I be a Father, says God, where
is mine honor? If I be a Master, where is my fear?] Mal. 1. 6. Many [ profess
that they know God, that in works deny him, being abominable and disobedient]
Tit. 1. 16. God is not taken indeed for your God, if he be not taken for your
chief Good and Happiness, and have not the chief of your desire and Love; and
if he be not taken for your absolute Sovereign, and have not the subjection and
obedience of your souls. You may easily see then, that it is not meet, it is
not possible that an unmortified person, or a worldling can be saved. For if
they shall be saved that would have God to be no God, then no man should be
damned; for there cannot be a worser man then these. Nay, if he be not God, how
should he save them, or how should he make them happy, if he be not their
chiefest Good?

If God should cease to be God, the world and all things would cease to be. For
if the first cause cease, the effects must all cease. And if the ultimate end
cease, the means and all use of means must cease. And as the cessation of God
as the first efficient, would destroy all Natural Being, so the cessation of
God as the ultimate end, would destroy all Moral Good whatsoever. Other sins
destroy some part or branch of Moral Good; but the sin of Idolatry, the
violation of the first Commandment, the taking to our selves some other God,
this does at once subvert all goodness, and destroy the very being of morality
it self.

Sirs, I am afraid many, yea most among us, have not well considered the nature
of worldly mindedness, or the greatness of the sin of valuing and loving the
Creature before God. If they did, it would not be a sin of so good repute among
us, but would have contracted more odium before this time, then it has done.
There are many sins far smaller then this that men are shamed for, and that men
are hanged for. But we must not judge by outward appearances, nor make the
judgment of the sinner himself to be the rule by which to discern the
greatness or smalness of the sin. A worldling, a fleshly minded man, an
unmortified man, that is not dead to the world; all these are terms that are
proper to men in a state of damnation, under the curse and wrath of God, and
are equipollent terms, with [ a Child of the Devil.] Oh how the Devil has
deluded multitudes, by making them think that this mortification is some higher
pitch of grace then ordinary, but not essential to the life of grace it self;
and therefore that a man may be saved without it: when they may as well think
to be saved, if they defy the God of heaven, if they despise the Lord that
bought them, and if they renounce salvation it self, for indeed so they do. It
must needs be that God must look first and chiefly to his own interest, in all
his works even in the collation of his ^reest grace. And therefore he will be
glorified in all his Saints, and no man shall have salvation dividedly from his
honor. He does not bring men to heaven to hate and contemn him, but to love
and praise him; and he will fit them for that work before they come thither,
and make them love and praise him initially on earth, before they come to do it
in heaven. And therefore he will make them contemn all those things that stand
in competition with him, and hate all that stands against him.

SECT. XI.
I Have showed the necessity of crucifying the world, as from Gods interest,
which the world does contradict; I shall next show it you from your own
interest. And in these conjunct considerations it will appear. 1. The world is
not your happiness. 2. The world is occasionally through the corruption of our
nature, a great enemy to your happiness. 3. God only is your happiness. 4. God
is not fully to be enjoyed in this world. 5. It is by knowing, loving and
delighting in him as God, that he is to be enjoyed to make us happy. 6. As
therefore it is impossible to have two ultimate ends, two chief goods, and to
enjoy them both, so is it impossible, that God and the world should both have
our chiefest estimation and affection. All this set together does demonstrate
the necessity of being crucified to the world, unless we will renounce our own
felicity.

1. For the first Proposition; that the world is not your Happiness; I think
all your tongues will readily confess it, I would your hearts would do so too.
Do you think that God does envy you your happiness, or that he would take the
world from you, because he esteems it too good for you? No, it is because he
pittieth your self-deceit: when he sees you take that for your happiness that
is not; and because he has far better things to bestow. If the world were as
good for you as you take it to be, and had that in it to satisfy you, as you
imagine it to have, you might keep it, and much good might it do you; for God
would not be about to take it from you. He that made you to be Happy, does not
grudge you that which should procure it. Doubtless if he did not see that it is
vanity, and that you have made a wrong choice, and do mistake your mark, he
would never trouble you in a worldly course, nor call you off. But it is
because he sees your folly and deceit, and wishes you much better. Woe to you
that ever you were born, if you have no better Happiness then the world can
afford you. Is it not Necessary then that you discern your error, and be
brought into your right way, and spend not your time and pains for nothing? If
God should let you alone to catch at this shadow, and play your selves with
worldly toys, till the time of grace were past; and then let you see that you
were befooled, when it is too late; you would then be le^t to a fruitless
repentance, and to the sense of that unhappiness which you chose to your selves.

2. And that the world is an enemy to your Happiness, may appear two ways.
First in that it deceitfully pretends to be your Happiness, when it is not;
and so would turn away your hearts from that which is. Secondly, in that by
allurements or discouragements, it is always hindering you in the way to life,
and is a snare to you continually in all that you do. And is it not Necessary
to your salvation that you be delivered from the enemies of your salvation? and
freed from such perilous snares? Can you conquer, while you are conquered? And
if the world be not Crucified to you, it does conquer you: For its victory is
upon your will and affections. And if it conquer you, it will condemn you. To
be servants to the world is to be servants to sin. And the servants of sin are
free from righteousness, Romans 6. 20. and free from Christ, and free from
salvation. A miserable freedom!

3. The following Propositions I shall speak of together. That God only is our
happiness and Chief Good, I need not prove to any that indeed believes him to
be God. That salvation consilleth in the ^ruition of this Happiness is past
doubt. And as sure is it that God is not fully enjoyed in this world; much less
in the creature, when it is loved for it self and not esteemed as a Means to
him. All that believe a life after this, do sure believe that there is our
felicity. And lastly, that the soul does enjoy its own felicity, by Knowing,
and Loving, and Delighting in its object, is also past doubt. So that you may
see that a worldly state of mind, is in it self inconsistent with a state of
salvation. To be saved is to have the blessed vision of God, and to Love him
and Delight in him perfectly to everlasting. And can you do this, when you love
and delight in the world above him, or in opposition to him? Would you have God
to save you, and yet not to take off your affections from the world to himself?
That were to save you, and not to save you; to feed you by that which is not
food; to comfort you by that which cannot comfort; If a worldling would be
saved, and not be mortified, either he speaks he knows not what, but plain
nonsense or contradiction, or else he means one of these two things: Either
that he would have an Heaven of worldly Riches, or Honors, or fleshly
Pleasures; (there is no such to be had.) Or else, that he would have the world
as long as he can, and have heaven when he can keep the world no longer, and so
would have the world Crucified to him, when there is no such world, or when he
is taken from it. But, as, 1. No man can truly desire future Grace and
Holiness, that does not desire it at the present, this being rather an
unwilling submission to it as a tolerable Evil, then a true desire of it as a
certain Good. So 2. God has determined that this life only shall be the Way,
and that the End: Here only must we use the means; and there must we partake of
the success of our Endeavors. You may better expect that God should give you a
Crop at harvest, who refused to plow and ^ow your Land, or that your children
should be men, before they are born, then that he should be your Happiness in
the life to come, if you finally reject him in this life, and choose to your
selves a secular happiness. Such as you now make choice of, such and no other
shall you have. Heaven and Earth were set before you. You knew that earthly
happiness was short: If yet you would choose it, think not to have heaven too:
For if you do, you will prove deceived at the last.

SECT. XII.
The Uses.
BEloved Hearers, I suppose you will give me leave to take it for granted, that
you are all the rational creatures of God, made subject to him, and capable of
enjoying him, and such as must be happy or miserable for ever: as also that you
are all unwilling to be miserable, and willing to be happy; and that this life
is the time for the use of those means on which your everlasting life
depends; and that Judgment will turn the scales at last, as Grace or Sin
shall turn them now. I hope also that I may suppose that you are agreed that
Christianity is the only way to happiness, and consequently that you are all
professed Christians. And one would think that where men are so far satisfied
of the End and of the Way, we might conceive great hopes of their sincerity and
salvation. But when we see that men's lives do nullify their professions, and
that while they look toward God, they row toward the world, and while they
Hope for Heaven, their daily travel is toward Hell, and while they plead for
Christ, they work against him, our Hopes of them are turned to necessary
lamentation. But how comes this to pass that reasonable men, yea men reputed
wise and learned, yea many that seem Religious to others and to themselves,
should be so shamefully over seen, in a matter that so concerns their
everlasting state? As far as I am able to discover, the causes of this Calamity
are these two.

1. One part of the Professed Christians of the world, understand not what
Christianity is, and so profess but the empty name, when indeed the thing it
self which is in their conception, and which they mean in that profession, is
nothing like to true Christianity.

2. The other part of miscarrying professors, though they do conceive of the
Christian Religion as it is, yet not with an apprehension intensively
answerable to the thing which they apprehend: Though their conceptions of the
Christian verities have a moral Truth in them, it being not false but True
which they conceive; yet there is no ^irmness and solidity in the Act, and so
they do not effectually app^^^^nded them. Nothing more easy, more common, and
more dangerous, then to make a Religion either of Names and Words, which he
that uses does not understand; or of mere speculations and superficial
conceits; which never became practical, habituate, and predominant; nor were
the serious; effectual apprehensions of the man. A right Object, and a sincere
and serious Act, do essentially constitute the Christians faith. If either be
wanting, it is not that faith, whatever it may pretend to be. Nothing but the
Gospel objects will suffice to a man's salvation, were it never so firmly
apprehended. And nothing but a firm and serious Belief of those objects, will
make them effectual, or saving to the Believer: Were we able to cure the two
forementioned defects, and to help you all to these two requisites, we should
make no question but you would all be saved. We cannot expect that men should
let go their sensual delights, till they hear of somewhat better to be had for
them, and till they firmly and heartily give credit to the report.

And because the matter before us in my Text, is sitted to both these needful
works, and contains those very truths which must rectify you in both these
points, I shall draw them forth, and distinctly apply them hereunto.

Use 1.
AND in the first place, you are here informed, that the Cros^ of Christ, is
the Crucifier of the world. Which contains in it these two parts, which make
up the point. 1. That this is the use of the Cross, and one great end of the
Doctrine of Christianity, to Crucify the world to us, and us to the world. 2.
That where the Cross of Christ and his Doctrine are effectual, this work is
always actually done: In all true Christians the world is thus crucified.

O that these truths were as plainly or truly transcribed upon your hearts, as
they are plainly and truly contained in my Text^

1. For the first; that This is the End of Christ Crucified, and of his
Doctrine, I shall briefly show, 1. The Necessity of this Information. And 2.
the certain ^^^^h of it.

1. Both the Commonne's and the Dangerousness of erring in this point, do show
the Necessity of this Information. It is not only the contemners of Religion,
but also too many that go among us for very godly men, that know not where
their happiness lies, nor what the Christian Religion is. Almost all the
apprehensions which they have of Happiness, are sensual; as if it were but a
freedom from sensible punishments, and the possession of some delights of which
they have merely sensual concerts. And so they think of Christ as one that came
to free them from such punishments, and help them to such an happiness as this.
And as for the true knowledge and fruition of God, in Love and Heavenly
delights, they look upon these either as insignificant means, or as certain
appurtenances and fruits of Religion, which we ought to have, but may possibly
be without, though we be true Believers. A confidence that Christ has freed
them from torments, and made them righteous by imputation of his obedience unto
them, they take to be all that is essential to their Christianity. And the
rest they call by the name of Good works; which if it be not with them a term
of as low importance, as the name of [ Works] alone, or [ Works of the Law] is
taken to be in Paul^ Epistles, yet at least they take it for that which does
not constitute their Religion. So that true Sanctification is either not
understood or taken to be of less Necessity then it is. A man that makes a
great deal of talk and stir about Religion, and is zealous for his opinions and
pious complements, goes current with many for a true Believer, though the
Interest of his flesh and of the world be as near and dear to him in this way
of Religiousness, as other men's is to them in a way of more open professed
sensuality.

And is it possible for a man to be a Christian indeed, that so far mistaketh
the very Nature and Ends of Christianity it self? It is not possible. By what
is said already, and will be by and by, it is evident that this is a damning
error, for any man to feign a Christianity to himself that excludes
Mortification, or is separable from it, in a capable subject. When men look at
a predominant fleshly interest, or worldly mind, as they do at some particular
sin, consistent with true faith: I say, this is an error about the very
Essence of Christianity, and which hazards their salvation.

2. And that it is the end of the Cross of Christ, and his Doctrine, to
Crucify the world to us, and sanctify us to God, I have already manifested in
part, and shall now further manifest.

1. It is the end of Christ, and his Cross and Doctrine, to recover Gods
Interest in the souls of men: But it is by mortification, as a part of true
sanctification, that Gods Interest in men's souls is recovered. Therefore, etc.
As God could have no lower ultimate end then himself in our Creation, so
neither in our Redemption. Christ himself as Mediator, is but a Means to God
who is our End; he is the way to the Father, and no man comes to the Father
but by him, Joh. 14. 6. He is the Truth that reveals the Father, and the Sun
of the world which enlighteneth every man that comes into the world, Joh 1. 9.
revealing to us both the End and Means; That as there is no light in the earth,
but what is communicated by the Sun, which enlighteneth some by the Moon at
midnight, and some by its direct approaching light, at the break of day, before
they see the Sun it self, and others by its glorious rays when it is risen, and
visible to them, and has also in it self an objective sufficiency to enlighten
those that shut their eyes, or want eyesight by which they should receive it:
Even so is Christ the Sun of the Redeemed World, which actually affords all
that Light to all which they do possess; even some (to all that have the use of
Reason) which has a tendency to recovery; and he has an Objective sufficiency
to the saving illumination of those that through their own fault are never so
illuminated. The pure Godhead is the Beatifical Light to be enjoyed for
felicity. The Mediator is the Mediate Light, to show u^ the way to God. And in
these two consists Life Eternal; to Know God the Beginning and End, who
himself has no Beginning or End; and to know Jesus Christ whom he has sent,
to ^ call us to himself, Ioh. 17. 3. Whether he that is now to us Medi^tor
acquisitionis, will also hereafter be Mediator fruitio^is, and whether the
glorified do only see the Godhead in the glass of the glorified body of Christ,
and of the most glorious effects which then they shall partake of, or also
shall immediately beheld it in it self, and see Gods essence, face to face, I
shall not presume to determine, while Scrip^^^^* seems so silent, and learned
conjectures are so much at odds. But as he is the Redeeming, restoring
Mediator, it is that we speak all this while of Christ: And ^o his Office is to
recover Gods Interest in the souls of men.

Now his Interest lies in our Estimation, and our Love; And these the world
has dispossessed him of. It is therefore the work of Christ to pull down this
Idol, and set up God in the throne of the soul. And therefore though faith be
the principal Mediant, using Grace; yet Love is the most principal final,
enjoying grace; and more excellent then faith, as the end, or that act which is
next the end is more excellent then the means.

2. It is the End of Christ, his Cross and Doctrine, to Heal us, and to save
us: to Heal us of our sin, and to save us from it, and its destroying fruits.
But by sanctification, and so by mortification, does Christ thus Heal and Save
us. If health be worth nothing, the Physician and all his Physic is worth
nothing. The Health of the soul objectively is God, and formally is its
Holiness, or perfect Disposedness, and Devotedness to God, of which anon. These
therefore does Christ come to restore: And therefore he comes to call us off
the Creature, and bring our affections back to God.

3. It is the End of Christ, his Cross and Doctrine, to conquer Satan and
destroy his works, and with him, the rest of the enemies of God, and of our
salvation: But the world is one of these enemies, and the Means by which the
Devil does prevail* therefore it is Christ's End to overcome the World, and cast
it out of the hearts of men, Luke 11. 22. Ioh. 16. 33. 1 Ioh. 3. 5, 8. He was
manifested to this end, to take away our sins, and destroy the works of the
Devil: And therefore he causes his followers to overcome him, 1 Ioh. 2. 13,
14. And herewithal observe, that it is essential to the Relation to respect the
End; to the Physi^ian, that he be for the health of the Patient: and to Christ
the Redeemer, that he be the Savior of his People from their sins, and the
Restorer of their souls to the Love of God: So that Christ is denied and made
no Christ, where Mortification, and Sanctification are denied: He is not
believed in as Christ, where he is not believed in for these Ends. And
therefore he that comes not with this intent to Christ, that he may restore
the Image of God upon him, and bring him off from the Creature unto God, that
he may live to him, does not come to Christ as Christ, and is not indeed a true
Christian.

The Doctrine of Christ does lead us from the world, in these several parts of
it, and by these steps (How the Cross does it, I showed before.) 1. It
declares to us what God is, and what man is: and so that God is our absolute
Owner, and Governor: and that he is the only Primitive, simply, necessary
being; and that man was made by him, and therefore for him, and disposed to
him. 2. It declares to us that the state of our integrity consisted in this
closure of the soul with God. 3. It shows us that our selicity consists in
his Love, and in the fruition of him by a mutual complacency. 4. It shows us
that our first sin was by turning from him to Carnal self and to the world 5.
And that this is our lost estate wherein both sin and misery are conjunct, to
Adhere to self and Creatures and to depart from God. 6. It shows us what
Christ has done and suffered, to Reconcile God to us, and open us a way of
admission into his presence, and how far God is Reconciled to us; and thus
Reveals him in the face of a Mediater as Amiable to our souls, that so we
might be capable of loving him, and closing with him again. For if he had
remained in his wrath, he would have been the object of our hatred, or mere
terror at least, and not of our Love. And no man can Love him that is not
presented to him, and apprehended by him as Lovely, that is, as Good. For it is
impossible that there should be an act without its proper object. Nothing but
appearing Good is Loved. If a lost condemned sinner have no hope given him of
Gods Reconciliation or his willingness to receive him to mercy, it is ( ex
part objecti) an impossible thing that the mind of that sinner should be
reconciled to God. And therefore the Gospel publishes Gods Reconcilation to
sinners ( viz. his universal Conditional Reconciliation) before it beseech them
to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. And before they believe, we cannot
give any one man the least assurance that God is any more reconciled to him,
then to others that are unconverted, or that he is any willinger to Receive
him, then others.

This therefore is the great observable means whereby Christ by his Gospel
recovereth the Heart of a sinner unto God, even by turning the frowning
countenance of God, by which he deterred the guilty into a more Lovely face, as
being Reconcilable, and Conditionally Reconciled to the world through Christ,
and so become to all the sinful sons of Adam, a fit object to attract their
Love, and draw off their hearts from the deceiving world, to which they were
revolted: and as being actually reconciled to all true Believers, and thereby
become a yet more powerful attractive of their Love. 7. It does also more fully
reveal the face of God, the object of our Love, and the transcendent Glory that
in him we shall enjoy. 8. And it disgraceth the creatures which have diverted
our Affections; that we may be taken off our false estimation of them. 9. It
earnestly persuades and solliciteth us to obey, and calls on us to turn from
the world to God. 10. It backeth these persuasions with terrible threatenings,
if we do not forsake the creature and return. 11. It prescribes to us the
standing Ordinances and Means by which this work may be further carried on. 12.
And lastly it directs us to the right use of the creatures, instead of that
carnal enjoying of them that would undo us. By all these means, (which time
does permit me but briefly to mention) the Gospel of Christ does tend to
Crucify the world to us, and to recover our hearts to the Chiefest Good.

And besides all this which the Cross and the Doctrine of Christ do to this
End* that you may yet fullyer perceive how much it is the End of Christ's very
office, and the execution thereof, let me add these two things. 1. That it is
the End of Christ's providential dispensations. 2. And the work which he sends
the Holy Ghost to perform upon the souls of his Elect.

1. As the Mercies of God are purposely given us to lead up our hearts to him
that gave them: So when we carnally abuse them, and adhere unto the creature,
it is the special use of Affliction to take us off. If the rod have a voice, it
speaks this as plain as any thing whatsoever; and if it reprehend us for any
sin, it is for our overvaluing and adhering to the creature. The wounds that
Christ gives us, are not to kill us, but to separate us from the world, that
has separated us from God.

2. And that this is the very office or undertaken work of the Holy Ghost, is
past all controversy: His work is to sanctify us; and that is by taking us
off the creature, to bring us to be heartily Devoted unto God. Sanctification
is nothing else, but our separation from the creature to God, in Resolution,
Affection, Profession and Action. So that in what measure soever a man has the
Spirit, in that measure is he sanctified: and in what measure he is sanctified,
in that same measure is he crucified to the world: For that is the one half of
his Sanctification, or it is his Sanctification denominated from the terminus a
quo; as many Texts of Scripture do manifest.

By this time I hope it is plain to you, that Mortification is of the very
being of Christianity, and not any separable adjunct of it, and that if you
profess not to be Dead to the world, you do not so much as profess your selves
Christians.

SECT. XIII.
1. AND as you see that the Christian Doctrine teaches this: So 2. It is
thence clear without any more ado, that wherever the Cross and Doctrine of
Christ are effectual, the world is Crucified to that man, and he to the world.
There are some great Duties which a man may possibly be saved, though he omit
them, in some cases: but this is none such. It is a wonder to see the security
of worldlings, how easily they bear up a confidence of their sincerity, under
this sin which is as inconsistent with sincerity as Infidelity it self is ^ If
they see a man live in common Drunkenness, or Adultry, or Swearing, they take
him for a profane and miserable wretch; and good reason for it: When in the
mean time they pass no such sentence on themselves, who may deserve it as much
as the worst of these. It is one notable cheat among the Papists, that
occasions the ruin of many a soul, that they make a Religious mortified life,
to be a work of supererrogation, and those that profess it, (and some of their
own inventions with it, which turn it into sin) they Cloister up from the rest
of the world, and these they call Religious people, and some few even of these
that are either more devout or superstitious then the rest, they call Saints.
So rare a thing is the appearance of Religiousness and Sanctity among them,
that it must be enclosed in Societies, not only separated from the world, as
the Church is, but separated as it were out of the Church it self. And yet the
common people are kept in hope of salvation in their way. By which means they
are commonly brought to imagine that it is not absolutely necessary to
salvation to be a Religious man, or a Saint, or one that does really renounce
and crucify the world; but that these things belong to certain Orders of Monks
and Friars, and that it is enough for other men to honor these devout and
mortified Saints, and to crave their Prayers, and do some lower and easier
things. And indeed their vows of Chastity, and separation, and
unprofitableness, and other Inventions of their own, they may well conceive
unnecessary to others, being noxious to themselves. But they will one day find
that none but Religious men and Saints shall be saved, and that every true
Member of Christ is dead to the world, and not only Monks, or Votaries, or such
like. And a Conceit too like to this of the Papists, is in the minds of many of
our Auditors. They think indeed that those are the best men that are resolved
contemners of all the Riches, and Honors, and Pleasures of the world; but they
think of them as the Papists do of their votaries; as People of a higher pitch
of Sanctity then the rest, but think not that it is essential to Sanctity, and
to true Christianity it self. They confess they should be all contemners of the
world; but, God forbid* say they, that none but such should be saved! But, I
tell you, God has forbidden already by his Laws, and God will forbid hereafter
by his sentence and execution, that any other but such should be saved. Do you
think in good sadness that any man can be saved that is not truly dead to the
world, and does not despise it in comparison of God, and the great things of
Everlasting Life? Let me satisfy you of the contrary here once for all, and I
pray you see that your flesh provoke you not to mutter forth such unreasonable
self-delusions any more, 1 Ioh. 2. 15. [ Love not the world, neither the things
that are in the world: If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not
in him] what can be spoken more plainly, or to a worldly minded man more
terribly? 1 Ioh. 5. 4. [ For whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the world;
and this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our Faith.] Jam. 4. 4.
[ Know ye not that the Friendship of the world is enmity with God? Whoever
therefore will be a friend of the world, is the enemy of God.] Will not all
this serve to convince you of this truth? Romans 8. 5, 6, 7, 13. [ For they that
are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh, but they that are after
the Spirit the things of the Spirit: For to be carnally minded is death, but to
be spiritual ^^nded is life and peace: Because the carnal mind is enmity
against God; for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be:
For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the Spirit do
mortify the deeds of the body ye shall live] Joh. 3. 6. [ That which is born
of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit.] Gal.
5. 16, 17. and 6. 8. [ Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of
the flesh: For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other.] [He that sows to his
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that sows to the spirit,
shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.] Col. 3. 1, 2, 3. [ If ye be risen
with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the
right hand of God. Set your affection on things above, and not on things on the
earth. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God: When Christ
who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory:
Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth.] Matthew. 6. 19, 20,
21, 24. [ Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust
does corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal; but lay up for your
selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where
thieves do not break through nor steal; for where your treasure is, there will
your heart be also. No man can serve two Masters; for either he will hate the
ore and love the other, or else he will hold to the one and despise the other:
Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.] Matthew. 10. 38, 39. [ He that takes not his
cross and follows after me, is not worthy of me: He that finds his life
shall lose it, and he that loses his life for my sake shall find it.] Mat.
16. 24. [ If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross and follow me.] Luke 14. 26, 27. [ If any man come to me, and hate not
his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea
and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple. And whosoever does not bear
his cross and come after me, cannot be my disciple.] Verse 33. [ Whosoever he
be of you that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my disciple.] Heb.
11. 13, 14, 15. and to the end. But I will cite no more. Here is enough to
convince you, or condemn you. If any thing at all be plain in Scripture, this
is plain, that every true Christian is dead to the world, and looks on the
world as a crucified thing, and that God, and the life of glory which he has
promised, have the Ruling and chiefest interest in their souls. Believe it
Sirs, this is not a work of supererrogation, nor such as only tends to the
perfecting of a Christian, but such as is of the essence of Christianity, and
without which there is not the least hope of salvation.

SECT. XIV.
Use 2.
BY all that has been said, you may perceive what it is to be a Christian
indeed, and that true Christianity does set men at a further distance from the
world, then carnal self-deceiving Professors do imagine. You see that God and
the world are enemies; not God and the world as his Creature, but as his
Competitor for your hearts, and as the seducer of your understandings, and the
opposer of his interest, and the fuel and food of a fleshly mind, and that
which would pretend to a Being or Goodness separated from God, or to be
desirable for it self, having laid by the relation of a means to God. To be a
Friend to the world in any of these respects, is to be an enemy to God. And God
will not save his enemies, while enemies. An enmity to God, is an enmity to our
salvation: for our salvation is in him alone. If then you have but awakened
consciences, if the true love of your selves be stirring in you, and if you
have but the free use of common reason, I dare say you do by this time
perceive, that it closely concerns you* presently to look about you* and to
try whether you are crucified to the world or not. Seeing my present business
is, for the securing of your Everlasting Peace, and the healing of your souls,
of that which would deprive you of it; let me entreat you all in the fear of
God to give me your assistance, and to go along with me in the work; for what
can a Preacher do for you, if you will do nothing for your selves? How can we
convert, or heal, or save you, without you? I do foresee your appearance before
the Lord; a jealous God; that will not endure that any Creature should be
sweeter and more amiable to you then himself. I do foresee the condemnation
that all such must undergo, and the remediless certain misery that they are
(...) know there is no way that the wit of man or Angels can devise, to prevent
the damnation of such a soul, but by Crucifying the flesh and world by the
Cross of Christ, and dethroning these Idols, and submitting sincerely to God
their Happiness. This cannot be done while you are strangers to your selves,
and will not look into your own hearts, and see what abominable work is there,
that you may be moved to return with shame and sorrow for that which has been
formerly your glory and your joy. O do not keep out the light of Conviction,
that you may keep up your Idols in the dark: Your sin is never the less because
you wilfully keep it out of sight: and your danger is never the less for being
unknown! If you will sin in darkness, you shall suffer in darkness: As you have
a fire of fleshly and worldly lusts within you, which abhors the light of
saving truth; so God has a fire of perpetual torment for you, which is as far
from the consolatory light of his countenance. As the fire of concupiscence is
dark, so is the tormenting fire dark. If you hate the converting light because
your deeds are evil, and will not by this light be made manifest to your
selves, John 3. 19, 20, 21. this will be your condemnation, and by this will
you deprive your selves of the Glorifying light. If you love Darkness, who can
you blame but your selves, if you be cast into outer darkness: And if you hate
light, you cannot reasonably expect to be partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in Light, Col. 1. 13.

What say you then, Beloved Hearers, are you willing to know your hearts, or
not? Whether you are dead to the world and the world to you? Me thinks you
should be willing; when you see the Question is as great, as Whether you are
Christians indeed or not? and as great, as Whether you are in a state of
salvation or not? Me thinks you that naturally love knowledge, and would be at
some pains to know all that's about you in the world, should not be unwilling to
know your selves, and specially, so great a matter by your selves, as Whether
you are the heirs of salvation or damnation? for in the issue it is no less.
Especially when your disease is such as must be cured by the Light, if ever it
be cured. You cannot lament your worldliness and sensuality, you cannot lament
your disaffectedness to God, and intolerable neglects of him, till you find
them out. You cannot betake you to Christ for the pardon of this sin, till you
have discovered it. A sin unseen, will never humble you and break your hearts,
nor fit them for Christ to bind them up. If you see not that the world is yet
alive in you, you will not apply the Cross, for the crucifying of it, nor have
recourse to a Crucified Christ for that End. Moreover, it is the Nature of all
sin, and worldly vanities, to seem best in the dark, and basest in the Light.
As God and heavenly things seem best in the greatest Light, and worst in the
Darkness. None do set light by God, and Grace, and Glory, but those that know
them not. And none do set much by worldly fleshly things, but those that know
them not. As illumination brings in God into the soul, so does it help to cast
out Satan and the world. When men's eyes are opened, and they are turned from
darkness to light, they are presently turned from the power of Satan unto God,
Acts 26. 18. These infernal worldly spirits cannot endure the Light: They walk
not by day, but haunt them whom they captivate, in the night of ignorance: and
if we do but come in upon them with Light, they are gone. It is the same Devil
that is called, The Prince of this world, and the Ruler of the darkness of this
world, Ephesians. 6. 12. and this power is a power of darkness, Luke 22. 53. and
therefore as light immediately expels darkness; so if you will admit the
Light of Christ, it will deliver you from the power of darkness, Col. 1. 13.
and cause you to cast off the works of darkness, Romans 13. 12. that is, your
worldly fleshly works.

For my part I have not access to your hearts, unless grace persuade you to
open me the door. I cannot promise to Illuminate you, and go with you into the
inmost rooms; but I shall stand at the door and hold you the Candle, by which
you may see your selves what is within, if you will but consent and take the
pains of a through enquiry. I do therefore earnestly entreat you, to set up a
judicature in your selves, and by the Word which you have heard to try your
states, and let Conscience be Judge, and do it speedily, faithfully and
effectually. By this means you may prevent a sharper trial If you are afraid of
Conscience, how much more should you be afraid of God? Will not his Judgment,
think you, be more dreadful then your own? What madness is it to leave all to
that tetrible Judgment, rather then to Judge your selves for the preventing of
it. Believe it, you shall be condemned, by your selves, or ^y God. Yea both by
your selves and by God, ^s your self-condemnation be seconded by an effectual
execution of the sin which you condemn. Willing or unwilling, you must to the
Bar either of Conscience, or of God, or both. Come on then beloved Hearers;
rouse up your sleepy souls; and remember that your salvation is the thing in
question; and therefore put it not to a wilful hazard, and leave not loose a
matter of such consequence: But if you are men of common reason, if you do not
hate your selves, and have not a resolved plot to damn your selves, take time
while you may have it, and aceept the light and help that is offered you, and
speedily and strictly examine your own hearts, Whether they are Crucified and
dead to the world, or not? Is it so, or is it not Sirs? Cannot you tell? If you
know but what this mortification is, and know but your own hearts, no doubt but
you may tell. And if you are ignorant of either of these, it is because you are
shamefully negligent, and have not much regarded the things that you should
know.

For those that are willing to be acquainted with their state, I shall besides
the foregoing discoveries, here give you a few more signs, by which you may
discern whether you are crucified to the world. And I beseech you do what you
can in the trial as we go, and make up the rest at the next opportunity, when
you come home, and follow it on till you come to a resolution.

SECT. XV.
IT is not a perfect work of Mortification, that I shall now enquire after: For
that no man on earth has obtained: Nor is it any high degree, which only the
stronger and better sort of true Christians do attain: For if I convince you
that you want either of these, you will not much be humbled by the conviction.
But it is the very least and lowest measure that i^ consistent with sincerity,
and which is in all that are heirs of heaven: this is it that I shall now
discover to you.

1. If you are sincerely Crucified to the world, it is not carna self that is
your End, but your ultimate End is God and Glory Can you but tell me what is
the main Design of your Life? Whether it be for Earth or Heaven? (...) this and
you may resolve the case. A worldling may speak contemptuously of the world,
and speak most honorably of God and the Life to come: But speculative
knowledge and practical are frequently contradictory in the same man. Still it
is this world that has his chief Intentions, and is the End of his designs and
life; and the world to come is regarded but as a reserve, because of their
unavoidable separation from this world. The main End of every upright
Christian, is to please and enjoy God: and the main End of all the rest of the
world is how to Please their carnal minds in the enjoyment of some earthly
things. If you could but discern which of these is your chiefest End, you might
discern whether it be Christ or the world that Lives in you. For Christ lives
in you, when he is your End, and the world Lives in you when it is your End.

But because some are such strangers to themselves, that they do not know their
own Ends, the rest of the signs shall be for the discovery of the former, that
you may discern whether the world or God be your ultimate End.

1. That which is your Principal End, is highlyest esteemed by your Practical
judgment. Not only by the speculative, but by that which moves and disposes
of the man. Is God or the world, Heaven or earth, thus highlyest esteemed by
you? Let your Practice show it.

2. It is your Principal End, that has the Principal Interest in you. That can
do most with you, and prevail most in a contest. Can God or the world do more
with you? Which of them does prevail, when an opposition does arise? I speak
not of God in his efficiency; for so I know he can do what his list; and will
do it whether you will or no; and will not ask your consent to do it. But its
God as your End, that I now speak of; as he works Morally by your own consent
and upon your wills. Honors, and Profits, and Pleasures are before you, and
these would draw you to something that he forbids: And God and Glory are
propounded to you to take you off, and turn your hearts another way; which of
these can do more with you? which is it that can nullify the persuasions of
the other?

3. It is your Principal End, that has the principal ruling and disposal of
your whole life. ^do purposely con^rive the man part of your life in order to
it: If you are indeed Christians* and God be your End, the main drift of your
Life is a contrived Means for the obtaining of that End; that is to Please God,
and to enjoy him in everlasting glory. If you were such as you should be, you
should have no other End at all, nor should you ever do one work, or receive or
use one creature, or speak one word, or behold one object, but as a means to
God, intend^ng the pleasing and enjoying him in all: As a traveller should not
go one step of his journey, but in order to his End. But while we are Imperfect
in our Love, and other graces, this will not be* But yet the main bent and
drift of our Lives must needs be for God and the Life to come; and thus it is
with every true Believer; and you are none if it be not thus with you. I say it
again, left you should slightly pass it over, though you may through infirmity
sometimes step out of the way yet if God be your End and Happiness, that is, if
he be your God, and you be Christians, the main scope, and bent, and drift of
your lives is for to please God and enjoy him in glory. But if the main scope
and drift of your life be for the flesh and the world, and God and Religion
comes in but upon the by, you are then no better then unsanctified worldlings:
Though you may do much in Religion, and be zealous about it, and seem the
devoutest and most resolved professors in all the Country where you live, yet
if all this be but in subordination to the flesh and the world, or if
coordinate it have the smaller Interest in your hearts, and when you have done
or suffered most for Christ, you will do and suffer more for the flesh and
world, you are carnal wretches and no true Christians. O that you would let
conscience do its office, and Judge you as we go along according to Evidence!
It is not by one or two Actions that you can judge of your estate, but by the
main scope, and bent, and drift of your life. What is your very heart set upon?
What is your care, and your chief contrivances? Are they for Heaven or Earth?
Speak out, and take the comfort of your sincerity if you are Christians: and if
you are not, know it while there is remedy, and do not wilfully deceive your
selves. Have you been so far illuminated by the Word and Spirit, as to see the
Amiableness of the Lord by faith, and have you so firm a Belief of the
Everlasting Glory, where we shall see his face immediately or more nearly, and
praise him among his Angels for ever? I say, have you so firm a (...) of this,
that you are unfeignedly resolved upon it as your Happiness, that you take it
for your Portion* and there have laid up your Hopes? Can you truly say, that
God has more of your Heart then all the world, and Heaven is dearer to your
thoughts then earth? Can you say, that whatever you are tempted to on the by,
that the main care, design and bent of your life is for God and the Glory to
come; and that this is your daily Work and Business? If so, you are Christians
indeed: you have Crucified the world by the Cross of Christ: The world is dead
and down, where God reigns and is exalted; and no where else. But if all this
be clean contrary with you; and if the flesh and the world have the prevalent
Interest, and these cut out your work, and form your thoughts, and choose your
employments; if these choose the calling that you live upon, and the manner of
managing it, and your very Religion, or set limits to it; if it be these that
rule your tongue and hands, and they can make a cause seem good or bad to you^,
and that seems best which most conduces to your fleshly, worldly interests,
and that seems worst which destroys it or is against it; if God be loved
and worshipped but as a Necessary M^ans to your carnal Happiness; or if he have
but the second place in your hearts, and the leavings of the flesh and world,
(be they never so much) and if your Religion and Endeavors for salvation, for
pleasing God, and for the invisible Glory, be but on the by; and the flesh and
the world has the main scope, and bent, and drift of your life; flatter not
your selves then, most certainly you are but carnal wretches and drudges of the
world, and slaves to him that is styled by Christ, the Prince of this world. Me
thinks Sirs you might be able by this time to be somewhat acquainted with your
own condition, and either to Condemn your selves as Worldlings and Carnal men,
or to see Christ by his Spirit and Interest reigning in your souls, and give
him the glory and take to your selves the joy of your Sanctification. Can you
tell me but what it is that you would have, if you had your wish? and what it
is that is predominant in your heart? What! know you not your own minds, and
thoughts, and desires? Can you tell me what it is that is your very Business in
the world? even the great Business that you live for, and that you study and
care and labor for? and what is the Design that you are daily carrying on?
Know but this, and the Question is resolved. If you see any man at work, and
ask him what he is doing, and why he does it? it is like he is not so sottish
but he can tell. If you meet a man upon the way, and ask him, whether he is
going? it is like he will not be so foolish* but he can tell you. He that has
no end, has no way, and therefore is never in his way, nor out of it; nor will
he care which way he goes, so he be going; and a circular motion is as good to
him as a progressive. You are doing somewhat all; you are going somewhither
every day: whither is it? and what is it for? Is it for heaven or earth? The
Texts which I before cited to you, fully give you the ground of the t^yal and
Judgment that I am urging you upon. Mat. 6. 21. Where your treasure is, there
will your hearts be also. Mat. 6. 33. Seek first the Kingdom of God, and its
righteousness, and all these things shall be added to you.] Psalm. 73. 25. Whom
have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that I desire besides
thee,] Luke 14* ^6. If any man come to me, and hate not all, even his own life,
he cannot be my D^s^^p^e.] So verse 33. He that for saketh not all that he
has.] But let us proceed yet a little further in the trial.

4. As that which is a man's End (if satisfactory) will content him when he can
attain it, so without it nothing will content him. No man will be content
without that which is the Principal end of his life, though he may without some
inferior end. If God be your end, nothing else will content you: If you had
all the honors and prosperity of the world, and this secured to you, it would
not content you. These are not the things that you live for, or that the
predominant inclination of your souls are suited to, and therefore it is not
these that will please you, and serve your turn. But if the world be your end,
you could be content with it if you could get it. Let who will take the world
to come, if the carnal wretch were but sure of this, he would think himself a
happy man, and could spare the other. He would not change his worldly happiness
for the hopes of that which he never saw, nor does not firmly and heartily
believe.

5. It is a man's End that puts the estimate upon all things else. All other
things are counted Good or Evil, so far as they help to it, or hinder it: If
Heaven be your End, you will account of all things as they respect that end --
Those will be the best Companions to you, and that the best calling and
condition of Life, the best speech, the best actions, the best way of disposing
what you have, what you think will most promote your Heavenly end: suffering
will be better in your eye then prosperity, if it do but help you best to
heaven. To give your money will seem better to you then to keep it, to lose it
then to gain it, when it apparently conduces more to the pleasing of God and
your salvation. That will be the best Ministry and means that tends most to
this: And so you will estimate all things else; for its most evident that it is
the end that prizeth the means, according as they are suited to the attainment
of that end.

But if flesh-pleasing and worldly prosperity be your end, that will seem the
best calling to you, and that the best employment and course of life, which
^ends most to advance and please your flesh: that will be the best company to
them, and those their most beloved friends that further this prosperity: that
will seem the best way of disposing of what they have, as to the main, what
ever they may do on the by. Their practical judgment esteems this most
eligible.

6. It is only a man's end, and the inseparable necessary means thereto, that he
can by no means spare. Other things he can spare, and be without, but not
without this. If God be your end, your heart is so upon him that you cannot be
without him: you can be without honor, or riches, or life it self, but not
without God. But if the world be your end, then its clean contrary; and that's
the thing that you cannot be without. Hence is it that men plead necessity of
that which is their end, and the necessary means. One thing seems necessary to
the Christian: he must have God in and by Christ: I must use his means, says
he, I must avoid the contrary, How shall I do this evil, and sin against God?
But the carnal man's necessity is on the other side. I must raise my Family if I
can; at least I must keep my estate: I must not be undone: I must preserve my
name, my life.

7. A man will hazard or part with any thing to secure, or attain his principal
End. Nothing can be too good, or too dear to purchase it: nothing can stand in
competition with it. If God and glory be your End, away goes all that is
inconsistent with it. You Will part with a right hand or eye, as thinking it
better to have Heaven with one, then Hell with both. You can part with house,
and land, and country, because you seek for a City that has foundations, whose
builder and maker is God, Heb. 11. 9* 10. You can live as Strangers and
Pilgrims on earth, and mind not to return to the world which you have
renounced, because you desire a better, even a Heavenly Country, Heb. 11. 13,
14, 15. 16. You will rather choose to s^ffer afflictions with the people of
God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the very
reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of the world, because you
have respect to the recompense of the reward, Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26. The fear of
man, even of the Princes of the earth will not prevail against your hopes,
because you see him that is invisible, Heb. 11. 27. You can endure to be made a
gazing stock, by reproaches and afflictions, and become the Companions of them
that are so used: You cannot only part with your substance when God calls for
it, but even take joyfully the spoiling of your goods, as knowing that you have
a better and more enduring substance in Heaven, Heb. 10. 33, 44. You will
reck^n that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared
with the glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8. 18. In a word, you can
deny your selves, for sake all, and follow Christ in expectation of a treasure
in Heaven, Luke 18. 22. Never tell me that Heaven is your end, if there be any
thing which you cannot part with to obtain it. For that which is dearest to you
is your End. Why else is it that labor and sufferings, yea, and the apparent
hazard of their salvation, seems not to a worldling too dear a price for the
purchasing of their present prosperity, but because they have laid up a
treasure upon earth, and earthly things are their chiefest end.

8. Lastly, that is your ultimate end, which you think in your practical
Judgment you can never Love or Labor for too much. I know there is scarce a
worldling to be found, which will not give it you under his hand as his settled
judgment* that its God and Glory only that cannot be loved too much, and he
will confess that he loves the world too much. ^ut yet he does it while he
confesses it; and he denies his chiefest Love to God, while he acknowledges
it due to him. And therefore it is not his practical effectual judgment that
is for it, but only he has an uneffectuall Notion or Opinion of it. But its
otherwise with the sanctified. Philosophers and Divine (...) to say, that
virtue is in the middle between two extremes: But that is only to be interpreted
of the subservient virtues, which are exercised about the Means: But the
chiefest Good and ultimate End is such as cannot be loved too much. The measure
here is, as Austin speaks, that it be without measure. It is our All that is
due to that which we esteem and take for our All. God is our All objectively
for fruition: and the All of our affections and endeavors should be his: With
all our heart, with all our soul and might, is the due measure of our Love to
him. We can never seek our End too diligently, nor buy it too dearly, nor do
too much for it, in Gods way. And as the Believer thinks he can never have too
much of God, nor do too much for him, so the lives of worldlings tell us, that
even while they speak disgracefully of the world, they think they can never
have too much of it, nor would they think they could ever do too much for it,
were it not that overdoing for one part of their worldly Interest, does deprive
them of another part.

I have now told you how you may discern whether it be God or the world that
Lives in your Hearts, and whether you are Dead to God or to the world. What
remains but that you take it home, and apply it yet closer then I can do, and
try what God it is that you adore; and what felicity it is that you esteem and
intend, and consequently what you are, and what will become of you if you
persevere. I beseech you make this your serious work, and take some time for it
purposely when you come home, to do it more effectually then now on the sudden
hearing may be expected. What say you, will you take your selves apart some
time, and purposely search your hearts to the very quick, till you have found
whether the world be Crucified to you, by the Cross of Christ and the hopes of
glory? If you did but know the usefulness of the discovery, I am confident you
would not need so much entreating.

SECT. XVI.
TRuly Brethren, it is one of the mysteries of s^n and self-deceit, that such a
multitude of people, yea seemingly Religious, can think so well of themselves
as they do, and bear it out with such audacious confidence, as if they were the
real servants of Christ, when it is apparent even to the eyes of others, that
they are not Crucified to the world, but live to it, and serve it day by day.
How anxiously are they contriving for it, while their care to please God is so
exceeding slender, that it takes up but little of their time and thoughts? How
sweet are their thoughts of a plentiful estate? To have the world at will,
houses, and lands, and full provisions for themselves and theirs, that they may
be clothed with the best, and fare of the best, and sit with the highest, and
be honored and reverenced of all, how fine a life does this seem to them. If
they have but a fair opportunity to rise, how little tender are they of the
lawfulness of the Means, at least where they are not so wicked as to dishonor
them! They can believe that to be the truth which befriendeth their worldly
Interest; and that to be false and erroneous which is against it. The world
chooses many of their opinions for them, and much of their Religion, and
tells them what party they should side with, and what not: It tells them
how far they shall tolerate other men's sin, and how far not; how far they shall
make profession of their faith, and how far they should conceal it from the
knowledge of the world: And so as Paul says, they account Gain to be
Godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 5. not only esteeming it better then downright Godliness,
but measuring out their Godliness by their Gain; making that to seem Religious
which fitteth their carnal ends; and easily believing that which is for their
worldly interest. How weak and silly reasons will persuade them that the point
is true, the cause is good, the means is lawful, which serves their turns for
worldly ends? And the clearest unquestionable Evidences are nothing to them
that are brought for the contrary. So potent a perswader is worldy Interest,
that any thing will serve where it takes part, and nothing prevail that it does
contradict. A powerful disputant, that most commonly has the best, whatever
side it takes, and the cause goes for it, be it right* or wrong. Either they
will not read such long and tedious discourses as are against them, or they
find some passage presently to quarrel with, that is too displeasing, and makes
them cast away the rest: Or if they read the whole, or hear you to the last, it
is with a resisting spirit all the while: Before they know what you will say,
they have consuted you: For they have resolved to believe that your reasons are
insufficient, and their cause is good. They read and hear not only with a
prejudice answerable to the reasons that formerly resolved them, but with an
opposing enmity and fixedness of will. Had we only their understandings to
dispute with, it were the less: but our main dispute is with Will and Passion,
which have no ears, nor eyes, nor brains, though sense enough. Their deceiving
baits first catch the sensual part, and so come to bribe the Intellect and the
will; and their strongest root is still in the brutish part where it begun,
which will hear no reason. When Paul was told of the truth of that Doctrine
which he before had persecuted, and must himself be persecuted if he should
entertain it, he sticks not at that, but immediately consulteth not with flesh
and blood, but falls to work, Gal. 1. 16. But these men will scarce do any
thing but flesh and blood must be consulted with. The Word was David's
Counselor; and the World is theirs. Their first question is, Is it for my
honor or dishonor* my profit or disprofit, my pleasure or my trouble: and as
it relisheth with their flesh, so is it esteemed of and concluded. And which is
more, their Carnal Interest so blinds their eyes, that they see not oft-times
their most palpable delusions. When their actions are such as unprejudiced
standers by do blush at, and the wisest and faithfullest of their friends
lament, and the shame of them is open to the view of the world, yet flesh does
so befool them, that they see not their nakedness, but glory in their shame:
Commodity cannot blush: The applause of flatterers justifies their crimes,
against the accusations of God and all good men. Have these men Crucified the
world indeed?

A Christian looks so much to his Rule as well as his End, that he dare not
say of Heaven it self, that every Means is lawful which seems to conduce to
it. But these men think that any thing is lawful that brings them gain, or
makes them great.

And as for the improvement of their talents for God, What is to be seen? What
self-seeking and unprofitable servants are they? They will confess that they
have all from God, and that all is due to him again: but it is but a
self-condemning Confession. How many charitable and pious uses do call aloud
for much of their estates? but how little of it is so expended. Now and then
two pence or a groat to the poor is a great matter with them and the wealthy
can come off with the quantity of the widows mite. Let God call, and Ministers
call, and the poor call and cry for it, all cannot extort their Idol out of
their purses: So fast do they hold their money, that scarce any thing but
thieves, or soldiers, or death can wring it out of their hands. But so loose
do they hold spiritual good which they seem to mind, that if a Seducer cannot
easily tice them from it, or a derision shame them from it, yet at least a good
bargain for the world can hire them from it, and the frowns of men in power, or
the change of the times can affright them from it. Long will it be ere they
will go from house to house through the Parish, and see what poor want
clothing, what children want means to set them to trades, and what families
want Bibles and other Books that may promote their salvation, and go as far as
they are able in procuring them, and set their friends a work where their own
ability is too short. O the disproportion that there is between the verbal
service, and the more costly service of worldly Hypocritical professors. How
far do their formal duties exceed their charitable communications and
distributions! Most commonly the world does cut short even these their
Religious actions. They can scarce find time to be constant in worshipping God
in their families, or in secret; in instructing and exhorting their children
and servants; there is some business to be done, or some gain to be got; or
while they seem to be deepest in their devotions, their thoughts run after
their covetousness, and it is one God that has their tongues, and another that
has their hearts. So that they pray as if they prayed not, and hear as if they
heard not, and possess Gods Ordinances as not possessing them, and use them
merely as abusing them, as apprehending no great benefit to come by them, but
the fruit of them were nothing but mere conceits, or all Gods Ordinances were
but (as the Scottish Sacrilegious Lord called their Book of Discipline) Devout
Imaginations. But yet for all the shortness of their Devotions, their real
Devotions and works of Charity are much more short. And for Pious Contributions
and Communications, some of them scarce know what they mean. They will sooner
learn to scorn such Duties, and plead against them as no Duties, then
conscionably to perform them. They say they are sanctified, and the people of
God; and if they were so indeed, they would be Devoted to him without reserve:
and if themselves were Devoted or Sanctified to him, all that they have must
needs be so too. But it is an Holy Name that they have received, and not a
consecrated heart or purse. I doubt it will be long before the Piety of this
age will give as much to Holy uses, as the seeming Piety of it has taken from
them. And if there be more Piety in taking from Holy uses, then in Giving to
them, we may next be taught that it is a more pious work to destroy Preachers
then to preach, and to destroy praying then to pray, and to curse God then to
praise him. I have often wondered that so many that we take for godly persons do
so overlook the many and exceeding urgent precepts to liberal Distributions
for God and his service, which Scripture does contain: and how they can think
to be saved without obeying these commands, any more then without obeying the
commands for hearing, praying, or any other Religious duty. Do they not read
these passages as well as others in their Bibles? How comes it to pass that
conscience then stirs not, when they know that they neglect such important
duties? They read that the Christians of the primitive times sold all, and
delivered the money to the Apostles: to manifest practically the nature and
power of the Christian Religion, which consists in renouncing all for Christ,
and Devoting our selves and all that we have to God, upon his promise of a
treasure in the heavens. They read that it was an appointed duty in the
Churches, to lay by in the Churches stock every Lords day for the relief of
needy Christians, according as God has prospered them the week before. 1 Cor.
16. 1, 2, 3. They read that Christ so regards this duty, that the sentence at
Judgment is described by him, as passing upon this account. And yet for all
this flesh and blood will be wiser then to trust God, and to obey so chargeable
a command. They will venture on Damnation to save their money; and let go
Heaven for fear of losing by it. And that they may be wise indeed, they can
justify all, and labor to bring their duty into scorn. [ We are not capable,
say they, of Giving to God; because that all is his already:] self* condemning
wretch! Is all his? Why then has he not all! Give then to God the things that
are his own! It is not a proper Donation that we call you to: You cannot give
him a propriety, who has it already; nor alienate it from your selve* who
never had it in respect to God: But yet you may Give it to him by tradition:
You may deliver him his own in the way that he requires it; and lay out your
Masters stock for his service! And if he will so far honor your fidelity, as
to call this a giving or a lending to him, me thinks this should encourage you
to liberality, but I see not how it can excuse your denying him his own.

Obj. But it is but to satisfy the covetousness of the Priests, that we are
called on to Give to God, as if they were God; or God had that which they have.

Answ. Adding reproach to covetousness, will prove one day but a sad excuse for
sin. If this age understood the fifth Commandment, and the hainousness of
ingratitude to God and man for the greatest mercies, and how it is that Christ
Teaches and Rules, and how he is Obeyed or Despised in the world, they would
tremble to think of the scorn and contempt of a faithful Ministry. The eye that
mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey a Mother, the Ravens of the valley
shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it, Prove. 30. 17. Who so
curses his Father or Mother, his Lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness,
Prove. 2^. 20. And he shall die the death, Exodus 21. 17. And for your Objection:
The Priests of the Lord under the Law were not God: the Apostles and Gospel
Ministers were not God; nor any that serve at the Altar, who yet must live upon
the Altar: The poor themselves be not God; and yet you shall understand one
day, that in as much as you did it not to one of these, you did it not to
Christ: and in despising them you despised him, Mat. 25. Luke 10. 16. The
vanity of your fond pretense was sufficiently told you by Christ himself, Mat.
25. 45. where he tells you how he will answer your companions that shall use
it, [ In as much as you did it not to one of these, you did it not to me.] And
yet will you say, [ Lord when did we see thee hungry, naked, etc.] when you
have your answer before hand: Worldly wretches! you would not part with your
wealth, if you could help it, to Christ himself, if he should come and ask it
of you. For you read in his word, that it is he that asks it, and commands
it from you now. But if you will not believe that it is Christ that requires
it, till he come himself in person to demand it, and if you are such faithful
Stwards, that you will part with none of your Masters stock, till he ask you
for it face to face, for fear of mis-imploying it; be patient awhile, and he
will come and seek his own with advantage, but to the eternal woe of
unprofitable servants. You can spare God the tithe of your words, in formal
duties, when the devil and the world have had the rest; but not so much as the
old legal proportion of your estates, much less the Evangelical All. What makes
you drop prayers so much thicker then Alms or Distributions? Do you think that
God does not as strictly require the one as the other? If speaking were not
cheaper to you then giving, your prayers and religious talk would be so seldom
and so short, as that it would be as your distributions are, next to none. If
words cost money, your tongues would be as strait as your purses are, and the
world should scarce hear whether you were of any Religion or none. Do these men
glory only in the Cross of Christ, and is the world by it crucified to them,
and they to the world? We have their answer in their actions, what need we any
more. They are dead in and by the world, but not to the world. They are its
slaves, though they are called the servants of Christ.

SECT. XVII.
Honorable, Worshipful, and all well beloved, it is a weighty This was
reached ^t an As^^ze at ^orcester before the ^udges; and therefore here are
these passages suited to that occasion.
employment that occasioneth your meeting here to day. The estates and lives of
men are in your hands. But it is another kind of Judgment which you are all
hasting toward: when Judges and Justices, the Accusers and Accused must all
appear upon equal terms, for the final decision of a far greater Cause. The
case that is then and there to be determined, is not whether you shall have
Lands or no Lands, Life or no Life; (in our natural sense;) but whether you
shall have Heaven or Hell, Salvation or Damnation, an endless life of Glory
with God, and the Redeemer, and the Angles of Heaven, or an endless life of
Torment with devils and ungodly men. As sure as you now s^t on those seats, you
shall shortly all appear before the Judge of all the world, and there receive
an irreversible sentence to an unchangeable state of Happiness or Misery. This
is the great business that should presently call up your most serious thoughts,
and set all the powers of your souls on work for the most effectual
preparation: that if you are men, you may quit your selves like men, for the
preventing of that dreadful doom which unprepared souls must there expect. The
greatest of your secular affairs are but dreams and toys to this: Were you at
every Assize to determine causes of no lower value then the Crowns and Kingdoms
of the Monarchs of the earth, it were but as childrens games to this. If any
man of you believe not this, he is worse then the Devil that tempts him to
unbelief: and let him know that unbelief is no prevention, nor will put off the
day, or hinder his appearance; but ascertain his condemnation at that
appearance. And if you all do believe this* you will sure be content that I
speak to you of it as one that also do believe it. Faith is the evidence of
things not seen: by it we may fore see the Judgment set, the world appearing,
and your selves there waiting for your final doom. And because we clearly find
beforehand, who then shall die and who shall live, I shall desire of you that
you would presently improve the discovery. Some think we cannot know in this
life what will become of us in the next: But God has not bid us try in vain,
nor in vain delivered us so many signs, by which it may be known, nor is the
difference between the saved and the damned so small as to be undiscernable.
Our own reason may tell us that the righteous God would not send some to Glory
with Angels, and others to endless misery with Devils, and make such a
difference between men hereafter, if there were not a considerable difference
here. He that knows the Law and the fact, may know before your Assizes what
will become of every prisoner, if the proceedings be all just; as in our case
they will certainly be. Christ will Judge according to his Laws: Know therefore
whom the Law condemns or justifies, and you may know whom Christ will
condemn or justify. And seeing all this is so, does it not concern us all to
make a speedy trial of our selves in preparation to this final trial? I shall
for your own sakes therefore take the boldness, as the Officer of Christ, to
summon you to appear before your selves, and keep an Assize this day in your
own souls, and answer at the Bar of Conscience to what shall be charged upon
you. Fear not the trial; for it is not conclusive, final, nor a peremptory
irreversible sentence that must now pass: Yet slight it not; for it is a
necessary preparative to that which is final and irreversible. Consequentially
it may prove a justifying* Accusation, an Absolving Condemnation, and if you
proceed to Execution, a saving quickening death, which I am now persuading you
to undergo. The whole world is divided into two sorts of men: One that Love God
above all and live to him, and the other that Love the flesh and world above
all and live to them: One that lay up a treasure in earth, and have their heart
there: The other that lay up a treasure in heaven, and have their heart there:
One that seek first the Kingdom of God and its righteousness; another that seek
first the things of this life. One that mind and savor the things of the flesh
and of man: the other that mind and savor most the things of the Spirit and of
God. One that account all things dung and dross that they may win Christ:
another that make light of Christ in comparison of their business, and riches,
and pleasures in the world. One that live by sight and sense upon present
things: Another that live by faith upon things invisible. One that have their
conversation in Heaven, and live as strangers upon earth: Another that mind
earthly things, and are strangers to heaven. One that have in resolution
forsaken a^ for Christ and the hopes of a treasure in heaven: Another that
resolve to keep somewhat here, though they venture and forsake the heavenly
reward; and will go away sorrowful that they cannot have both. One that being
born of the flesh is but flesh: The other that being born of the Spirit is
Spirit. One that live as without God in the world: The other that live as
without the seducing world in God, and in and by the subservient world to God.
One that have Ordinances and Means of Grace as if they had none: The other that
have houses, lands, wives, as if they had none. One that believe as if they
believed not, and love God as if they loved him not, and pray as if they prayed
not, as if the fruit of these were but a shadow: The other that weep as if they
wept not (for worldly things) and rejoice as if they rejoiced not. One that
have Christ as not possessing him, and use him and his name, as but abusing
them: The other that buy as if they possessed not, and use the world as not
abusing it. One that draw near to God with their lips, when their hearts are
far from him: The other that Corporally converse with the world, when their
hearts are far from it. One that serve God who is a Spirit with Carnal
service, and not in Spirit and Truth: The other that use the world it self
spiritually, and not in a carnal worldly manner: In a word: One sort are
children of this world; and the other are the children of the world to come,
and heirs of the heavenly Kingdom. One sort have their Portion in this life:
And the other have God for their Portion. One sort have their Good things in
this life time, and their Reward here: The other have their Evil things in this
life, and live in Hope of the Everlasting Reward.

I suppose you know that all this is from the word of God, and therefore I need
not cite the Texts which do contain it! But lest any doubt, I will lay them all
together, that you may peruse them at leisure, Matthew. 22. 37. and 10. 37. and
6. 19, 20, 21. and 6. 33. John 6. 27. Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3. Romans 8. 5, 6, 7, 13.
Phil. 3. 9, 10, 11. Mat. 22. 5. 2 Cor. 4. 18. Heb. 11. 1. throughout. Phil. 3.
19, 20, 21. Psalm 119 19. Heb. 11. 13. Luke 14. 33. and 18. 22. John 3. 6.
Ephis. 2. 12. 1 Cor. 10. 31. Psalm 16. 8. Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32. 1 Cor. 7. 29* 30,
31. John 2. 23, 24. Psalm 78. 35, 36, 37. John 15. 2. and 1. 9, 10, 11. Mat.
15. 8. Psalm 73. 23, 24, 25. 1 These. 5. 17, 18. Phil. 3. 21* Matthew. 15. 9. John
4. 22, 23. 1 Gor. 10. 31. Luke 10. 8. and 20. 34. Romans 8. 16, 17. Psalm 17. 14.
and 16. 5. and 73. 26. Luke 16* 25. Mat. 6. 5. and 5. 12. Luke 18. 22. In these
Texts is plainly contained all that I have here said to you.

Well then, Beloved Hearers, seeing you that sit here present are all of one of
these two sorts, let conscience speak, which is it that you are of? These are
the two sorts that shall stand on the right and left hand of Christ in
Judgment: They that gave Christ his own with advantage, and lived to him, and
studiously devoted their Riches and other Talents to his use, as men that
unfeignedly made God their End, these are they that are set on the right hand,
and adjudged as Blessed to the Kingdom which they so esteemed. And those that
hid their talents, by keeping or expending them to their private use, denying
them to Christ, and living to themselves, these are they that are set on the
left hand, and adjudged to the everlasting fire, with the Devils whom they
served. It is a desperate mistake of self-deceiving men, to think that a state
of Holiness consists only in external worship, or that a state of wickedness
consists only in some gross sins. I tell you from the word of God, the
difference is greater, and lies deeper then so. If you would know whether you
are Christians indeed and shall be saved, the first and great question is, What
is your End? What take you for your portion? And what is it that has the
prevalent stream of your desires and endeavors? As it is not every step that
we set out of the way to heaven, that will prove us ungodly, so is it not any
Religiousness whatsoever that stands in a subserviency to the world, that
will prove you godly. Would you know then what you are? And whether you are in
the way to Heaven or Hell? And what God will judge of you, if you so continue?
Why then deal faithfully with your selves, and answer this question without
deceit! What is it that has your Hearts? your very Hearts? What is it that is
the matter of your dearest Love? And what the matter of your chiefest care?
What is it that is the very bent and scope of your life? Is it for this world
or the world to come? What do you daily labor and live for? Is it for God? or
your carnal selves? What interest is it that is predominant in you? Know but
that and know all.

AND now I shall apply my self to those of you that are guilty* in whose souls
the worldly Interest is predominant, and in whom the world is not Crucified by
the Cross of Christ, but rather Christ again Crucified by the world. I have no
mind to dishonor you or exasperate you: but if faithfulness to Christ and you
will do both, there is no remedy. I do here prefer an Indictment against you in
the Court of your Consciences, and before this Congregation: the Articles I
shall distinctly read: And first, I require you, study not a defense: excuse
not, extenuate not your crimes: but confess your sin freely, and condemn your
selves impartially, and return to God, and forsake them speedily, or you shall
do worse: Self-condemnation may be saving and preventive, and the Death of sin
thereupon, may be the life of your souls: But if this be neglected, and you
hold on a while till the great Assize, you shall have another kind of charge
then this, even such an one as shall appale that face that now can merrily
smile at the accusation; and such an one as shall bring down the stoutest of
your spirits, and make the hardest heart to feel, and the stubbornest of you
all to stoop and tremble. O how easy is it to hear your sin and danger from
such a worm as I? or to hear your state discovered, and your selves condemned
by a Minister of Christ in a Pulpit? but how dreadful will it be to hear all
this from the Lord of Glory? and that when the case is past remedy, which now
might have been remedyed if you would, and if your obstinate hearts had not
resisted.

The General charge that I put in against you, is, That you are Carnal
flesh-pleasers, and have loved and lived to the world which you should have
Crucified, and have not lived as Devoted unto God, nor has he been your End,
or his Interest predominant in your hearts and lives.

I speak only to the guilty: and for Evidence of the fact, I need none but your
Consciences, seeing it is only to your Consciences that I accuse you, which are
acquainted, or should be, with the whole. But lest Conscience it self should be
bribed and corrupted, I shall, besides all that is before said, produce a
little Evidence more.

1. If indeed the world be Crucified to you, what means your eager pursuit
after it? Are not your thoughts contriving for it, and your wit and interest
all improved for it? Are not those taken for your chief friends, that further
your advancement or worldly Ends? and those for your chief enemies that hinder
it most? Is it not in your mind in the night when you awake, and in the day
when you are alone? Do you not rise earlyer for your worldly business, then for
prayer or any holy exercise? Ask your family whether you do not ofter call them
up to work then to pray? and whether you drive them not on harder to your own
service then to Gods? and whether you examine them not strictlyer about your
business, then about the matters that their salvation does depend upon? and
whether you be not more deeply offended with them for crossing your commodity,
then for sinning against God? Ask your neighbors whether you talk not with
them many hours of worldly vanities, for one hours serious discourse about the
life to come? What a stir do poor men make to be rich, or to live in some
content to the flesh, and what a stir do rich men make to be richer, or to keep
that they have; and yet have they the face to pretend that they are Crucified
to the world?

2. If you are dead to the world, how comes it to pass that it has so powerful
an influence upon your judgments? and that you change your minds as your
carnal Interest does change? and can set your sails to any wind that is like
to drive you to the harbor (as you call it, but indeed upon the sands) of your
worldly ends. What would you not give in troublesome times to know certainly
which will be the prevalent side? that you might resolve what side to take your
selves; and perhaps what Religion to be of, or to seem so to be? Among all the
Books that are written, if there were but one that taught the art of growing
rich, or a Directory for obtaining dignities and honors in the world, how
eagerly would you buy it, and how diligently would you read it? more diligently
then you read the Bible or any Book of that nature. If preachers did teach you
the way of prosperity and advancement, and could tell you how to be all great
and honorable in this world, O how early would you come to the Congregation?
how attentively would you hear? how retentively would you remember? and how
faithfully would you practice? Then how beautiful would* the feet be of them
that bring you the tidings of such good things? What honorable persons should
Ministers be? and how well worthy of your Tithes and more? Then you would not
swell against their Doctrine or Application? nor cavil at them instead of
understanding them, nor scorn them as men of a useless office, nor take them
for your enemies, nor refuse to come to them and ask their advice. Wretched
Hypocrites! It is our office to help them to the Everlasting Kingdom; and the
more diligent we are in this, the more they hate us: if we send for them to
Instruct them personally, or catechize them, or help them in the matters of
salvation, they sco^n to come, and ask us, By what Authority we send for them?
But if we could teach them all to be Princes, or Lords, or Gentlemen, yea or
but to get a few shillings more then they have, none would draw back? None of
them would ask us, By what Authority do you send for us? Had we but money
enough to feed them all, O what good men we should be! and how many friends
should we have? and how easily might we persuade them! If one man had all the
money in the Land, and could secure it, and the disposal of it from violence,
what might not that man do? and who is it that would not be on his side, except
those few that have Crucified the world? The multitude would even follow the
man that has money, as an horse will follow him that has his provender: and
yet they will hypocritically pretend to be Crucified to the world. But if
indeed they are so, how comes it to pass that Conscience is so often stretched
and wracked to make it own a gainful cause! and that many that have seemed
godly can break over all bounds, of Law and Charity, Friendship and Religion,
to attain the dignities or riches which they so desire? and will tread down the
nearest friend, and Christ himself as much as in them lies, if he stand in the
way of their affected exaltation. Yea soul and all shall be ventured in this
game: Rise they must, and rise they will, if they can procure it. Whatever
become of Heaven they must have Earth. Seeing it is their God, their End,
perfas aut nefas it must be had. As the Commonwealths man says, Salus populi
suprema Lex esto; and the Christian says, The pleasing of God is the supreme
Law: so the worldlings maxim is, that the Interest of the flesh is the supreme
Law. And are these men Crucified to the world?

3. If the world were a Crucified thing in your eyes, you would not so much
overvalue the Rich, and vilify or neglect the Poor as you do. An humble Godly
man that walks the streets in a thread bare coat, may pass by you without the
least respect: but if a shining gallant were in the place, how observantly do
you behave your selves? If a poor man, though never so wise or pious, have any
business with you, how cold is his entertainment? how strange is your
deportment toward him? and how slightly do you shake him off? But if they be
rich and honorable in the world, you are their servants, and no respect is too
much for them, nor no entertainment too good. Wisdom and Piety clothed in
rags may pass by you unobserved: when a silken sot is bowed to like an Idol.
As reverently as you now speak of Peter, and Paul, and Christ himself, now you
hear them magnified, and see not their outward appearances as they did that
conversed with them on earth; I make no doubt but if you had lived in those
days, and seen them of so low a presence, and walk up and down in so mean a
g^rb, attended or regarded by few but the poor, you would have set as light by
them as others, and looked at them as poor contemptible fellows; if not as the
filth and the offscouring of all things; and if you had not laid hands on them
as too saucy reprovers of you, at least you would have given them one of
Iulian's jeers, or Hobbs his scorns. It was this worldly Spirit that caused the
Jews to be such obstinate unbelievers, and to persecute Christ and his
servants: Men reverence not the face of the poor. And this is it that
continues them in their unbelief to this very day. We have many of their own
writings and disputations against Christ published by themselves; and we find
this the very sum of all their reasonings, [ Show us a Messiah that fetches us
from captivity, that gathers the whole Nation of the Jews to Judae^, and
restores them to their ancient possessions and dignities, with much more, and
makes the Nations stoop to them and serve them, and sets up again the Temple
and the Law, and we will believe in him as the true Messiah; but in no other
will we believe:] For though they cannot deny but the prophesied time of the
Messiahs coming is past, yet taking it for granted that this only is his true
description, they say they must look more at the description then the time: and
to salve the Prophesies, they do believe that the Messiah did come about
Christ's incarnation, but is somewhere ^id with Henoch and Elias, and will
appear when the Jews do mend their lives and are worthy of him. Thus a worldly
carnal mind that blindly admireth worldly things, and favors not the things
of the Spirit, nor discerns the excellency of the Hevenly riches, does make
them to be open Infidels, and make the Turks adore their Mahomet, and makes the
nominall bastard Christian to set so light by the true Riches of the Gospel,
and only to honor the name of Christ: for they cannot receive the things of
God, because they are Spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Were not you
worldlings, you would discern more matter for your admiration, reverence and
love in the poorest heavenly minded man, then in the greatest Prince on earth
that is ungodly. But you have the Faith of Jesus Christ the Lord of Glory with
respect of persons. For if there come into your Assembly a man with a gold
ring, in goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment;
you have respect to him that wears the gay clothing, and say to him, sit
thou here in a good place: and say to the poor, stand thou there; despising the
poor, and committing sin by respect of persons, as if you believed not that God
had chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom,
which he has promised to them that love him, Iam. 2. 1. to the 10.

Obj. But must we not honor the gifts of God? Riches are his gifts.

Answ. Yes, according to their nature and use: Riches are a gift which he
gives even to his enemies, and to those that must perish for ever; and few
that have them come to heaven. But Holiness is a gift which he gives to none
but his beloved, and is the beginning of eternal life. Which then should be
most honored?

Obj. But would you draw men to despise Dignities and Authority?

Answ. Authority is one thing, and worldly Riches is another. We reverence
Authority more then you do. We look on it as a beam from God, as participating
of somewhat that is Divine; I look on a Magistrate as Gods officer, and one
that deriveth his Authority from him; and I no more acknowledge any Power which
is not efficiently from God as the supreme Rector of the universe, then I
acknowledge any natural Being which is not efficiently from God as the author
of nature and the first Being. I look at a Magistrate as ultimately for God, as
a man authorized to do his work, and none but what is ultimately his. So that
as his office is so humane as to be also participatively Divine, and he is so
an humane creature, as to be by participation Divine, so the Reverence and
Obedience which I owe to a Magistrate, is by participation Divine: And
therefore though I judge not peremptorily that those Ancients were in the right
that made the fifth Commandment to be the last of the first Table, yet I doubt
not but our Moderns are less likely to be in the right, that confine it only to
the second Table. And as I think it stands so between the two as in several
respects to belong to each, so I rather think that it more principally
belongs to the first. You see then the difference between a true Christians
honoring of Magistrates and yours: You honor them but for your worldly Ends;
and because they are able to do you good or hurt. But we honor them as Gods
officers, speaking and acting for him and from him by his Commission, and we
obey their Power, as participatively Divine: but as they can do us good or hurt
we less regard them: And this honor and obedience we owe them, not for their
wealth, but their Authority: and if the meanest man have this Authority, he
shall be honored and obeyed by us, as well as the richest.

4. If the world be Crucified to you, How comes it to pass that you are so
tenderly sensible of every loss or dishonor that does befall you? If you are
wronged in your estate, what a matter do you make of it? If a man should
deprive you but of a few pounds, you can hardly put it up; but you must go to
Law for it, or you must seek revenge? Or if you pass it by, you think you have
done some great meritorious act. If one slander you, or dishonor you, how
sensible are you of it? How it sticks upon your stomachs, as if you had lost
your treasure? Death is not sensible. If you were Dead to the world, and the
world to you, these things would all seem smaller in your eyes; and you would
have more ado to remember them then now you have to forget them. You could not
be so sensible of a loss or an injury, if you were not too much alive to the
world. And if you be Poor, what an impatient complaining life do you live? as
if you wanted your treasure or your God? and if you grow rich or gain, how glad
are you? Were you Dead to the world, and the world to you, you would be more
indifferent to these matters, and Poverty and Riches would not seem so much to
differ as now they do: but Godliness with contentment, which is Profitable to
all things, would seem to you the Great Gain, 1 Timothy 4. 8. and 6. 6.

Obj. But may not a man go to Law to recover his own, or to right his own
Reputation, if he be slandered?

Answ. Distinguish carefully in all your wrongs between Gods Interest in them
and your own. Your own you must forgive, but Gods you cannot. If he have
entrusted you with talents for his service, and any would fraudulently or
violently deprive you of them, you must look after them as your Masters stock:
If a wound in your name or state disable you from doing God service, you must
use all lawful means to heal it, that you may be in a capacity of serving him
again: And if your children or others have remotely a right in what you are
defrauded of, you may look after their right. And you must not remit the crime,
as often as you remit the injury: For that God has imposed penalty upon, and the
Rule is good, that the Punishment of the notoriously vicious is a Due to the
Commonwealth, because of the Necessity of it to its good. In a word therefore,
if you could do these things, you might your selves resolve when it is lawful
to go to Law, or seek your Right, and when not. 1. If you can well distinguish
between Gods Interest and your own. 2. And be sure you forgive all your own
injuries. 3. And that you watch your hearts narrowly le^t they pretend Gods
cause, and intend your own. 4. And be able by the consideration of
circumstances to discern in probability, whether Gods Interest will be more
promoted by going to Law, or passing it by.

But alas, how rare a course is this! Of all the suits that are before you at
this Assize, I fear there are few that are commenced unfeignedly for the
Interest of God! If the Lord himself should ask both Plaintiff and Defendant,
Do you follow this suit for Me, or for your selves? What answer think you they
must make, if they speak the truth? But of this anon.

HAving thus given in my General charge against the carnal worldling, and some
Evidence of his guilt; I shall now give you the Quality and Aggravations of
your crime, in several Articles, as follows.

1. You are Guilty of Idolatry, which is high Treason against the God of
Heaven. That which has your highest estimation, and dearest affection, and
chiefest service, is your God. But this the world has; therefore it is your
God. That which has the most of your Hearts is your God. But it is the world
that has the most of your hearts. You know that the main drift of your life is
for the world: And that which has the main bent of your life, has your heart.
If Reason be no Evidence, you cannot refuse Scripture, Col. 3. 5. [ Mortify
therefore your Members upon earth;] and one is [ Covetousness, which is
Idolatry,] Ephesians. 5. 5. [ For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean
person, nor covetous man, who is an Idolator, has any Inheritance in the
Kingdom of Christ and of God.] The case is plain in Scripture, and in the
effects. The world has that Love that God should have, that Care, and Trust,
and Service which belongs to God; and therefore it is your God. I do therefore
here on the behalf of God, indite every worldly carnal sinner of you at the
Bar of your own conscience, as a Traitor against the Lord that made you, and
against the Son of God that did Redeem you! And what greater sin can man be
guilty of (besides the Blaspheming of the Holy Ghost.) He that would have
another God, would have the Lord to be un-Godded, and to lose his Sovereign
Power and Goodness! And is such a man fit to live in his sight? Why wretched
Traitor! If he be not thy God, thou can not expect to live by him, or be
sustained, preserved, and provided for by him: Thou can not live an hour
without him! and yet will thou cast him off? Would thou pluck up thy own
foundation? and cut off the bough on which thou stand? Would thou fire the
house thou dwell in? and sink the Ship that keeps thy self and all that
thou have from sinking! Relations are mutual! If he shall be no God to thee, be
it known to thee thou shall be none of his People! If he shall be no Father to
thee, thou shall be none of his child. And, wretched soul, what will thou do
without him! It i^^^e that keeps thy soul in thy body while thou art serving
his enemy. Thou would be in Hell within this hour if his Mercy did not keep
thee out. And is this thy requital of him? He has but one Trinity of enemies,
the flesh, the world, and the Devil; and will thou turn to these, and forsake
him by whom thou live? Why I tell thee, the Lord must be thy God, or thou
must have no God indeed. The world is like the Heathens Idols; that has eyes
but cannot see thy wants; ears, but cannot hear thy cries* hands, but cannot
help thee in thy distress. All thy Riches, Dignities, and Pleasures, are silly
things to make a God of. They may have the room of God in thy heart; and in
that sense be thy God: but indeed they are no more God, then a mawkin is a man;
nor no more able to help and save thee. Would thou then have a God or no God?
If thou would have no God, thou would have no Helper, no Governor, no
Preserver nor no Happiness. And do thou think that thou art sufficient for
thy self? What! Can thou live a day without God? Can thou save thy self
from danger without him? Can thou relieve or shift for thy self at death
without him? Dare thou tell him so to his face? and stand to it? But if thou
must have a God, what God would thou have? Would not thou have a God that
can preserve, and help, and save thee? The world cannot do it, man! I shall
tell thee more of this anon, that the world cannot do it. If thou trust to it,
it will deceive thee. But if thou say then, the Lord shall be thy God] Away
then with all thy Idols. God will have no partner, much less a superior, that
is exalted above himself in thy soul. As Joshua said to the Israelites, Josh.
24. 14. so say I to you, [ Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in
sincerity and in truth, and put away the world (which has been your God) and
serve ye the Lord: And if it seem evil to you to serve the Lord, choose you
this day whom ye will serve: but as for me and my house we will serve the
Lord.] And if you say as they, [ God forbid that we should forsake the Lord to
serve other Gods.] I answer you, as he, Away then with the world and all other
Idols; or else, [Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is an holy and a jealous God,
and will not forgive such transgressions and sins; but if ye forsake the Lord
and serve the world, he will turn against you and consume you,] Verse. 19, 20.
God will not stoop to be an underling in your hearts. He should have all, an^
will at last have all or none: But in the mean time, he will have the Best or
none. I do witness here to every soul of you in his name, that if he have not
the Sovereignty, and be not nearer and dearer to your hearts, then all the
honors, and riches, and pleasures of the world, he is not, he will not be, he
cannot be your God. And if he be not thy God, thou will be Godless, as thou art
ungodly; thou will be without his help, as he was without thy heart.

Well, this is the first Article of my charge against every one of you that
has not Crucified the world, you are Idolators and Traitors against the God of
Heaven: And he that would have no God, deserves to be no man, and worse; and
shall either by Repentance wish with groans that he had never been a worldling
and a neglecter of God, or else in Hell with groans shall wish that he had
never been a man. As the first Commandment is the fundamental Law, and
informs all the obligations of the particular precepts following; so Idolatry
which is against that Commandment is the fundamental crime, and is the life of
all the rest. He that would overthrow the Godhead, would overthrow all the
world.

2. The next Article of my charge is this. You are guilty of most perfidious
Covenant Breaking with God. Did you not in your Baptism, solemnly by your
parents, Renounce the world, the flesh and the Devil, and promise to fight
against them to the end of your life under the Banner of Christ? And have you
performed that vow? No: you have turned treacherously to the enemy that you
renounced, and fought for the world and the flesh, against the Word and the
Spirit of Christ. And if you renounce your Baptismal Covenant, you renounce in
effect the benefits of that Covenant. And if God deal with you as with
Perfidious Covenant-breakers, thank your selves.

3. Moreover you are guilty of debasing your humane nature, and so of wronging
God that made it, and is the owner of it. God made you not as bruits, that are
capable of no higher things then to eat, and drink, and play, and die, and
there is an end of them: But he made you capable of an Everlasting life of Glory
with himself. And as he suiteth all his works to their uses and ends, so did he
suit the nature of man to his immortal state. As we were made by God, we were
sitted and disposed to everlasting things. And you ^^ave turned your hearts to
the vanities of this world; and set your mind on them as your happiness, as if
you had no greater things to mind. Objects do either ennoble or debase the
faculties according as they are. That is the vilest creature which is made for
the vilest uses and ends, or imployes himself in such. And that is the most
excellent creature which is exercised about the most excellent Objects. God
made you for no less then his everlasting praises, before his face, among his
Angels; and you have so far debased your own nature, as to root like swine in
earth and dung, and to live like bruits, that have not an immortal state to
mind. How will you answer this dishonor done to the workmanship of God? That
you should blot out his image, and employ your souls against his Laws, and live
as moles and worms in the earth. He put you on earth but as travelers toward
Heaven: and you have taken up your home in the way, and forgotten your End and
Restingplace.

4. The next part of your Guilt is, that you have perverted the use of all the
creatures, and turned the Works and Mercies of God against himself. He gave
them all to you, to lead you to himself, and to furnish you for his service. He
made this world to be a Glass in which you might see the Maker, and a Book in
which you might read his Name and will. And will you overlook him, and forget
the end and use of all? What shame and pity is it that men should live in the
world, and not know the use of it! That they should see such a beauteous frame,
and not understand its principal signification! That they should daily converse
with so many creatures, which all proclaim the name of God, and with one accord
declare his praise, and yet that this language should be so little understood?
Like an illiterate man in a Library, that sees many thousand Books, and knows
not a word that is in any of them. Or like an ignorant man in an Apothecaries
shop, that sees the drugs, but knows not what they are good for, nor how to
use any of them, if he had the greatest need. The poorest cottage and smallest
pittance of these earthly things might be a greater Blessing to you, if you
could understand their use and meaning, then all the world would be to him that
understands it not. Your possessions in themselves, if you have not God in
them, are but the very corpse or carkaise of a blessing! The Life of them is
wanting! And without the Life, they will but trouble you: For you have the
burden without the use. Your horse will carry you, while he has life and
health; but take away his life once, and you must carry him if you will have
him any further. Verily it is no wiser a trick to make a stir in the world, and
seek the profits and pleasures of it, without God, or any otherwise then as
they are animated by God, then it is to ride a dead horse, where you may spur
long enough before you are one mile further on your way. While your friend is
living you may delightfully converse with him: but when he is dead you will
have little pleasure in his company: the corpse of the most learned man will
actively teach you no more then a block. Were it the wi^e of your bosom who
through prudence and beauty were never so lovely to you, when her carkaise is
left without a soul you will hasten to bury it out of your sight, and would be
loath so much as to keep it in your house, much less in your bed and bosom as
heretosore. He that knows not that God is the Life and Soul of all our
Blessings, does neither know what God is, nor what a Blessing is. They are but
the empty casks and shells, and not the Blessings themselves without him. You
have the Burden, and not the Benefit: You must carry them, but they can do
nothing to the supporting of you. Its the absence of God that denominateth them
Vanity and Vexation: and it is he only that can make them strengthening and
consolatory. That must have some life in it, that must be pabulum vitae, and
must sustain our lives. Souls cannot feed upon mere terrene corporeal things,
any more then the body upon mere spirituals. As we have both a soul and a body
to be sustained, so have we a sustenance suitable to them both; even the
creature animated by God, or God in and by the creature.

How great then is your sin, that destroy your blessings by depriving them of
their Life? and that in a sort destroy the world to your selves, by separating
it from its soul? and so most ^ainously injure God, and rob your selves of the
comfort of all, and turn your blessings into burdens, and your helps into
hindrances and snares to your souls. Have you lived so long in the School of
the world, yea and of the Church too, where you have not only the Library of
Nature, but supernatural Revelations to teach you to understand it, and yet do
you not know a word or letter? You do but lose and abuse the creatures of God,
if you see him not in them; and if you be not in the use of them led up to
himself. The heavens declare the Glory of God, and the ^irmament shows his
handy work: Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows
knowledge: there is no speech or language where their voice is not heard; their
line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the
world, Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3. and yet poor carnal wretches will not understand
them. All the works of God do praise him; for he is righteous in all his ways,
and holy in all his works, Psalm. 145. 10, 17. and yet the wicked will not
understand. O how many talents must the ungodly be accountable for, as having
neglected them, and perverted them from the prescribed use! Every creature that
you see is a Teacher of Divine things to you; and you shall answer for your not
learning by them Every creature is an Herald sent from heaven to proclaim the
will of your Maker, and your Duty: and you gaze upon the Messenger, and note
his garb, and hear his voice, and never understand or regard his Message. I
would you did but consider what you lose by this your folly! and what life and
sweetness there is in creatures, which the heavenly believer draws forth, and
you have no taste of? And till the Spirit of Sanctification have fitted you to
such a work, you are never like effectually to taste it. For it is not every
fly that can suck honey from the sweetest flower, though the Be can do it
from that which we call a stinking weed. An ignorant Countryman has a Meadow
that abounds with variety of herbs; he can make no other use of them then to
feed his cattle with them: Or if he walk into his garden, he can only smell the
sweetness of a flower: but a skilful Physician that knows their use, can thence
fetch a medicine that may be a means to save his life. But the Believing soul
can yet go further, and there find that which may further his salvation. If you
have a Lease of your Lands, or a pardon for your life, that is written in an
excellent character: There Is a great deal of difference between another man's
delight in viewing the character, and yours in considering of the security you
have by it for estate or life. But the difference is much greater in our
present case, between those that have only the superficial sweetness and beauty
of the creature, to the pleasing of the flesh, and those that have God in it,
to the spiritual refreshing of their souls. Believe it Sirs, it is not a small
sin to pervert the whole creature (that's within our reach) to a use so contrary
to that which it was appointed to, as foolish worldlings do: not only to lose
that use and benefit of the creatures which we might have, but to turn all into
poison and death to our selves! Not only to rob God of that Love, and Honor,
and Service which they should procure him but also to turn all this upon
themselves. I tell you this will prove no venial sin.

5. And your Guilt herein is further aggravated, in that you do hereby as much
as in you lies frustrate the works of Creation and Redemption. For God made
all things for himself, and you use nothing for him. The Redeemer has
reprieved and restored the creature, for its primitive use, that God might yet
have the Glory of his works: and yet you will not give it him; but when you
pretend to know God, you Glorify him not as God, but become vain in your
imagination, your foolish hearts being darkened, as Paul tells them, Romans 1. 21.
And what does that man deserve that would, as to the use, destroy all the
world, and frustrate all Gods works both of Creation and Redempion?

6. Herein also you are guilty of Enmity against God. For this is the greatest
wrong that an enemy can do him, to rob him of the glory of his Goodness and
Power, and to preser his creatures, as if they were more amiable then himself.
You cannot dethrone him from his glory; but you may possibly deny him the
pre-eminence in your hearts. You may deny him the Kingdom within you; but you
cannot dispossess him of his Eternal Power or Kingdom without you. The worst
enemy that God has can do him no harm; but this is no thanks to you: he will
not be beholden to you for it. You may as truly show your Enmity by wronging,
as by hurting. And what greater injury can you offer to the Almighty, then to
set up the silly creature in his stead, and give it that Love and Service which
is his due?

7. Moreover you are guilty of wilful self* murder: you choke your selves with
that which should be your food: you turn your daily blessings to your bane; by
dropping your Poison into the cup of Mercies, which bountiful providence
puts into your hands. There is not a surer way in the world to undo you,
then by Turning to the creature, and forsaking God. You cry for more of the
world, and you are unsatisfied till you have it; and when you have it, you do
but destroy your souls with it, by giving it your hearts, which must be given
only unto God. What a stir do men make for temptation and destruction? What
cost and pains are men at to purchase them an Idol, and to make provision for
the flesh* to satisfy its desires, when they confess it to be the greatest
enemy of their souls? Like a man that would give all that he has for a coal of
fire to put into the thatch; even such is your desires after the world, and the
use you make of it.

8. What abundance of precious time and labor do you lose, which might and
should be better spent? Does not this world take up the most of your care, and
strength, and time? You are about it early and late! It is first and last, and
almost always in your thoughts. It finds you so much to do, that you have
scarce any time so much as to mind the God that made you, or to seek to escape
the everlasting misery, which is near at hand. It has taken up so much of your
hearts, that when God should have them in any holy duty, or service for his
Church, you are heartless. When you shall see your accounts cast up to your
hands (as shortly you shall see it, though you will not now be persuaded to do
it your selves) and when you shall there see, how many thoughts the world had
in comparison of God; and how many hours were laid out upon the world, when
Gods service was cast by for want of time; and how near the creature was to
your heart, while God as a stranger stood at the door: And, in a word, how the
world was your daily business, while the matters of God stepped in but now and
then upon the by; you will then confess that you labored in vain, and that
your life and labor should have been better employed. Has God given you but a
short uncertain life, and laid your everlasting life upon it; and will you cast
all away upon these transitory delights? How short a time have you for so great
a work; and shall the world have all? Oh that you did but know to how much
greater advantage you might have spent this time and labor in seeking God and
an endless Glory! One thing is needful: make sure of that: and waste not the
rest of your days in vanity! What wise man would spend so precious a thing as
Time is, upon that which he knows will leave him in Repentings that ever it was
so spent? The world does rob poor sinners of their time: but when they see it
is gone, and they would fain have a little of that time again to make
preparation for their everlasting state, it is not all the world then that can
bring them back one hour of it again. Certainly such a loss of time and labor
is no small aggravation of a worldlings sin.

9. You are also guilty of the high contempt of the Kingdom of Glory, while you
prefer these transitory things before it. Your hearts and lives speak that
which you are ashamed to speak with your tongues. You are ashamed to say that
Earth is better for you then Heaven, or that your sin is better for you then
the favor of God: but your lives speak it out. If you think not your present
condition better for you then heaven, why do you choose and prefer it? and why
do you more carefully and laboriously seek the things of earth, then the
Heavenly Glory? If your child would sell his inheritance for a cup of Ale, you
would think he set light by it: And if he would part with father and mother for
the company of a beggar or a thief, you would say he had no great love to you.
And if you will venture your part in heaven for the pleasures of sin, and will
part with God for the matters of this world, would you have him think that you
set much by his Kingdom or his love? O the unreasonableness of sin! the madness
of worldly fleshly men! Is it indeed more desirable to prosper in their shops,
their fields, and their pleasures for a few days or years, then everlastingly
to live in the presence of the Lord? Shall Christ purchase a Kingdom at the
price of his blood, and offer it us freely, and shall we prefer the life of a
bruit before it? Shall God offer to advance so mean a creature to an heavenly
station among his Angels; and shall we choose rather to wallow in the dung of
our Transgressions? Take heed, lest as you are guilty of Esau's folly, you also
meet with Esau's misery! and the time should come, that you shall find no place
for Repentance, that is, for Recovery by Repentance, though you seek it with
tears. Contempt of kindness, is a provoking thing: For it is the height of
ingratitude. And especially when it is the greatest kindness that is contemned.
As it will be the everlasting employment of the Saints, to enjoy that felicity,
and to admire and praise that infinite Love which caused them to enjoy it: So
will it be the everlasting misery of the damned, to be deprived of that
felicity, and to think of their solly in the unthankful contempt of it; and of
the excellency of that Kingdom which thus they did contemn. God sets before you
Earth and Heaven: If you choose earth, expect no more: And hereafter, Remember,
that you had your choice.

10. To make short of the rest of the aggravation of your sin, and sum it up in
a word; Your Love of the world is the sum of all iniquity. It virtually or
actually contains in it the breach of every command in the Decalogue. The
first Commandment which is the foundation of the Law, and especially of the
first Table, is broken by it, while you make it your Idol, and give it the
Esteem, and Love, and Service that is due to God. The second, third and fourth
Commandments it disposes you to break. While your hearts and ends are carnal
and worldly, the manner of your service will be so, and you will suit your
Religion to the will of men, and your carnal Interest, and not to the will and
word of God. The name and holy nature of God, is habitually contemned by you,
while you more set by your worldly matters then by him: His holy days you
ordinarily violate, and his Ordinances you do hypocritically abuse, while your
hearts are upon your covetousness or sensual delights; and are far from him
while you draw near him with your lips. Worldlinys* will make you even break
the bonds of natural obligations, and be unthankful to your own Parents,
disobedient to your superiors, unfaithful to your equals, and unmerciful to
your inferiors. There is no trusting a worldling, he will sell his friend for
money. He cares not to wrong you in your life, your chastity, estate and name,
for his lustful, ambitious, and covetous desires. For he directly breaks the
tenth Commandment, which is the sum of the second Table, requiring us to regard
the welfare of our neighbor, and not to maintain a private selfish interest
against it. So true is that of Paul, 1 Timothy 6. 10. The love of money is the
root of all evil. As adhering to God, is the sum of all Duty, and Spiritual
Goodness; so adhering to the creature, instead of God, is the sum of all
wickedness and disobedience.

And seeing all this is so, I require you here in the name of God, to cast out
this wickedness, and cherish it no longer: Bring forth that Traitor that has
dethroned God in your hearts and exalted it self, and let it die the death. It
subverteth Commonwealths, and all societies; it causes perjury,
perfidiousness and sedition; it raises wars, and sets the world together by
the ears: it overturneth all right order, and strikes at the heart of Morality
it self, and would make every man a Woolf or Tiger to his brother: It is a
murderer of your own souls* and the cause of cruelty both to the souls and
bodies of others: It is a liar that promises what it cannot perform: It is a
cheater that would deceive you of your everlasting happiness; and tice you into
Hell, by pretenses of furthering your profit^ and contents: It causes parents
to neglect the souls of their children, and children to wish the death of their
parents, or be weary of them, or disregard them: and causes Lawsuits and
contentions between brother and brother, and neighbor and neighbor; and fills
the heart with rancor and malice; and turns families and Kingdoms into
confusion: it makes people hate their Teachers; and too many Ministers to
neglect their flocks: It adulterously seeks to vitiate the spouse of Christ,
and take up the heart which was reserved for himself: It robs him of his
honor, of our affections and obedience; and Sacrilegiously defaceth the Temple
of the Holy Ghost: It will not allow God one free thought, nor full affection
of your heart, nor one hour entirely improved for his honor.

This is the World; and thus is it used by sensual men. Judge now whether it
deserve not to die the death; and to be cast out of your souls! and wherher we
have not reason to say, Crucify it, Crucify it? Ask me no more, What evil it
has done! You see it is such an enemy to the God of heaven, that if you
cherish it and let it live in your hearts, you are not friends to Christ or
your salvation. Away with it then without any more ado; and use it as the world
did use your Lord: and as it nailed him on the Cross, so go to his Cross, for a
nail to fasten it, and for strength to Crucify it, that you may be victors and
super-victors through him that loved you, and overcame the world for you.
Choose not to be slaves, when you may be freemen and triumphers. Take warning
by all that have gone before you: serve not a Master that casts off all his
servants in distress; and leaves them all in fruitless complaints of its
unprofitablness! Think not to speed well where never man sped well before you;
nor to find content, where none have found it. If all the worlds followers
complain of it at the parting, take warning by them, and foresee the end. Find
out one man that ever was made happy by the world, (in a true and durable
happiness) before you venture your own hopes and happiness in such hands. Put
not your selves and all that you have in such a leaking vessel that never yet
brought man safe to shore. Will neither the experience of your own lives, nor
the experience of all the world before you, delivered in the history of so many
thousand years, be a sufficient warning to you to avoid the snare? What will
you take then for a sufficient warning? Were not reason captivated, one would
think that a walk into the Churchyard might satisfy you. The sight of a grave
or of a dead body should kill and disgrace the world in your eyes. Do you see
where you must lie, and what that flesh which you so regard must be turned to,
and what is the most that can be expected from the world, and in how poor and
despicable a case it will then leave you? and yet will you dote upon it, and
neglect and lose the life everlasting for it? Will you be wilfully seduced by
the vainglory and oftentation of blinded worldlings, when you are certain
beforehand that they will not be long of the mind themselves, that now they
are? Name me one man if you can, that rejoices in his worldly prosperity now,
and speaks well of it, who rejoiced in it, and spoke well of it two hundred
years ago! Its a child indeed that would have an house builded by every fine
flower that he sees in his way, and forgets his home, his friends and his
inheritance! When its two to one but the flower will be withered, before his
house be finished, and the pleasure will not answer the trouble and cost.
Indeed if the world were a better place, then that which we are going to, I
could not then blame any to desire to keep it as long as they can: And yet if
it were so, the certainty of our removal should make us less regard it, and
look more to the place where we must evermore remain. Much more when our home
does exceed this world in worth, as much as in continuance. Its folly enough to
set a man's heart upon the fairest Inn that is in his way; but to prefer a
swine-stye before a Palace where his Father dwells and his inheritance does
lie, is somewhat worse then mere folly: and its meet that such be used
according to their choice. Its meet indeed that we be patient in our
Wilderness, and murmr not at God for the sufferings that it casts us upon.
But to love it better then the promised Land, and to think or speak hardly of
our happiness it self, and those that would lead us to it, this is
unreasonable. The Israelites were never so foolish as to build Cities in the
Wilderness, as desiring to make it their fixed habitations; but contented
themselves with moveable tents. What a curse were it if God should put you off
with earth, and give you no other treasure and felicity, but what it can
afford. You might well then look on your Inheritance as Hiram did on his twenty
Cities in Galilee, 1 King. 9. 11, 12. and disliking it, call it the Land of
Cabul. It is the description of miserable wicked men to have their portion in
this life* Psalm 17. 14. Suppose you had the most that you can expect in the
world; would you be contented with this as your portion? What is that you would
have, and which you make such a stir for? Would you have larger possessions,
more delightful dwellings, repute with men, the satisfying of your lusts? etc.
Dare you take all this for your portion if you had it? Dare you quit your hopes
of the life to come for such a portion? You dare not say so, nor do it
expressly; though you do it implyedly and in effect. O do not that which is so
horrid that your own hearts dare not own without trembling and astonishment!

I pray you tell me; do you think that a sufficient Portion which the Devil
himself would give you if he could, or is willing you should have? He is
content that you enjoy your lusts and pleasures; he is willing to let you have
the honors and fullness of the world, while you are on earth. He knows that he
can this way best deal with your consciences, and please you in his service,
and quiet you awhile till he has you where he would have have you. He that
told Christ of all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, would
doubtless have given him them, if it had been in his power, to have obtained
his desire. Though you think it too dear to part with your wealth or pleasures
for heaven, and to be at the labor of an holy life to obtain it; the Devil
would not think it too dear to give you all England, nor all the world, if it
were in his power, that thereby he might keep you out of Heaven: And he is
willing night and day to go about such kind of work, that may but attain his
ends in devouring you. If he were able, he would make you all Kings, so that he
could but keep you thereby from the Heavenly Kingdom. Alas, he that tempts
you to set light by heaven, and prefer this world before it, does better know
himself to his sorrow, the worth of that everlasting glory which he would
deprive you of, and the vanity of that which he thrusts into your hands. As
our Merchants that trade with the silly Indians, when they have persuaded them
to take glass, and pieces of broken Iron, and brass, and knives, for Gold or
Merchandise of great value, they do but laugh at their folly when they have
deceived them, and say, What silly fools be these to make such an exchange! For
the Merchants know the worth of things, which the Indians do not. And so is it
between the Deceiver of souls, and the souls that he deceives. When he has
got you to exchange the love of God and the Crown of Glory, for a little
earthly dung and lust, he knows that he has made fools of you, and undone you
by it for ever.

Do you not think your selves that it is abominable madness in those Witches
that make a Covenant with the Devil, and sell their souls to him for ever, on
condition they may have their wills for a time? I know you will say it is
abominable folly. And yet most of the world do in effect the very same. God
has assured them that they must for sake him or the world, and that they must
not love the world if they will have his love; nor look for a portion in this
life, if they will have any part in the inheritance of the Saints: He offers
them their choice; to take the pleasures of Earth or Heaven: And Satan
prevails with them to make choice of Earth, though they are told by God
himself, that they lose their salvation by it.

And here you may see what advantage Satan gets, by playing his game in the
dark, and doing his work by other hands, and keeping out of sight himself, and
deceiving men by plausible pretenses. Should he but appear himself in his own
likeness, and offer poor worldlings to make such a match with them, how much
would the most of you tremble at it and abhort it? And yet now he does the same
thing in the dark, you greedily embrace it. If you should but see or hear him,
desiring you to put your hands to such a Covenant as this is, [ I do consent to
part with the love of God, and all my hopes of salvation, so I may have my
pleasures, and wealth, and honor till I die.] Sure, if you be not besides your
selves you would not, you durst not put your hands to it. Why then will you now
put both hand and heart to it; when he plays his game underboard, and
implicitly by his temptations does draw you to the same consent? What do the
most of the world, but prefer earth before heaven through the course of their
lives? They prefer it in their thoughts, and words, and deeds. It has their
sweetest and freest thoughts and words, and their greatest care, and diligence,
and delight. And what then do these men do, but sell their salvation for the
vanities of the world? Believe it, Sirs, if you understood the Word of God, and
understood Satan's temptations, and understood your own doings, you would see
that you do no less then thus make sale of your precious souls. And it is not
your false Hopes that for all this you shall be saved, when you can keep the
world no longer, that will undo the bargain. If the Law of the Land do punish
Murder and Theft with death, he that ticeth you to commit the crime, does tice
you to cast away your life; and it will not save you to say, [ I had hoped that
I might have played the thief or murderer, and yet be saved.]

O Sirs, if you knew but half as well what you sell and cast away, as the Devil
does that tempts you to it, sure you durst never make such a match, nor pass
away such an inheritance, for a little earthly smoke and dust.

SECT. XVIII. Use of Exhortation.
MEN, Fathers and Brethren, hearken to the word of Exhortation which I have to
deliver to you from the Lord. I know that this world is near you, and the world
to come is out of sight. I know the flesh which imprisoneth those souls, is so
much inclined to these sensual things, that it will be pleased with nothing
else: But yet I am to tell you from the word of the Lord, that this world must
be forsaken before it forsake you, and that you must vilify and set light by
it, and your heart and hopes must be turned quite another way, and you must
live as men of another world; or you will undo your selves and be lost for
ever. If you have thought that you might serve God and Mammon, and Heaven and
Earth might both be your End and Portion, and God and the world might both have
your hearts, I must acquaint you that you are dangerously mistaken. Unless you
have two hearts, One for God, and one for the world: and two souls, One to
save, and one to lose. But I doubt when one soul is condemned, you will not
find another to be saved. I must plainly tell you, that the case of multitudes,
not only of the sottish vulgar, but of persons of Honor and Worshipful
Gentlemen, is so palpably miserable in the eyes of impartial discerning men,
that we are obliged to lament it. We hear you speak as contemptibly of the
world in an affected discourse, as any others: but we see you follow it, with
unwearied eagerness: You dote upon it: You contrive and project how you may
enjoy it; You think you have got some great matter when you have obtained it: A
filthy stir you make in the world, some of you, to the disquiet of all about
you that you may be richer or greater then you are. It takes up your heart,
your time, your strength; and visibly it is the very work you live for, and the
great game that you play, and the main trade that you drive on; and all your
Religious affairs come in but on the by, and God is put off with the leavings
of the world: And if you are low in the world, or miss of your desires, and
suffer in the flesh; you whine, and repine, as if you had lost your God and
your Treasure. If you will deceive your selves by denying t^is, that bettereth
not your case: Neither God, nor any wise man, that sees your worldly lives,
and how much you set by worldly things, and how little Good you do with your
wealth, and how much the flesh and your posterity have as devoted unto them,
and how little God has devoted unto him; I say, no wise man that sees this
will believe that you are mortified heavenly men. I do here proclaim to you
this day from the Word of the Lord, that this your way is your folly, Psalm 49.
13. Luke 12. 20. and that you are at present in a damnable condition, that you
are the enemies of God, whoever of you are friends to the world, and that if
you love the world, the love of the Father is not in you, 1 John 2. 15. and
that you must in Affection and Resolution forsake all that you have in the
world, and look for a Portion in the world to come, or you are not Christians
indeed, nor can be saved, Luke 14. 33. It would grieve the heart of a Believing
man, to see how desperately many civil ingenuous Gentlemen and others delude
and destroy themselves insensibly. You will I hope all cry shame upon a common
swearer, drunkard or whoremonger: you will hang a Thief, a Murderer, or a
Traitor. But you seem not sensible of the misery of your own Condition, that
are perhaps in a more dangerous case then these. I beseech you consider! Is not
that the most sinful and dangerous state, where God has least of the heart,
and the creature has most? What know you, if you know not this? Why it is
apparent, that there is less Love to the world in many an one of the
forementioned wretches, then in many Civil Gentlemen, that live in good
reputation in their Country, and little suspect so much mischief by
themselves. That is the most wicked man, that has in his heart the strongest
Interest which is opposite unto God: and all that is not subordinate is
opposite. Sin has not so deep and strong an Interest in some Muderers, that
kill a man in a passion, in some swearers that get nothing by it, but swear in
a passion, or in some thieves, that steal in necessity, as it has in many that
seem sober and Religious. I say again, the greater creature ^nterest, the more
sinful is the estate. Alas, Sirs, the abstaining from some of these crimes, and
living like Civil Religious men, if the world be not Crucified to you and you
to it, does but hide your sin and misery, and hinder your shame and repentance,
but not prevent your damnation. Nay the very Interest of the flesh it ^elf may
make you forbear disg^acefull sins; and so that may be finally your greater
vice, which you so much glory in, and which is materially your duty. All the
priv^ledge of your condition is, that you shall serve the Devil in more Golden
setters, then the poorer and contemned fort of sinners; and that you may be the
children of wrath with less suspicion; and that you may go to Hell in more
credit then the rest; and by your self-deceit, you may keep off the knowledge
of your misery, and the disquiet of soul that would follow thereupon; till
death make you wiser when it is too late. And is this a benefit to rejoice in?
Indeed you have your Good things in this life; you may be clothed in the best,
and fare deliciously, and when you are in Hell Torments, where you would be
glad of a drop of water, your kindred on earth may nevertheless honor your
name, and little suspect or believe your misery. And this is the Privilege
that you have above more disgraced offenders: You leave a better esteem of you
on earth, when your souls are in Hell I But, alas, if a Pope should Saint you,
and his followers pray to you and worship you, as its possible they may do,
this will not ease your torments. I confess I am sensible that this kind of
discourse is not very like to please you; but it is not my errand to Please,
but to Profit. For my part, I bear you as much respect, as you are Magistrates,
or otherwise qualified for the common good, as others do: But I must deal
plainly with you, in hope of your recovery, or at least of the discharge of my
own soul. I confess to you, I look upon a worldly Prince, or Judge, or Justice,
or Gentlem^n, or Freeholder yea or Minister, as men as wicked before God, and
in as dam^able and dangerous a case to their own souls, as the thieves that you
bur^ in the hand and hang. I am far from extenuating their sin or misery: but I
am showing you your own. Your sin may be as deep rooted, and the interest of
the world may be more predominant in you, then in them. Your lands, and houses,
and hopeful posterity, and the other provisions that you have made for your
flesh, may have more of your hearts, then the world has of the heart of a poor
prisoner that never had so much to Idol^ze. Believe it Gentlemen, Christ was
not in jest, when he so often and earnestly warns men of your quality of
their everlasting peril: Even more then ever he did Adulterers or Thieves. Its
not for nothing ^^^t he tells us how [ the cares of the world, and the
deceitfulness of riches choke the word, that it becomes unfruitful, Luke 8. 14
Mat. 16. 2^. The Pharisecs that were covetous derided Christ, when others did
believe, Luke 16. 14. They cannot be true Believers that receive Honor one of
another, and seek not the honor that comes from God only, John 5. 44. that
is, who prefer the former. It is not for nothing that Christ assures you, that
it is as hard for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God, as for a Camel
to go throw a needles eye. Which though it be possible, does plainly show some
extraordinary difficulty, Mat. 19. 23, 24. such use to go away sorrowful, when
they hear of forsaking all, because they are rich, Luke 18. 23. Has not God
chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, to be heirs of the Kingdom, which
he has promised to them that love him? Iam. 2. 5. And the Holy Ghost says not
without cause, that [ Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble are called,] 1 Cor. 1. 26. But God has chosen the weak things of
the world to confound the things that are mighty; and base things of the world,
and things that are despised, has God chosen, and things that are not, to
bring to naught things that are, that no flesh should glory in his pr^sence, v.
27, 28, 29. It is the common case of prospering worldlings to play the fool
after all Gods warnings, and in their hearts to say, Soul take thy rest; when
they know not but that night their souls may be called for, Luke 12. 20. O that
you would be pleased but considerately to read those two parables or histories,
Luke 12. 16. and Luke 16. 19. which you have so often read or heard
inconsiderately. I beseech you think not that we wrong such men, if we rank
them with the most notorious sinners. The Apostle reckons them with the most
heinous sinners that should arise in the last days, 2 Timothy 3. 2, 4. Covetous,
and lovers of their own selves, and lovers of pleasures more then God, and bids
us turn away from such. And he reckons them among such as the Church must
excommunicate, and with whom a Christian may not eat, 1 Cor. 5. 10, 11. And
with the notorious wicked men that shall not enter into the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 6. 10. Ephesians. 5. 5. It is a sin not to be once named among the Saints, Ephesians.
5. 3. In a word, if you are worldly or covetous, you are certainly wicked and
abhorred by God, how highly soever you may be esteemed of men. Psalm 10. 3. The
wicked boasts of his hearts desire^* and blesses the covetous whom the Lord
abhorreth] If yet you think I use you unmannerly in speaking so hardly of you,
hear the Holy Ghost a little further, Iam. 5. 1. Go to now ye rich men; weep
and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you. Your riches are corrupted,
and your garments motheaten, your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of
them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire,
ye have heaped treasure together for the last dates] And mentioning their
oppression, he adds, [ Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been
wanton: Ye have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter.] In a word, If
Christ called Peter himself a Satan, when he would have had him favor himself,
and avoid suffering, because he savoured not the things of God, but of men,
Mat. 16. 22. You may see that we call you not so bad as you are.

I Shall now take the freedom to come a little nearer you, and close with you
upon the main of my business. Poor worldlings! I come not hither to beat the
air, nor to waste an hour in empty words: but it is Work that I come upon. An
unpleasing Work to flesh and blood; even to take away your profits, and
pleasures, and honors from you! to take away the world from you, and all that
you have therein! Not out of your Hands, but out of your Hearts! Not against
your wills, (for that is impossible) nor by unresistible force (I would I could
do that) but by procuring your own consent, and persuading you to cast them
away your selves. I cannot expect the consent of your flesh, and therefore I
will not treat with it; but if yet you have any free use of your reason in
matters of this nature, look back upon the Reasons that I have before laid
down, and tell me whether you see not sufficient cause to forsake this world,
and betake your selves to another course of life, and look another way for your
felicity? This then is the upshot of all that I have been saying to you, and
this is the Message that I have to you from God; to require you presently to
renounce this world, and unfeig^edly to despise it, and proclaim war against
it, and to come over to him that is your rightful Lord, and will be your true
and durable Rest. What say you! Will you be divorced from the world and the
flesh this day* and take up with a naked Christ alone, and the Hopes of an
heavenly felicity which he has promised? Will you bring forth that Traitor
that has had your hearts and lives so long, and let him die the death? Shall
the world this day be Crucified to you, and you to it? I am to let you know,
that this is the thing that God expects, and nothing less will serve the
turn, nor will any worldly kind of Religiousness bring you to salvation. This
world and flesh are enemies to God, and you have been guilty of High Treason
against his Majesty by harboring them, and serving them so long. And I am
moreover to let you know, that God will have them down, one time or other:
Either by his Grace, or by his Judgment* Had you rather that Death and Hell
should make the separation, then that saving grace should do it? Will you still
hide it as sugar under your tongue? Will you obstinately cleave to it, when you
know its vanity, and the mischief that such contempt of God will bring? If you
do so, God will embitter it to you in the end! and he will make it gall in your
mouths, and torment to your hearts, and you shall spit it out, and be forced
to confess that it is no better then you were told. I do charge you therefore
in the name of the Lord, that you renounce this world without delay, and
presently and effectually Crucify it to your selves. You once did it by your
parents in Baptism, and you have proved false to that profession: Now do it by
your selves, and stand to what you do. If it had not been a part of
Christianity, you had not been called to do it then: And therefore you may
understand, that it is but to be Christians indeed that I persuade you. A
Christian worldling, is as mere a fiction, as a Christian Infidel. Enter now
into your own hearts with a Reforming zeal. It should be the Temple of the Holy
Ghost: down then with every Idol that is there erected: Whip out the buyers and
sellers, and overthrow the money Tables, and suffer it not to be made a den of
thieves. Down with your Diana's: Though the world worship her; God and his
sanctified ones despise her. What the ungodly say of our Zion, we say of your
Babel, Down with it, raze it, even to the foundation: it is a thing to be
destroyed: happy is he that dasheth the brats of worldly concupiscence against
the stones, Psalm 137. 7, 8, 9. Mortify your members that are on earth.
Crucify this your p^^^ended King. Away with the world out of your hearts, it
is not fit that it should there live.

Honorable, Worshipful, and all Well-Beloved; I beseech you hear me not, as
if I speak but words of course to you, or read you but a formal Lecture. I mean
as I speak, and I prosess to the faces of you all, that either the world and
flesh or you shall die. Kill it, or it will kill you; and Christ will destroy
both it and you. Think not any more of a fleshly earthly minded man, that has
his affections on this world, as a tolerable sinner of the smaller size: I
tell you, the Devil may as soon be saved, as a man that lives and dies a
sensualist. I mean not only the notorious Misers, or the infamous Drunkards,
Gamesters or idle Gallants; but all men, even the most Civil or seemingly
Religious, in whose hearts a worldly fleshly interest is predominant. If you
are such, your Honors and Riches will not keep you from being firebrarnds of
hell. Down therefore with the world, and set up God alone in your souls.

I cannot but understand, that I am like to be an unwelcome Messenger to you,
that come on such an ungrateful errand. If I came as the Levellers or Quakers,
to cry down your pride and worldliness, with such mixtures of destraction as
might make you laugh at me as a self-conceited fantastical person, perhaps it
would trouble you less to hear me. For you look on them as histrionicall
actors. Quakers do but jest with you, or harden you by their vanity: But we are
in good sadness, and God himself is in good sadness with you. We must have your
worldly Interest out of the very hearts of you; Christ will have your heart
blood for it, if he shall not have it.

And here you may see, that it is no wonder if the serious faithful Ministers
of Christ, be men detested by most of the world, even of professed Christians
themselves. For alas, what an errand is it that God does send upon! If I should
take the Crown from the Princes head, and tread it in the dirt, what must I
expect! If I came to take away your honors, or your estates, your houses,
lands, or moneys; What must I expect! Do you not prosecute and hang Thieves for
robbing you of some of these! Why though I do less in some respects, it is more
that I am sent to do in other respects. Though we take not the Princes Crown
from his head, we must take it from his heart. Though we take not your money
out of you^ purses, nor your goods out of your houses, nor your houses out of
your possessions, we must attempt to take them all out of your hearts. No
wonder then if we be hated of all such; For at the heart it is that the world
is sweetest to you: there it is nearest and dearest to you: and there is your
carnal Interest deepest rooted. To be let blood in the very heart, will be more
grievous to you then in the hand. And yet so it must be, that the heart blood
of worldly Interest may be let out, in the Crucifying of it, as the world did
let out the heartblood of Christ. What are all your suits at this Assize about!
but against one man that robbed you of your money! against another that took
your cattle! against another that would deprive you of your estate! and against
another that has wounded your Honor and Reputation! and another that some how
provoked you to revenge by contradicting your will. What wonder then if you
should all turn your spleen against me, that would take not one of these, but
all, and that from you all, and that from your very hearts. The flesh would be
all, and have all; or else it were not the chiefest Idol: No marvel then if it
storm, when we would take all from it.

And yet let me tell you, to abate your indgnation, that though we talk of
casting down your Temple, we add withal, that it shall be built again in three
days: and the casting of it down, will tend to its greater glory. The world
will be more honorable and useful to you when it is Crucified, and the flesh
when it is subjected, then now they be: But of that more anon.

Obj. Oh but, says the Carnal Heart, Have my honors and dignities cost me so
dear; have I been so long in getting my Riches, and shall I now part with all
for your speeches? and do you think I am such a fool as to be worded out of
them? Soft and fair: I came not by them so easily, nor will I so easily part
with them, nor with the content and comfort that my heart has in them.

Answ. Because that worldlings think themselves so wise, and put such a face of
confidence on their dotage, I shall yet draw nearer you, and reason the ^ase a
little further with you, and to that end I shall propound these following
Questions, desiring your serious answer.

Quest. 1.
BEcause you presume to call it folly, to part with all at Christ's command,
tell me, Whether is God or you the wiser, and whose judgment is fittest to
determine which is the wisest way? Who are like to be the fools indeed? those
that you call so, or that God calls so? Sure you should easily be resolved of
this: For if you be wiser then God, then you are Gods, and God is no longer
God. For he that is wisest and best is God. And me thinks, as bad and as mad as
you are, you should not be so mad yet as to say, or think that you are Gods, or
that you are wiser then God. Well then, ^old but there, and then let us
consider, Whether God and you be both of a mind, about the matters of the
world, Psalm 49. 13. When he has described the life of a prosperous worldling,
he says, [ This their way is their folly: yet do their posterity approve their
sayings.] And in Luke 12. 20. we find Christ's censure on such an one as you,
that said within himself, [ Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years:
take t^i^e ease, eat, drink and be merry.] To whom God says, [ Thou ^ool, this
night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be
which thou have provided?] And that you may learn to make a due application of
this, and not think it is nothing to you, Christ adds, [ So is he that lays
up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God.] Where you may note the
exact description of a graceless worldling, such as throughout this discourse
we mean: He is one that lays up treasure for himself, and is not Rich toward
God; as all the sanctified are. The difference lies in the matter, and end, or
use of his riches. The worldling lays up earthly treasure, the sanctified man
lays up a treasure in heaven with God: The worldling is rich for himself, and
all that he parts with for Gods service or the poor, is but the leavings of
the flesh* and that which it can spare, when its own desires are satisfied,
(for so much an Epicure may part with to good uses:) But the sanctified does
employ his riches for God, as being Rich to him, and not to his Carnal self.

You see by this time who they be that are the fools in Gods account. And that
though the children of this world are wiser in their Generation then the
children of light, Luke 16. 8. yet the wisdom of the world is foolishness with
God, and the foolishness of God is wiser then men, 1 Cor. 3. 19. and 1. 20, 25.

And you know that it is Christ that requires you to forsake all that you have
for him; and dare you say that Christ commands you to be fools? Is not that
the wisest way which he requires?

Obj. But Christ would not have us cast away that which he gives us, but only
rather to forsake it, then to forsake him; and that I would do.

Answ. But if you forsake it not first in Affection and Resolution, you will
never forsake it actually when he calls you to it; though you may be confident
you should, while you look not to be put to it. In your hearts all must be now
forsaken, though you may keep some in your hands till God require it. 2. And
even in prosperity you must devote your wealth to God, and use it more for him
then for your selves, if you will prove your selves to be his servants.

Quest. 2.
MY second Question to you is this: You that are so loath to part with the
world and be Crucified to it, tell me, What has it done for you? that you
should be so fond of it, and that it should seem worthy of such estimation and
affection? Has it not put you to more care and sorrow then it is worth? It
never gave you solid Peace! it never made you acceptable to God! You are not a
jot better when you are rich, then when you are poor; unless grace do that for
you that riches cannot; nay and grace must do it not only without, but against
your riches. All that the world can do for you, is but to satisfy your sensual
appetite, and by the superfluity to please a Covetous mind. And is this a
matter of so great worth? A beast may have his sensual delight as well as you?
And if man be better then a beast, do you think he is not capable of a better
and higher delight then beasts? Will you call your selves Men and Christians,
and yet take up with the pleasures of a bruit, and there place your happiness?
If the drunk^rd have an hundred barrels of Ale or Wine more then he can drink,
this does not so much as please his appetite; but only his fa^^^: So if you
have never so much riches more then your flesh ^^ self has use for, this only
pleases a covetous fancy. All that you enjoy is but so much as may satisfy
the lu^^s of your flesh. And I pray you tell me, Whether you do not your selves
believe that a sober, temperate, heavenly Christian does live as comfortable a
life as you? And, Whether they have not more peace in their minds without your
sinful sensual delights, then you have with them? Indeed it is but the
distemper of your minds that makes that so pleasant to you, which another that
is well in his wits would be weary of: As the swine takes pleasure to tumble in
the mire, which a wise man would not do. Do you not sin against your own
experience! Have you not found, that the world is an unsatisfactory thing, and
cannot help you in a day of trouble? And yet will you stick to it?

Quest. 3.
MY next* Question is, What has the world done for any other, that should
persuade you to set so much by it as you do? Did it ever save a soul? or heal a
soul? or make a man truly happy at the last? Look back in any credible Records,
to the beginning of the world, and down to this day, and tell me where is the
man that is made happy by the world? And Consider what it has done for them
all? He that had most of it, and made the best of it, for the pleasing of his
flesh, had but a short taste of sonsual pleasures, which quickly left him worse
then he was before; like cold drink to a man in the fit of an Ague. And will
you so far lay by your reason, as to go against the Experience of all the
world? Do they all cry out against it as Vanity, and yet will you take no
warning? Can you think to find that by it that no man ever found before you?
What art have you to extract such comforts from the creature, that never man
could do till now? It is the shame of them that spend so much cost, and time,
and labor, in seeking that seed of Gold which they call the Philosophers
stone, because never any that sought it could find it, but have all lost their
labor. So is it your far greater shame* to run an hazard so much greater for
that which never man from the beginning of the world could find till now.
^olomon went as far as any, in the pleasing of his flesh with the fullness of
the world, and in the Conclusion he passes this sentence on it, that All is
vanity and vexation of spirit.

Quest. 4.
MY next Question to you is this: What is it that you do seriously expect from
the world for the time to come, that should persuade you to stick so close to
it as you do? Some great matter sure you think it will do for you? or else you
would never so esteem it. I pray you tell me what it is? Do you think verily,
that it will make you truly happy? Do you expect that it should bring you to
heaven? I suppose you do not. What then will it do for you? It will neither
prevent a sickness, nor remove it: It cannot take away a tooth-ake, nor a fit
of the gout or stone: It will not save you from the jaws of death, nor keep
your bodies from rotting in the grave, nor bribe the worms or corruption from
devouring them. When your Physician tells you that your disease is uncurable,
and you see that there is no way but one with you, and you must be gone,
there is no remedy, if then you cry for help to the world, it cannot help you:
Friends cannot save you, Riches and Honors, Houses and Lands cannot preserve
you: Death will obey his will that sends it, and you must away. O who would
love that, and love it at so dear a rate, which cannot help you in the time of
your necessity? Who would serve such a Master, such an Idol God, as cannot
relieve you in the day of your distress^^* When conscience is awakened, and
begins to stir, and gripe you, and the wrath of God does look you in the face,
will your honors ease you? Will your friends deliver you, and give you a solid
lasting Peace? You know they will not: You cannot with all the wealth in the
world procure the pardon of the smallest sin? You may get the Popes pardon for
money, but not Gods. You must go to Judgment, and if you be worldlings, must
be damned for ever, for all your wealth. Were you Lords of all the world, it
would not save your souls from Hell, no nor procure you a drop of water for to
cool your tongues. What is it then that you expect by this world? Sure you
would never so much love it, and make such a stir for it, if you looked for
nothing from it? Why it is that your flesh may have some satisfaction in the
mean time. And is that all? Yea: that is even all. I shall then proceed to the
next Question.

Quest. 5.
HOW long can you say that you shall keep the Riches and Honors which you
possess? Can you say that they shall be yours this time twelve-moneth? or to
morrow? I know you cannot. You know not when you arise in the morning, whether
ever you shall lie down again alive. Nor when you lie down at night, whether
you shall rise alive. And is a state of such uncertain tenure so valuable? You
glory in your Honors, and pleasures, and possessions, and for ought you know
within this week, or hour, they may be none of yours? However, you are certain
to be deprived of them ere long! Its a dull understanding indeed, that cannot
foresee the day, when he must be stripped of all, and take his final farewell of
the world! You know as sure as you shall live that you must die, and your
corpse be laid in the common dust: And whose then shall all your pleasure be?
When God calls you away, there is no resisting! Or if he call for any of your
earthly comforts, there is no withholding. Then keep them if you can. The bones
and dust of your forefathers will not say, This house and land is mine! Nor do
they retain any impress of their former earthly pleasures and felicity!
Alexander could not know his Father Philip's bones by the sight of them, nor
find any print of the Crown upon his skull. If you open the Grave and Coffin of
your Grandfathers, you shall find there no great signs of Riches or of Honor,
or any delights. And should you not look on that which will be, even as if it
were already? I cannot but take that which certainly will be, in a manner as if
it were in being; and that which certainly will not be, as if it were not: For
interposing time is such a Nothing, as makes the difference next to None. What
if you might be the Emperor of the world to day, and must be as you are again
to morrow, were it desirable, or worthy to be regarded? It disgraceth the
greatest felicity on earth, to say, that It will have an end: The time is near
when it will not be. As it extenuateth the labors and sufferings of a
Believer, into a kind of Nothing, to say that they will shortly be at an end.
That which will be Nothing, is next to Nothing.

Quest. 6.
MY next Question to you is this: How do you think you shall value the world,
when it is parting from you? or at the furthest, when you are newly parted from
it? If a man come to you on your deathbed, when you see that there is no hope
of life, and ask your opinion then of the world, will you magnify it as now
you do? When your spirits are languishing, and your heart fainting, and your
body even possessed with pain, if then one should ask you, Is the wealth and
honors of the world such excellent things as once you deemed them? Do you now
think it folly to renounce and forsake them all for Christ? What would you then
say? I beseech you tell me, What think you that you shall then say? Do you
think you shall then extol the world, and count them fools that will be
persuaded to forsake it? Or rather will you not wish your selves, [ O that I
had forsaken it, before it did forsake me!] Will you not cry out, [ Oh vain
world! Deceitful world!] And wish you had more regarded the durable Riches? I
think you will.

Quest. 7.
WHat is it that dying men do commonly think and say of the world? If you can
observe what all others say of it, you may partly conjecture what mind you
shall be of your selves. You have sometimes sure been about dying men; (If you
have not, you were best draw near them hereafter; for the house of mourning is
better then the house of mirth.) Do you not hear them all cry out of the world,
as a worthless thing? Do you not see how little good it can then do them? And
will no warning serve you? Surely the judgment of one of these men (much more
of so many) is more to be valued, then of many that are in health and
prosperity, that overvalue the world. You are but in the chase, and know not
what it is which you do pursue: but they have overtaken it, and find it but a
feather: You are but in the trying of it, but they have tried it already, and
have found how little or nothing it can do. You are entangled in the midst of
its deceits: but they begin to see it bare-fac't. Your senses are more violent
in withdrawing you and perverting your judgments: but so are not theirs, who
are languishing unto death. If you come to one of them, that know they must die
within a few days, and tell them that such a Lordship is fallen to them, or
such Honor is bestowed on them, or such a friend has given them great
possessions; how will they regard it? will they not say [ Alas, what is this to
me, that am presently to leave the world, and appear before the eternal Judge!]
If you then come to them, and offer them such baits as were wont to catch the
glutton, or drunkard, or fornicator, do you think they will regard them? Would
they not rather cry shame against him that would then entice them to any such
thing? Why then should you so value that now, which all the world will vilify
at the last?

Quest. 8.
YOU that now say, you are not such fools as to be talked out of your Estates,
or Honors, or delights, and that wilfully stick to them against all that we
can say, I pray you tell me, Whether you will stand to this at the Bar of God?
Will you then own these Resolutions and sayings, or will you not? Dare you look
the Lord Jesus in the face, and tell him, [ I did well to set more by the world
then by thee, and the glory which thou did promise! I did well to take my
pleasure for a time, and to venture my salvation.] You dare not stand to this
at Judgment: I know you dare not: And will you now insist on that which you
dare not stand to? And be of that mind which then you must condemn your selves?
Do you think that this is a reasonable course to be ventured on in so great a
matter?

Quest. 9.
MY next Question is this, Do you ever mean to Repent of your fleshly and
worldly-mindedness, or not? If you do not, it seems you are far from a
Recovery. Many an one perishes with bare uneffectuall purposes of Repenting:
but those that have not so much as such a purpose, are graceless indeed. But if
you do purpose to Repent, I would further ask you, Do you think that is a right
mind, or a wise course which must be Repented of? If it be right and wise, what
need you to Repent of it? If it be not wise and right, why will you now retain
it, yea and wilfully maintain it, against the persuasions of God and man? Does
not this proclaim that you are wilful sinners? and that you know you sin, and
yet will do it; even against your own knowledge and conscience? that you know
the world to be a deceitful vanity, and yet for all that you will stick to it
as long as you can, with the neglect of God, and the true felicity? And can you
expect mercy and salvation, that wilfully and knowingly do set your selves
against it, and reject it?

Quest. 10.
MY next Question which I desire you to answer is this, Do you in good sadness
take the world for your enemy, or for a hindrance to you in the way to heaven?
If you do not, why did you in your Baptism renounce it, and promise to fight
against it? And why have you professed since to stand to that Covenant? And how
then can you believe the word of God, which so often tells you, what a
hinderance Riches and Honors are to men's salvation? But if indeed you believe
that the world is your enemy and hinderance, why then will you love it, and be
impatient if you want it, and take such pleasure in it, and desire to have more
of it? Do you love to have your salvation hindered or hazarded? and will you
love and long for that which is an enemy to it? I think the way to heaven is
hard enough to the best. They need not make it harder then it is, and be at so
much labor all their lives to make themselves more enemies, and more work, and
to block up the way, while they pretend to walk in it. O the hypocrisy of a
carnal heart! How notoriously do men's lives contradict their tongues? When
they will call the world their enemy, and vow to fight against it to the death,
and at the same time will labor for it, and greedily desire it, as if they
could never have enough! That they will make so much of it, as to neglect God
himself and their salvation for it, and make it the greatest care and business
of their lives to get and keep it, and all the while profess that they take it
for their enemy! This is dissembling beyond all bounds of shame. Remember this
when you are impatient of your low estate, or contriving further accommodations
to your flesh, or hunting after a full estate. Are these the signs of enmity to
the world? Do you hate your salvation, that you so love the hinderers of it?
Either live as you profess, or profess as you live.

Quest. 11.
YET further I demand, Whether indeed you do intend to Renounce your
Christianity, and all your hopes of heaven, or not? If you do, you know whom to
blame when you are deprived of it? And I could wish you would first find out
some better way, or something that may be of valuable consideration, to repair
your loss. But if you say, you have no such intent; I further ask, Why then do
you do it? and do it after so much warning? Do you disclaim your Christianity
in the open light, and yet say that you intend no such thing? You cannot do it
against your will. And that it is in effect a Renouncing or Denying your
Christianity, yea and your salvation, is plain: For your Christianity
contains a Renouncing of the world: and therefore it is part of our Baptismal
Covenant. If then you return to the world which you renounced, you forsake your
Christianity: Had you rather forsake the world, or Christ? One of them you must
forsake: For he has told you, that [ Except you forsake all that you have, you
cannot be his Disciples] Luke 14. and that you cannot serve God and Mammon; Had
you rather renounce the world, or your salvation? One of them you must let go:
For God has said, that the love of the world is enmity against God* and that
if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.] If therefore
you will still say, You hope you may keep both: What do you less then give God
the lie? If you will still adhere to the world, and yet say that you do not
renounce your Christianity or Salvation, you may as well say, that though you
join in Arms with open Rebels, yet do you not forsake your Loyalty to your
Prince! Or though you live in Adultery, yet you do not forsake your conjugal
fidelity and chastity: and that you do not cast away your life, though you take
poison, when you know it to be such: or though you commit those crimes which
must be punished with death. I beseech you consider well, Why you forsake
Christ, and why you will destroy your selves, before you do it past remedy?

Quest. 12.
MY last Question which I desire your answer to is this: Do you indeed think
that God is not better then the world, and that Heaven is not more desiarble
then earth, and an endless glory then a transitory shadow? Or is there any
comparison to be made between them? Have you considered what a sad exchange you
make? O unthankful souls! Has not God done more for you then ever the world
did? He made you, and so did not the world! He Redeemed you, when none else
could do it! He preserves you, and provideth for you, and all that you have is
from his bounty. He can give health to your bodies, peace to your consciences,
salvation to your souls, when the world cannot do it. If the world be better
then God in prosperity, what makes you call upon God in adversity? When any
torment seizes on your bodies, or death draws near and looks you in the face,
then you do not cry, O Riches help us! O Pleasures or Honors have mercy upon
us! But O God have mercy upon us and help us. Can none else help you in your
distress, and yet will you prefer the creature in your prosperity! Ah poor
deluded souls! that follow the world which will cast you off in your greatest
need, and neglect him that would be faithful to you for ever! The time is
coming when you shall cry out, [ The world has deceived me! I have labored
for naught!] but if you had been as true to God as you were to it, he would
never have deceived you. He would have received your departed souls, and made
you like Angels, and raised your bodies to glory at the last, and perpetuated
that Glory! Will your Riches, or Pleasures, or Honors do this? He would have
rescued you from the devouring flames which your inordinate love of the world
will bring you to. O miserable change! to change God for the world, it is to
change a Crown of Glory for a Crown of thorns: the love of our only friend, for
the smiles of deceitful enemies: Life for death; and Heaven for Hell? O what
thoughts will arise in your hearts, when you are past the deceit; and under the
sad effects of it, and shall review your folly in another world? It will fill
your consciences with everlasting horror, and make you your own accusers and
tormentors, to think what you lost, and what you had for it: To think that you
sold God and your souls, and everlasting hopes for a thing of naught. More
foolishly then Esau sold his birthright for a mess of pottag^. If the Sun, and
Moon, and Stars were yours, would you exchange them for a lump of clay? Well
sinners! if God and Glory seem no more worth to you, then to be slighted for a
little fleshly pleasures, you cannot marvail if you have no part in them.

SECT. XIX.
IF Reason and Scripture-Evidence would serve turn, I dare say you would by
this time be convinced of the necessity of being Crucified to the world, and
the world to you But sensuality is unreasonable, and no saying will serve with
it; like a child that will not let go his apple for a piece of gold. But yet I
shall not cease my Exhortation, till I have tried you a little further; and if
you will not yield to forsake the world, you shall keep it to your greater
cost, as you keep it against the clearer light that would convince you of your
duty.

1. As you love God, or would be thought to love him, love not the world. For
so far as you Love it, you Love not him, 1 Ioh. 2. 15. As ever you would be
found the friends of God, see that you be enemies, and not friends to the
world. For the friendship of the world is enmity to him, Iam. 4. 4. You are
used to boast that you Love God above all; If you do so, you will not Love the
world above him: And then you will not labor and care more for it, then for
him: Your love will be seen in the bent of your lives: That which you Love
best, you will ^eek most, and be most careful and diligent to obtain. As they
that love money are most careful to get it; so they that Love heaven will be
more careful to make sure of that. As they that love their drink and lust will
be much in the Alehouse, and among those that are the baits and fuel of their
lust; So they that Love the fruition of God, will be much in seeking him and
enquiring after him, and much among those that are acquainted with such Love,
and can further them any way in the accomplishment of their desires. If you
Love God then, let it be seen in the Holy Endeavors of your lives, and set
your affections on things above, and not on the things that are on earth: For
that which you most look after, we must think that you most Love: Can you for
shame commit Adultery with the world, and live with it in your bosoms, and yet
say that you love God?

2. As you Love your present peace and comfort, see that you love not, but
C^ucifie the world. It does but delude you first, and disquiet you afterward:
Like wind in your bowels, which can tear and torment you, but cannot nourish
you. And if God do love you with a special Love, he will be sure to wean you
from the world, though to your sorrow. If you do provoke him to lay wormwood on
the breasts, and to hedge up your forbidden way with thorns, when you find the
smart and bitterness, you may thank your selves. It is the remnant of our
folly, and our backsliding nature that is still looking back to the world which
we have forsaken, that is the cause of those successive afflictions which we
undergo. Did you Love the creature less, it would vex you less; but if you will
needs set your minds upon them, and be pleasing your worldly sensual desires,
God will turn loose those very creatures upon you, and make them his scourges
for the recovery of your wits, and the reducing of your misled revolting
souls. Are you taken up with the hopes of a more plentiful estate? and think
you are got into a thriving way? How soon can God blast and break your
expectations? By the death of your cattle, the decay of trading, the
false-dealing of those you trust, the breaking and impoverishing of them, by
contentious neighbors vexing you with Law* suits; by corrupted witnesses, or
Lawyers that will sell you for a little gain; by ill servants; by unthrifty
children; by thieves, or soldiers, or the raging flames; by restraining the
dew of heaven, and causing your land to deny its increase, and make you
complain that you have labored in vain. How many ways has he in a day or an
hour to scatter all the heap of wealth that you have been gathering, and to
show you that by sad experience, which you might have known before at easier
rates? At the least, if he meddle not with any thing that you have, yet how
quickly can he lay his hand upon your selves, and lay you in sickness to groan
under your pain and sin together; and then what comfort will you have in the
world? when head ake's, and back ake's, and nothing can ease you: When pain and
languishing make you weary of day and of night, and weary of every place, and
weary of your best diet, your finest clothes, your merriest companions: Where
then is the sweetness and beauty of the world? Then if you look on house, or
goods, or lands, how little pleasure find you in any of them? Especially when
you know that your departure is at hand, and you must stay here no longer, but
presently must away. Oh then what a carkaise will all the glory of the world
appear? and how sensibly then will you read, or hear, or think of these things,
that now in your prosperity are very little moved by the hearing of them!

Is it your children that you set your hearts upon, in inordinate Love or Care?
Why, alas, how quickly can God call them from you by death? and then you will
follow them to the Churchyard, and lay them in the grave with so much the
sadder heart; by how much the more inordinately you loved them. And perhaps God
may leave them to be Graceless and unnatural, and make that child by rebellion
or unkindness to be the breaking of your heart, whom you most excessively
affected. If it be a wife that you over-love, you know not but they may fall
into that peevishness and frowardness, that jealousy or unkindness, that
perverseness of tongue or other distempers, that may make your lives a very
burden to you! Do you look after the favor of great ones? Perhaps you shall
feel their injustice and cruelties; and God will be so merciful to you as to
cure you by the means of their srowns, who would else have been infatuated and
poisoned by their favors. Is it popular applause that you so much regard; and
does it tickle you to hear of your own commendations? Take heed lest you
provoke God to give you such a bitter corrective for your pride, as may make
you as vile in the eyes of men, as you desired to be Honorable. He can quickly
give you such a prick in the flesh, or suffer such a Messenger of Satan to
buffet you, as shall humble you to your sorrow. Perhaps he may let you fall
into some disgraceful sin, which the world may ring of to your reproach: Or if
you be never so innocent, the tongues of men may make you guilty. If you be as
chaste as any man, it is easy for a slanderous tongue to make you incontinent,
and to lay some odious blot upon your name, which shall never be wiped off,
till the Judge of all the world shall*justifie you. If you give to the poor and
other charitable uses as far as you are able, it is not hard for slanderous
tongues to make you seem uncharitable and covetous. If you be never so
temperate, in meat and drink, apparel and recreations, its easy for a
slanderer to make you seem a proud, or luxurious scandalous man. The
weathercock is not more unconstant, nor the waves more impetuous, then the
giddy raging vulgar are. And will you repose your selves in the thoughts of
such? They that applaud you in prosperity, and when you fit their turns, will
despise you in adversity, and rage against you, as if you were unworthy to
live, when once you cross their opinions and desires. If you are so puffed up
that you love the praise of men, perhaps God may make you run the gantlope
through town and country, and suffer every venomous tongue to speak swords to
your heart, and have a lash at your reputation; till you have learned to stand
to Gods approbation, and to account it a small thing to be Judged of man.

Yea if it be reputation with Godly men that you dote upon, its possible that
the tongues even of godly men may become your scourge. Sometimes their ears lie
open to the slanders that worser men have raised, and they think it no great
sin to report the reproaches which they have heard from others: And sometime
through Temptations and the remnant of their corruptions, they are ready to be
the principal authors themselves. If you differ from them in any opinion in
which they expect reputation themselves, or if you contradict them, or stand in
the way of their sinful designs and ends, o^ any way diminish their honor with
men, you may possibly find that you had but a slippery standing in their
esteem. Even godly men in passion may offer you as base indignities as others,
and may tread down your desired reputation the more successfully, by how much
their credit is stronger then other men's, to carry on their reports. For if one
that is esteemed godly do accuse you, the most will think they are obliged to
believe it, and to say, [ Such or such a godly person spoke it] does seem to
many enough to warrant the spreading of the falsest reports to your disgrace.

Or if it be your honor in the eyes of Ministers, and learned men, that you
inordinately regard, perhaps you may find from some of them that their learning
does but make them the more skilful in abusing you, and the keener instruments
to prick you to the heart, and to cut in pieces that reputation which you
overvalued: You shall be reproached more learnedly by them then by others* and
slandered a great deal more cunningly, and so with more success. They may
perhaps differ from you in some points of judgment; and so may think that they
do God service by proclaiming you to be erroneous or heretical; and their own
errors may persuade them that it is their duty to defame you, and accuse you
of the guilt which is indeed their own: Like a man that has a stinking breath,
and thinks it is not his own but his companions, and therefore runs out of his
company, and tells him he cannot abide his breath.

Its possible also that their Interests and yours may clash, and they may be
tempted to tread your reputation in the dirt, as a necessary means for the
maintaining of their own: Especially if in a faction, they find you of a party
which they are engaged against, whatever you are your selves, you must bear the
reproaches of your party; and it will be crime enough to be one of that side
which they abhor. And its likely they will not want engines to execute their
wrathful zeal. Perhaps they will have some nickname of reproach for you, and
join you with this or that Heresy, which they perceive to be odious with those
they speak to: and so they will do more by reproachful names and titles, then
they could do by plain argument, or any ingenuous course. At least its likely
they will not be wanting in the bitteerst censures behind your back: And the
hearers will think, be it never so false, that sure there is some truth in it,
or else such a learned well-esteemed man, would never have reported it. So that
if Satan can get but one tongue or pen of a learned man in credit to slander
you, its ten to one but he will get many hundred ears and hearts to drink in
the venom, and either to believe it, or entertain uncharitable suspicions of
you; and as many tongues to divulge the report (though with pretended
compassion and charity) to taint the minds of others with the same infection*
It may be those very learned men whom you admire, and whose esteem you are
sinfully ambitious of, may be given over to set them against you, with the most
malicious shameless calumnies, and lay to your charge the things that never
entered into your thoughts, and the things that you never did nor spoke; for a
better man then you was so served, Psalm. 35. 11, 12. They laid to my charge the
things which I knew not, they rewarded me evil for good, to the spoiling of my
soul.] Thus did false witnesses rise up against him, even such for whom he had
humbled his soul, and mourned in their affliction, and behaved himself to them
as his brethren and friends: yet, says he, Verse. 15, 16. [ In my adversity
they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together, yea the abjects gathered
themselves together against me, and I knew it not, they did tear me, and ceased
not: with hypocritical mockers in feasts, they gnashed upon me with their
teeth.]

Obj But is it possible that godly men can be guilty of such sins as these?

Answ. Through the remnant of their corruptions and the power of temptations,
even learned godly men may be made the powerful Instruments of Satan, to
shatter and destroy your reputation for ever (on earth) and make even Countries
and Kingdoms to believe that of you from Generation to Generation, which never
entered into your soul; and by their means, if you were persons of so much note,
you might be recorded in history to posterity, as guilty of the crimes of which
you were most innocent, yea much more innocent then the reporters themselves:
So that it will be the work of Christ at the day of Judgment to clear the
names of many an innocent one, that has gone under the repute of an Heretic,
a proud malicious man, an Adulterer, a Deceiver, and a mere unconscionable and
ungodly person, even from age to age, and that among the godly themselves, by
receiving the slander at first from some one that had the advantage to procure
a belief of it: Its like it was a seeming godly man that had been David's own
familiar friend, in whom he trusted, and which did eat of his bread: Yet was he
used in this kind by such, Psalm. 41. 6, 7, 9. And Psalm. 55. 12, 13, 14. he
says, [ It was not an enemy that reproached me; then I could have born it;
neither was it he that hated me, that did magnify himself against me; then I
would have hid my self from him: but it was thou, a man* mine equal, my guide
and mine acquaintance; we took sweet counsel together, and walked to the House
of God in company.].

Obj. But (perhaps you may think) I Will walk so carefully and innocently that no
man shall have any matter of such reproach.

Answ. 1. There is none of the imperfect Saints on earth that can be free from
giving all occasions of reproach. 2. And were you perfectly innocent, it would
not free you. Nay your innocence it self may be the occasion of those reports
that proclaim you wicked. For it is not that which really is a fault, but that
which they think so, that is the matter of such men's accusations. The Apostles
of Christ that walked in such eminent holiness and self denial, and consumed
themselves for the good of others, could not escape the tongues of slanderers,
but were accounted as the very scum and offscouring of all things, and as a
byword, and even a gazing stock to Angels and men. And the blessed Son of God,
who was holy, harmless, undefiled and separated from sinners, was yet reputed
one of the greatest of sinners, and Crucified as such. And he that could
challenge them, [ which of you convinces me of sin?] was commonly defamed of
what he was innocent of. If John came fasting, they say he has a Devil. If
Christ eat and drink temperately with sinners, that he might take opportunity
to feed their souls, they say, [ Behold a man gluttonous and a wine-bibber, a
friend of publicans and sinners] Mat. 11. 18, 19. They that saw him eat and
drink with sinners, had so fair a pretense to raise their reproach, that they
might the easilyer procure belief, though it was perfect innocence it self Leg.
E^as. Epist. ad Alphons. valet. de annuli sui ^i^^llo.
which they reproached. The best men on earth have ever had experience, that
there is no caution that can defend from a slanderous tongue. As Erasmus once
calumniated, says, [ Fatalis est morbus calumniandi omnia. Et clausis oculis
carpunt, quod nec vident, nec intell gunt: Tanta est morbi vis: Atque interim
sibi videntur Ecclesiae columnae, qu^m nihil aliud quam traducant suam
soliditatem, pari malitia conjunctam, etc.] How often was good Melancthon fain to
complain, that there is no defense against a quarrelsom slanderous tongue; and
the too much sense of it did almost break his heart.

Obj. But at least I can say as the Philosopher; If they will reproach me and
speak evil of me, I will so live that no body shall believe them.

Answ. Wherever there be men to make the report, there will lightly be enough
to believe it: And if they that know you will not believe it, yet that's but a
few to the most of them abroad that hear of you, and know you not.

You may see then by this time, if Reputation with men be the thing you
overvalue, what a vain uncertain thing it is; and how easily God can make your
sorrow arise even from thence where you expected your vain applause.

And you will find by experience if you do not prevent it, that while you
overvalue this or any earthly thing, you are in the road to these afflictions.
It is Gods ordinary dealing with his children, and frequently with others, to
punish them by their Idols, and to make them sickest of that which they have
most greedily surfeited of. Could you but Crucify the world, and use it for
God, it would have no power thus to vex and crucify your minds. It is you that
sharpen it, and arm it against your selves, and give it all the strength it
has, by your over-valuing and overloving it. Its like a Spaniell that will
love those best that beat him: but if you cocker it, it will fly in your faces.

Obj. But I may fall under all these afflictions whether I love the world or
not.

Answ. 1. But your perverse affections do provoke God to multiply such
afflictions. Had you not rather bear a smaller measure, and taste of a cup that
has less of the ga^^? 2. And if you were but Crucified to the world, the same
Afflictions would be as nothing to your mind, which now seem so grievous to
you, and cast you into such vexations and discontents. If it did as much to
your flesh, it could not reach the heart; and if all be sound and well within,
its no great matter how it is without. The very same kind of affliction,
whether it be poverty, sickness, slanders or other wrongs, are as nothing to a
man that is dead to the world, which seem intolerable to unmortified men. For
the heart and soul of the unmortified are the seat and subject of them; when
the mortified Christian has a Garrison within, and blots the door, and keeps
them from his heart. What great trouble will it be to any man to part with that
which he does not care for? especially while he keeps that which has his
heart. Its no great trouble to a worldling to want the love of God or communion
with him, nor to be without the life of grace, nor to lie under the burden of
the greatest sins, and to be the slave of the Devil: because he is dead in sin,
and dead to God, and the things of the Spirit; and therefore he perceives not
the excellency of them, but is well content to live without them; And if
spiritual death can make men so contented without the great unvaluable
treasure, and can make men set light by God and Glory; What wonder if they that
are dead to the world do set as light by such in inconsiderable vanities? And
if the dead in sin can bear so easily the greatest misery that man on earth is
ordinarily capable of, as the slavery of the Devil, the guilt of sin, the curse
of the Law, the danger of damnation, etc. what wonder then if they that are
Crucified to the world can bear a little poverty, or sickness, or reproach?
which is to the other, but as the prick of a pin, or the scratch of a thorn, to
a deadly poison, or a stab at the very heart.

3. But yet this is not all. Your inordinate love of any thing in the world,
will not only embitter your lives, but it will be the horror of your souls at
death and judgment. And therefore as ever you would leave the world in peace,
and as ever you would appear before the Lord your Judge with comfort and as
ever you desire that the creatures should not be your Tormentors, take heed
that you do not over-love them now, but see that they be Crucified to ^ou. You
cannot possibly be sensible now, what a pang of horror it will cast you into
at the last, when you shall see the world leaving you, and see what it was that
you ventured your souls and their everlasting welfare for. O with what grief
and tearing of heart do earthly minded persons part with the world? When you
are dying, that one thing that had your heart, will more torment your hearts to
remember it, then all things else will do. Nothing is such a terror to the
thoughts of a a dying covetous man, as his money, and lands, and worldly
wealth: Nothing so vexes the ambitious, as to think on that shadow of honor
which he did pursue: Nothing does so torment the filthy fornicator, as the
remembrance of that person with whom he committed the beastly sin. All other
persons or things in the world will not then be so bitter to you, as those that
stole your hearts from God: but at judgment and in hell the remembrance of
them will be a thousand fold more bitter. And who would now prepare such misery
for themselves, and glut themselves with that which they can no better digest
or bear? What wise man would not rather be without the drunkards cups, then be
fain to spue it up again, and part with it with so much sickness and disgrace.
And why should you desire to be drunk with the profits or pleasures of the
world, when you know before hand, with how much shame and trouble of conscience
you must cast it up again at last?

4. But yet this is not the worst: but if you will needs live to the world, you
must take it for your portion, and look not for any more. And therefore as ever
you would not be deprived of your hopes of eternal life, and be put off with
the earthly portion of the wicked, see that the world be Crucified to you, and
you to the world. How poor a portion is it that worldlings do possess? Even
like Nebucadnezar, that had his portion with the beasts, Da^. 4. 15. How soon
will all their portion be spent, and then they will feed with swine, yea and be
denied these very husks: For they are set in sl^ppery places, and are brought
to desolation in a moment, Psalm. 73. 18, 19, 20. O how much better a portion
might you have had, if you had not refused or neglected it when you had your
choice? Me thinks in your greatest pleasures and abundance, it should astonish
your souls to think, [ This is my portion, I shall have no more.] When you are
past this life, and entering into Eternity, then where is your ^ortion! Alas,
says Conscience, I have had it already! I cannot spend it and have it too] You
know what you have now; but what shall you have hereafter to all eternity? Your
Portion is almost spent already, and what will you do then? Oh then* to think,
that the Eternal glory of the Saints might have been yours, it was offered as
freely to you as to them, but you have lost it by preferring the world before
it, and that after a thousand convictions of your folly, O what a cutting
thought will this be, Luke 16. 25. To remember that you chose your good things
in this life, will be a sad Remembrance, when all is gone. The Lord is the
protion of his Saints inheritance, Psalm 16. 5. even their portion for ever,
Psalm 73. 26. their portion in the Land of the living, Psalm. 142. 5. and this
was it that encouraged them to labor, patience and hope, Psalm 119. 52. Lam.
3. 24, 25, 26. But for the worldling, [ The heaven shall reveal his iniquity,
and the earth shall rise up against him, the increase of his house shall
depart, and his goods shall slow away in the day of wrath. This is the portion
of a wicked man from God, and the heritage appointed to him by God, Job 20. 37,
38, 39.

If you can be content with such a Portion, make much of the world, and take
your fleshly pleasures while you may: But if you hope for the everlasting
portion of Believers, away with the world, and Crucify it without any more
ado, and set your hearts on the portion which you hope for.

SECT. XX.
HAving said as much as is suitable to the other parts of this discourse, to
persuade you to be willing to Crucify the world, I shall next give some
Directions to those that are persuaded, and tell you by what means the work may
be done. And I beseech you mark them, and resolve to practice them.

Direct. 1.
OBserve and Practice the Direction intimated in the Text. It is the Cross of
Christ that must Crucify the world to you. Its thither therefore that you must
repair for help. An Infidel may fetch such weapons from reason and experience
as shall wound the world, and diminish his esteem of it, and make it less
delightful to him: But it is only the Cross of Christ that can furnish us with
those weapons that must pierce it to the very heart. Or if the Unbeliever were
deprived of all earthly delight, and brought into despair of ever receiving
more comfort from the world (as it is with many of them in some extremity, and
with all at death) yet he himself is not Crucified to the world: Though his
delight in it be gone, yet his love to it is not gone: Though he be out of Hope
of ever having content in it, yet his desires after it are the same: If he call
it vanity and vexation, as the Believer does, it is because it denies him his
desires: Not because he takes it heartily for an Enemy, but for an unkind
Lover, that deals hardly with him that has given it his heart. If he look
upon it as Dead, and unable to help him, yet does he behold it as the carkaise
of a friend, with grief and lamentation. It is his greatest trouble that the
world cannot give him that which he would have: And therefore he is trying what
it will do for him as long as he has any hope: As the poor Infants in Ireland
lay sucking at the breasts of the corpse of their mothers, when the Irish
Papists had slain them: so will these poor worldlings still hang upon the
world, even when they find that it cannot help them; and when it will scarce
afford them a miserable life; but with much labor and suffering they hardly
get a little food and clothing. So that their affections are still alive to
the world, even when to their sorrow they look on the world as dead, or almost
dead to them.

But the Cross of Christ will teach you to Crucify the world in another
manner. As Christ did voluntari'y contemn it, and show that he set so little by
it, that he could be content to be the most despicable Object upon earth, in
the eyes of men; so will he teach you also voluntarily to contemn it; and set
up your selves as the Butt, which all the arrows of malice and despite shall
be shot at. So that though you have naturally a desire of the preservation of
your lives, and from that may say, [ Father, if it be thy will, let this cup
pass from me;] Yet shall you have a far greater desire of Pleasing* Enjoying,
and Glorifying God, which shall cause you from a comparative Judgment to say,
[ Yet not as I will, but as thou will.] Much more shall you be enabled to
despise the unnecessary matters of the world, and to mortify your inordinate
and distempered affections. The Cross of Christ will show you Reason, (though
such as the worldly wise call foolishness) even such Reason as none but a
Teacher come from God could have revealed, for the leading up your affections
from the world; and it will point you to the higher things that do deserve
them. This Cross is the truest Ladder, by which you may ascend from earth to
heaven: When in this wilderness, and as without the gate, you are lifted up
with Christ on the Cross of worldly desertion and reproach, you are then in the
highest road to Glory, and if you faint not, shall be lifted up with him into
the throne. For if you suffer with him, ye shall also reign with him, Romans 8.
17. And to him that overcomes he will grant to sit with him in his throne,
even as he also overcame, and is set down with his Father in his throne, Rev.
3. 21.

And as the Cross of Christ is Teaching, so also is it Strengthening. As the
touch of his garment stayed the poor woman's issue of blood, so will a touch of
the Cross by faith, even dry up the stream of your inordinate affections that
have run out after the world so long. When a worldling mourns over the Dead
world as having lost his chiefest friend, the Cross of Christ will cause you to
rejoice over it as a conquered enemy, and to insult over the carkaise of its
vain glory and delights. For its one thing to have an angry God by providence
to kill the world to them, and another thing to have a gracious Father by his
Spirit to Crucify us to the world, and the world to us, by the changing of our
^^^imation and affections.

Set therefore a Crucified Christ continually before the eye of your souls. See
what he suffered for your adhering to the creature; and what it cost him to
loose you from it, and bring up your souls again to God. Can you still dote
upon the world, and entangle your affections in its painted allurements, when
you consider that this is the very sin, that killed your Savior, and which the
blood of his heart was shed to cure? Look up to that Cross, and see the fruits
of worldly love. If you see a man that has surfeited on unwholsom fruits, lie
groaning, and gasping, and trembling in pain, and at last must die for it, you
will take heed of such a surfeit your selves. It was we that took a surfeit of
the creature, and the Lord that saw there was no other remedy to save our
lives, did by a Miracle of mercy and wisdom derive upon himself the pain and
trouble, and groaned, and sweat, and bled, and dyed for our Recovery. And will
you feed and surfeit again upon the creature?

Look up to that Cross of Christ, and see the enmity of the world unto your
Head: And will you take it for your friend? See how it used him: and will you
expect that it should deal contrarily with you? Did it hang him up among
Malefactors: and will it set you on a throne, or dandle you in its lap? Did it
pierce his side, and will it heal your wounds? Did it reach him Gall and
Vinegar, and will it reach you milk and honey? If it do, yet trust it not: For
the milk is but to prepare you for that sleep, in which it may destroy you
without resistance; for you must next expect the hammer and the nail, as Iael
used Sisera, Judge. 4. 19, 21.

There is not so clear a glass in all the world, in which you may see the world
in its just complexion and proportion, as the Cross of Christ. There you may
see what its worth, and how to be esteemed, by the estimate of one that never
was deceived by it, but had a perfect knowledge of its use and value. When you
have so long beheld that Cross by faith, as that you can be contented to be
hanged between heaven and earth, and become the most forlorn and despicable
creature in the eyes of men, and to be stripped of all the comforts of life, and
life it self for the sake of Christ, and for the Invisible Kingdom which by his
Cross was purchased for you; then are you thoroughly Crucified to the world, and
the world to you by the Cross of Christ.

Direct. 2.
BE sure that you receive not a false picture of the world into your minds; or
if you have received such an one, see that you blot it out; and think of the
creature truly as it is. The most are deceived and undone by mis-apprehensions.
As if a man should dote on an ugly harlot, because of a painted face, or
because he sees a beautiful picture, which is falsely pretended to be hers. The
world in it self is vanity and insufficiency: As opposite to God, it is poison
and enmity to us: But most men conceive of it as if it were the very seat of
their felicity, and so are enamoured of they know not what. If men did not
entertain false apprehensions of God, and his holy ways, as being against
them, or hurtful to them, or needless and uncomfortable, they could not be so
much against them as they are: And so if they did not entertain false
apprehensions of the creature and the ways of sin, they could not be so much
for them, nor embrace them with so much delight. For they draw in their fancies
some odious picture of the blessed God, and his ways, and therefore they are
averse to them: And so they draw in their fancies some false alluring picture
of the world, and make it seem to be what it is not; and therefore they admire
it. So that the right way to rectify your Affections, is first to rectify
your Conceptions I would not have you think worse of the world then it
deserves, but only persuade you to judge of it as it is Do not dream of a
Palace in the air, and then be enamoured on the matter of your dreams. You
think the world is some excellent thing, and will do some great matters for
you, and that they are happy men that abound with its riches, and honors, and
delights. I beseech you Sirs, return to your wits. I told you before, that
those that have tried the world think otherwise of it: They that have seen the
utmost that it can do, do shake the head at it, as the blind unbelievers did at
Christ, when they see him hanging on the Cross. Why then should you be of so
differing a mind? Come nearer and consider what it is that you admire? Is it
not the great Deceiver of the Nations? the bait of the Devil, by which he
angles for souls? If you should fall in love with a post that were dressed in the
finest clothes, it were a disgrace to your understandings: And what course
should we take to quiet and rectify the mind of such a lover? but even to
undress the post, and take off all the bravery, and show it you naked; and when
you see it is but a post, me thinks you should not be fond on it any more. Do
so then by the world which you more foolishly admire. Its clothed with Riches,
and Honors, and Delights: its adorned by the great applause of its followers:
there is such running after it, and courting it, that you think, sure all this
ado is not for nothing. But take off all these befooling gawdes, and strip it
of these ornaments, and then see how you like it. But perhaps you will say, How
should I do that? Why 1. Consider frequently of how little moment these things
are as to you. You have matters of everlasting life or death, salvation or
damnation to look after; and what is riches or vain pleasures to this? These
are not the things that must denominate you happy or unhappy. You do not stand
or fall by them. They are but by-matters, that are promised you as an over
plus, so far as shall be fit: but your life or death consists not in them.
Should a man that must be for ever in Heaven or Hell, and has but a little
time to determine which it must be, should such a man spend that little time
about riches and pleasure? Can you have while at the door of Eternity to hunc
after the delights of the flesh, and study after the prosperity of this world?
Why do not dying men do so then? Why do they not bargain, and deceive, and
contrive for their lusts and worldly accommodations? No, they have then no list
to them, then they have other things to think of: And why not now as well as
then? O Remember, how little matter it is* Whether you go poor or rich to the
grave? This is not your concernment: and therefore let it not take you up,
unless you will wilfully neglect your selves.

2. And then forget not the brevity of your worldly possessions. Remember
whenever they are presented to you in their beauty, that all this will be but
for a little while. The very est beggar in the Town, that is not a fool, had
rather be as they are, then to have an house full of Gold till tomorrow, and
then to be strip^ of it all again. Remember, the pleasures of sin are but for a
season: By that time the feast is done, you are as hungry as before: by that
time you have done laughing, the matter of your mi^th is turned into sorrow,
and the jest is cold, and the game is at an end: The hour is almost come
already, wherein you shall say of all your pleasure, It is past and gone. And
will you trouble your selves, and ruin your poor souls, for such a fleeting
transitory thing? Will you be at so much cost, and labor to build an house,
that before you have finished it, will be spurned down by death in a moment?

O that you would but still think of the world as it is, and take off the
gloss, and wash away the painting which deceives you, and look on it naked, as
shortly you shall do; and then it could not have that power to bewitch you, as
now it has, but you would see that your Interest lies not in it, and that you
have greater matters that call for your regard; and this is the way to Crucify
you to the world.

Direct. 3.
THE Crucifying of the world does very much depend upon the Crucfying of the
flesh. For I have told you before, that the flesh is the master Idol, and the
world is but its provision, and the Devils bait. And therefore it is the life
of carnality that is the life of the world in you. When men have an Appetite
that must needs be satisfied, and must have the meat and drink which it
desires, and it is as much to them to deny their appetites, as if it were some
great and weighty business; these beasts are far from Crucifying the world. For
they must needs look after provision for these Appetites: He that must have the
sweetest morsel^, and the pleasants drink, must needs look after provision to
maintain it. And he that has a Proud corrupted mind, that must needs be
somebody in the eyes of others, and therefore must needs be clothed with the
best, and placed with the highest, and keep company with the greatest, or the
idlest and merri est companions, this man does think that he must needs have
provision to maintain all this. No man does admire the world, but he that
Judges by his fleshly Interest, and is a s^ive to his sensuality. Set Reason
in the throne: let ^aith illuminate and advance it: subdue your inordi^ate
se^^ual desires: And then the world will wither of it self. The servants will
hide their heads, or comply, if the Master be once conquered. Nay you may then
press the world upon a better service. Remember that your sensual Appetite was
made in order to the preservation of your Natures, and to be ruled by Reason;
if therefore it would become the predominant faculty, and would take up with
its own delights as your end, and would rebel against its Guide and Master;
its time then to use it as a rebel should be used, and with Paul, to buffet
it, and bring it into subjection. And if you can do this, the work is done. Its
a childish, if not a brutish thing, and below a man, to be captivated unto
sense. Its the content of the higher faculties, that are the pleasures of a
man: The pleasing of the throat is common to us with the swine. Its the basest
Spirit, that makes the greatest matter of sensual things: and so must be
drowned in unprofitable cares, What he shall eat or drink, and wherewith he
shall be clothed. What matter is it to a wise man, Whether his meat be sweet
or bitter, or whether his drink be strong or small, or whether his clothes be
fine or homely; or whether he be honored, or derided or past by; save only as
these things may have relation to greater things; and as the body must be kept
in a serviceable plight; and we must value that capacity most, in which we may
best do our Masters work. Keep under the flesh, and you will easily overcome
the world: Otherwise you strive against the the stream. While you have
unmortified raging appetites, and corrupted fancies, and sensual minds, you are
biased to the world, and if the rub of a Sermon or sickness may turn you out
of your way awhile, the bias will prevail, and you will quickly be on it
again. If you dam up the stream of these unmortified affections, they will rage
the more; and if you stop them for a while, by good company or some restraint,
yet will they shortly break over all, and be more violent then before. All your
striving by ways of mere restraint, are to little purpose, till the flesh it
self be subdued. It is but as if you should strive with a greedy dog for his
bone, and with an hungry Lion to bereave him of his prey: be sure they will not
easily part with it. Its the case of many deluded people, that have some
knowledge of Scripture, enough to convince them, and tip their tongues, and
strive to restrain them from their sensual ways, but not enough to mortify
the flesh, and change their souls. O what a combat is there in their lives!
The flesh will have its prey, and pleased it must be: Their conscience tells
them, It will cost thee dear? Their flesh like an hungry dog is ready to seize
upon that which it desires: And conscience does as it were stand over it with a
staff, and says, Meddle with it if thou dare: And sometime the poor sinner is
restrained* and sometime again he ventureth upon the prey, and he that had
condemned himself for his sin, does turn to his former vomit, and once more he
must have his whore, or his cups; and then conscience takes him by the throat
and terrifieth him; and makes him forbear a little while again: And thus the
poor sinner is tossed up and down; and Satan leads him captive at his will: And
because he finds a combat within him, he thinks it is the combat between
the flesh and the sanctifying Spirit; when alas, its no more but the combat
between the flesh and an enlightened conscience, assisted with the motions of
common grace, which because they resist and trample underfoot, their
condemnation will be the greater. Would you then have the boiling of your
corruptions abated? Put out the fire that causes them to boil; or else you
trouble your selves in vain. Mortify the flesh once, and get it under, and
scorn to be a slave to a sensual appetite, but let it be all one to you to
displease it as to please it, and leave such trifles as pleasant meats, and
drinks, and dwellings, and fine clothes, to children and fools that have no
greater things to mind, and use the flesh as a servant to the soul, supplying
it with necessaries, but correcting it if it do but crave superfluities; Do
this and you will easily Crucify the world. For the world is only for the
flesh. For says John, 1 John 2. 16. All that is in the world is the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and pride of life, which are not of the
Father, but of the world. And the world passes away, and the lust thereof, but
he that does the will of God abides for ever.] Remember that he that says in
my text, that he is Crucified to the world, does say also, Gal. 5. 24. that,
They that are Christ's have Crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.]
This is to kill the world at the Root, (for it is Rooted in the fleshly
Interest.) When otherwise you will but lop off the branches, and they will
quickly grow again.

Direct. 4.
BE sure to keep your minds intent upon the Greater matters of Everlasting
life, and all your Affections employed thereupon. Diversion must be your cure:
Especially to so powerful and transcendent an object. Be once acquainted with
Heaven by a life of faith; and it will so powerfully draw you to it self, that
you will be ready to forget earth, and take it as a kind of Nothing. Get up to
God, and fix the eye of your soul on him; and his glory will darken all the
world, and rescue you from the mis-leadings of that false fire that did delude
you. Come near him daily, and taste how good he is; and the sweetness of his
love will make you marvail at them that think the world so sweet; and marvail
at your selves that you were ever of such a mind. You cannot think that the
world will be cast out of your Love, but by the appearance of somewhat better
then it self. You must go to Heaven therefore for a Writ of ejectment. You must
fetch a beauty, a pleasure from above, that shall abase it, and silence it, and
shame its competition. O what is earth and all things in it, to him that has
had a believing, lively thought of Heaven! Nothing below this will serve the
turn. You may think long enough of the troubles of the world, and long enough
confess its vanity, before you can Crucify it, if you see not where you may
have something that is better. The poorest life will seem better then none; and
a little in hand, will be preferred before uncertain hopes. Till faith have
opened Heaven to you, as being the Evidence of the things invisible, and have
showed you that they are not shadows but substances, which the promise
reveals, and Believers do expect; you will be still holding fast that little
that you have; and you will say in your hearts, as some do with their tongues,
[ I know what I have in this world, but I know not what I shall have in
another.] But the knowledge of God will soon make you of another mind. Let in
God into the soul, and he will fill it with himself, and leave no room for
earth and flesh. Learn what it is to walk with him, and to have a conversation
in heaven, and it will cure you of your earthly mindedness, Phil. 3. 18, 19.
There is no consistence between Earth and Heaven. All men are either Earthly or
Heavenly minded. None therefore but the truly Heavenly Believer has Crucified
the world. But because I have said more of this elsewhere, I now forbear.

Direct. 5.
Understand well the right use and end of all creatures, and make it your
business accordingly to improve them. I have told you before that they are all
for God, and glasses wherein we may see his face, and books in which we may
read his Name and Will. Look after God in them; and never come to a creature,
without either an actual or at least an habitual Intending of God, as the end
thereof. Judge that creature unprofitable wherein you receive not somewhat of
God, or do not somewhat for him by it. Take not up with lower thoughts and uses
of it. Its one of the commonest and greatest sins, (and I doubt with most
professors of Religion) to use the creature for themselves, and to overlook
God in his works and in their mercies, and so to profane them, and turn them
into sin. Do you understand what is meant by this, that, To the pure all things
are pure; and that all things are sanctified to us? All should be Holy to Holy
men. To be Holy is to be separated unto God, from common base inferior uses.
If you your selves are separated to God, all creatures will be sanctified to
you; they will be the Messengers of God, the revealers of his will, and his
Remembrancers to your souls: And you will use them accordingly (in that measure
as you are sanctified.) As we call the Temple and Utensils of Gods worship
Holy, because they are devoted to God for his special service: So may we call
our meat, and drink, and lands, and houses, our corn, and grass, and every
plant, and flower Holy (in their places*) When the sanctified soul does read
his Makers name upon them, and admire, and fear, and love him in them, and
study how to use them for himself. You will confess that he is a prophaner of
Holy things indeed that can read over the Scripture, and never observe the name
of God in it, or else regard it but as a common word, and use that Book but as
a common Book. Though I do not equal the creatures with the Scriptures, in
clearness or fullness of discovering the will of God, yet seeing that it also is
one of his Books, (and that more legible and glorious then some inobservant
wretches do believe) I would entreat all that fear God to lay this more to
heart; and to consider for the time to come, Whether it be not Prophanness,
even flat Prophanness, to us^ Gods works as common and unclean, and to
overlook him, who is the life, and sense, and glory of them? And whether it be
not a sin that we are all too guilty of, to take up with selfish carnal uses,
of almost all the works of God, when we should still use them all to higher
ends? I fear this great unholiness in our using of the world and all therein,
is little bewailed in comparison of what it ought to be. Some Christians are
apt enough to hearken to their privileges and titles of honor given them by
the Lord; but they consider not that all these are for God, and therefore
oblige us to answerable duty. Study well those highest titles, that are given
you in 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9. You are built up a Spiritual house, an holy Priesthood,
to offer up Spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.] And what is
a Spiritual house for, but the habitation of the Lord, and the performance of
his service? And surely these holy Priests must fetch their sacrifice from all
the creatures that are fit for sacrifice. And Verse. 9. Ye are a chosen
Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, that you
should show forth the Praises of him that has called you out of darkness into
his mavelous light.] And must not a people so holy, and peculiar, adore and
hallow the Lord in his works? Though you be not called to Minister at his
Altar, you are called to see him, and sanctify him in his creatures, and in
all that you have to do with. Gods works are part of his name, and therefore
see that you take not his name in vain. You are brought nearer him then the
rest of the world: and therefore remember that he will be sanctified of all
that draw near him. You have learned in point of Receiving to rise with Peter,
kill and eat; and not to call that common which God has cleansed: See that you
learn it also in point of duty, and in regard of the use of the creatures which
you receive; and take them not as common things, for common fleshly uses only,
as common men do; but remember that they are cleansed, and that you profanely
devour them, further then God is intended in them.

By this time you may perceive that the Crucifying of the world, is by its
truest Exaltation and Improvement, and that it is so far from being your loss,
as that it will prove your greatest gain. I would commend it to you all that
desire to live a life of holiness, that you would make it your daily care and
study to sanctify your very trades and worldly labors, and all the mercies
and matters of your lives. For it is not a bare contempt of the world that will
serve. If you should sleep out your days, and never think of the world, or if
as Melancholy men you should be weary of your lives, because of the vexatious
miseries of the world, all this is little to Christian Mortification. But if
you can see and taste the Goodness, and Greatness, and Wisdom of God, in every
thing you have or do, this is the using the world a^^ght.

Quest. But how should a man get his soul to that frame to carry on his calling
in order to God, and to see him, and intend him in all that we have or do.

Answ. To dispatch it in a word, thus, 1. Be sure that God be habitually your
End in the main. For if you take him not for your Portion, and intend him not
habitually in the drift of your lives, you cannot rightly intend him in
particulars. 2. Make it your every days prayer to God, before you go about the
labors of your calling, that he would give you hearts to seek him in all, and
would watch over you, and save you from ensnaring temptations, and remember you
of himself, and give in somewhat of himself by his creatures, and sanctify
them all to you. 3. Keep up a godly jealousy of your hearts, lest they should
abuse the creature, and seek it and use it more for your carnal selves then
for God. If God be jealous, its time for you to be jealous of your selves.
Especially when the sin is the most common, and radical, and destroying sin.
4. Before you go about your callings, bethink your selves how you may Improve
them for God. Find out his Interest, and study how to promote it; and how to
improve all that he gives you to that end. And renew your particular Intentions
of God, in the midst of your work. 5. When you receive or use any creature,
consider it both as a mercy and as an obligation unto duty; and as you will not
run over the Bible by bare reading, without considering what is the meaning,
but will endeavor to take the sense as you go; so do in your callings and
about all the creatures. Think with your selves, [ Here is now a lesson in my
hands, if I can but learn it. Here is somewhat that may show me, both God
himself and my duty; if I could but skilfully open it, and understand it.] And
so bethink your selves, What it is that God would teach you, or command you by
that creature: and especially, to what use he requires you to put it. And
remember, that if you should think of God all the day long, and yet not intend
him, and refer your labors and your riches to his service, and give them up to
his use, this is not sanctifying God in the creature, but hypocritical abusing
of him. For it is not all thinking of God that will serve the turn. 6. As you
use to take account of your servants, how they do your work, so I would advise
you every night, or as often as you can, to take an account of your selves as
you are the servants of the God of heaven, and ask your Consciences, [ What
have I done this day for God; and how have I observed and sanctified him in his
works?] So much for the fifth Direction.

Direct. 6.
REmember always that the world is the enemy of your salvation, and that if
you be damned, it is like to be through its enticements; and therefore labor
to be always sensible that you go in continual danger of it. And this will
make you use it as an enemy, and walk in a constant fear least it should
overreach you. And see also that you endeavor as clearly as you can, to find
out wherein its enmity does consist; and then you will perceive that it is
especially in seeming more Lovely then it is, as it is the fuel of
concupiscence, and the provision of the flesh. And when you understand this,
you will perceive, that your danger lies in over-loving it, and that it
kills by its embracements: And this will direct you which way to bend the
course of your opposition, and what you must do to be saved from its snares: To
call the world an enemy is easy and common: but so far as your very hearts
apprehend it as an enemy, so far you are out of danger of it: An easy enemy
that is conquered by understanding that it is an enemy! And the way of its
conquest is, by enticing men to take it for a friend.

And also remember, how great a part of your Christian life consists in
keeping up the com^ate with this enemy, and how certainly and miserably you
will perish if you be overcome.

Direct. 7.
TO ^e much in the house of mourning, and see the end of all the living, will
help us toward the Crucifying of the world. Go among the sick, and hear what
they say of the world. Stand by the dying, and see what it will do for them;
and think now, whether God or the world be better. Look on the corpses of your
deceased friends, and think now, Whether the soul be ever the better for all
the riches and pleasures of the world? Take notice of the graves and bones of
the dead, and think what a worthless thing is the world, and all the glory and
delights that it affords, which will so turn us off, and leave our bodies in
such a plight as that. Take notice of the frailties and diseases of your own
flesh, that tell you how shortly it must lie down in the dust. And then compare
this world and that to come, where your abode will be everlasting. Its a shame
for a wise man to live as a stranger to so great a change, and to look so much
after a world that he is leaving, and so little after the world that he shall
abide in.

Direct. 8.
IT will much avail to the Crucifying of the world to you, that you study the
improvement of all your Afflictions. Do not repine at them, and think them a
greater evil then they are; but believe that they are a special advantage to
your souls, for the mortifying of your inordinate affections to the world: and
if you have but the wisdom and hearts to make use of them, they may do you more
good then all the prosperity of your lives has done. If you fall into poverty,
or fall under slanders or reproach from men; if your friends prove false to
you; if those that you have done good to prove unthankful; if the wickedness
and frowardness of men do make you even weary of the world; remember now what
an advantage you have for Mortification! When you have experience it self to
disgrace the creature to you, and your very flesh does seem to be convinced.
Now see that you observe the teachings of this providence, and come off from
the world, when you see it is so little worth; and set as light by it as it
does by you: Bethink you now that God does this to lead you to himself, and
thankfully accept his call, and close with him as your portion, and be content
with him alone, and let them take the world that can get no better. You see
that adversity will make even a worldling speak hardly of the world, as men
will do of their friends when they fall out with them. How much more should it
help the gracious soul to a fuller sense of its vanity and nothingness, and of
the necessity and excellency of more certain things. Its a great sin and folly
in us, that we strive more to have afflictions removed then sanctified, and so
we lose the gain that we might have got. Though affliction alone will do little
good, yet grace does make such use of affliction, that thousands in heaven will
have cause to bless God for them, that before they were afflicted, went astray,
and were deceived by the flatteries of the world as well as others. Abundance
that have been convinced of the vanity of the world, have lingered long before
they would forsake it, till affliction has rowsed their sleepy souls, and by a
louder voice has called them away.

Direct. 9.
BE very suspicious of a prosperous state, and be more afraid of the world when
it smiles, then when it frowns. Some are much perplexed for fear left they
should not stand in adversity, that too little fear being ensnared by
prosperity. They are afraid what they should do in a time of trial, and do not
consider, that prosperity is the great trial. Adversity does but show that love
of the world, which was in men's hearts in time of prosperity. When men forsake
Christ for fear of suffering, and because they will not forsake the world, they
do but show the effects of that disease, which they had caught long before.
When the world pleased them they fell so deep in love with it, that now they
will venture their souls to keep it. It is prosperity that breeds the disease,
though adversity show it. Love not the world, and you will easily part with it,
and so will easily suffer for Christ: And prosperity is liker to tice your Love
to it, then adversity. This is a great reason why worldly Prosperity and true
Holiness do so seldom go together: and so few of the great ones of the world
are saved. O how hard is it to have the world at will, and not to be ensnared
by it and over-love it? How hard is it heartily and practically to contemn a
prosperous condition! How hard to have serious lively thoughts of the great
things of eternity, and serious preparations for death and judgment, when we
have health, and wealth, and all the accommodations which our flesh does
desire! Satan knows this well enough: and therefore he is willing that his
servants shall have prosperity. He knows that it is not the way to get him
servants, to beat them and use them hardly, but to please them by flatteries,
and fulfill their lusts, that they may be enticed to imagine* his service to be
the best. Its the custom of harlots to set out themselves to the best, and to
adorn themselves for the tempting of their lovers; and not to go in an homely
dress, which no one will be taken with. No wonder then if Satan the Pandor of
the world, do adorn it with the best clothes, and present it to you in the
most enticing garb he can. If the lips of this harlot did not drop as an
honeycomb, and her mouth were not smoother then ^yl; she could not lead such
multitudes to her end, which is bitter as wormwood, and sharp as a two-edged
sword; her feet go down to death, her steps take hold of hell; lest men should
ponder the path of life, Prove. 5. 3, 4, 5, 6. And it is no wonder that God to
save his people from this delusion, does dress the world to them in a courser
attire; and when he sees them in danger to be enamoured on it as well as
others, if he present it to them in the rags of poverty, and in the scabs of
its corruption, confusion and deformity, that they may see the difference
between it and their home.

Its strange to see how highly prosperity is regarded by the most! how
earnestly they desire it, pray for it, or contrive it! and how much they are
troubled when they fall into adversity; when yet they know, or say they know
that the love of the world is the bane of the soul, and that it kills men by
deceiving them. Can you keep your affections as loose from the world, when you
have houses and lands and all things at your will, as you could if it were
otherwise? Remember I beseech you that the poison of the world is covered by
its sweetness, and that it kills none but those that love it: Be suspicious
therefore that there is danger where you find delight: If your estate be such
as is pleasing to your flesh, believe it is not likely to be safe to your
souls. If therefore your health, your wealth, your honors, be such as your
flesh would have them if your houses your accomodations, your friends be suited
to your carnal desires, believe it your souls are in no small hazard; and
therefore look about you as you love your salvation; and fear the snare. The
great enemy of your souls has not baited his hook with so curious and costly a
bait, for nothing. The cautelous fish that is afraid to swallow, yea or to
taste, or to come near till he knows what is under it, does save his life, when
that which boldly ventures, and fearlessly devoureth the bait is destroyed. Its
not for nothing that Solomon charge the man that is given to his appetite, to
put his knife to his throat at a feast, and not to be desirous of the d^inties
which are deceitful, Prove. 23. 1, 2, 3. A prudent man foreseeth the evil (even
when it is covered with the pleasantest bait,) and so he hides himself and
escapes, when the simple passes on and is punished, Prove. 22. 3. It is part
of the description of the sensual a postates in Jude 12. that in their feasts,
they fed themselves without fear. And it is as dangerous a thing to cloth your
selves without fear, to seek after wealth and honors without fear, to possess
your houses and lands without fear; to see any thing that's carnally pleasing to
you, or hear your own praises without fear; when other men must needs have
things to their will, do you study your duty, and let the will of God be your
will; and if he give you a plentiful estate without seeking it, or give you
reputation and the praise of men without your affecting it; receive them not
without fear; Think with your selves, [What a snare is here now for my soul?
Though it be good in it self, and as it comes from God, yet what an advantage
has the Deceiver here against me! How easily may such a carnal heart as mine
be enticed to the inordinate love of these, and to be more remiss about higher
and greater things, and to be forgetful or insensible about the matters of my
endless state! How many men of worldly wisdom, yea how many that seemed
Religious, have been thus deceived, and perished before me? Yea this is the
common road to hell! And is it not time for me then to look about me!] The old
Christians were so jealous of the world, and afraid of being mortally poisoned
by its delights, that they sold what they had, and gave to the poor, and
voluntarily thrust themselves into poverty, as thinking it better to go poor to
heaven, then to say in Hell, that once they had riches: I commend not any
extreme to you, for indeed I have ever thought that its greater self-denial to
devote and use our riches for God, then at once to cast them away or shut our
hands of them; and that he is a better steward that improveth his Masters
slock, then he that rids his hands of it, out of an injurious fear of his
Masters austerity. But yet I must say that the other extreme is more common and
more dangerous. And they that out of excess of fear, betook themselves to
poverty and to wildernesses, were in a far better case then many that seem now
to be zealous professors, and yet are looking after the pleasures, and riches,
and glory of the world! I have many a time wondered at some eminent professors,
that are as constant and seraphicall in the outside of duty, even to
admiration, as almost any I know, and yet as closely and busily grasping at the
world, and laboring to be rich, as if they were the wretchedst worldlings on
earth. I have often wondered how they can quiet their consciences, and how they
make shift so constantly to delude such knowing souls. The Country sees them
drowned in earth, and the generality of their godly friends lament them, as
mere hypocritical earthworms; and yet because they can carry it on smoothly,
and not be noted for any palpable oppression or deceit, they wipe their lips,
they bless themselves, and with gracious words would cloak their covetousness,
as if men did but uncharitably censure them, because they cannot prove them to
be such Deceivers; When yet the very bent and course of their lives proclaims
them worldlings to almost all men but themselves; who by the just, but heavy
judgment of God, are given over to that blindness, as not to see that damnable
sin in themselves, that the enemies of Religion see with scorn, and their most
impartial friends do see with lamentation: but seeing it, are not able to
remedy; for worldliness is the commonest badge of an Hypocrite; and where there
is a false heart at the bottom, and but an hypocritical faith, and an
hypocritical love to God and the life to come, there will be no effectual
resistance of the world; but all exhortations do come upon so great
disadvantage with such souls, that usually they are lost, and leave them as
they find them. If any covetous scraping earth-worm, whether he be Gentleman,
Tradesman, or Husbandman, do feel his conscience at the reading of this begin
to stir, I beseech him (if there be any hope of such hypocrites) to hearken to
it in time, and regard a little more the warnings of his friends, and not to be
so stiffly confident of his innocence; nor yet to think himself free from
heinous, gross and scandalous sin, as long as he is a covetous worldling! If
covetousness be idolatry, and the sin of those with whom we may not so much as
eat, and if the covetous shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven, and be
such as the Holy Ghost does join with thieves and the vilest sinners, who then
but an Infidel can think that it is not a scandalous sin, and such as will be
the damnation of all that be not thoroughly cured of it? See Ephesians. 5. 5, 6, 7. 1
Cor. 5. 10, 11. Psalm. 10. 3. 2 Timothy 3. 2. 2 Pet. 2. 14. Luke 16. 14. Mark 7.
22. 2 Timothy 3. 2. Ier. 8. 10. and 6. 13. David prays God to incline his heart
to his testimonies, and not to covetousness, Psalm. 119. 36. and now men think
they may be inclined to both, and that they have found out the terms of
reconciling heaven, with earth and hell. I marvail these men will not see their
own faces, when the Prophets and Christ himself do hold them so clear a glass?
Ezekiel. 33. 31. They come unto thee as the people comes, and they sit before
thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them; for with
their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their
covetousness.] Mat. 13. 22. [ He that received seed among the thorns, is he
that hears the word, and the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of
riches choke the word, and he becomes unfruitful.] I know the men that I am
now speaking of have many excellent gifts, and in other respects do seem the
forwardest for godliness in the Country; but the more is the pity that men of
such parts should be rotten-hearted hypocrites, and damned for worldliness
after so much pains in duties: For an heathen may as soon be saved as a
worldling: When they have prayed, and preached, and cried down prophanness, let
them hear what the Lord says to them, Luke 18. 22, 23, 24. and there see again
their faces in that glass: [ Yet lackest thou one thing: (even such an one as
none can be saved without, even a Love to God and Heaven above earth:) sell all
that thou have and distribute unto the poor, and thou shall have treasure in
heaven, and come follow me: And when he heard this he was very sorrowful; for
he was very rich. And when Jesus saw that he was sorrowful, he said, How hardly
shall they that have riches enter into the Kingdom of God?]

Set not then so high a value on a full estate. Let your conversation be
without covetousness, and be contint with such things as ye have; and trust
your selves on the security of his promise, who has said, I will never fail
thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5. It is not for nothing that Christ himself
has given you so many and so terrible warnings to take heed of this sin? As
Luke 12. 15. Take heed and beware of covetousness: for a man's life consists
not in the abundance of the things that he possesses. As if he should say,
While you think you are securing your wellbeing, you do not secure your Being
it self. When you have done all to provide for the delights of your life, you
are never the surer of life it self. Read the following passages in the Text,
and let them warn you, or condemn you. If such admonitions as these will not
take, from the mouth of him whom you call your Lord, and from whom you profess
to expect your Judgment; What have we then further to say to you, or how
should our warnings expect entertainment with you? Yet I shall do that which is
my duty, and leave the success to God. I do therefore again in the name of God,
advise and warn you to Take heed of having too pleasant thoughts on a
prosperous state. Long not after fullness and plenty in the world. Be not too
eager for accomodations to your flesh. A Coffin of two yards long will shortly
hold it, and be room enough for it: And will nothing but well built houses,
adorned rooms, the neatest clothing and plentiful possessions serve you now?
How sad a mark is this of a soul that never had a saving taste of the
everlasting riches! Away foolish children, and stand not building houses with
sticks and sand! Home with you, to God, and remember where you must dwell for
ever. When you have feathered your nests, and made them as you would have them,
you must leave them before you are well settled and warm in them. And if it
comfort you to think that you leave them to your children; remember that you
leave them the fruit of your sins, and bequeath to them the snares that undid
your souls, that so they may become the heirs of your wickedness and be
deceived and destroyed by the world as you have been. This is your great care
for them; and this is your kindness to them. I have told you once already from
God, that this your way is your folly, though your posterity be like to approve
your sayings, because you do so much to make them of your mind, Psalm 49. 13.
For though your inward thoughts be that your houses shall continue, and you
hope to leave a name behind you, yet man being in honor abides not, but is
like the beasts that perish: When he dies he shall carry nothing away, his
glory shall not descend after him: though whiles he lived he blessed his soul,
and men praise them that (thus) do well to themselves; yet shall they go to the
generation of their fathers, and shall never see Light. Man that is in honor
and understands not, is like the beasts that perish, Verse. 11, 12, 17, 18,
19, 20. Though the ungodly prosper in the world and increase in riches, yet he
that goes believingly into the Sanctuary may see their end: Surely they are
set in slippery places, and cast down into destruction: How are they brought to
desolation as in a moment, and consumed with terrors, Psalm 73. 12, 17, 18,
19. And in that very day do all his thoughts perish, Psalm 146. 4. Then shall
they eat the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices; for
the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools
shall destroy them, Prove. 31. 32.

See then that you be not eager for prosperity; and if God cast it on you, use
it with fear. And if ever you feel the creature begin to grow too sweet and
delightful to you, then spit it out as the poison of the soul, and presently
take a mortifying antidote before you are past remedy. As you feel the working
of poison by its burning, or griping, or other effects agreeable to its nature,
by which it seeks the extingushing of life; so you may feel when the world is
poison to your souls, by its creeping into your affections, and insinuating
into your hearts with present delight, or future hopes; by seeming more Lovely
and more Necessary then it is. As soon as ever you feel it thus creep into your
hear^s, its time to rise up against it with holy fear, and to cast it out, if
you love your souls.

And that which I would advise you to at present, when the world has got too
deep into your hearts before you are aware, is this: Do something extraordinary
in such a necessity, for its crucifixion and your recovery. Though a careful
diet may serve to preserve health while you have it, yet if you have lost it,
and sickness be upon you, you must have recourse to Physic for your cure. If
honor, or preferment, or house, or land, or friends, or gain, or recreations
begin to seem too sweet and dear to you, and your hearts begin to hug them with
delight, or make out after them with keen desires; you must now have recourse
to extraordinary helps: and in particular, try these following. 1. Withdraw
your selves to some more frequent and serious meditation of the brevity and
vanity of the world, then you have been used to: steep your thoughts longer in
mortifying considerations, till the bent of your hearts begin to change. 2. Be
ofter with God in secret and public prayer, and give up a larger portion of
your time to holy things then ordinarily you have done; that acquaintance with
heaven may wean your mind from earth; and the Love of God may drown your
worldly Love. When you have taken any extraordinary cold, you will get nearer
the fire then ordinary, and be longer at it, and drive it out by heating
things: And when the world has insinuated into your affections, and chilled
and cooled them to God and heaven, its time to draw nearer God then before, and
to be longer with him; and to strive harder in every duty then you did, till
spiritual life do work more vigorously and expel that earthly distemper which
had possessed you. 3. And at such a season let prayer be furthered by fasting
and extraordinary humiliation; which may help down the flesh which causes you
so much to overvalue the world. Even an A^ab found some ease by a common
humiliation, when he had taken a mortal surfeit of Naboths Vineyard and his
Blood: Much more may a true Christian find much help, by special humiliation,
when he has surfeited on any creature whatsoever. 4. And I think it would be a
very good course at such a time as that, to be at some more cost for God, then
you were before. When you feel your love to the world increase, Give somewhat
extraordinary then to the poor, or to pious uses, according to your ability.
Yea what if it were so far as might a little pinch your selves! This were a
real opposition to the world, and you might turn a very temptation to a gain,
and get much good by occasion of a sin: It might do much to dis-hearten and
repel the tempter, when he sees that you over-shoot him in his own bow, and
make such use as this of his temptations, as to do the more good, and use your
wealth the more for God, and deny your selves more then you did before. If you
would but faithfully practice these few directions, you would find it the
surest way of recovery, when you begin to be infected with this earthly disease.

Direct. 10.
THE last Direction that I shall give you for the Crucifying of the world, is
this. Be sure to keep off the means of its livelihood, and keep it still under
the mortifying means. Lay siege to it, and stop up all the passages, by which
the worlds provision would come in; and keep it still under the strokes of
enmity, and the influence of that which is contrary to it. Some particulars I
will but briefly mention.

1. Keep a constant guard upon your senses; for this way the world creeps in to
your hearts. It is by gazing on alluring objects, or hearing, or tasting, or
the like, that the flames of concupiscence are kindled in the heart. By gazing
upon beauty or comeliness of per^^n, the heart of the wanton is infected with
lust, and so incited to the damnable practices of uncleanness. The sight of the
cup does set an edge on the desires of the drunkard: and the sight of enticing
meats, does awaken and enrage the appetite of the gluttonous: and by the
presence of the bait their disease is set awork, as worms in the body are by
some kind of food. Clemens Alexandr. says of these men, that their disease Cl.
Alex. Paedag. l. 2. c. 1. The whole Book is worth the reading, by such.
is called (...), that is, A madness about the throat: And (...), that is, A
madness in the belly: And says of them that are given to fullness or fineness
of diet, for the pleasing of their bellies, that they are ruled by a
Belly-Devil, which says he, is the worst and most pernicious of all Devils.
Lay siege then to this belly-Devil, and starve him out. It is by the sight of
gaudy fashions, and curious apparel, that the minds of vain effeminate persons
are provoked to desire the like. And the sight of pomp and honors does kindle
the fire of ambition; and the sight of buildings, and money, and lands, does
help to provoke the desires of the Covetous. See therefore that you always
keep a watch upon your eyes. Let them not run up and down like a master-less
dog, nor roll as the eyes of the lascivious, that are hunting after the prey of
lust. If you have cause to pray as David, Psalm. 119. 37. Turn away mine eyes
from beholding vanity.] You must practice according to your prayers, and
endeavor your selves to turn them away. Have not the best of us as much reason
as Job to make a Covenant with our eyes? Job 31. 1. What wonder if the Garrison
surrender not where the besieged have free passage and continual supplies? And
what wonder if the house be robbed, where the doors stand always open, and all
is common to every passenger? Be sure therefore to keep a constant guard upon
your eyes your appetites and every sense, or else the world will not be
Crucified. Let not your eye move but by the conduct of your reason: at least,
let it not fix upon any object, till reason give it leave. Taste not a bit of
meat, or a cup of drink* till you have advised with right informed Reason* and
be able to justify what you do. Take an account of all that enters at the
door of any of your senses: For he that must give an account to the living God,
had need to keep account himself.

2. Keep also a constant guard upon your Thoughts as well as upon your senses.
As the Thoughts will tell you what is in your hearts, so they will let in
whatsoever bribeth them to consent. The fancies of men are the garden of the
Devil, where he sows and waters the plants of impiety: Yea they are a
principal room in which he does inhabit. Its certain that the Devil has
readyer access to the fantasy, then to the heart; and that it is his shop in
which he forgeth most vices, and does a very great part of his work. An unclean
spirit possesses the fantasies of the unclean; so that their thoughts are
running upon lustful objects; and they are guilty of the filthyest cogitations
within, when they seem to be of the chastest behavior without; and do
frequently commit fornication in the heart, when fear or shame does restrain
the outward practice, and cover their iniquity. The malicious person is
possessed by a spirit of maliciousness that dwells in his fantasy, and sets
him on contrivances of cruelty and revenge, and fills his mind with thoughts
of hatred and disdain. The same spirit reigns in the fancies of the Proud,
and sets them upon contrivances for the advancing of their names, and
causes them to thirst after the reputation of the world, and fills them with
the troubled malicious thoughts of Haman, when they miss of their expectations.
The earthly spirit possesses the fantasies of the covetous, and sets them
on contrivances for the increase of their estates. Do you not feel by sad
experience, how many of Satan's assaults are made upon your cogitations, and how
much of his interest lies there, and how much of his work is there done? As
ever you would be Crucified to the world then, set a watch upon your thoughts,
and keep a daily and hourly account of them, and see that they be always under
the Government of faith and reason. Your thoughts should be kept chaste as the
entrance into your hearts, and not be as common harlots entertaining every
comer. If you feel your thoughts stepping out upon Lust or Malice, look after
them betime, and call them in, and check them sharply, and lay a charge on them
hereafter to be more pure. If you find that they are running with Geheza after
the prize, and are making out after the provisions for the flesh, recall them
and correct them, and bewail this evil before the Lord, and let your watch be
stricter for the time to come. Believe it, your hearts will be such as are your
thoughts. The flies that lie upon sores, or dung, or carrion, and the worms
that are bred in them will be of the nature of that corruption themselves. If
you would have your hearts clean, and humble, and heavenly, let your Thoughts
be clean, and humble, and heavenly. If you will let your Thoughts run on the
objects of Lust, you will be Lustful: And if you will Think on the enticements
of Pride, you will be Proud: And if you will let out your thoughts on the
Profits of the world, no wonder if it steal away your hearts, says the Lord to
the covetous and unmerciful, Deuteronomy. 15. 7, 8, 9. If there be among you a poor
man of one of thy Brethren within any of thy gates, thou shall not harden thy
heart, nor shut thy hand from thy poor Brother, but thou shall open thy hand
wide unto him, and shall surely lend him sufficient for his need in that which
he wants. Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying, The
seventh year, the year of release is at hand, and thy eye be evil against thy
poor Brother, and thou give him naught; and he cry unto the Lord against
thee, and it be sin unto thee. Thou shall surely give him, and thy heart shall
not be grieved, when thou give to him: because that for this thing the Lord
thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou put thine
hand unto. For the poor shall never cease out of the Land: therefore I command
thee saying, Thou shall open thy hand wide unto thy brother, to thy poor, and
to thy needy in the Land.] Besides the main drift of the Text, mark how we are
commanded to beware that a Thought of unmercifulness enter not into our hearts.
And when Christ does so vehemently dissuade his followers from this damning
sin, he does it by setting a Law upon their Thoughts: Why take ye Thought? etc.
Take no thought, etc. Mat. 6. 25, 27, 28, 31, 34. Luke 12. 22, 26. If the
unrighteous man forsake not his thoughts, he will not forsake the evil of his
way, Isa. 55. 7. As you love your souls then look to your Thoughts, and keep
them under the Government of the Lord. Would you be free from a vain and
sensual mind? How long then shall your vain thoughts lodge within you? Ier 4.
14.

3. And see also that you make not worldly minded men your companions. While
they savor nothing but earth and flesh, they will have no savoury discourse of
any thing else: And their discourse is like to be infectious to your minds. As
a Stews is not the best place to preserve you from uncleanness; nor an Alehouse
the best place to preserve you from drunkenness; so the company of worldlings
is not the best place to preserve you from worldliness: Where you shall see or
hear little, but earthly things, and heavenly matters can find no room. Its not
the safest place to fight against the Devil, in the midst of his own Army; but
in the Army of Christ.

On the contrary side, be sure that you keep under mortifying means. Attend to
the lively preaching of the word, which will disgrace the world to you, and be
still drawing your hearts another way. Be much with God in secret prayer, and
be much above in Heavenly Meditation; and dwell upon those Thoughts which lay
the world naked to you, and show it you in its own complexion. If death and
judgment be seriously in your minds, it will waken you from these fleshly
dreams, and prick the bladder of your aerie minds, and let out that wind which
puffed you up, and kept out the things of God and Glory. Converse also as much as
you can with the most Heavenly people, whose discourse, and prayers, and daily
examples will help to draw up your minds to God, and to affect them with things
that nearlyer concern you, then all the profits or pleasures of the world.

I Have now told you how you should Crucify the world, and be Crucified to it;
but which of you will be so happy as to practice these Directions, I cannot
tell. I have brought you the armor and weapons by which this mortal enemy must
be conquered; but it is not in my power to give you courageous hearts to use
them. I can certainly tell you what a safe and comfortable life you might live,
if you had but this enemy under your feet; and what an easy and happy death
you might die, if you were first dead to the world: But to make you so happy is
not in my power. I can foresee the certain damnation of all unconverted
sensualists and worldlings, and how sad a farewell they must shortly take of
all their felicity: But to prevent it is not in my power. For I cannot make you
willing to prevent it. Its a greater work then bare information that is here to
be done. If it were but to give the world a few contemptuous words, and to call
it vanity and a worthless thing, I should make no doubt of prevailing with the
most: But to kill it in your hearts is an harder work: And with some kind of
men, it prospers most, when it is hardlyest spoken of. Its easy to tell a man
why and how he should lay down his life for Christ if he be called to it: But
there is more to be done before it will be practiced. Till an heavenly light
possess your minds, and show you the better things to come, and assure you of
more to be had in Christ, then the world can afford you; I cannot look you
should lose your hold, nor that an hundred Sermons should make you willing to
seek the death of that which has your heart. Sense is tenacious, and
unreasonable: When you have knock^ it off an hundred times, yet still it will
be sense, and will be eager after its delights again. Some will be still
thinking that Mortification and heavenly mindedness is so rare a thing, that
God will be more merciful then to condemn all that are without them: And some
will be inconsiderate and senseless when the clearest reason is set before them;
and will venture their salvation rather then become dead to all their worldly
lusts and hopes. So that with sorrow I must say that now I have said all, and
delivered my Message, I fear the most will still be the same, and reject the
counsel of God to their perdition. For this is a grace that accompanies
salvation* and therefore will be the portion only of the heirs of salvation.
Though our hearts d^e ^ire, and prayer, and endeavor must be that the
professed Is' raelites may be saved; yet we must take up our comfort shorter
that the Elect shall obtain it, though the rest are hardened. For its Gods will
and not ours that must be done. If Christ be satisfied in the salvation of his
little flock, as seeing in them the travail of his soul; even so must we: and
though as Samuel did over Saul, so we may mourn over the rest that God has
forsaken, yet that sorrow must know its season and its measure. For my part I
must needs say to you, that though it may seem an high extraordinary thing to
some of you, for a man to be thus Crucified to the world, I have no more hope
of the salvation of any of you, except it shall be thus with you, then I have
of the salvation of Cain or Judas. And as great and wonderful a work as this
is, if ever God mean to save your souls, it will be done on you. I shall
therefore according to my duty beseech you, to review and practice the
Directions which are given you, and to use the world, as the heirs of Heaven,
that have laid up their hope and treasure there. But if you will not hear and
take warning, it is because the Lord will destroy you, and because you are not
the sheep of Christ, 2. Chron. 25. 16. 1 Samuel 2. 25. John 10. 26, 27.

SECT. XXI. Use last.
I Have been all this while Persuading and Directing you to be Crucified to the
world, and the world to you. I doubt not but God has done this work already
upon the souls of many of you, even upon all that truly believe in a Crucified
Christ. To such therefore I shall next address my speech: and in general, this
is my earnest request to you, [ That you would use the world as a Crucified
thing, and as men that are Crucified to it should do.] I will not lengthen this
discourse in using many motives to you. One would think that which way ever you
look, you should have forcible motives before your eyes. If you look downward
on earth, you may see enough to wean you from it: and if seeing will not serve,
your most wise and gracious Father will make you feel, and put the case beyond
dispute. If you look upwards, you may perceive a better and more enduring
substance, and an inheritance so much more glorious and enduring, as should
suffice to take your minds from earth: If you look within you, what footsteps
of the Spirit may you there trace, what graces in act and habit may you find,
which are all at mortal enmity with the world! You may read there a Law
engraven upon your hearts, which condemns the world to subjection and
contempt: And many an obligation you may there find, wherein you are deeply
bound against it: For I hope you have not cancelled them all, and forgot all
the promises which you made to God. All your Professions, and all your blessed
Privileges and Hopes, do engage you to another world, and to the hearty
renouncing and forsaking of this. You say you are Crucified and Risen with
Christ; If you be, then seek the things that are above: set your affections on
the things that are above, and not on the things that are on earth. For you are
dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God: When Christ who is your life
shall appear, then shall you also appear with him in glory. Mortify therefore
your members which are on earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate
affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness which is idolatry: For which
things sake the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience, Col. 3. 1.
to 7. It does not beseem the members of a Crucified Christ to be earthly
minded; nor the members of a Glorified Christ to set their minds o^ things so
low It ill b^seems the Heirs of an incorruptible (rown of Glory to make too
great a matter of these trifles. It is the Enemies of the Cross of Christ, and
not those that are Crucified with him, whose God is their belly, and who glory
in their shame, and who mind earthly things: but the Saints conversation must
be in Heaven, from whence it is that he expects his Savior to change his
vile earthly body, and make it like to his glorious body, Phil. 3. 17, 18, 19,
20, 21. If indeed you have laid up your treasure in heaven, where rust and
moath corrupt not, and where thieves do not break through and steal, let it
appear then by the effects. For where your treasure is, there will your heart
be, and where your heart is, that way the Labors of your lives will tend. I
shall reduce my Exhortation to some particulars.

1. IF you are Crucified to the world, be sure that you seek it not, nor any
thing in it, for its own sake; but only as a means to higher things. The
sincerity of your hearts does lie much in this; and the life of your souls
depends much upon it. Labor in your lawful callings and spare not (so you
exclude not your spiritual work): It is not your Labor that we find fault
with: But if the creature be the end of any Labor, you may better ^it still,
and spare your pains, or rather speedily change your intentions. If you
overtake the hastyest traveller in his journey, and ask him, why he takes all
that pains; he will not say it is, For Love of the way that he travaileth in,
but for Love of the place to which he is going, or the persons, or things which
^e there expects: So must it be with you, if you are the heirs of heaven: I
blame you not to be glad of a fair way, and to love it rather then a foul one:
but it is not for the love of the way that you must travail. He that runs in a
race, does not bestow all that pains for the Love of the path which he runs in,
but for Love of the Prize, which he expects at the end. And he that plougheth
and sows, does it more for Love of the crop which he hops for, then for
Love of his labor: He that saileth through the dangerous Seas, performs not
his voyage for Love of the Sea, or of his Ship, but for Love of the Merchandise
and Gain which he seeks. The Carryer that goes weekly to London with your
wares, does not take all that pains for Love of the carriage, or of the way;
but of the gain which he deserves. So must it be with you, in all your worldly
business. When you seek for credit, or pleasure, or maintenance in the world,
it must not be finally for the Love of these, but for the End which they are
given for, and which your hearts and lives and all must be devoted to. Your
hearts will as soon deceive you in this as in any thing, if you do not watch
them with jealousy and diligence. How quickly will the heart begin to Love the
creature for it self, that seemed once to Love it but for God? Look in what
measure you love your wealth, your houses, your recreations, your friends, for
themselves, and because they accommodate the flesh; so far you wrong God, and
abuse them to ^dolatry.

And if your Love do begin in greater purity, if you be not watchful it will
quickly degenerate to a carnal Love. Many a Scholar that at first desired
Learning to fit him for the service of God, and his Church, does by suffering
carnality to insinuate and prevail, lose much of the purity of his first
affections, and in time grow more cold and regardless of his first ends, and
loves common Learning merely for it self and for the delight of knowing, or
(which is worse) to get him a name among men.

Its common with men that need recreation for their health, when they set upon
it as they think but to fit them for their duty, to fall in love with it
afterward, to the perverting of their hearts, the wounding of their
consciences, the wasting of their time, and the neglect of that work of God for
which it should be used.

We should take our meat, and drink, and clothes, but to strengthen and ^it us
for the service of our Master: but how quickly do we turn them to the
gratifying of our flesh, and so the service of another Master?

Its too frequent for young persons of different sexes to Love each other at
first as Christians only, with a chaste and necessary Love; but when they have
been tempted awhile to an imprudent familiarity, their Love does degenerate,
and that which was Spiritual becomes Carnal, and the Serpent deceives them to
the corrupting of their minds, and its well if it proceed not to actual
wickedness, and the undoing of each other.

Many a poor man thinks with himself, If I were but out of debt, or could but
live so as to serve the Lord without distractions, and had such and such
necessities supplied, I would not desire any more, or care any further for the
world But if their desires be granted them, they find themselves entangled, and
their hearts deceived, and they thirst more after fullness, then before they did
after necessaries. And many a one thinks, [ I care not for riches or honors,
but only to do good with, and if I had them I would so use them.] But when they
have their desires, the case is altered: the flesh then has need of it, and
can spare for God as little as other men, because it loves it better then
before, and pretends to have more use for it then formerly it had.

Watch therefore over your deceitful hearts, and be sure to keep up the Love of
God, and actually intend him in all that you have or do; and be not withdrawn
to carnal affections.

2. IF you are Crucified to the world, be not too eager for it. As God has
promised it you but as an appendix to your felicity, and as an overplus to the
great blessings of the Covenant, so must you desire it but as such. And as God
has promised it you but with certain limitations, so far as he shall see it
good for you, and agreeable to his greater ends; so you must desire it but with
such limitations. I observe many to have so much reason, as to put up their
prayers for outward blessings, with those limitations, and will not for shame
express themselves in absolute peremptory language; when yet there is apparent
cause to fear, that they limit not their desires, as they do their words, nor
do they submit so freely to the disposal of God in their hearts, as they seem
to do in their expressions: and so they make their words to be modest, while
their desires are inordinate; their language to be chaste, while their hearts
are committing adultery with the world; their expressions are pious, while
their affections are idolatrous: And so their prayers are made monstrous, while
the soul of them is so disagreable to the body. Be ashamed and afraid to desire
that which you are ashamed and afraid to ask. You dare not say to God in your
prayers, [ Lord, I must needs have a fuller estate! I would fain be rich and be
somebody in the world; I cannot live contentedly in poverty: food and raiment
will not serve turn; unless I fare deliciously, and be clothed neatly, and be
set by in the world, and unless I may leave prosperity to my children, when I
am dead and gone.] If you dare not say thus, do not dare to desire or think
thus. Mr. Robert Bolton, that holy learned Divine, does use among the heinous
damning sins, to reckon this; * A desire to be r^ch.] And if we hearken to the
Scripture, we shall find that it is not without good cause. Prove. 23. 4. the
command is, * Labor not to be rich.* And Prove. 28. 20. He that ma^gth haste to
be rich, shall not be innocent.* The Syriack rende^s the word * (...)* and the
Arabic * the wicked* which we here translate [ ^e that ^asteth to be rich.]
And they must needs be the some men, when the Apostle says, that the love of
money is the r^ot of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10. Therefore says Paul, They that
will be rich, fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition, 1 Timothy 6. 9. By
this word [ they that will, or are willing to be rich] is meant [ they whose
wills are set upon it, and are in love with it, and fain would be rich.] Is it
fitter for God or you, to determine how many talents you shall be entrusted
with? Do you long to have more duty, and danger, and a double account? Its
true, you may desire the success of your Labors; but not for the Love of
Riches, nor with an unmannerly peremptory desire. Its true also that you must
be thankful for prosperity if God give it you: But as it must be with an holy
jealousy, so it is as true, that you must be thankful also for adversity, when
God sends it; though not for it self, yet for the good that it may conduce to:
And therefore says James 1. 9, 10. Let the brother of low degree, rejoice in
that he is exalted, but the rich in that he is made low. And Job could say, The
Lord gives, and the Lord takes away; blessed be the name of the Lord, Job 1.
21.

3. IF you are Crucified to the world, then let it not have power to Crucify
you, by putting you upon inordinate cares or sorrows. Will you vex your brains
with contrivings for the world, and weary your mind with tearing cares, and
walk in sorrow because you have not your desires? and yet say that you are
Crucified to the world? Are the dead so solicitous? or is a Carkaise to be so
much valued? Your Passions and Endeavors will proclaim your excessive
estimation of the world, when you have never so long in words professed your
contempt of it. Alas how many that seem to know better, do almost distract
their minds with cares, and entangle themselves in a life of so much misery, as
a wise man would not like, for all the world! If they want any thing, what
trouble are their minds i^ till their wants be supplied? If they be afflicted
with losses, or wrongs, or contempt; they are troubled as if they had lo^^ some
great o^ necessary thing. A Crucified world could not make such a ^^^^ in your
minds; but doubtless it is so far alive as it thus a^^^cte^h you. The Lord
Jesus has himself made so full and moving a Sermon to his Disciples, against
the cares of the world, Mat. 6. and Luke 12. that its a double sin to
Christians to be still so careful and earthly minded; and I know not what to
hope for from that man that will not be moved with such words as those from the
Lord himself. And yet how many professors have I known that have tormented
themselves with cares and sorrows, yea and cast their bodies into diseases by
it, and many of them have dyed of it, and some it has brought besides their
wits: So observable is that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7. 10. The sorrow of the
world works death] even temporal and eternal, unless we be delivered by
undeserved Grace. Bear all conditions then with an equal mind, and let your
passions show that you are Crucified to the world.

4. IF you are Crucified to the world, then Let it not thrust out the service
of God, and be made an excuse for a negligence in Religion. How rare are holy
Meditations in the minds of many that think themselves Religious? And it is
worldly Thoughts that thrust them out, and worldly businesses that are the
common excuse. How formal are many in the Instructing of their families? how
seldom and how coldly do they exhort their children or servants to make ready
for death, and make sure of their salvation? How coldly and cursorily are
family prayers and other duties slubbered over? And all is because they have
other things to mind: the world will give them leave to do no more. The decay
of zeal and diligence in family duties, is the common symptom and cause too, of
the destruction of knowledge and godliness in the Land. And all is because the
world is Master, and must be served before God: The business of the world does
seem to them the principal business, and must first be done; and all thoughts
and talk of Heaven must stand by, till the world will give them leave to enter.
Men cannot have while to call upon God and instruct their families, because
they have their worldly works to do. Go into the families of most Noblemen,
Knights or Gentlemen in England, and see there whether God or the world be most
regarded and looked after. Perhaps they may civilly yield an ^^r while a
Chaplain makes a short prayer among them: but if you look after heavenly
mindedness, and seriousness in Religion, and zeal against sin, and diligence to
help to save the souls that are under their charge, how little shall you find?
Do they earnestly persuade their servants to study holy things? and do they
examine them about their everlasting state, and call them to account of what
they learn from the public Ministry? Do they show a vehement hatred of sin,
and go before their families in an heavenly conversation? Alas, how thin are
such families as these! No, no: they are so taken up with entertaining their
friends, and pampering their flesh, and in complements, and in worldly affairs,
that they have little time for heavenly work: And if they do for fashion sake,
get a godly young man to be their Chaplain, he is so wearied with the sensual
courses of some, and the scorns of others, and the vanity, and worldliness, and
negligence of the rest, that his life is a burden to him, and he can no more
enjoy himself in such families, then in a fair or popular tumult. On the other
side, poor men are in so much want, that they think themselves sufficiently
excused for the neglecting of almost all the means of their salvation. They
think Necessity lies upon them, and therefore that God will not require it of
them to understand the Scriptures, nor to labor after eternal things. Christ
tells them that One thing is needful, and would have them choose the better
part, which shall not be taken from them. But they believe not Christ; but
hearken to their flesh, and it tells them that its Another thing that is
needful, and persuades them to choose the worser part, which will shortly be
taken from them. Christ bids them, Labor not for the meat that perishes,
but for that which endures to everlasting life, John 6. 27. But venture non
habet aures; the flesh understands not such exhortations: A greedy appetite
is the reason that it judges by: An hungry belly is not filled nor quieted
with arguments. They must have their present wants supplied, let what will
become of their immortal souls. And thus the Rich have so much to look after,
that they cannot have while to be diligent for their souls: And the Poor have
so much to seek after, that they cannot have while: And so the world abuses
them that Have it and that Want it. As if two men that had forfeited their
lives were traveling to London for a pardon; and the one goes so fair a way,
that he forgets his business and sits down picking flowers in the way; and
the other meets with so fowl a way, that he thinks he is excused, because he
must take heed of being wet or dirtyed.

O Sirs, if the world be Crucified to you, how can it have such power over you,
as to cause you to neglect your greatest Lord, and your immortal souls? If
indeed you are Dead to it, and alive to Christ, let it be seen in your
families, and be seen in all your duties and conversation. Let the greatest
persons that enter into your families, attend the worship of him that is
Greater, or let them not be attended. Neglect them that will neglect the
service of God. Remember that the fourth Commandment requires you to see that
the Sabbath be sanctified, even by the stranger that is within your gates, as
well as by your selves and the servants that are in your houses. If you have
carnal Gentlemen at your table, or are at theirs, do not be your selves so
carnal as to be ashamed of holy discourse in their presence, or to suppress any
speech that may tend to edification, and to the honor of your Lord. Let them
all know that you have greater matters to do, then to attend and humor them,
and that you have a Master that must be Pleased whoever be displeased.

Take heed also that the world do not cause you to neglect the opportunities
which are before you for your own advantage. Miss not a Sermon which may be
profitable to you, without Necessity. Miss not the help of private Instructions
and Conference, and other edifying Sacred duties, without necessity. Omit not
any of your secret addresses to God, without Necessity. And take nothing for a
Necessity, but that which is at that time a greater duty then that which you do
Omit. I know that Works of Necessity and Mercy may be done even on the Lords
day, and acts of Worship may be delayed on such occasions: for God will then
have Mercy and not Sacrifice. But Mercy on our own and others souls in seeking
their relief, must not be neglected for lower things.

And look not only to the Matter, but the Manner of your duties, that
Worldliness do not destroy the Life and Vigor of them. Turn out all thoughts
of earthly things when you approach the Lord in holy worship. Provoke not his
jealousy by presenting before him a distracted mind, or lifeless carkaise. O
what sleepy frozen duties do many professors offer to the Lord, even from week
to week, because their hearts are so distracted by the world, that they are to
seek when God should have them.

5. IF you are Crucified to the world, take heed that you use no unlawful means
for the procurement of worldly things. Stretch not your consciences for the
compassing of such ends. Lay still before you the Rule of Equity; Do as you
would be done by. Put your brother with whom you deal, in your own case, and
your selves in his; and so drive on your bargains in that mind. If you did
thus, you would not sell too dear, nor buy too cheap; you would not make so
many words to get his goods for less then the worth, nor to sell your own for
more then the worth: Nay you would not take more then the worth, if by
ignorance or necessity your brother should offer it you; nor give less then the
worth, though through ignorance or necessity he would take it. The love of
money has so blinded many, that in selling they think it to be no sin, to take
as much for a commodity as they can get; and in buying they think it no sin to
get the commodity as cheap as they can have it; never once asking their own
hearts, How would I desire to be dealt with my self, i^ it were my own case?
Nay Covetousness is the common cause that makes most of the world cry out
against Covetousness. When men are like ravenous greedy beasts, that grudge at
every bit that goes besides their own mouths, they will reproach all that cross
their covetous desires. If they cannot by words persuade a tradesman to sell
his ware at such rates as he cannot live by, they will defame him as a covetous
griping man: and all because he fitteth not their covetous desires: and all
that will escape their censure of being covetous, must shut up their shops ere
long, to the defrauding of their creditors. If a Physician that has been a
means to save their lives, do demand but half his due, it being the calling
which he lives on, they will defame him as Covetous, because he contradicts
their covetous desires: and would have any thing from them which is so near to
their hearts. Let a Minister but demand his own, which was never theirs, but is
his by the Law of the Land, and they will reproach him like Quakers, as a
covetous hireling; and if he will not suffer every worldly miser to rob him,
they will defame him as if he were sick of their disease: So far are they from
the Primitive practice of selling all, and laying down at the feet of the
Apostles, that they would steal from the Church those Tenths which neither they
nor their Fathers before them had any propriety in, any more then in the Lands
of any of their neighbors, as in the case of Impropriators they are forced to
confess. Let a man give all that he has to the poor, and he shall be defa^^ed
as covetous, because he will not give more then all. I or if he give to
nineteen, and have not wherewith to satisfy the twentieth, he that has
nothing or less then he expected, is as much unsatisfied, and as forward to
speak evil of him, as if he had given to none at all. And usually so
unreasonable are these covetous expectations, that you may sooner displease ten
of the^, then satisfy one.

Whence also comes the Theevery, the Lying for the sake of Commodity, the
over-witting and overreaching of each other, but from this sin. Whence is it
that most Ale*sellers and Vintners will make a trade of poisoning souls, and
will nourish that odious vice, which is the ruin of men's bodies, the
impoverishing of their families, the dishonor of God, and the shame and danger
of the towns and Commonwealths in which they are committed? but only for the
love of a sordid gain. And were it not more for fear of men then God, the most
of them by far, would make the Lords day their chief Market Day; for they care
not to rob even God himself for this unprofitable gain. And its well if
Butchers, and many other Tradesmen would not do the like, if the Laws of the
Land and the severity of Magistrates did not restrain them. This is the Love
they have to God, and eternal Glory! Thus you may see whether they are dead to
the world, or rather to Christ! Gehezi thought himself wiser then his Master,
when he went after Naaman for his prize: And Achan thought himself wiser then
all Israel, when he hid the gold: And Saul thought it wisdom to spare Agag and
the best things from destruction. But the Leprosy taught one, and the stones
taught another, and Gods rejection taught the third, to know that by experience
which they would not learn by the warnings of the Lord. The like may be said of
contentious Lawsuits, the common effects of Covetousness and Revenge; and so
of all other unlawful gain.

If indeed you are dead to the world, do not so much as tell a lie to get all
the riches of the world. Remember also the commands of God, Lev. 19. 13. Thou
shall not defraud thy neighbor, neither rob him: the wages of him that is
hired shall not abide with thee all night: And 1 These. 4. 6. That no man go
beyond and defraud his brother in any matter, because that the Lord is the
avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned you, and testified. And 1 Cor.
6. 7, 8, 9. Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to
Law one with another: Why do ye not rather take wrong? Why do ye not rather
suffer your selves to be defrauded? Nay you do wrong, and defraud, and that
your Brethren: Know you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God?] These lessons would be better learnt, if covetousness did not stop
men's ears. But its a befooling stupifying vice. It makes men lose themselves
for gain. For as Austin says, [ Avarus antequam lucretur, seipsam perdit; and
antequam aliquid capiat, capitur.] And all this is for the pleasing of their
fancy, that they may have more then they need. For Avarus est caecus; credendo
enim dives est, non videndo. Amas pecuniam O caece, quam nunquam videbis,
caecus possides, caecus morituruses, etc. Idem.] And when they pretend
Necessity, it is but the voice of Covetousness: For, says the same Austin,
[Non est in carendo difficultas, nisi cum fuerit in possidendo cupiditas.] Et
alibi [ Pauperiorem se judicat abundans: quia sibi de^sse arbitratur, quicquid
ab aliis possidetur toto mundo eget, cujus non capit mundus cupiditatem.]

6. IF you are Crucified to the world, let us see it by your improving all for
God, and not employing it to the pleasing of your flesh.

Use all that you have as men that must be accountable for them. Remember that
you receive them from your Master for his use. Resolve therefore so to expend
and employ them, as may most further his service. Look about you, and see what
good is to be done, and then consider, how far you are furnished and enabled to
do it; and accordingly lay out the talents which you are entrusted with. Seek
after such work; and do not stay till it be brought to your hand. If you love
Christ indeed, me thinks you should not stay for an invitation to do him
service, nor should you need that men come a begging to you to awaken your
charity, when you know before that it is a charitable and necessary work that
is before you.

Two sorts of persons I would especially direct this advice to. First to the
rich and powerful in the world. Secondly, To all that are professors of
Religion.

For the first sort, let them consider, that their Riches are snares to them,
and will prove a certain means of their damnation, if they devote them not to
God. Tithes, and Oblations, and Firstfruits were devoted to God under the Law:
but all is expressly devoted to him under the Gospel; Which was expressed by the
Primitive Christians selling all, and laying down at the Apostles feet: For as
Life and Immortality is brought to light more abundantly in the Gospel; So also
is the means of obtaining it, and the duty which we owe to him that gives it:
And as Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, and the greatest mercies are
revealed by the Gospel: So the greatest holiness comes by Christ, and the
greatest obligations are laid on us in the Gospel: Especially to self-denial,
and an hearty Devoting our selves and all we have to God. I beseech you observe
the distinction which Christ uses, Luke 12. 21. between Laying up Riches to
your selves, and being Rich to God, and how dreadful the Application is. If
almost all your Riches be expended on your selves and yours, or laid upin store
as for provision for your flesh, its plain then that you [ Lay up riches for
your selves] and so are concluded by the sentence of Christ among the miserable
fools that are there described. But if you are [ Rich to God] you will study to
improve your Riches for God, and often bethink your selves which way they may
be employed to his greatest service. He that cannot spare his wealth, for the
service of his Redeemer, and the good of his Brother, and the furthering of his
own salvation, is very far from being Crucified to the world.

2. And it is not only the great ones that have need of this advice, but all in
their places that are entrusted with Gods Mercies. Think not your selves
excused from works of Charity, because you have but one talent: for one talent
must be proportionably improved as well as ten, or else you will be condemned
as unprofitable servants. People of the lower rank do commonly think that God
requires nothing of them, but to receive what others give them, and to labor
for themselves: And when they have reviled sufficiently at Rich men for
worldliness, they often show themselves as worldly, by denying their mites, and
by unmercifulness to those that are poorer then themselves, as the Richer do by
denying their larger proportions.

The scarcity and defectiveness of charitable works, with all sorts of men from
the highest to the lowest, even those that seem more forward in verbal
devotions, do show us too evidently how common hypocrisy is, and how few are
entirely devoted to God, and what a bewitching and blinding thing the world is.
They that think a man utterly ungodly that does not in the length and life of
his duties go much beyond the common sort of men, do never judge themselves
ungodly for not exceeding them in works of Charity. In acts of piety and
worship, they (justly) think, that they should not only set apart one day in
seven, to be wholly employed herein, but also a considerable part of every day
in the week, besides their holy Meditations which they mix with their common
works. But how few are they that will allow God such a Proportion of their
estates? as besides their daily works of charity upon ordinary occasions, to
devote also a seventh part entirely to his service? Though all cannot do this,
yet many shall see when their eyes are opened, that they should have done more.
For ought I see, the charitable works of the Richest, and of too many
Professors of the greatest Piety, are too like the pious actions of the
ungodly; even, seldom, and by the halves, and lifeless, and to little purpose.
As the ungodly will drop morning and night a formal, seeming heartless prayer,
upon the by, while their minds are another way; and if you urge them to any
higher, and costlyer devotion, instead of obeying, they will cavil against it,
and put it off with vain excuses, and say, God does not require this of us,
because we are not learned, and because we have our necessary labors to look
after. Even so many Rich men, and seemingly Religious, will drop now and then a
penny or an alms to the poor, and give upon the by some inconsiderable
pittance, which costeth them but little, and does no great good: But if you
urge them to any greater works, you shall have excuses enough, and reasonings
against their duty, but little of performance. Then they have families to
provide for, and their estates are but small, and God does not require this at
their hands. I wonder when God will speak so plain, for abounding in Good
works, as that hypocrites and worldlings will be able to understand him? This
voluntary deafness is not remedyed by speaking loud; nor will the common
eye-salves cure him that is wilfully blind: He Is always an unprofitable
Scholar that hates his book. If God had spoken but the hundredth part as much
in favor of their worldliness and tenacity, as he he has done against it,
they could soon have heard, and easily understood it; If Paul do but tell some
covetous persons, that cast their poor widows on the Church for maintenance,
that were of their near kindred, that [ they are worse then Infidels, if they
will not provide for their own families, or kindred] 1 Timothy 5. 8. these
worldlings can ^ind an excuse for their tenacity from such a Text as this,
which was meant to rebuke it: and when they have driven on a trade of
worldliness, and scraped for themselves and children all their lives, and never
done any considerable works of charity, they can quiet their consciences by the
mis-application and abuse of such a Text. They that have money to feed their
pride, and revenge, and lusts, have little for God, in any good work. They will
sooner spend six pence in an Alehouse, then give a groat to the poor. They
that have ten, or twenty, or an hundred pound to spend in a Lawsuit for
revenge or covetousness, have not half so much to give to charitable uses. They
will see all supposed conveniences provided for themselves, before they will
supply the Necessities of others. And what thanks is it to them to show their
poor Brethren the charity of a swine, that will leave that to others which he
cannot eat himself. And yet there are multitudes that will not use this bestial
charity, because their own flesh and their posterity are an insatiable gulf,
that swallow up all: And what they cannot use, they will lay up for Provision,
lest their lust should be extinguished for want of fuel; and when their flesh
has had its fill, they may leave the rest behind them, that their children may
live in golden fetters, and be gulled of their salvation, and ticed from God as
well as they. Is not that man's belly his God, that will bestow a more costly
sacrifice on his belly then he will do on God? If God command, and his
Ministers request, they are most frequently denied: If Christ require it, and
his Members need, and perhaps crave it, they are denied; but if the back and
the belly crave, they are seldom denied. God says, [ To do good and to
communicate forget not; for with such sacrifices I am well pleased] Heb. 13.
16. and he cannot be heard, nor will they please him at such rates. The flesh
says, [ To pamper and provide for me, forget not: for with such sacrifices I
am well pleased;] and it is quickly heard, and no cost and labor seems too
dear. We may see where men's hopes and hearts are by their adventures: Surely
you take that for the chiefest Pearl, which you are willing to give most for!
When you can lay out so little upon Heaven, and so much upon your flesh, it
appears which it is that indeed you most esteem. A pack of belly Gods there be
in the world, that will spend more in one year in excess upon themselves, even
in gluttony and drunkenness, then they will give in two years to the relief of
them that need: Yea some that would be loath to give in a twelve month so much
to the poor, as they will spend at one feast in the entertainment of their
like; or so much as they will venture on one horse-race, or one game at Dice,
or Cards, or Bowls. But these are not they that I have now to deal with; and
therefore I shall speak to them in the Preface more fully. It is those that
confess they have all from God and that have verbally devoted all to him again,
and profess themselves entirely his servants, that I have now in hand. And with
such one would think a few words might serve, to persuade them to lay down all
at his feet, and to give to God the things that are Gods. I do not urge you to
pine your flesh, nor to starve your children, nor to deal unmercifully with
either. But consider impartially in the fear of God, whether you make an equal
distribution? and when you have cast up, what your flesh has by the year, and
what is laid up for the like uses for the future, for your selves and yours,
and then what God has in pious and charitable works, bethink your selves,
whether you deal wisely or honestly with him? And whether this which you allow,
be all that he this way requires or expects?

BUT I suppose some ungodly malicious hearts, will make an ill use of all that
I say, and will think with themselves, [ This touches the Professors of
Religion: They are as covetous as any; and under pretense of long prayers do
devour widows houses: after all their preaching and praying, there is none that
are more cruel and close handed, or ready to overreach or deceive then they;
nor any that are more greedy for the things of the world.]

In answer to this Objection, I shall first say somewhat to the Professors of
Religion, and then shall speak to the objecters themselves.

First, you that profess the fear of God, take notice I beseech you of this
accusation, and though it may show you cause to pity malicious slanderers, yet
let it provoke you to search your hearts and lives, and see that you give not
cause for this reproach. As for those worldly time-serving hypocrites, which in
all places creep in among the Saints, and do but serve themselves of Christ,
let them know that God will one day require an account at their hands, of all
these scandals which they have caused in the Church, and the ruin of poor
ungodly souls that are dashed in pieces, and cast themselves into hell, by
stumbling at this stone which their worldly practices have laid before them. If
you would needs be worldlings, you were better have kept in the world among
worldlings, then to have crept into the Church of Christ, and brought thither
your scandalous worldly lives, to the dishonor of that Religion which
condemns your practices and you. Did not Christ warn you to count your costs,
and never to dream of being his Disciples, unless you could forsake all and
follow him under the Cross, in expectation of a promised treasure in Heaven? ^s
there any thing that Christ did more peremptorily require of you, then to
Renounce the world and deny your selves, if you would be his Disciples? And yet
will you come without this wedding garment, and bring your base and earthly
minds among his servants; and cause his truth, and his house and followers, to
bear the reproach of your worldly baseness? I tell you, it is like to cost you
dear, that you have cast this dishonor on the name of God, and caused the
damnation of the impious reproachers. The wrong you have done to God and men,
you shall certainly pay for in everlasting misery, unless a through repentance
do prevent it. (And I fear it is but few of these worldly Hypocrites that ever
truly do repent.) But wo^ to them by whom offense comes: It were good for that
man that he had never been born.

2. And as for you that truly fear God, I beseech you let the slanders of
wicked men awake you to an holy jealousy of your selves. You see what their
eye is upon: Take heed then how you walk; you hear what it is that offends
them. As far as is possible avoid all occasions of such offense. Take heed in
your bargaining, buying or selling, how you carry your selves toward them, and
what you say. If all the actions of your lives were right save one, they will
reproach you for that one: If you speak but one rash or unhandsom word, they
will forget all the rest, and remember that one, and traduce you, as if all
were like that one. See therefore that you walk and speak by line and rule. And
remember that it is not an ordinary measure of charity and good works that is
expected from you, (according to your abilities) by God and man. If you love
those that love you, what Reward have you? do not even the Publicans the same?
And if ye salu^e your brethren only, what do you more then others? do not even
the Publicans so? But (says Christ) I say unto you, Love your enemies; bless
them that curse you; do good to them that hate you; and pray for them that
despightfully use you and persecute you: That ye may be the children of your
Father which is in heaven: for he makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the
good; and sends rain on the just and on the unjust, Mat. 5. 44, 45, 46, 47.
Let your Light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven, Mat. 6. 15. Your actions and words are
observed and scanned more then any other men's. For malice is quick-sighted, and
of a strong memory: And you are the Light of the world: A City that is set on
an hill cannot be hid, Mat. 5. 14. Take heed therefore that you be blameless
and harmless, the Sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and
perverse Nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world, holding forth the
word of life: This will not only stop the mouths of the enemies, but it will
also rejoice your Teachers in the day of Christ that they have not run or
labored in vain: Yea if they were offered upon the sacrifice and service of
your faith, they would rejoice with you all, Phil. 2. 15, 16, 17. And for your
selves also it is necessary that you excel others in good works: For except
your righteousness exceed the righteousness even of Scribes and Pharisees, you
shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5. 20. Remember that you live
among the blind: and if you stumble and fall, you know not how many will fall
upon you; and if you break but your shins, they that fall upon you may break
their necks; and if you rise again, you are not sure that they will rise.
Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims (in this world) abstain
from fleshly lusts which war against the soul; having your conversation honest
among the Gentiles (the unbelievers and profane) that whereas they speak
against you as evil doers, they may by your good works, which they behold,
glorify God in the day of visitation, 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12. For so is the will of
God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, 1
Pet. 2. 15. Finally brethren, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of
another; love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous; not rendering evil for
evil, or railing for railing; but contrariwise blessing, knowing that ye are
thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing, 1 Pet. 3. 8, 9. And so
walk, that if any obey not the word, they may yet be won by your exemplary
conversation, 1 Pet. 3. 1. As you hear more then others, so do more then
others, that it may appear you build upon a rock, Mat. 7. 24, 25. And as the
book of God is much in your hands and mouth, so remember that whosoever looks
into the perfect Law of liberty, and continues therein, he being not a
forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his
deed. For Pure Religion, and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep your selves
unspotted from the world, Iam. 1. 25, 27.

2. Having said this much to the godly by way of caution, I shall now make
answer to the Objecters themselves. You that say, There are none so cruel and
so covetous as these that profess themselves so Religious; if you have any
moderation left, will you soberly answer me these Questions following.

Quest. 1. Is it the Hearts or the Outward actions of these professors that you
perceive this covetousness by? If it be the Heart, you are slanderers, and self
idolizers. For the Heart is open to none but God; and will you make your selves
Gods; and that when you are playing the part of the Devil? This has been the
tricks of Satan's instruments in all ages. When they are not able to say of the
godly, that they are swearers, or drunkards, or adulterers, or stealers, or
liars, or slanderers, as they themselves are; they presently go to their
hearts, which are out of sight, and say, They are covetous, and proud, and the
like: For there they know that none but God is able to justify them. But
common reason might also have taught them, that none but God is there able to
accuse them. For how know you men's hearts, but by their professions, or by
their lives?

But if you say, It is the Life you judge by, I demand, what is it in the lives
of such men that proves their covetousness? If it be oppressing, deceiving,
injustice, or unmercifulness, I would demand of you in the second place,

Quest. 2. Is it all or some of them that you thus accuse? If you know some few
to be such, what is that to the rest? But this has been always the trick of
the malignant. If they see one professor fall, or prove an hypocrite; they cry
out, [ They are all alike; If you could but see their hearts, they are all
such.] Chrysostom and other of the Fathers tell us, that this was the use in
their days, and no wonder if it be so still. What if there be one Cain in
Adams family: It follows not that Abel or Seth were like him. What if there
were one Cham in Noah's Ark, will it follow that they were all alike, or that
his family was no better then the rest of the world which was drowned? What if
there was an Absalon in David's family? What if there was one Judas among the
Disciples of Christ? Will you say therefore that all the rest were such, or
that Christ's Disciples were as bad as others, or his family no better then the
rest of the world? But I would further ask you,

Quest. 3. Is it the course of their lives that you judge by? or is it some one
particular action? He that is not blind may see, that the course and drift of
their lives, is less earthly and more heavenly then other men's. And God judges
of a man by the scope of his life, and not by one single action: and so must
we. The very bent and drift of your lives is worldly. If a man come into your
family, what shall he see but worldliness? If one fall into your company, what
shall he hear from you, but about this world? If one observe what you do from
year to year, he may see that you lay out your selves for the world: You cannot
refrain upon the Lords own day; but you are minding it, and talking of it. You
savor not any other discourse. The very talk, and labor that is laid out
about another world, is troublesome to you, and its this that makes you dislike
the godly. You cannot say so of the course of their lives. If once any of them
have fallen by temptation into a miscarriage; will you judge of all their lives
by that? Do they not lament and bewail it as long as they live after? and avoid
it more carefully for the time to come. What if Noah were once drunk in his
life: will you judge of his whole life by it, or say, that he is as bad as the
rest of the world? What if Lot be given over to a temptation? What if Abraham
did once tell a lie or equivocate, and Isaac do the like in a fear? What if
Moses did once provoke God? What if David did once commit an heinous sin? Or
Peter did deny his Master in his fear? Will you either judge of all other godly
people by them? Or will you judge of the course of their lives by one action,
which they bewail and lament as long as they live? And can you see no
difference between a Worldly action, and a Worldly life?

Quest. 4. I would further know of you, Whether you have gone to them in love,
and admonished them of their sin, when you judged them to be guilty, and heard
them speak for themselves? If not; either you are incomperent judges; or else
you draw the guilt upon your selves, and make the sin your own, as the express
commands of God will tell you, in Levit. 19. 17. and Mat. 18. 15. If you have
admonished them and they repent not, why do you not tell the Pastors of the
Church that they may admonish them and seek their reformation? This is Christ's
order: But you will not, you dare not do this; lest for want of proof, you be
proved slanderers, and the shame of your accusations fall upon your selves. You
think you may whisper behind men's backs, or accuse them in general without
naming any particular fact, and not be proved liars. But this will not hold
long.

Quest. 5. Moreover I would know of you, when you accuse men for not being more
bountiful in your eyes, Do you know of all their works of charity? Are you
acquainted with their bestowings? Sure you are not: For God has commanded
them, Matthew. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. [ Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to
be seen of them: otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven:
therefore when thou do thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee as the
hypocrites do, etc. But when thou do thine alms, let not thy left hand know
what thy right hand does; that thy alms may be in secret; and thy Father which
sees in secret, himself shall reward thee openly.] This command they make
conscience of: and how then can you be meet judges of their alms?

Quest. 6. Also I would know, Are you certainly acquainted with their
particular estates? and do you know how able they are to give? If you do not,
you are no competent Judges. How often have I known men reproached for
unmercifulness, and for not being more liberal, when they have been so low in
their estates, that they were not able to maintain their families, or to pay
every man his own: and yet they that knew not this did back-bite them as
covetous.

Quest. 7. Furthermore I would know; Are you sure it is not Satan within you
that prompteth you to these accusations? Hear my evidence and judge. He is
called in Scripture the Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12. 10. and he is
described to be a Lying malicious spirit. If therefore it be a Lying,
malignant, malicious spirit, then certainly it is the spirit of Satan.

And 1. We have cause to believe that it is a Lying spirit by these evidences
following.

1. We find the word of God assuring us that the godly overcome the world, and
are such as have laid up their treasure in heaven. And by the rest of their
lives, we find the characters of the godly to agree more with them, then with
the negligent multitude.

2. We know that their Religion condemns worldliness; and they hear, and
read, and speak against it.

3. They only under God do know their own hearts: and they profess themselves
to be contemners of the world, and heirs of a better world. And we find them at
least as true of their words in other things, as any other men: and therefore
having not forfeited their credit, we are bound to believe them.

4. Especially when we know that you that accuse them are unacquainted with
their hearts.

5. And when we read in Scripture and Church History, that the malignant
enemies of Christ and his Church have in all ages used the same reproaches
against his people, from mere prejudice, and the words of others, and the
malice of their hearts.

6. And we our selves do live among them as well as you, and as near them as
you: and we see not by them any such thing for which you accuse them. As far as
we can judge, it is you that are the worldlings, and their conversation is in
heaven, Phil. 3. 20, 21. Excepting some hypocrites that creep in among them, as
they ever have done, and will do into the Church, till Christ at Judgment shut
them out. Moreover we see in the course of their lives, that their speeches are
more heavenly then yours, and less of the world: They can spare time from the
world to worship God in their families, and instruct those that are under their
charge; which you cannot do. We see they take pains for another world through
the course of their lives, which you will not do.

8. To conclude, we see by daily experience, that where you give a penny to any
good use, we have many from them. I have often wondered at the impudence of blind
malignant persons in this place. I must needs my self bear witness that in
diverse collections for charitable uses, we have had from those that profess
Religion ten shillings and twenty shillings a man, when we have had from men
that are commonly supposed richer, a shilling, or six pence, or a groat, or not
a penny. And I can witness that among them there are frequent collections for
persons in distress at home and abroad, when we never mention them to the rest
of the people, as knowing them so worldly that it is in vain; and we should get
a scorn from them sooner then a groat, when the persons whom they reproach as
covetous will give many shillings; and that frequently time after time. And for
collections at Fasts and Sacraments, all men may see the difference. I would
not have mentioned any of these matters, but that the impudency of Calumniators
does in a sort constrain me: For when of my own knowledge we have had this many
years more pounds from some of them, then we could have pence from others, for
the relief of the poor in voluntary contributions, yet do I frequently hear
these worldlings crying out of the covetousness of professors; as if they had
brazed their foreheads, as well as wilfully shut their eyes.

Quest. 8. But yet I would further be informed of you; To what end is it that
you make this objection? Is it not with a desire to have a life of holy
diligence despised in the world, or thought evil of, or judged needless? Ask
your own hearts, and deal sincerely. And if it be so, is not this the very work
of the Devil, which he has been doing in all ages against the Church, and by
which he ticeth souls to hell?

Quest. 9. And I would desire you to tell me, if covetousness be among them,
Whether you are able to charge it upon their Religion or Profession? Do they
not witness against it as much as any people in the world? Does not the Bible
which they read cry it down, and threaten damnation to it? Do not the Books
which they read do so too? Do not the Sermons which they hear and repeat cry it
down? Did you ever hear us preach for covetousness? say so if you can or dare.
There is not a greater enemy to covetousness and all other vices in the world,
then Christ, and the Gospel, and Religion which these men profess. If then
there should be covetous ones among them, what is this to Religion which
teaches them to abhor it? Will you blame the best Physician and remedies that
men are sick, when there is no cure but by those remedies? Will you blame
clothing or fire that men are cold? Or eating and drinking, because men do
consume by some disease? I tell you, all men naturally are worldlings; and no
man can be cured of that deadly disease, but only those that are cured by the
Religion which these men profess.

Quest. 10. And I pray you tell me, Do you think that the works in which they
differ from you are good or bad? Is it good or bad to hear Sermons and repeat
them for the help of memory, to pray and praise God together, and to live in
the Communion of Saints, which in your Creed you profess to believe. If you
have the face to say this is evil or needless, you accuse God himself that has
so often commanded it. If it be evil, its long of God that so urgently
requires it, and not of them: But if you dare not say so, but confess it is
good, why then do you not imitate them? What! will you forbear Good, because
others do Evil? Will you sin against God in one kind, if they do so in another?
We desire you not to join with them in evil? If they deceive, or lie, or
oppress, do not you do so: But will you therefore refuse your duty to God; and
therefore destroy your own souls? It is to God and not to them that your duty
is necessary. Its God that commands it, and God you owe it to: And will you
abuse God and rob him, because you have hard conceits of men? Will you abuse
him, because you think they do? And who is it that will have the loss of this
but your selves? The Lord has witnessed that without holiness none shall see
God, Heb. 12. 14. And will you neglect an holy life, and shut your selves out
of heaven, and damn your own souls, because you think professors are bad? A
wise course indeed. Starve your selves because professors wear clothes, and
famish your selves because they use to eat. This is a wiser trick of the two,
then to neglect or refuse an holy diligent life, because they use it.

Quest. 11. And if worldliness be so great a sin, I would fain know of you,
Whether in reason you can think that their course or yours is the way to
overcome it. Dare you say that sitting in an Alehouse, or talking of the
world, even on the Lords day, is a better course to overcome the world, then
hearing and reading the Directions of the Word of God, and praying to God for
assistance against the sin that they are guilty of. I see them take pains to
learn those Instructions that should cure them of worldliness, and are glad to
fasten them in their memory; and I hear them warn each other to avoid it; and
begging of God that he would destroy all the remnants of it in their souls: And
I see others follow the world, and live a careless life, and use none of these
means. Which of these shall I think in reason does take the course to conquer
the world?

Quest. 12. Moreover, if these men are as bad as you make them, then sure they
are none of the people of God, but a pack of hypocrites; then they are not
Saints indeed. And then the thing that I would know of you is, Which be the
Saints of God, if these be not; and where shall we find them? I hope you know
that God has his Saints on earth, yea that none but Saints shall be saved: For
it is expressed in Scripture over and over, Heb. 12. 14. and in many other
places. As I said, The Communion of the Saints is an Article of your Creed.
Tell us then where they are, if these be not they. Will you go to the Quakers,
or to the Papists, Monks and Nuns for them? Or whither will you go? Or will you
say, that such as you are the Saints, that reproach holiness, and refuse to
lead an holy life? Is idle worldly discourse a better sign of a Saint, then
keeping holy the Lords day, and laboring for salvation? Is ignorance of the
Scripture, or neglecting it a greater sign of a Saint, then meditating in it
day and night? Read the first Psalm, yea all the Scripture, and then judge.

Quest. 13. Do you think if any of them miscarry, it is because they are too
much Religious; or rather, because they are too little? Surely it is the later.
For, as I said, their Religion severely condemns covetousness: and therefore
if they were more Religious, they would be less Covetous. And he that is most
godly, is least worldly: and ordinarily, he that is most ungodly is most
worldly.

Quest. 14. Is it not then evident, that other men's sins should move you to be
the more Religious and careful of your selves, and not the less? If you see
them stumble, you should look the better to your feet, and not cast your selves
headlong from the Rock that you should be built upon. You should think with
your selves, If such men are so faulty for all the pains they take; how much
more pains must I take to escape such faults. If they that run so hard, shall
many of them miss of the prize by coming short; it is a mad conceit of you, to
think to win it by sitting still, or doing less then they that lost it.

Quest. 15. Lastly, I would advise you to consider, Whether God that justifies
his servants, will suffer you to condemn them? And how you can answer the
challenge, Romans 8. 32, 33. And when Christ has shed his blood to Absolve them,
whether is it likely that he will take it well at them that vilify them? Be it
known to the faces of all their enemies, that [ The Lord takes pleasure in his
people: he will beautify the meek with salvation, Psalm. 149. 4. The Lord
takes pleasure in them that fear him: in those that hope in his mercy, Psalm
147. 11. He is nigh to all them that call upon him; to them that call upon him
in truth, Psalm 145. 18. The Lord preserves all them that love him: but all
the wicked will he destroy. He suffered no man to do them wrong: yea he
reproved Kings for their sakes: saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm, Psalm 105. 14, 15. He that touches them, touches the apple
of his eye, Zech. 2. 8. For all their infirmities, its dangerous vilifying a
people so dear to the God of heaven. They shall shortly hear that joyful voice,
Rev. 12. 10. [ Now is come salvation, and strength, and the Kingdom of our God,
and the power of his Christ: for the Accuser of our brethren is cast down,
which accused them before our God day and night.] And then they that joined
with the Accuser in his work, shall be joined with him in the reward, Mat. 25.
41, 45. The very coming of the Lord to Judgment, will be [ to be glorified in
his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe,] 2. These. 1. 10. And
what then will be the doom of those that vilified them whom Christ will be
glorified and admired in, you may read and tremble, in Verse. 6, 7, 8, 9.

But again I charge you all that fear God, that you learn by the accusations of
malicious men: and take heed as you love God, your selves or others, of giving
them ground of such reports. And though I know that the wicked are absurd and
unreasonable, 2 These. 3. 2. and that you will never be able to stop the mouths
of all such men, till Grace or Judgment stop them; yet see that you walk
circumspectly in such evil days, and give no offense to Jews or Gentiles, or
the Church of God. If you are Christians indeed, you cannot take the Riches or
Honors of the world to be matters of so much worth or weight, as to be
preferred before the honor of your Lord, and the good of souls. It will grieve
you more to hear the reproaches of the ungodly, against the ways and servants
of God, then all your wealth will do you good. Does it not go to your hearts to
hear poor blinded sinners on all occasions reproaching your holy profession,
and saying, [ There are none more proud, and covetous, and unmercifull, then
these Professors of so much strictness and holiness.] Though for the general,
it be a malignant Satanicall slander; yet take heed as you love the honor of
God, and of his holy truth and ways, and the souls of men, that you give not
occasion of such reproach.

SECT. XXII. Use: For Consolation and further Persuasion.
HAving said this much to you for the Crucifying the world, and the using it as
a Crucified thing; I shall here briefly enumerate some of the great benefits,
which will follow to your selves where this is done. And this I shall do in
order to these two ends conjunctly. 1. That those to whom the world is
crucified may lay to heart the greatness of the mercy, and be thankful to God
that has done so much for them. There is the greater need of encouragement and
comfort to the soul, in our Crucifixion to the world, because it is a state of
so much suffering to the body, and a work that requires so much self-denial
and patience. Who will be persuaded to cast all overboard, and forsake all the
pleasures and profits of this world, but he that knows of somewhat to be got by
it that will make him a gainer or a saver in the end? No man will incur so
great a loss, and cast himself upon a life of troubles, without some
considerable benefit to encourage him. And in the conflict, the heart will be
ready to fail, if we have not a cordial at hand for its refreshment. As Christ
himself must have an Angel in his agony to comfort him, and when consolation is
withdrawn by God, does feel himself as one forsaken: So all his members in
their Crucifixion, have need of these reviving Messengers of God, that seeing
the ends and benefits of their sufferings, they may be able to resign their
natural wills in a full submission to the will of God, and so to persevere and
conquer in their sufferings. They have need of a believing consideration of the
Benefits, that they may be daily and hourly furnished against temptations, and
may bear those losses and abuses from men, even to the laying down of life, and
all things in this world, which flesh and blood is so exceedingly against. He
that believes the faithfulness of the promiser, will hold fast the profession
of his faith without wavering, Heb. 10. 23. And he that believes the
recompense of Reward, will not cast away his confidence, Heb. 10. 35. He that
knows in himself that he has in heaven a better and more enduring substance,
will endure the greatest fight of afflictions, becoming a gazing stock by
reproaches and afflictions, and becoming a companion of them that are so used;
and will take joyfully the spoiling of his worldly goods, Heb. 10. 32, 33, 34.
He that can look to Jesus the author and finisher of his faith, and with him to
the Joy that is set before him, will endure the Cross, and despise the shame,
and run with patience the race that is set before him, Heb. 12. 1, 2. He that
by faith fore-seeth the Peaceable fruits of righteousness, will bear the
chastisement which for the present seems not joyous but grievous, Heb. 12.
11. All the cloud of witnesses and army of Martyrs, Heb. 11. do testify this
to us; that it is faith's beholding the benefits and promised blessings, that
must enable us to contemn the world, and suffer the loss of all for Christ.
Having therefore need of Patience, that after we have done the will of God, we
may receive the promise, we have need also of these encouraging helps which
must support our patience, that in this Patience we may possess our souls; When
impatient men to save the world, do lose their souls, Heb. 10. 36. Luke 21. 19.
Mat. 16. 25, 26. These considerations are necessary to us in so hard an
undertaking, lest we be wearied and faint in our minds, Heb. 12. 3. Though we
may manfully bear some few assaults, yet when we feel the vinegar and the gall,
and the cruelty of the world even piercing not only our hands and our feet, but
our very heart, and see them shrink from us that were most obliged to adhere to
us, we shall then judge our selves forsaken of God; if we have not the lively
sense of these benefits. As the very thought of Forsaking all, does strike a
carnal heart with sorrow, and the work does over-match all the power of flesh
and blood, Luke 18. 22, 23, 24, 27, 28, 29. So also the Believer has need to
keep his faith waking and in exercise, that he may lift up the hands that else
will hang down, and the knees that else will be feeble, and may make straight
paths for his feet, that the lame may not be turned out of the way, but may be
healed, Heb. 12. 11, 12, 13, 14. For if we hear Jobs Messengers, and have not
Jobs Faith and Patience, we shall not be able heartily to say, The Lord gave,
and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord, Job 1. 21.

2. My second end in the mentioning of these benefits is; that if yet all that
is said before, have not persuaded you to be Crucified to the world, at least
you may be persuaded by the consideration of the benefits, and of the happy
condition of those that are thus mortified; even when they seem in the eyes of
unbelievers to be most miserable. To these two ends I shall mention the
Benefits.

Benefit 1.
YOur Crucifixion to the world by the Cross of Christ, will be one of the
clearest and surest evidences of your sincerity; And so may afford you abundant
help for the conquering of your doubts, and the ascertaining your salvation.
When on the contrary, an unmortified worldly mind, is the certain and common
mark of a miserable hypocrite. I know a melancholy man may be so weary of the
world, as to be impatient of his life: But to prefer the Lord and everlasting
Life, before it, in our practical Estimation, and Resolution, and Endeavors,
is the very point of saving sincerity, and the specifical nature of true
Sanctification: And all other marks must be reduced unto this. There is no man
so spiritual and heavenly, but while* he is here, has a mixture of earthliness
and carnality: And many a thousand that are earthly and carnal, have some
esteem of God and Glory, and some purposes for them, and some endeavors after
them: But it is that which is predominant that gives the Denomination.
According to that, it is that we must be called either Spiritual and Heavenly,
or Carnal and Earthly men.

More particularly, 1. If you look to the Understanding, this Crucifixion to
the world is a very great part of the Wisdom of the soul. For wherein does
wisdom more consist, then in judging of things as indeed they are, and
especially in matters of greatest moment. He therefore that is Crucified to the
world, must needs be wise: And, whatever his knowledge or reputation may be, he
that wants this must needs be a fool. Is that a wise man, that knows the
times and seasons, and how to do this or that in the world, and knows not how
to escape damnation, nor where his safety and happiness must be sought? And is
not he a wiser man that can see the snares that are laid for his soul, and so
escape the burning Lake: then he that will sell his Savior and his soul, for a
little pleasure to his flesh for a moment? I make no doubt, but the weakest man
or woman, that practically knows the vanity of this world, and the desirable
excellencies of God and Glory, is a thousand fold wiser, then the most famous
Princes or Learned men that want this knowledge. He never take that man for a
fool, that can hit the way to heaven; nor that for a wise man that cannot hit
it. Its the Greatest matters that try men's Wisdom, though childish Wit may
appear in trifles.

2. To be Crucified to the world, is the Certain effect of a Living effectual
faith. The dead faith that James speaks of, may move you to so much
compassion as to say to the poor, Go in peace; be warned and filled, Iam. 2.
16. But it will not so far loose you from the world, as to persuade you to part
with it to supply his wants: At least you will never be persuaded to part with
all and follow Christ, till the Belief of a Treasure in Heaven do persuade you
to it, Luke 18. 21, 22. Can you say from your hearts, [ Let all go, rather then
the Love of God*] And in a case of trial, do you certainly find, that There is
nothing so dear to you, which you cannot part with, for God and the hopes of
everlasting life? This is a sign of an effectual Faith: For neither nature nor
common grace did ever bring a soul so high.

3. It is also a certain evidence of unfeigned Love. For wherein is Love so
clearly manifested, as in the highest adventures for the person whom we Love,
and in the costlyest expressions of our Love when we are called to it? Then it
will appear that you Love God indeed, when there is nothing else that you
prefer before him, and nothing but what you lay down at his feet: When the
greatest professors that love the world, do show that the love of the Father is
not in them, 1 John 2. 15. So far as it is loved.

4. To be Crucified to the world, and alive to God, is the very Honesty, and
Chastity, and Justice of the soul. This is your Fidelity to God, in keeping the
holy Covenant that you have made with him in Christ. This is your keeping your
selves unspotted from the world, and undefiled by it: When the friends of it
live in its Adulterous embracements, Iam. 4. 4. Thus do you give the Lord his
own, even both the creature and your hearts; when worldlings do unjustly rob
him of both. This is the great command and request of God, Prove. 23. 26. My
Son, give me thy heart. Give him but this, and he will take it as if you gave
him all: For indeed the rest will follow this. But if you give the world your
hearts, God will take all the rest as Nothing.

Benefit 2.
THE second Benefit is this. If you are truly Crucified to the world, Your
minds will be free for God and his service; When the minds of worldlings are
like imprisoned hampered things. What a toylsom thing is it for a man to
travail in fetters, or to run a race with a burden on his back? But knock off
his fetters, and how easily will he go? and take off his burden, and how
lightly will he run? Do you not feel your selves that the world is the clog of
your souls? and that this is it that hinders you from duty, and hinders you
in duty, and keeps you from the attainment of an heavenly conversation? When
you should cheerfully go to God in secret, or in your families, the world is
ready to pull you back: Either it calls you away, by putting some other
business into your hands; or else it dulleth and diverteth your Affections, so
that you have no heart to duty, or no life in it; or else it creeps into your
Thoughts in duty, and takes them off from the work in hand, and makes you do
that which you seem not to be doing: And if you shake off these thoughts, and
drive them out of your way, they are presently again before you, and meet you
at the next Turn. But in that measure as you have Crucified the world, you are
freed from these disturbances. The Apostle Peter describes the miserable
estate of Apostates, 2 Pet. 2. 20. to be like a bird or beast that had escaped
out of the snare that he was taken in, and after is taken in the same again;
Having escaped the pollution of the world, etc. (...), they are again entangled
therein: as a beast in a snare, that cannot escape or help himself; So 2 Timothy
2. 4. its said, no man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this
life: (...), etc. So that you see that the world is a snare that entangleth
men's souls, and holds them as in captivity. The table of the wicked becomes
a snare to them, and so* do all the bodily mercies which they possess.

But the mortified Christian may look back on all these dangers, and say,
Blessed be the Lord that has not given us as a prey to their teeth: Our soul
is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers; the snare is broken, and
we are escaped, Psalm. 124. 6, 7. Oh with what ease and freedom of mind may you
converse with God in holy Ordinances, when you are once dis^entangled from this
snare? Now that which formerly drew off your hearts, and clogged your affections
is Crucified and dead: that enemy that kept your souls from God, and was still
casting baits or troubles in your way is dead* As the Apostle says of sin,
Romans 6. 7. He that is dead is freed from sin; So I may say of the world: He
that is dead to the world, in that measure as he is dead to it, is freed from
the world. Let us therefore lay aside every weight, and the sin that does so
easily beset us* and then we may run with Patience, the race that is set before
us, Heb. 12. 1.

This makes a poor Christian sometimes to live in more content and comfort in
the depth of adversity, then he did before in the midst of his prosperity:
because, though his flesh has lost, his soul has gained: though he want the
fleshly accommodations which he had, yet the world is now more Dead to him then
before; and so his mind is freer for God; and consequently more with him. How
blessed a life is it to converse with God with little disturbances and
interruptions! A runner in a race is willing to be rid of his very clothes,
that should cover him and keep him warm, because they are a burden and
hinderance to him in his race: But the lookers on would be loath to be so
stripped. Take away prosperity from an unmortified man, and you take away the
comfort of his life: When if the same things be taken from the mortified
believer, he loses but his burden. How readily will that man obey that is dead
to the world, when he is commanded to do good, to relieve the poor according to
his power, to suffer wrongs, to let go his right, to forgive and requite evil
with good, to forsake all and follow Christ. When to another man these duties
are a kind of impossibilities; and you may as well persuade a Lion to become a
Lamb, or a beast to die willingly by the hand of the Butcher, as persuade an
unmortified worldling to these things. They think when they hear them, These
are hard sayings, who can bear them? Or at least, they are duties for a Peter
or a Paul, and not for such as we. There is a very great part of Christian
obedience, that will be easy to you when you are Dead to the world, which no
man else is able to endure, nor will be persuaded to submit to.

Benefit 3.
ANother Benefit of this Crucifixion is this, The Tempter is hereby disarmed,
and he is disabled from doing that against you, which with others he can do.
The Living world is the Life of Temptations. As a Bear for all his strength and
fierceness, may be led up and down by the nose, when by a ring the cord is
fastened to his flesh: So the Tempter leads men captive at his will, by
fastening together the world and their flesh. He finds it no hard matter to
entice a sensual worldly mind, to almost any thing that is evil. Bid him lie
or steal, and if it be not for shame or fear of men he will do it. Bid him
neglect God and his worship, and he will do it. Bid him hate those that hinder
his commodity, or speak evil of them that cross his desires, or seek revenge of
those that he thinks do wrong him herein; and how quickly will he do it? The
Devil may do almost what he list, with those that are not Crucified to the
world. They will follow him up and down the world, from sin to sin, if he have
but a golden bait to tice them. But when the world is Crucified to you, what
has he to entice you with? The cord is broken by which he was wont to bind and
lead you. Can you tice a wise man by pins and counters, as you may do a child?
If he would draw you from God, he has nothing to do it with: for the world by
which he should do it, is now dead. If he would tice you to pride, or ambition,
or covetousness, or to sinful means for worldly ends, he has nothing to do it
with; because the world is dead. The Devil has nothing but a little money, or
sensual pleasure, or honors to hire you with to betray and cast away your
souls: And what cares a mortified man for these? Will he part with Christ and
heaven for money, who looks on money as other men do on chips or stones? It is
the frame of men's hearts that is the strength of a temptation. To a man that is
in love with money, O what a strong temptation is it, to see an opportunity of
getting it by sin? But what will this move him, that looks on it as on the
dirt in the streets? To a proud man that is tender of his reputation in the
world, what a troublesome temptation is it to be reproached, or slighted, or
slandered? and what a dangerous temptation is it to him, to be applauded? But
what are these to him that takes the approbation and applauses of the world,
but as a blast of wind? As Christ says of himself, John 14. 30. The Prince of
this world comes, and has nothing in me.] that is, He comes to make his last
and strongest assault; but he shall find no carnal sinful matter in me to
work upon; and he comes by his instruments to perscute me to the death: but he
shall find no guilt in me, which might make it a glory to him, or a dishonor
to me: So in their measure the mortified members of Christ may say: When Satan
comes by temptations, the world is dead by which he would tempt them, and he
shall find little of that earthly matter in them, to work upon, and to
entertain his seed: and therefore when he afterward comes by persecution, he
will find the less of that guilt which would be the oil to enlarge and seed
these flames. Your innocence and safety lies much in this Mortification.

Benefit 4.
ANother Benefit that follows our Crucifixion of the world, is this, It will
prevent abundance of needless unprofitable cost and labor, that other men are
at. You will not be drawn to run and toil for a thing of naught: When other men
are riding, and going, and caring, and laboring for a little smoke, or a
flying shadow, you will sit, as it were, over them, and discern, and pity, and
lament their folly. To see one man rejoice that has got his prize; and another
lament because he cannot get it; and a third in the eager pursuit of it; as if
it were for their lives. While they live as if they had forgotten the eternal
Life which is at hand; will cause you to lift up your soul to his praises, that
has saved you from this dotage. The world works on the sensual part first,
and thereby corrupts, and as it were brutifieth our very reason; and the
whole course of worldly designs and affairs, even from the glorious actions of
Kings and Commanders, to the daily business of the plowman and the beggar, are
all but the actions of frantic men, or mad men* I say, so far as the affairs
of the world are managed by this sensual unmortified principle, a sanctified
Believer can look upon them all, as on the runnings or tumults of children or
idiots, or on a game at Chests, where wit is laid out to little purpose.
Mortification will help you to turn your thoughts, and cares, and labors, into
a more profitable course: So that when the end comes, you will have somewhat to
show that you have gained; when others must complain, that they have lost all
their labor, and worse then lost it. What abundance of precious time do other
men lose, in dreaming pursuits of an empty, deceiving, transitory world? When
God has taken off the poise from you, of such unprofitable motion; and taught
you better to employ your time. Many an hundred hours which others cast away
upon worldly thoughts, or discourse, or practices, are redeemed by the wise for
their everlasting benefit.

Benefit 5.
MOreover this Mortification, Will help you to prevent a great deal of sharp
Repentance, which must tell unmortified worldlings of their folly. When they
have run themselves out of breath, and abused Christ, and neglected grace, and
either lost or hazarded their souls, they must sit down in the end and befool
themselves for losing their time and lives for nothing. When God has given a
man but a short life, and laid his everlasting life upon it, and put such works
into his hand as call for his utmost wisdom and diligence: What a sad
perplexing thought must it be, to consider that all or most of this time has
been cast away upon worldly vanities? If a man shall run away from his own
Father, and serve a Master that at last will turn him off with nothing but
shame and blows, will he not wish that he had never seen his face? Such a
Master all worldlings and sensualists do serve: And he that got most by the
world among them, shall wish at last that he had never served it: When the
mortified Christian that slighted the world, and laid out his care and labor
for a better, may so far escape the bitterness of such Repentings, and be glad
that he has chosen the better part. That is not the best meat that is sweetest
in the eating, when afterward it must be vomited up with pain, because it
cannot be digested. The sparer diet of Mortified men, will prevent such after
pains and troubles.

Benefit 6.
MOreovor where the world is Crucified, A great deal of self-tormenting care
and trouble of mind will be prevented. You will not live such a perplexed
miserable life, as worldlings do. Even in your outward troubles you will have
less inward trouble of soul, then they have in their abundance. They are like a
man that is hanged up in chains alive, that gnaws upon his own flesh a while,
and then must famish. What else do worldlings but tear and devour themselves
with cares and sorrows, and scourge themselves with vexatious thoughts and
troubles? If others did but the hundredth part as much to them, against their
wills, as they wilfully do against themselves, they would account them the
cruellest persons in the world. Paul says of men that are in love with money,
that while they covet after it, they do not only err from the faith, but also
(...), they pierced themselves through and through, and stabbed their own hearts
with many sorrows. A worldly mind and a melancholy are some kin: The daily
work of both is self-vexation, and they are wilfully set upon the stabbing and
destroying of themselves. But it is not thus with the Believer so far as he is
mortified. Will he vex himself for nothing? Will he be troubled for the loss of
that which he disregardeth? The dead world has not power thus to disquiet his
mind, and to toss it up and down in trouble. When it has power on his body, it
cannot reach his soul. As the soul of a dead man feels no pain, when the
corpse is cut in pieces, or rotteth in the grave: So in a lower measure, the
soul of a Believer, being in a sort as it were separated from the body by
faith, and gone before to the heavenly inheritance, is freed from the sense of
the calamities of the flesh. So far as we are Dead, we are insensible of
sufferings.

Benefit 7.
ANother Benefit that follows upon the former is this: We shall be far better
able to suffer for Christ, because that sufferings will be much more easy to
us, when once we are truly Crucified to the world. What is it that makes men so
tender of suffering, and startle at the noise of it, and therefore conform
themselves to the times they live in, and venture their souls to save their
flesh? but only their over-valuing fleshly things, and not knowing the worth
and weight of things everlasting. They have no soul within them but what is
become carnal, by a base subjection to the flesh; and therefore they savor
nothing but the things of the flesh. All Life desires a suitable food for its
sustentation. A Carnal Life within, has a Carnal appetite, and is most
sensible of the miss of Carnal commodities: But a Spiritual Life has a
Spiritual appetite: And as Carnal minds can easily let go Spiritual things; so
a spiritual mind, so far as it is such, can easily let go carnal things, when
God requires it. When you are Dead to the world, you will easily part with it.
For all things below will seem but small matters to you, in comparison of the
things which they are put in competition with. If you are scorned, or accounted
the off scouring of the Town, you can bear it; because with you it is a very
small matter to be judged of man, 1 Cor. 4. 3. If you must endure abuses or
persecutions for Christ, you can do it: because you reckon that the sufferings
of this life are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
revealed, Romans 8. 18. You can let go your gain, and account it loss for Christ;
yea and account all things loss for the knowledge of him; and suffer the loss
of all things for him, accounting them but as dung, that you may win him, Phil
3. 7, 8. If you knew that bonds and afflictions did abide you, yet none of
these things would move you, neither would you account your life it self dear
to you, so that you may finish your course with joy, Acts 20 23, 24. So far as
you are dead to the world, and alive to God, it will be thus with you. When
they that are alive to the world are so far from being able to dye for God,
that every cross does seem a death to them. I have many a time heard such
lamentable complaints from people that are ^aln into poverty, or disgrace, or
some other worldly suffering, that has given me more cause to lament the
misery of their souls then of their bodies. When they take on as if they were
quite undone, and had lost their God and hope of heaven, does it not too
plainly show, that they made the world their God and their heaven?

Benefit 8.
MOreover if indeed you are Crucified to the world, your hearts will be still
open to the motions of the Spirit, and the motions of further Grace: And so you
will have abundant advantage, both for the exercise and increase of the graces
which you have received. The earthly minded have their hearts locked up against
all that can be said to them: Never can the Spirit or his Ministers make a
motion to them for their good, but some worldly interest or other does
contradict it, and rise up against it. But what have you to stop your ears when
the world is dead? The word then will have free access to your hearts. When the
Spirit comes, your thoughts are ready, your affections are at hand; and all are
in a posture to entertain him and attend him: and so the work goes on and
prospers. But when he comes to the worldly mind, the thoughts are all from
home; the affections are abroad and out of the way, and there is nothing for
his entertainment, but all in a posture to resist him and gainsay him. O what
work would the preaching of the Gospel make in the world, if there were not a
worldly principle within, to strive against it? But we speak against men's
Idols, against their Jewels and their Treasure, and therefore against their
hearts and natures. And then no wonder if we leave them in the jaws of Satan
where we found them, till irresistible merciful violence shall rescue them. But
so far as you are mortified, the enemy is dead; contradictions are all
silenced; opposition is ceased; the Spirit finds that within that will
befriend its motions, and own its cause; the soul lies down before the word;
and gladly hears the voice of Christ: And thus the work goes smoothly on.

Benefit 9.
MOreover when once you are Crucified to the world, you are capable of the true
spiritual use of it, which it was made for. Then you may see God in it; and
then you may savor the blood of Christ in it: Then you may perceive a great
deal of Love in it: And that which before was venomous, and did endanger your
souls, will now become a help to you, and may be safely handled when the sting
is thus taken out. Before it was the road to Hell: and now there is some taste
of heaven in it. The stones and earth are useful for you to tread upon, though
they are unfit for you to feed on, or too hard to rest upon. So though the
world be unfit to Rest, or feed your souls, it may be made a convenient way for
you to travail in. It is unmeet to be Loved, but it is meet to be Used, when
you have learned so to use it, as not abusing it. When self is thoroughly down
and denied, and God is exalted, and your souls brought over so clearly to him,
that you are nothing but in him, and would have nothing but in and with him,
and do nothing but for him; then you shall be able to see that glory and
amiableness in the creature, that now you cannot see. I or you shall see the
Creator himself in the creature.

Benefit 10.
WHEN once you are truly Crucified to the world, You will have the honor and
the comfort of an heavenly life. Your thoughts will be daily steeped in the
Celestial delights, when other men's are steept in Gall and Vinegar. You will
be above with God, when your carnal neighbors converse only with the world.
Your thoughts will be higher then their thoughts, and your ways then their
ways, as the heaven where you converse is higher then the earth. When you take
flight from earth in holy Devotions, they may look at you, and wonder at you,
but cannot follow you; for whither you go, they cannot come, till they are such
as you. You leave them grovelling here on earth, and feeding on the dust, and
striving like children, or rather like swine or dogs, about their meat. When
you are above in the Spirit, on the speedy wings of Faith and Love, beholding
that face that perfecteth all that perfectly behold it; and tasting that Joy,
which fully reconcileth all that fully do enjoy it: which we must here contend
for, but none do there contend about it. What a noble employment have you, in
comparison of the highest servants of the world? How sweet are your delights in
comparison of the Epicures? O happy souls that can see so much of your eternal
happiness, and reach so near it. Were I but more in your condition, I would not
envy Princes their glory, nor any sensualists and worldlings their contents,
nor desire to be their partner. I could spare them their troublesome dignities,
and their burdensome Riches, and the unwholsom pleasures which they so often
surfeit on, and the wind of popular applause which so swells them: Yea, what
could I not spare them, if I might be more with you. O happy poverty, sickness
or imprisonment, or whatever is called misery by the world, if it be nearer
Heaven, then a sensual life! and if it will but advantage my soul for those
contemplations, which are the employment of mortified heavenly men! Yea if it
do but remove the impediments of so sweet a life! I know (by some little, too
little experience I know) that one hours time of that blessed life, will easily
pay for all the cost; and one believing view of God will easily blast the
beauty of the world, and shame all those thoughts as the issues of my dotage,
that ever gave it a lovely name, or turned mine eye upon it with desire, or
caused me once with complacency to behold it, or ever brought it near my heart.
O Sirs, what a noble life may you live! and how much more excellent work might
you be employed in, if the world were but dead to you, and the stream of your
souls were turned upon God? Had you but one draught of the Heavenly
consolations, you would thirst no more for the pleasures of the world. Yea did
you but taste of it, as Jonathan of the honey from the end of his rod, (1 Samuel
14. 27.) your eyes would be enlightened, and your hearts revived, and your
hands would be so strengthened in your spiritual warfare, that your enemies
would quickly perceive it, in your more resolute prevailing opposition of their
assaults. And experience will tell you, that you will no further reach this
heavenly life, then you are Crucified to earth and flesh. God uses to show
himself to the Celestial inhabitants, and not to the Terrestrial: And
therefore you will see no more of God, then you get above and converse in
Heaven: And if faith had not this elevating power, and could not see further
then sense can do, we might talk long enough of God, before we had any saving
knowledge of him, or relish of his Goodness. And doubtless, if we must get by
faith into Heaven, if we will have the reviving sight of God; then we must
needs away from earth: For our hearts cannot at once converse in both. Believe
it Sirs, God uses to give his heavenly Cordials, upon an empty stomach; and
not to drown them in the mud and dirt of sensuality. When you are emptyest of
creature-delights and love, you are most capable of God. And fasting from the
world, does best prepare you for this heavenly Feast. Let Abstinence and
Temperance be imposed upon your senses; but command a total Fast to your
Affections, And try then whether your souls be not fitter to ascend, and
whether God will not reveal himself more clearly then before. It may seem a
paradox that the valleys should be nearer Heaven then the Hills; But doubtless
Stephen saw more of it, then the high Priests: And Lazarus had a fairer
prospect thither, from among the dogs at the Rich man's gate, then the Master of
the house had at his plentiful table. And who would not rather have Lazarus's
sores with a foresight of Heaven, then the Rich man's fullness without it; yea
with the fears of after misery? A Heavenly life is proper to the mortified.

Benefit 11.
MOreover, those that are Crucified to the world, are most fruitful unto
others, and blessings to all within their reach. They can part with any thing
to do good with. They are rich to God and their Brethren, if they be rich, and
not to themselves. If a mortified man have hundreds or thousands by the year,
he has no more of it for himself, then if he had a meaner estate. He takes but
necessary food and raiment; he shunneth intemperance and excess: Nay he often
pincheth his body, if needful, that he may tame it, and bring it into
subjection to the Spirit: and the rest he lays out for the service of God, so
far as he is acquainted with his will. Yea his necessary food and raiment which
he receives himself, is ultimately not for himself, but for God: Even that he
may be sustained by his daily bread for his daily duty, and fitted to please
his Master that maintains him. If they have much they give plenteously: If
they have but little, they are faithful in that little: And if they have not
silver and gold, they will give such as they have, where God requires it.

But the unmortified worldling, is like some spreading trees, that by drawing
all the nutriment to themselves, and by dropping on the rest, will let no other
prosper under them. They draw as much as they can to themselves: For themselves
is their care and daily labor, Psalm. 49. 18. They all mind their own things;
but not the things of Christ or their Brethren. Getting, and Having, and
Keeping is their business; and as swine, are seldom profitable till they die.

Benefit 12.
THE last Benefit that I shall mention is this: If you are now Dead to the
world, and the world to you, your natural Death will be the less grievous to
you when it comes. It will be little o^ no trouble to you to leave your houses,
or lands, or goods; to leave your eating, and drinking, and recreations; to
leave your employments and company in the world; for you were dead to all that
is worldly before. Surely so far as the Heart is upon God, and taken off these
transitory things, it can be no grief to us to leave them and go to God. It is
only the remnants of the unmortified flesh, together with the natural evil of
death, that makes death to seem grievous to Believers: but so far as they are
Believers, and dead to the world, the case is otherwise. Death is not near so
dreadful to them, as it is to others; except as the quality of some disease, or
some extraordinary dissertion, may change the case: Or as some desparate wicked
ones may be insensible of their misery. How bitter is the sight of approaching
death, to them that laid up their treasure on earth; and placed their happiness
in the prosperity of their flesh? To such a fool as Christ describes, Luke 12.
that says to himself, Soul take thy ease, eat, drink and be merry; thou have
enough laid up for many years. How sad must the tidings of death needs be to
him that set his heart on earth, and spent his days in providing for the
flesh, and never laid up a treasure in heaven, nor made him friends with the
Mammon of unrighteousness, nor gave not diligence in the time of his life to
make his Calling and Election sure? To a worldly man, that sets not his heart
and hopes above, the face of death is unspeakably dreadful. But if we could
kill the world before us, and be dead to it now, and alive to God, and with
Paul, die daily, it would be a powerful means to abate the terrors, and a
certain way to take out the sting, that death might be a sanctified passage
into life. So much of the Benefits of Mortification.

AND now what remains, but that you that are Mortified Believers, receive your
Consolation, and consider what the Lord has done for your souls, and give him
the praise of so great a mercy: Believe it, it is a thousand* fold better to be
Crucified to the world, then to be advanced to prosperity in it; and to have a
heart that is above the world, then to be made the possessor of the world.

And for you that yet are strangers to this mercy, O that the Lord would open
your hearts to consider where you are, and what you are doing, and whether you
are going, and how the world will use you, and how you are like to come off at
last, before you go any further, that you may not make so mad a bargain, as to
gain the world and lose your souls. O that you did but thoroughly believe, that
it is the only wise and gainful choice, to deny your carnal selves, and forsake
all and follow Christ, in hope of the heavenly treasure which he has promised.
And let me tell you again, as the way to this; That though melancholy may make
you weary of the world, and stoicall precepts may restrain your lusts* yet it
is only the power of the Holy Ghost, the Cross of Christ, the belief of the
promise, the Love of God, and the Hopes of the everlasting invisible Glory,
that will effectually and savingly Crucify you to the world, and the world to
you. It is a Lesson that never was well taught by any other Master but Christ*
and you must Learn it from him, by his Word, Ministers and Spirit in his
School, or you will never Learn or Practice it aright.

The second PART: Of the CHRISTIANS Glorying.
SECT. XXIII.
HAving thus dispatched the first part of my subject, concerning a Christians
Crucifixion to the world, by Christ and his Cross: I come to the second Part
concerning the Glorying of a Christian. The Iudaizing Teachers did Glory
carnally, even in a carnal worship, and carnal privileges, and in the
carnal effects of their Doctrine on their Proselytes: but Paul that had more
to Glory in then they, does disclaim and renounce all such Glorying as theirs,
and owneth and professes a contrary Glorying, even in the Cross of Christ and
his Mortification. The Observation to be handled is; that, True Christians must
with abhorrency renounce all Carnal Glorying; and must Glory only in the Cross
of Christ, by whom the world is Crucified to them, and they unto the world.

In handling this, I shall briefly show you, 1. What is included, or what we
may Glory in. 2. What is excluded: or what we may not Glory in. For the former,
here are two things expressed in the Text, in which a Christian may and must
Glory: 1. The Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. Our Crucifixion to the world
hereby. So that the Positive part of the Doctrine contains these two
branches, which I shall handle distinctly, before I speak to the Negative part.

1. True Christians that are Crucified to the world and the world to them by
the Cross of Christ, may and must Glory therein.

2. Yet so, as that their Glorying must be principally in Christ, and their own
Mortification must be Gloryed in, but as the fruit of his Cross.

For the first Part, it must be understood with these necessary limitations.

1. As Glorying signifies a self-ascribing and Proud conceit of our own
Mortification, and is contrary to Christian self-denial and humility, and
Glorying in God, so we must take heed of it and abhor it.

2. As Glorying signifies any outward expression of this inward pride, either
by words or deeds, we must also avoid it with abhorrence.

3. So must we also do by all unseasonable offensive ostentation, which may
seem to others to savor of Pride, though indeed it proceed from a better cause.

4. But as Glorying signifies the apprehension of the Good of the thing, and
our Benefit by it, and the due Affections of Content, and Joy, and Exultation
of mind that follow thereupon, thus must a Christian Glory in his Mortification
by the Cross of Christ. We commonly call this act, a Blessing of our selves in
the apprehension of our case. As the carnal ungodly world do Bless themselves
in their Possessing carnal things; so may a Christian bless himself that he is
Crucified to them: that is, he may rejoice in it as a great blessing of God,
that tends to further blessedness.

5. And when we are called to it, we may express to others our Glorying herein.
But so as that we give the Glory to God; and not to our own corrupted wills.

6. And when we are called hereto, we must do it very cautelously; as Paul
does, 1 Cor. 4. 4. [ I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified.]
Signifying that we do it with holy intentions for the good of the hearers and
the honor of God, as he does, 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2, 6, 8. to the end. And 2 Cor. 2.
5, 6, etc. 1 Cor. 9. throughout. 2 Cor. 3. 1, 2, etc. And we must so do it as
to confess it is like to folly, it being the custom of proud fools to be
boasters of themselves: And so Paul when he is called to mention his
privileges, calls it his folly in this sense, 2 Cor. 11. 1, 17, 19, 23. lest
others should be encouraged to sinful boasting by his example, if he did not
brand it by the way with the note of folly; though it was but materially so in
him (being the matter that folly is by others expressed in) but formally in the
proud.

2 HAving told you, How we may Glory in our own Mortification, I shall next
give you the proof of the point, that we may so do.

And first it is proved by the example of Paul himself, both here in my Text,
and in many other places. 2 Cor. 5. 11, 12, 13. 2 Cor. 11. throughout. 2 Cor.
12. throughout. Verse. 5, 6. Of such a one will I glory; yet of my self I will
not glory, but in mine infirmities:] that is, not in any thing that seems to
advance me in the eyes of the world, lest it should seem a carnal Glorying, or
men should be drawn thereby to overvalue me; but in such things as men rather
pity or villifie for, even my worldly meanness, and contemptibleness, and
sufferings for Christ; though before God these are honorable, and therefore I
will glory in them openly, as secretly I may do in all other graces. So it
follows, [ For though I would desire to Glory, I shall not be a fool: for I
will say the truth. But now I forbear, lest any man should think of me above
that which he sees me to be, or that he hears of me.] And so Verse. 9, 10,
11. [ Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the
power of Christ may rest upon me] (that is, that my Glorying may magnify that
Power of Christ that is manifest in sustaining me, and not my self:) therefore
I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions,
in distresses for Christ's sake: for when I am weak, (that is, in the flesh and
the eye of the world) then am I strong, (that is, in the Spirit, and the work
of Christ) I am become a fool (that is, like a fool) in Glorying: Ye have
compelled me: For I ought to have been commended of you; For in nothing am I
behind the very chiefest Apostles, though I be nothing.] Yea 1 Cor. 9. 15. he
says, he [ had rather die then any should make his glorying void] concerning
his self-denial for the advantage of the Gospel.

2. I also prove it thus. We may and must glory in the blessed effects of the
blood of Christ. Or else we shall not give him his honor. But our own
Mortification is one of the blessed effects of the blood or Cross of Christ:
therefore we may and must glory in it.

3. We may and must glory in the certain tokens of the Love of God. But our own
Mortification is one of the certain tokens of the Love of God: therefore we may
and must glory in it.

4. We may and must Glory in Christ dwelling in us; and the effects of his
indwelling. For if we may glory in Christ Crucified, then also in Christ as our
Head, to whom we are united, and from whom we receive continual influence and
communication of graces: But our own mortification is the certain fruit of
Christ dwelling in us: therefore we may glory in it.

5. We may glory in the image of God upon our souls. For as it is our glory, so
it is the livelyest representation of God himself. But our Mortification is
part of Gods Image upon us: therefore we may glory in it.

6. We may glory that we are the temples of the Holy Ghost, and that the Spirit
of Christ is in us, and we may glory in his fruits and works. But our
Mortification is a principal fruit of the Spirit, which shows that he
dwells in us: therefore we may glory in it.

7. There is no doubt but Christians may glory in the cessation of their sin
against God, and that as to the dominion of sin, they do not dishonor him, by
breaking his Laws, abusing his Son, his Spirit, and his Mercies as formerly
they did. But all this is contained in our Mortification: therefore we may
glory in it.

8. No doubt but we may glory in the Honor of God, when his wisdom, and
goodness, and power are demonstrated, to the confusion of his foes and the
encouragement of his people; but this is done in the Mortification of his
Saints: In them he conquereth; and in him that loves them they are
super-victors, Romans 8. 37. If we must glorify the workman, as such, then must
we also glorify the work. If Moses and all Israel must sing such a song of
praise to God for overthrowing Pharaoh and his Host in the red Sea; much more
must we sing his praise that conquereth Satan and all our corruptions: And the
work it self must be magnified in order to the Conquerours praise. If Deborah
must sing Gods praises for the conquest of weak men, much more must we, for the
conquest of the world by faith, and for subduing the powers of darkness to us.
There is more of Gods love and power seen in the Spiritual victories of a poor
mortified Christian, that is taken no notice of or despised in the world, then
in the bodily conquests of the famous Princes of the world, who, most of them
perish everlastingly after all, because they are conquered by the world and
their own flesh.

Though it be the design of the Devil and the slanderous world to obscure or
villifie the work of grace on the souls of the sanctified, yet must it be the
care of Believers to counter-work them, and maintain and manifest the luster of
that grace, to the glory of the author. He that magnifieth the Cure does honor
the Physician; but he that slighteth or disregardeth it does dishonor him. To
debase the work of Creation is a reproach to the Creator; yea to overlook it
and not admire and magnify it, is an injury to him: To villifie the work of
the Redeemer, is horrible insidelity and ingratitude: and to slight it, and not
to magnify it, is damnable. And must it not be so then to villifie or not to
magnify the works of the Sanctifyer? Why should it not be our duty to magnify
the work of Sanctification, as well as the work of Creation and Redemption?
Especially when it is the end which the other do tend to, and that without
which we are incapable of sincere magnifying either Creation or Redemption?

9. It is certain that we may Glory in the healing of our diseases, and
recovery of our depraved miserable souls. He that must be sensible of his sin,
must needs be sensible of the mercy of the deliverer. It cannot be that we
should be obliged to mourn for sin, and yet may not Glory in our deliverance
from it. Nature it self constrains us to lament the known unhappiness of our
souls, as well as the wounds and calamities of our bodies: And therefore the
same nature must needs teach us to rejoice and glory in our spiritual recovery.

10. If we may Glory in our Remission or Justification, then by proportion or
parity of reason, we may also glory in our Mortification. For both are ours by
gift, and neither are deserved by us. But it is past doubt that we may glory in
our Pardon or Justification: therefore we may also glory in our Mortification.

11. Undoubtedly we may glory in the ruin of the enemies of Christ and us. How
can a soldier be obliged to fight, and not to glory in the victory or good
success? But our Mortification is the ruin of Christ's enemies and ours;
therefore we may glory in it.

12. We may glory in that which tends apparently to the good of our Brethren,
yea to the common good of Church and Common wealth, For he that is bound to
Love his Brother, and the Commonwealth; is bound to rejoice and glory in their
benefits. But certainly the mortification of every individual member, does tend
to the good of each part, and of the whole. Oh how profitably should we
converse together if it were not for this sin! How peaceable, and edisying, and
comfortable would our conversation be, to all about us? We should not then
tempt them to sin by our example; nor disturb the peace of families or
neighbourhoods by the distempers of our souls and lives; ^or draw down Gods
judgments on the places where we live. No wonder if all about them, be the
wor^^ for one unmortified man; and if the Ship be in sudden danger till Jonah
be cast overboard: or if Israel be dismayed for Achans sin. And all that are
about them may fare the better for a mortified Believer. In this respect
therefore we must glory in our mortification.

13. It is certainly lawful to glory in that which is the earnest of our
heavenly everlasting glory, or a note or evidence of our title to it. For it
cannot be, that Felicity can be desired as Felicity, which is with our highest
affections and endeavors, but we must needs glory in that which assures us
that we shall attain it. But our Mortification is a certain sign of our title
to it, and an earnest of it: And therefore we may justly glory in our
Mortification.

14. Lastly, it is undoubly meet that we glory in that which is Pleasing to God
our Father. For the Pleasing of him is our ultimate end; and the doing of his
will is the whole work of our lives. And therefore if we may not glory in that,
we may glory in nothing at all. Even Christ's own Sacrifice, and Merits, and
holy Life are therefore to be extolled, because they were fully Pleasing unto
God: and the full Commendation which the Father gives him was [ This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased] Matthew. 3. 17. Now it is certain that
God is pleased also with the mortified souls and lives of his people, and that
through Christ they are amiable and acceptable to him. 1 Cor. 7. 32. 1 These. 4.
1. 2 Timothy 2. 4. Heb 13. 16. They that walk with God by faith, have this
testimony, as Henoch had, that they please God, Heb. 11. 5. [ Beloved, if our
heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God, and whatsoever we
ask we receive of him, because we keep his Commandments, and do those things
that are pleasing in his sight,] 1 John 3. 21, 22. To this end is all our
wisdom and knowledge, that we may walk worthy of the Lord in all well-pleasing,
being fruitful in every good work, Col. 1. 9, 10. He is not a Christian that
Rejoices not in that which is pleasing to the Lord. The Righteous Lord Loves
righteousness, Psalm. 11. 7. And he Loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9. 7. And
shall we not glory in that which is beloved of God? You see then the truth of
the point is most evident.

SECT. XXIV. Use 1.
THE first Use that we shall make of this part of the Observation (before we
proceed to the explication of the other parts) is, To inform us of the mistake
and injurious dealing of some misguided ones, commonly called Antinomians, who
tell us, that we must look at nothing in our selves, nor fetch comfort from it,
and earnestly exclaim against the Preachers of the Gospel for teaching men to
look at any thing in themselves, and to take comfort from the Evidence of their
graces, and tell us that we must look to Christ alone, and call all those
Legal Preachers or Professors that be not of their mind in this. But you may
see by what is said before, that they speak against the clearest fullest
Evidence; and that the whole stream of Scripture, bears down their opinion.
And therefore it is sad, that when they go against the light of the Sun, they
should be so confident as to accuse their Brethren of darkness, and so rash as
to censure them as Legalists and ignorant of the righteousness of Christ.

Let us a little distinguish, and all the mists of their accusations will
vanish, and the case will be clear. 1. We must distinguish between [ Carnal
Self] which we are called in Scripture to deny. And [ Self] as it signifies
our personal being; And this we are commanded in Scripture to Love and Cherish.
For we must Love our neighbors but as our selves, and a man must cherish and
nourish his wife but as his own body, and love her but as himself; for no man
ever yet hated his own flesh, Ephesians. 5. 28, 29, 33. And [ Self] in the third
sense, as taken for Renewed Self, that certainly none is bound to hate.

Now in the first sense its true that we must look at Nothing in our selves for
comfort; that is, at nothing in our carnal selves. But of self in the other two
senses, we must further enquire.

2. We must distinguish between that which is both in our selves and of our
selves originally, and that which is in our selves, but not of our selves, but
of God by Christ: Or only of our selves in subordination to Christ. The former
sort we have small reason to glory in, for it is our sin and shame. But the
later we may glory in; for the glory redoundeth to the author.

3. We must distinguish between Looking at something in our selves with a
mistaking eye, as judging it Meritorious, or to be more our own then it is. And
looking at it with a right judgment, and saying of it no more then what is
true. In the later sense we may look at it and glory in it, but not in the
former.

4. And we must distinguish betwixt a Glorying that is terminated ultimately in
our selves, or is accompanied with any undue ascribing to our selves. This is
no doubt unlawful: And a Glorying which tends to God and is terminated in
him, and gives no honor to any creature but what God gives them, and what is
in a due appointed order to Gods honor. And this Glorying is a duty, and by
all Christians to be carefully performed.

If any that peruse these lines be tainted with this weak mistake, let them
consider, besides what is said before.

1. Is it just or pious that Christ should lose the honor of his mercies,
merely because he has bestowed them on us? Does that make them no mercies: Or
rather make them the greater mercies? Shall his grace be villified, because he
makes thy soul the subject of it? Why then it seems you would have thanked him
more to have kept his mercy to himself.

2. Is Christ ever the less Christ, because he dwells in the hearts of
Believers? Ephesians. 3. 17. And will you pretend to honor Christ without you, and
deny him his honor within you, even because he is within you? Yea and will
pretend that it is for the honor of Christ thus to dishonor him? and tell men
that they deny or overlook it, because they admire him within them, as well as
without them? If Paul say, [ I have labored more abundantly then they all* and
add when he has done, [ Yet not I, but the Grace of God which was with me; and
by the grace of God I am what I am; and his Grace which was bestowed on me was
not in vain,] 1 Cor. 15. 10. will you tell him that he exalts himself against
Grace? No: but he exalts Grace in himself. Paul travailed in birth of the
Galathians till Christ-were formed in them, Gal. 4. 19. And must not he and
they observe and honor Christ ^n them after all this travail, If we glory that
we [ are Crucified with Christ, and that we live] we always add or understand
[ yet not we, but Christ lives in us, and the life which we now live in the
flesh, we live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved us, and gave himself
for us, Gal. 2. 20.] And is it a dishonor to Christ to acknowledge him in us,
and to say that we Live by him?

3. Was it not the very end of Christ's death to save his people from their
sins? Mat. 1. 21. and to bring them from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan unto God? Acts 26. 18. and did he not give himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity, and sanctify to himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works, Ti^. 2. 14. Did he not therefore die for all, that they
which Live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that dyed
for them, and rose again? 2 Cor. 5. 15.] [ When he ascended up on high, he led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.] To what end? ^ For the perfecting
of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of
Christ, till we all come in the unity of the Father, and the knowledge of the
^on of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness
of Christ, that henceforth we be no more children, etc. ^ ^ Christ loved the
Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by
the washing of water, by the word, that he might present it to himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such t^ing, but that it
should be holy and without blemish. ^ Abundance of such passages in Scripture
do assure us that the Holiness of the Saints was the End that Christ intended
in his death. If therefore you teach men that they must not look at the En^, in
effect you ^each them that they must not look at the Means* ^f they must not
re^oyce in the fruits of Christ's death, they must not rejoice in his death it
self: For in it self considered, his death was not matter of Joy, but of
Sorrow: but it is for the sake of the effects that we must rejoice in it. It is
a dishonor to the sufferings and merits of Christ, to obscure or make light of
the ends and effects of them. And they that will Glorify the blood of Christ,
must Glorify its effects on the souls of men. Who is it that more honors
the Physician? he that magnifieth the cure, or he that villifieth it, or makes
nothing of it? as was aforesaid.

4. Doubtless we must observe and Glory in that which all the world must
observe and glorify God for: and that which will be the matter of our
Redeemers honor at the last day; yea the magnifying of himself therein is the
end of his coming. But such is the holiness of the Saints. They that see their
good works must glorify our Father which is in heaven, Mat. 5. 16. And Christ
shall come to be Glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that
believed, even because they believed the Gospel, 2 These. 1. 10. Read also ver.
11, 12.

5. The Holiness of the Saints is called their participation of the Divine
nature; (as 2 Pet. 1. 4. is commonly expounded and it seems more agreeable to
that which follows, then to expound it of a Relative participation of the
Divine nature in Christ without us.) This is given to them that escape the
corruption that is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1. 4. And will you
overlook the Divine Nature, and refuse to honor it, and this on pretense, that
it is a wrong to Christ? Take heed lest by your doctrine you make Christ an
enemy to God and holiness, who came into the world to do his Farhers will, and
to recover sinners by sanctification from the world to God.

6. It is the great sin of the Devil and wicked men, to wrong and dishonor
Christ in his Saints, and when he himself is out of their reach, they persecute
him in his members; and those that love not and relieve not these, shall be
judged as not loving and relieving Christ. It is certainly our duty then to do
contrary to them, and to love and admire Gods graces in the Saints, and to
observe and honor Christ within them.

7. What comfortable use can we make of the promises, if we must not look at
those Evidences in our selves that prove our interest in them. God has
promised, that If we confess with the mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in the
heart that God raised him from the dead, we shall be saved, Romans 10. and that
he that believes shall not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3. 16. If
you say with the Papists, that no man can tell whether he be a true Believer or
not: then you make the promise vain; For what good will it do any man to know
that heaven is promised to Believers, if it cannot be known whether we are
Believers or not: But if you confess that it may be known, why should we so
despise the comfort of the promise as not to search after and observe the
qualification, which must evidence that it is ours? Will you apply this promise
to all, or to some, or to none? If to none, then its made in vain. If to all,
you will deceive the most. I mean if you absolutely promise them the benefit.
For it is not all that are Believers, nor all that shall have everlasting life.
You dare not absolutely tell all men in the world, that they shall not perish.
It must needs therefore be the proper benefit of some: and how will you know
but by the Text who those are. There is no way of applying it, that the Text or
common reason will allow of, but by discerning that we are Believers, to
conclude thereupon that we shall not perish. If you say that all are bound to
believe that they shall not perish, I answer, then most should be bound to
believe a falsehood; which cannot be. They are only bound to believe the truth
of the Gospel, and accept of Christ as offered therein, and then discerning
this faith in themselves to conclude that they shall be glorified.

8. Should we not observe the lower m^r^i^s that we possess, it were great
unthankfulness: much more to overlook the special mercies that accompany
salvation. We must bless God for the very health and strength of body that is
within us; for our understandings and memories: How much more for the graces
that are within us.

9. Our Mortification is part of our Salvation: and our Holiness is a beginning
of our Happiness; and when we come to heaven we shall be perfected herein. If
therefore we may not take comfort in this, we may not take comfort in heaven it
self, which is the perfection of it.

10. Lastly consider, that Sanctification is that mercy that makes us capable
of glorifying God for the rest of his mercies, and receiving the comfort of
them. An unsanctified man cannot give any honor sincerely to Christ. And may
we not observe and glory in that mercy, that enableth us to give God the glory
of all mercies? Can it be a wrong to Christ, to rejoice in that without which
we can do nothing but wrong him? and to take comfort in that, without which we
are incapable of true comfort?

By this time I hope it is evident to you, that it is an injurious dealing
against Christ and his Saints, for any to reproach them for Glorying in Gods
graces, even that they are Crucified to the world, and the world to them.

SECT. XXV. Use 2.
FRom hence also many disconsolate Christians may see their error, who cannot
Glory in a Mortified state. They can see matter of comfort in a state of
exaltation, when they perceive themselves prosper in all that they undertake,
and find a present answer of their prayers, and enjoy the sense of the Love of
God: but to be Crucified to the world and the world to them, does seem to them
but an uncomfortable state, and they cannot see the greatness of the mercy. It
is easy to perceive the excellency of those mercies that participate of the
ultimate End, and are known by proper fruition, and have nothing in them but
pure sweetness and delight: And therefore a state of Joy declares it self: But
as for those mercies that have the Nature of a Means, whose excellency is in
order to their end, and those that have some wholesome bitterness mixed; because
they are less grateful to sense, and valued only by faith, therefore we are too
prone to overlook their worth, and to neglect the comforts which the
consideration of them might afford us, and so to deny God the thanks that is
his due. Every sensual man can rejoice in the having and enjoying of outward
prosperity: And every Christian can rejoice in the fruition of God, whether in
foretaste here, or in fullness hereafter: But to rejoice in the absence of
worldly prosperity, in that we are dead to it and have learned to set light by
it; and to Rejoice in the absence of God, in that we have hearts that are set
upon him, and cannot be satisfied without him, and are desiring after him, and
in progress toward him, and hope ere long that we shall be with him; this is
the joy that must be expected by believers here on earth.

Though an Enjoying foretaste may now and then afford them a feast, yet is it
this Believing, desiring, seeking Joy that must be their ordinary sustentation:
And if in this world they have no other, they have cause to be abundantly
thankful for this.

To Rejoice in the fruition of God, (especially when it is full) is the part of
the Glorified Saints in heaven. To Rejoice in the creature as accommodating
their flesh, is the Joy of the Carnal Unsanctisied here on earth (A remnant of
which is in the imperfect Saints.) To rejoice in mere outward Ordinances and
the false conceits of special Grace, is the Joy of hypocrites and common
prosessors. To be without Joy is the part of some of the ungodly under the
terrors of their consciences, and of true Christians that know not their own
sincerity, or are under some great desertions of God. To be out of all hope and
possibility of Joy, is the part of the Devil, and damned men. But to Rejoice in
the true mortification of the flesh, and in the holy contempt of worldly
things, and in the desires and hopes of the glory to come, this is the part of
the Saints on the earth; and the present joy that comes by believing. And this
kind of joy is most suitable to our present condition: as Fruition is suitable
to our Heavenly End. The comforts of travailers is not of the same kind with
those of a man that is at home. He that is at home would have his wealth about
him. But you would not carry your houses with you in your journey, nor would
you drive your cattle with you, or carry all your goods and riches with you: A
travailer would have as fair a way as he can get, and as good a gui^e, and
necessaries for his journey, and no more, but all the rest he would have at
home, that he may find it when he comes thither. It is his benefit in the way,
to want no more, and to have no more: For the more he needs, and has, the
more he must be burdened and troubled. Mark the descriptions of our present
blessedness that you find in the Scriptures, and you may see that they consist
in our present Mortification to things below, and desires and hopes of things
to come, rather then in a state of enjoyment here, whether it be of the world
or of God. Though still the reason of our Blessedness in a mortified estate, is
the tendency that it has to a glorified estate; because it is the way to that,
Mat. 5. 3. [ Blessed are the poor in Spirit.] It is not [ Blessed are the
worldly rich: Nor Blessed are the Glorified only.]. But the reason is, [ For
theirs is the Kingdom of heaven] that is, in title; but not in possession. ver.
2. [ Blessed are they that mourn.] And why are mourners blessed? [ For they
shall be comforted.] Luke 6. 24, 25. Woe unto you that are Rich, for ye have
received your consolation: Woe unto you that are full, for you shall hunger: Woe
unto you that laugh now, for you shall mourn and weep: Woe unto you when all men
speak well of you, etc.] that is, Woe to you that place your comfort and
felicity in Riches, and Fullness, and Mirth, and the Applause of men: Yea though
you possess the things you desire, yet woe to you, because you shall miss of the
true and durable felicity.] Thus also run all the rest of the blessings in
Matthew. 5. [ Blessed are the meek; Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness; Blessed are the merciful; Blessed are the pure in heart; Blessed
are the peacemakers; Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness
sake; Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you, and shall say
all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake:] that is, When you are so
firm in the faith, and so far in love with me, and the heavenly reward, that
you can bear all these revilings, and slanders, and persecutions, you are
Blessed even when the troubles are upon you.] So that you see here, that our
present Blessedness consists in Mortification to present things, and Hope of
future: And from the future the Reason of our present blessedness is fetched:
[They which hunger and thirst after righteousness shall be filled: The merciful
shall obtain mercy: The pure in heart shall see God: The peace makers shall be
called the children of God: The persecuted shall have the Kingdom of heaven.]
Indeed to the meek it is promised in present, that [ they shall inherit the
earth,] as Psalm. 37. 11. had before said: that is, It shall afford them
accommodations for a travailer, which is all that is desirable in it, or can be
expected from it: For godliness has the promise of this life, and of that to
come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Yea moreover there is a special promise to the meek, above
those godly persons that are most wanting herein: For their passage through
this world to heaven shall ordinarily be more peaceable and quiet to them then
other men's: They do not so molest their own minds, and vex themselves; nor make
themselves troubles, nor provoke others against them, as the passionate do; and
commonly they are either loved, or pittyed, or easilyer dealt with by all.

So that you may see throughout the Gospel, that our present blessedness is in
Mortification and Hope, as the way to our future blessedness, which consists
in fruition. And therefore it is a a very great error in Believers, when they
overlook the blessedness of a Mortified state, and can see little in any thing
but sensible fruition and rejoycings. When you are low in afflictions, and
grieved for your corruptions, and fill the ears of God and men with your
complaints, though you have not then the joyful sense of the Love of God, yet
me thinks you might easily perceive your Mortification; And will that afford
you no refreshing? Do you not feel that you are Crucified to the world, and
your desires after it are languid and life-less? Can you not truly say that the
world is Crucified to you, and that you look on it but as a Carcass; as an
empty, lifeless, and unsatisfactory thing? Would you not gladly part with it
for more of Christ? Could you not let go credit, and wealth, and friends, so
that the Kingdom of God might be more advanced within you, and you might live
more in the Spirit by a life of faith? Could you not be content to be poor in
the world, so that you might but be rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom
which God has promised to them that love him? Why do you not then consider
what a blessed condition you are in, and that your Mortification is a Mercy
that leads to salvation, and as sure a token of the Love of God, as your most
sensible joys? Did you ever mark and conscionably practice that command of
Christ, Mat. 5. 12. to the persecuted, reviled, slandered Believers; [ Rejoice
and be exceeding glad (mark what a frame your Savior would have you live in)
for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the Prophets which
were before you.] So when you are poor and afflicted, and have hearts that set
light by earthly things in comparison of God and Glory, you have cause to
Rejoice and be exceeding glad, though you live under sufferings; for thus it
has been with the true Believers that have gone before you.

SECT. XXVI.
I Come now to the second Branch of the Observation: which is, that [ When
Believers Glory in their own Mortification, it must be as it is the fruit of
the Cross of Christ, that so all their Glorying may be principally and
ultimately in Christ, and not in themselves.]

They must take heed of ascribing the honor to themselves, or of resting in
themselves, but all their observation of the graces that are in them must be in
pure respect to him that is the fountain and the end, that we may thankfully
acknowledge our receivings, and admire the eternal Love which did bestow them,
and the compassions and merits of our Crucified Redeemer, and the powerful
operations of his Spirit in our souls, and so may be carried out to Love and
Duty in the sense of our receivings, and may live to the praises of him that
has called us out of darkness into his mavelous light.

And that you may see how great reason there is for this, and so may be kept
from glorying in your selves, I shall open the cause to you as it lies both on
Christ's part and on ours; What he is to us, and what we are to our selves.

Consider, 1. It was Christ and not we that wrought our deliverance, by the
wonderful work of our Redemption. Long enough might we have layen in prison
before we could have paid the utmost farthing; and long might we have born the
wrath which we deserved, before we could have done any thing to merit or any
way procure our deliverance. Had we wept out our eyes, and prayed our hearts
out, and never committed sin again, this would not have made satisfaction to
God for the sin that was past. Long enough might we have lain in our blood, if
this compassionate Redeemer had not taken us up, and undertaken the cure. Had
he turned us off to any creature, we had been left helpless. Had we looked on
the right hand for some to deliver us, or on the left, we should have found
none: Besides him there is no Savior. Isaiah 43. 11. Acts 4. 12.

And moreover the way he has taken is wonderful. There are unsearchable
wonders of Love, and wonders of Justice, wonders of Wisdom, and wonders of
Power: Its the admiration of Angels; the study of all Saints, to know the
height, and breadth, and length, and depth; and when they have all done, they
find that the Love of Christ surpasses knowledge. As all other knowledge of
arts, creatures, languages, is nothing in comparison of the knowledge of a
Crucified Christ; so our own knowledge is too narrow to comprehend the
greatness, and too dull to reach to the bottom of the mystery, of this design
of the heavenly Love, Ephesians. 3. 17, 18, 19. When Christ has posed men and Angels
with wonders in our Redemption; And when we have done nothing in it our selves,
its easy to perceive in whom we should Glory.

2. Consider also that it is Christ that God has advanced to this Glory, and
it is the magnifying of him that is designed by God, and not of such as you.
Its true, that he intends to Glorify us with Christ, and that in some
participation of his Glory: But that is not by ascribing merit, and power, and
wisdom to us, nor by praising us for that which indeed we have not: but it is
by communicating some of the Spirit of Christ unto us, and letting us see the
glory of our head: Though we may see the brightness of the Sun, and have the
comfort of its rays, yet that does not make us Suns our selves. So though we
shall be where Christ is, and behold his Glory, 1 John 17. 24. and exercise our
selves in his eternal praise; yet all this is but a derived dignity,
communicated to us by the aspect of our Lord; and therefore it will not be our
work to praise our selves but him. Rev. 5. 9. Him has God advanced to be a
Prince and a Savior, Acts 5. 31. and made him head over all things to the
Church, Ephesians. 1. 22. and delivered all things into his hand, 1 John 13. and
given him all power in heaven and earth, Mat 28. 18. and a name above every
name, that at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, Phil. 2. 9, 10. and to
this end he dyed, rose and revived, that he might be Lord of the dead and of
the living, Romans 14. 9. So that the exalting of the Redeemer is a more
principal end in the work of Redemption then our exaltation, and in ours we
are passive, receiving the dignity which from him is communicated to us; but
Christ with his Father is the fountain and end of his own glory.

3. Consider also your Debasement in condemnation and humiliation is the
designed way to the glory of your Redeemer, and in it your own glory. This is
his honor, that when the Law had condemned you, he absolved you by his Ransom:
and when you were dead in trespasses and sins he quickened you, through the
riches of mercy and the great Love wherewith he loved you, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. you
must be sick before he can have the honor of curing you: He will ^ay you at
the feet of God in shame, crying out, Father I have sinned against heaven and
before thee, and am no more worthy to be called a son, make me one of thy hired
servants. You shall call your selves foolish, disobedient, even mad, and the
greatest of sinners, Tit. 3. 3. Acts 26. 11. 1 Timothy 1. 15. If therefore you
begin to glory in your selves, you contradict the glory of Christ, and
consequently hinder the glory you should receive from him. You have but the
benefit of receiving his alms, and therefore must stand in the posture of
beggars, but it is he and not you that must have the honor of giving it. You
must be Nothing, that he may be All, or else you will be Nothing indeed? You
must not Live, but Christ in you, or else you will not Live indeed, Gal. 2. 20.
You must be found in him, not having your own Righteousness which is of the
Law, or works, but the Righteousness which is of Christ by faith, or else you
will lose your selves and your righteousness, Phil. 3. 9. And thus the just,
being dead in themselves must live by faith, but if any be lifted up, his soul
is not upright in him, Heb. 2. 4. Christianity therefore teaches you to glory
in Christ and not in your selves.

4. Consider, it is Christ and not you that revived your souls when you were
dead in sin, and Crucified you to the world, to which you were alive. You might
have rotted and stunck in the grave of sin, if he had not called you out. You
saw the spectacles of Mortality before your eyes, and you could say, The world
is vain before: But yet it lived in your hearts, till power came from Christ to
kill it. Words were but wind; you would never have let go your bone of present
worldly pleasure, if Christ had not taken it out of your jaws, by showing you
the hopes of greater things. Long might you have heard Sermons, and yet have
been carnal still, if his Spirit had not entered into your hearts. Seeing then
it is he that has done the cure so far as it ^is done, it is in him that you
must glory, and not in your selves.

5. Consider, if yet he should deal with you according to your deservings, the
remnants of your sin would bring you to damnation. If yet he did not hide your
nakedness, and by his intercession procure you a daily pardon, you would every
day be your own distroyers; nay you would not be an hour longer out of hell. If
he did not bring you before his Father, you could have no access to him in any
of your addresses. Your sacrifices would be cast back into your faces as dung,
if the merit of his sacrifice made them not accepted. So that by this you may
see in whom you must still glory.

6. Now you have a little grace, you cannot keep it of your selves: Now you are
made alive, you cannot keep your selves alive. If you be not preserved by him
that did revive you, and kept by his mighty power to salvation, and if he be
not the finisher of your faith, who was the author of it? how speedily, how
certainly would you prove apostates, and undo all that has been so long a
doing? If then you stand not on your own legs, but are carried in his arms, you
may see in whom it is that you should glory.

7. Nay more, if you were left to your selves, but to resist one temptation, it
would bear you down. You now think of many sins with an holy scorn: But the
filthyest of those sins would become your pleasure, if you were forsaken by
Christ. You now look on whoredom, and gluttony, and drunkenness, and ambition,
as dirt and dung: But if Christ should forsake you, this dung would you feed
upon, and as dogs you would eat up the filthyest vomit that ever you did
disgorge your selves of, and as swine you would choose that mire for your bed,
and rest in it till hell awaked you. By this then you may perceive in whom you
should glory.

8. Moreover, without Christ you cannot make use of the Grace that he has
given you. The life and comfort of your grace is in the exercise. To draw forth
your Faith, and Love, and Joy into exercise, is the way to increase them, and
to show you experimentally their nature, truth, and worth, and to attain their
ends. And without Christ, you will never do this. You may lie as if you were
dead, and dry, and withered, if he do but withdraw his quickening influences:
For without him you can do nothing. Judge then by this in whom you should glory.

9. Yea further, as you cannot do these of your selves, so neither can you go
to Christ your selves for strength to do them. You will not so much as move a
hand, or lift up your voice to cry for help. For the nature of sin is to make
the sinner willing of it, and unwilling to be delivered from it. You would
rather God would let you alone; and thus you would continue.

10. Yea more, without Christ you would not so much as understand and be
sensible of all this misery and disability in your selves. You will think your
selves well when you are next the worst, and give no one thanks that would
pity or help you. So that lay all this together, and judge in whom it is that
you should Glory.

11. And indeed, the very nature of all your graces, if you have any, will lead
you from a glorying in your selves to a glorying in Christ. Repentance will lay
you low and make you vile in your own eyes, and loath your selves for all your
abominations, Ezekiel. 36. 31. Self-denyalis a great part of the new creature.
Faith leads you out of your selves to Christ. Love will carry you quite above
your selves to God. And so it is with other graces. To live in your selves,
upon your selves, and to your selves, is the state of the unsanctified. To live
in Christ, and upon Christ, and to Christ, is the state of all his living
members: So far then as you are new creatures, this Law is written in your
hearts, and I have the less need to teach you this lesson, and persuade you to
the practice of it, because you are really taught of God, to Glory in Christ
and not in your selves.

12. To conclude, even Nature and Common Reason may teach you that you have
little cause to glory in your selves: For it may easily tell you that you have
nothing of your selves, and therefore nothing that is originally your own: Who
knows not that we have our being, and all the means of our well-being, and
every thing that is worth the having, from God alone? As Nothing could not make
itself to be Something, so neither can that dependent Something uphold it self,
or carry on it self unto its End. What have thou which thou have not received?
And if thou have received it, why should thou glory as if thou had not
received it? 1 Cor. 4. 7. To such poor, empty, unworthy worms as we are, one
would think it should be an easy thing, to know that we have nothing but what
we have of God: For whence else should we have it? In him we live, and move,
and have our being, and of him and by him, and for him, are all things, and
therefore to him must be the praise for ever, Romans 11. 36. Not therefore to our
selves, but unto him must we give the glory, Psalm. 115. 1. Though Nature cannot
lead us to Christ, it may tell us that we are creatures, and have nothing but
from the bountiful hand of our Creator. It is therefore against this Nature
and Reason to Glory in our selves.

Use.
SEE then that you abhor all self-advancing thoughts: And receive no Doctrine
that gives the glory of Christ unto your selves. They are miserable that are
made irreligious by their pride: But they are more miserable, because more
uncurable, that make themselves a Religion by their pride: and frame to
themselves both Doctrines and Devotions, whose tendency and use is to keep
alive this devilish sin. You do not believe well, nor repent well, nor pray
well, nor do any Christian duty well, if you be not more humble in and after
it, then you were before. Its a sad case for a man to preach himself and pray
himself into hell, and to strengthen the bonds of sin and Satan by his
devotions. And yet proud Devotions are as ready a way to this, as you can
devise. If you read, or confer, or preach, or pray, with a mind that is lifted
up, and glories in it self, you do but serve the Devil, with the name of God
and his holy Ordinances. And therefore we have seen by sad experience, in a
multitu^ of sects, and horrible delusions of late in this Land, that none run
to such dreadful outrages in sin, nor go so far against the Lord, as proud
self-conceited professors do. As you love your souls, take heed of being
conceited of your own understanding or worth, and of being proud of your
supposed holiness or abilities. What fearful ends have we seen of such! If
indeed thou art a Christian, thou must become as a little child, and learn of
Christ to be meek and lowly, and be a servant to all: And lay thy self still at
the feet of Christ, as sensible that all the sin is thine, but the good is his,
from whom thou did receive it. Thou can destroy thy self, but in him is thy
help. Thou have the skill and ability, to set thy own house on fire; but its he
that must quench it or repair it. Thou art wise to do evil, but thou have no
knowledge to do good, but what he gives thee. Thou have the art of stabbing
thy self, but not of curing thy self. He must do that for thee, or else it must
be undone. You can snarl and ravel the state of your own souls, but its he that
must untye the knots which thy folly and carelessness have tied. Thou can with
Jonas raise the storm and cast thy self overboard; but its he that must
provide the Whale to receive thee, and bring thee to the Land. Remember
therefore that though thou be a vessel of mercy, it is the fountain that
fills thee and not thy self. Thou can scarce more dishonor thy
qualifications, and actions, and consequently thy self, then to say they are
thine own and originally from thy self. For sure all that is thine and from
thee will be like thee: and therefore must be weak and bad as thou art. When
ever therefore thou gloriest in thy graces; do it but as the beggar gloryeth in
his alms* that ascribes all to the giver; or as the patient gloryeth in his
cure, that ascribes all to God and the Physician; or as a condemned rebel does
glory in a pardon, which he ascribes to the mercy of his Prince. I durst not
have told you as I did before of the duty of Glorying in your Crucifixion to
the world, without adding this caution, to tell you whether all must be
referred, and how little you are beholden for it to your selves. Meet every
thought of self-exalting with abhorrence^, and give it no other entertainment
in your souls then you would give the Devil himself, who is the Father of it.
For casting down Christ will prove the casting down of your selves, and he that
exalts himself shall be abased.

SECT. XXVII.
I Come now to the third and last branch of the Observatition; viz. that To
Glory in any thing save the Cross of Christ and our Crucifixion thereby, is a
thing that the soul of a Christian should abhor.

Here I shall show you what it is that is not excluded from our glorying in
these words: And then what it is that is excluded; and conclude with some
Application.

1. It is none of the Apostles meaning in these words, that we may not Glory in
God the Father. For his love to the world was the cause of their Redemption.
And his pleasure and glory is the end of Redemption; and was intended by
Christ, and must be intended by us. As Iustine Martyr says, he would not have
believed in Christ himself, if he had led them to any but the true God. So I
may say, Christ had not done the work of Christ, if he had intended any End but
God, and had not brought up all to God.

2. When it is said, that we must Glory only in the Cross of Christ, the
meaning is not that we must not also Glory in his Incarnation, and holy Life,
and Resurrection, and Intercession, and every part of his Mediatorship: For the
Cross is not here put as Contradistinct from these; but all these are employed
in his Cross; as having their share as well as it, in the work of our salvation.

3. Nor is it the meaning of the Apostle, to forbid us to Glory in the promise
that Christ has made us, and in the glad tidings of the Gospel: For this
brings the blessed news to our ears, this is the joyful sound; the voice of
Love; the Charter of our inheritance; and therefore sweet to all the sons of
Life.

4. Nor is it any of the Apostles sense, that we may not Glory in the Spirit of
Christ, as magnifying him for the work of illumination and Sanctification. As
it was an high sin in Ananias and Sapphira to lie to the Holy Ghost; and as it
is the unpardonable sin to blaspheme the Holy Ghost: So it must be a great duty
to honor and magnify the Holy Ghost. And therefore it should make us tremble
to hear some profane men abuse the Holy Ghost in deriding his works, saying,
These are the Holy Brethren: these are the Saints: these have the Spirit.

5. Nor yet are we forbidden to Glory in the effects of the Cross of Christ
upon us: for these you find are included in the Text, even our Crucifixion to
the world thereby. And the other effects of it, even our Justification,
Adoption, and the rest, may be Gloried in, as well as this that is here named,
as the Apostle does, Romans 8. 30, 31, 32, 33. to the end; yet still referring
all to God in Christ.

6. Nor are we forbidden to Glory in the helps of our salvation, the Ordinances
of God and means of Grace, so we give no more to them then their due, and look
at them but as the appointed means of God, that can do nothing but by him.

7. No nor is it unlawful so far to Glory in our Teachers, as God has sent
them and qualified them for our good, and as they are the Messengers of God,
and instruments of the Spirit. So did Cornelius glory in Peter, Acts 10. and
when the Apostles brought the Gospel to Samaria, there was great joy in that
City, Acts 8. 8. And the Apostle commands the Churches to know them that are
over them in the Lord, and submit themselves and este^^ them highly in love for
their works sake, 1 These. 5. 12.

8. Nay we may Glory even in honor, and riches, and other outward things, as
they are the effects of the Love of God, and the blood of Christ, and as they
reveal God to us, or furnish us for his service, and the relief of his people,
and any way further the Ends of our holy Faith. In a word, we may glory in any
thing that is good, as it stands in its due subordination to Christ, ascribing
to it no more, then belongs to it in the relation, and not separating it in our
thoughts or affections from Christ, but carrying all the Glory ultimately to
God, and making the creature but the means thereto. And thus we may not only
praise the Physician, but the Medicine, the Apoth^ca^y, the handsome
administration, the glass that it is brought in; the silver spoon in which we
take it; and all this without any wrong to the Physician, or danger of
displeasing him, if we respect every thing but as it stands in its own place.
So much to show you what is not exexcluded.

2. But what is it then that we may not Glory in? As I told you in the
beginning, not in our selves, or any creature, as opposite to Christ, or
separate from him, or any way pretending to be what it is not, or do what it
cannot. But let us enter into some particulars.

1. Have you dignities, and honors, and high places in the world? Do others
bow to you, and have you power to crush them or exalt them at your pleasure?
Glory not in it as any part of your felicity. A horse is stronger then a man:
The great Mogal, and the Turkish Emperor, and many another Infidel Prince, is
a thousand fold beyond the greatest of you, in Power and earthly dignity: and
yet what are they but miserable wretches! Your power will not conquer death,
nor keep off sickness, nor keep the stoutest of your Carcasses from corruption.
When a man shall see you gasping for breath, and yielding your selves prisoners
to unresistible death; and closing those eyes that look so haughtily, then who
can discern the Glory of your greatness? Who then will fear you, or honor or
regard you, further then your deserts or their interests lead them? Your
flatterers will then forsake you, and seek them a new Master? When they are
winding your Carcass, and laying it up for rottenness in the dust, what signs
of your power will then appear: Will your corpse have any reverend aspect? How
many have been spurned when they were dead, that were bowed to while they were
alive? There are many in Hell, and there will be for ever, that were greater
men then you on earth. The higher you clime, the lower you have to fall. If the
breath of a thousand applaud you now, perhaps a million may reproach you when
you are dead? However, it is not the applause of men that will carry you to
heaven, or abate the least of your pain in Hell. Glory not then in worldly
honors or greatness. But rather rejoice that you have enough without all this
in God. How well, thinks the Christian, can I spare all these tedious
troublesome employments, these complements, these applauses, this sumptuous
provision and retinue; and all this stir that they make in the world? How
easily can I spare their Titles and Obeysances? When I look up at them as on
the pinac^e of a steeple, I bless my self that I am below them on sa^er ground.
I have more leisure to converse with God in my solitude, then they have in a
crowd. Rejoice that you neither need nor desire such a s^ate, but find Christ
enough for you in a lower condition, and nothing without him enough in the
highest. That you are above these empty childish honors, when those that
possess them may be enslaved under them. That you have the dignity of a Son of
God, a Member of Christ, and an Heir of Heaven, and have an heart that can
contentedly let other men take the dignities of the earth. Its more to have the
world, and the Kingdoms and glory of it under your feet, by the Spiritual
advancement of your souls, then to be the Monarch of the world.

2. Have you abundance of earthly Riches, and provision for your flesh? So that
you want nothing, but have the world at will? Glory not in it, as the least
part of your felicity. This will not keep your souls in your bodies; nor take
away their guilt, nor open to you the gates of heaven. You may want a drop of
water in Hell, for all your riches on earth. If you escape that danger, no
thanks to your riches. If ever you get to heaven* you must be beholden to
Christ to save you from your riches: And when all is done, you will have a
harder journey, and a greater load to burden you then others, and will be saved
with very much ado. Glory not then in these; but rather glory that you have a
taste of higher and sweeter things, which take off your minds, and make you
look on these as chips. To have an heart that cares not for wealth or honors,
but can rejoice in poverty and daily reproaches, is a thousand times greater
mercy, then to have all the wealth and honor of the world.

3. Have you convenient habitations, for buildings, and rooms, and walks, and
lands, and neighborhood? Glory not in them as any of your felicity. They are
baits to tice your hearts from God. But rather rejoice that you have a building
not made with hands eternal in the heavens, and that you can be contented till
you come thither with any thing in the way, and make shift with inconveniences
for a little while. Heaven wants no furniture, nor has any encumbrances, nor
inconveniences. If a winding sheet and Coffin be room enough when we are dead,
we can endure sure to be somewhat straitened while we are alive, seeing we are
dead to the world while we live in it. O what is the most sumptuous Palace, to
the meanest room in our Fathers house. The green and flourishing earth in
Summer, covered with the more glorious spangled Firmament, is a goodly
structure; but far short of that which the poorest Saint shall have with God.

4. Have you comelyness of body? have you beauty or strength? Glory not in it.
It is but warm well*coloured earth. The pox or other sickness can quickly turn
your beauty to deformity. If age do not wrinkle it, death will dissolve it. The
comelyest and strongest body, will shortly be as homely and loathsome a thing,
as the dirt in the streets, and as the carry on in a ditch. The stoutest youth,
and the neatest d^mes must come to this; there is no remedy. And is such a body
a thing to be Gloried in: No, but glory rather in your assurance of a
Resurrection: when your mortal^ bodies shall put on immortality, and your
corruptible, incorruption, and and death shall be swallowed up in victory; and
when you shall shine as Stars in the Firmament of your Father, and be subject
to heat and cold, hunger, and thirst, and weariness no more: And that in the
mean^time you can tame this flesh, and use it as a servant, and instead of
caring for its inordinate provision, can lay out your care for a more during
substance.

5. Have you comely apparel for the adorning of your bodies? Glory not in it.
This is so childish that its below a man, and therefore so sin^ull as to be
unbeseeming a Christian. The emptyest person may have the best attire. It is
not your outside that shows your worth. The Philosopher asks the Question, Why
women are more addicted to look after neat attire then men? and he answers,
Because nature is conscious of their want of inward worth, it seeks to make it
up with somewhat that is borrowed. It may make a man suspect that somewhat is
amiss within, when there needs all this ado without. They are not always the
best horses, that have the neatest trappings. A fool may be as bravely dressed as
a wise man: and few but fools and children do admire you, or think you ever the
better, but many an one will envy you, and many take you to be the worse. A
graceless soul will be but sorrily covered with neat attire. And whatever you
hang without, we all know that there is dung and filth within. Paul's shop has
comlyer Ornaments then these, 1 Timothy 2. 9. Let women adorn themselves in modest
apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety; not with broidered hair, or gold, or
pearls, or costly array, but which becomes women professing godliness, with
good works; learning in silence with all subjection.] Glory in the whole
raiment of the Saints, even the righteousness of Christ, lest when you go naked
out of the world as you come naked in, your souls should be found naked before
an holy jealous God.

6. Have you health of body, and feel no sickness? Glory not in it. It will
last you but a while. Your oil will be spent ere long, and your candle will go
out: You must know what pains and death are as well as others. A little cold,
or heat, or a thousand accidents, may quickly change the case with you. Many
that were young and lusty go to their graves, when some that were more likely
to have gone before them are left behind: But first or last we must all away.
Rather glory in a healthful frame of soul: that Christ has cured you of your
worldliness and pride, of your self-seeking, and passion, and fleshly lusts:
For this will be a more durable health then the other.

7. Have you Nobility of birth? are you descended of worshipful or honorable
Ancestors? Glory not in it. We are all made of one common earth. There is as
good blood in the veins of a beggar as of a Lord. This is but a remnant of your
Ancestors honor. Perhaps the favor of some great men might bestow it on them
at first without desert? Or it might be the Consequent of a little riches,
though ill got. However the merit descends not to you; and therefore its
little honor that comes that way. That Is your chief honor which is most your
own and least borrowed from others: The deserving Son of a beggar is more truly
honorable, then the undeserving Son of a Lord. Glory rather that you are born
again, not of the flesh, but of the Spirit, not of corruptible seed, but
incoruptible; the word of God that endures for ever. Your first birth, how
noble so ever, makes you but children of wrath and slaves of Satan. But your
new birth is the truly honorable birth, which makes you partakers of the
Divine Nature, the Sons of God, the heirs of Heaven, and Coheirs with the Lord
Jesus. 1 Pet. 1. 23. John 3. 6. and 1. 12. Romans 8. 17.

8. Have you friends that love you, and are able to countenance you, and are
daily tender of you and helpful to you? Bless God for them, but glory not in
man: For Cursed is is he that trusts in man and makes flesh his arm, and
withdraws his heart from the Lord, Jer. 17. 5. Cease from man whose breath is
in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of, Isa. 2. 22. Your best
friends are uncertain, and quickly lost, and may turn so unkind as to break
your hearts. Or if their minds prove constant, their lives are uncertain; and
the dearer they were to you, with the greater grief you will lay them in the
grave. Or if you fall your selves into sickness, they will prove but silly
comforts to you: They can but look on you and be sorry for you; but that will
not ease your pain, nor succor you. Oh how much more cause have you to glory
in such a friend as Christ, that will save you from sin, and wrath, and Hell?
In such a friend as God Almighty, that can rebuke your diseases by a word? Or
make them tend to the cure of your souls? and that will stick to you when
others leave you: with whom you must dwell in heaven for ever.

9. Have you the pleasantest meats or drinks that your appetite desires? the
easiest lodgings? the easiest lives? the pleasantest recreations or companions?
Glory not in them. These are the most desperate bait of the Devil, and the
common ruin of the world. To take your fill, and please your flesh, and fit
your lives to its desires, is the very way to hell, and the property of the
slaves of Satan: Your sweet meat will have sour sauce. If you live after the
flesh you shall die; but if by the Spirit you mortify the deeds of the body
you shall live, Romans 8. 13. You know what became of him, Luke 16. that was
clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared deliciously every day. Its a
heavy case to have your portion and all your good things in this life. Rejoice
rather that you have conquered the desires of your flesh, and have brought it
into subjection: That you are Masters of your appetites, and can eat and drink
to the glory of God, and that you can deny your ease, and endure hardness as a
soldiour of Christ: That you have pleasanter recreations in the ways of life,
and sweeter comforts then the flesh can have any: and that you have delights
that are more durable, and meat to eat that others know not of. Rejoice that
you have conquered the flesh your greatest enemy, and so have escaped the
greatest danger. For there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
that walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1.

10. Have you the love of your neighbors, and do all men men speak well of
you? Glory not in it as any of your felicity. For it will be woe to many that
are as well spoken of as you. The world is not so wise nor so good, that a man
should much rejoice in its good word.

Are they learned men that extol you? yet do not Glory in it. They may boast
you into Pride and Hell, but they cannot add a cubit to the stature of your
worth. They see not the state of your soul? and therefore you may be miserable
when they have said their best.

Are they godly men that admire you and speak well of you? yet Glory not in it
as any certain Evidence of your felicity. They speak as they think, and may
easily be deceived. They are not your Judges. As their hard thoughts cannot
condemn you, so their good thoughts or words cannot justify you with God. Oh
Glory rather in Gods approbation, who knows your heart; to whose judgment it
is that you stand or fall, who judges not by outward appearance, but in
righteousness. If he say, Well done good and faithful servant: his words will
be life to you: but a thousand others may say so, and do you no good at all,
but hurt.

11. Are you famous for Learning? and have you great parts in knowledge and
utterance? Glory not in it as any of your felicity, or evidence thereof. There
are learneder men then you in hell: the greatest knowledge of common things
has much sorrow and shows you so much of your ignorance, and what is yet
beyond your reach, that it disquiets you the more. Much more may you Glory that
you know Christ Crucified, and that you know your interest in the Love of God;
and can Love him whom you know: without which all your knowledge would make you
but as sounding brass, or a tinckling Cymball. Of all these together, I may
say, Ier. 9. 23, 24. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, let not the wise man Glory
in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich
man glory in his riches; but let him that glories, glory in this, that he
understands and knoweh me, that I am the Lord, which exercise loving
kindness, judgment and righteousness.]

12. Have you spiritual mercies as well as corporal? Take heed in what respect
you Glory in them. For example,

1. Have you abundant and excellent means of grace? Have you Ministers, and
holy Ordinances, and Christian Communion, in the purest order? Glory in them as
Gods mercies and helps to higher things: But not as your felicity, or a certain
Evidence of it. For many are first in these respects, that will be last in
respect of life Eternal. The greatest fall is from the highest Mercies; And
many that had the chiefest place in the Church, will have the ^orest place in
hell. Abominable Sodom will escape better then many hearers of the Gospel. But
Glory in this, that you have the Spirit of the Gospel, and that Christ within
you that is preached in the Gospel.

2. Have you much understanding in the Doctrine of the Gospel? and are you
eminent teachers of it to others? Glory in it as an opportunity of serving your
Lord, and doing and getting good. But not as a certain Evidence of a good
estate. For many shall say, Lord have we not preached in thy name? whom Christ
will not own, because they were workers of iniquity, Mat. 7. 22. And he that
knows his Masters will and does it not shall be beaten with many stripes,
Luke 12. 47. But if your Love and Obedience be answerable to your knowledge,
glory rather in that.

3. Have you done many works of mercy to others? Have you given all you have to
the poor: have you converted many souls? Are you public mercies to the place
where you live? Give God the Glory of so great a mercy: But take heed of giving
the Glory to your selves And take not the outward works alone, so much as for
certain Evidences of your happiness.

4. Have you extraordinary experiences of Mercy, and extraordinary feelings of
comfort in your selves. Rejoice in in them as Gods mercy, and give him the
Glory. But remember that these are no certain Evidences of your safe condition.
Many have been wonderfully saved from death, that will not be saved from hell.
And many large comforts, have ended in eternal sorrows.

5. Have you a living faith, and a soul abounding in the Love of God, and
emptyed of Self in Christian humilty, and exercised in holy walkings, and
conflicts for Christ, and looking with hope to the Joy that is set before you?
What then shall I say to you? Glory in this blessed work of Grace: this image
of Christ: this heavenly nature and conversation: and this foretaste and
earnest of everlasting life. But sure I need not bid you give not your very
Graces the Glory due to Christ. For this were to prohibit you a contradiction:
it is the nature of them all to carry you to Christ, and to cause you to deny
your selves: You cannot exercise these Graces but you must do it. Do I need to
desire you that you make not your own faith the matter of that Righteousness
which must answer the Law, when faith it self is a Receiving of another for our
righteousness? Or need I advise you that you trust not in your Love and
Evangelical Obedience as a satisfaction to Gods Justice, or the matter of that
righteousness which must answer the Law; when that Love and Obedience is
nothing else, but a Love to him and an Obedience of him that has satisfied for
us and is become our righteousness? Do I need to persuade the humble so far as
they are humble, not to be proud of their own graces or works? or the
self-denying not to glory in themselves. The nature of the new creature, and
the anointing that is in you, does effectually teach you all these things; and
you have already learned them. Yet because you are sanctified but in part, you
have still need of warning; and therefore I require you, that you objectively
abuse not these Graces of Christ (for actively you cannot; seeing Grace is that
as Austin defines it, qua nemo male utitur.) Should you think you merit by
denying merit? or should you think you have somewhat to Glory in with God,
because you have denied your selves and your own worthiness? or should you
trust in those acts as the matter of your Justification against that Law, whose
nature is to distrust in all that is your own, and thus to trust in Christ
alone; you would be guilty of the most sacrilegious robbing of Christ, and of
an impious abuse of the most precious gra^^s contrary to their nature and ends;
and of the most absurd and senseless abuse of your very Reason by palpable
contradiction.

To conclude, I now beseech you all, take heed of your Glorying, internally and
externally. Let the blinded worldling glory that he has the world; but do you
glory that you need it not, and can be without it, and are heirs of a better
world. Let sensual wretches glory in the pleasing of their flesh; but do you
glory that you are able to deny it its desires, and to please your Lord. Let
the deluded ambitious ones glory in their honors; but learn you to pity them
in the height of their prosperity, and glory in the durable prerogatives of the
Saints. Let natural men glory in their health and natural Life: but glory you
in a readiness to die and be with Christ, and in the Believing expectations of
the Life everlasting. Let hypocrites glory in their evading of sufferings: But
do you glory in tribulations and infirmities, and that you are accounted worthy
to suffer for Christ. Let Pharise^s glory in their superstitions, and
ceremonies, and self-righteousness; but glory you in Gospel simplicity, and in
the righteousness of Christ, Isa. 45. 24, 25. Surely shall one say, In the Lord
have I righteousness and strength; even to him shall men come, etc. In the Lord
shall all the seed of Israel be justified and shall glory?] I^r. 4. 2. The
Nations shall bless themselves in him, and in him shall they glory.] Let the
pomp and fullness of a flattering world be the glory of the worldling. But let
the despised humility and hopes of true Believers, in the lowest ebb of worldly
accomodations, be our greater glory. For God has chosen the foolish things of
the world to confound the wise, and the weak things of the world to confound
the things that are mighty; and base things of the world, and things that are
despised, has God chosen; and things that are not to bring to naught things
that are; that no flesh should glory in his presence. But of him are ye in
Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Sanctification, and Redemption; that according as it is written, He that
Glories, let him Glory in the Lord.] 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. And believe
this; As Carnal Glorying is childish against our own reason and daily
experience, and will shortly make all that used it ashamed; so the spiritual
glorying of the mortified Believer, is also rational and manly, and will never
make him ashamed, but end in the perfect endless glory. Fix then your
resolutions with this mortified Apostle; God forbid that I should Glory, save
in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is Crucified to me,
and I unto the world.

FINIS.

