THE MISCHIEFS OF Self-Ignorance, AND THE BENEFITS OF Self-Acquaintance, Opened
in Diverse Sermons at Dunstan's-West: And Published in answer to the Accusations
of some, and the Desires of others.

By Richard Baxter.

For if a man think himself to be something when he is nothing, he deceives
himself: But let every man prove his own work; and then shall he have rejoicing
in himself alone, and not in another* For every man shall bear his own burden.

(...), Printed by R. White for F. Tyton, at the three daggers in Fleet Street,
1662. (...).

To the right Honorable Anne Countess of Balcarres, etc.
Madam,
THough it be usual in Dedications to proclaim the honor of inscribed names,
and though the proclaiming of yours be a work that none are like to be offended
at that know you, they esteeming you the honor of your ^^x and nation; yet
that you may see I intend ^ot to displease you by any unsafe or unsa^oury
applause, I shall presume here to lay (...) double dishonor upon you: The one
by ^refixing your name to these lean and hasty ^ermons: The other by laying
part of the ^ame upon your self, and telling the world ^^at the fault is partly
yours that they are ^^^blished; Not only yours I confess: For had it not been
for some such auditors as Christ had, Luke 20.20. and Mark 12.13. and for the
frequent reports of such as are mentioned Psalm. 35.11. I had not written down
all that I delivered, and so had been incapable of so easily answering your
desires. But it was you that was not content to hear them, but have invited
them to recite their message more publicly: as if that were like to be valued,
and effectual upon common hearts, which through your strength of charity and
holy appetite, is so with yours. My own thoughts went in the middle way;
neither thinking as those that accused these Sermons of injurious tendencie,
against -- I know not whom, or what. (that have been so long in contention,
that they dream they are still contending, and fancy every word they hear,
from those that their uncharitableness calls adversaries, to signify some
hostile terrible thing; as the scalded head does fear cold water:) nor yet did
I think them worthy to be tendered by such a publication to the world: But
valuing your judgment, and knowing that the subject is of great necessity,
though the manner of handling be dull and dry, I hope it may be profitable to
some; and I find nothing in it to be hurtful unto any, an^ therefore submit,
and leave you both to bear the blame, and take the thanks, if any be returned.

I perceive you value the subjects which you have found in the practice of your
soul to be most useful: As they that know God would fain have all others to
know him; so those that know themselves, do love the Glass, and would have
others to make use of it: I wonder not if your experience of the benefits of
self-acquaintance, provoke you to desire to have more partakers in so
profitable and so sweet a^knowledge. Had you not known your self, you had never
known your Saiviour, your God, your way and ^our end, as you have done: you had
never ^een so well acquainted with the symptoms and cure of the diseases of
the Soul; the nature and exercise of grace, the way ^f mortification, and the
comfortable ^upports, refreshments and fore-tasts of ^eavenly believers: you
had never so clearly ^^en the vanity of all the pomp and fullness ^f the world,
nor so easily and resolutely de^ised its flatteries and baits, nor so quietly
^^rn variety of afflictions; nor imitated ^oses, Heb. 11.25, 26. nor received
the (...) Character, Psalm. 15. He that is a stranger (...) himself, his sin,
his misery, his necessity, etc. is a stranger to God, and to all that might
denominate him wise or happy. To have taken the true measure of our capacities,
abilities, infirmities, and necessities, and thereupon to perceive what is
really BEST FOR US, and most agreeable to our case, is the first part of true
practical saving knnowledge. Did the distracted mindless world consider, what
work they have at home for their most serious thoughts and care and diligence,
and of what unspeakable concernment and necessity it is, and that men carry
within them the matter of their final doom, and the beginning of endless Joy or
sorrows, they would be called home from their busie-idleness, their
laborious-loss of precious time, and unprofitable vagaries, and would be
studying their hearts, while they are doting about a multitude of
impertinencies, and would be pleasing God while they are purveying for the
flesh; and they would see that it more concerns them to know the day of their
salvation, and now to lay up a-treasure in Heaven, that they may die in faith,
and live in everlasting Joy and Glory, than i^ the crowd and noise of the
ambitious, covetous, voluptuous Sensualists, to run after a feather, till time
is past, and mercy gone, and endless woe has unexpectedly surprised them. Yet
do these dead men think they live, because they laugh, and talk, and ride, and
go, and dwell among gnats and flies in the sun shine, and not with worms and
dust in darkness: They think they are awake, because they dream that they are
busy; and that they are doing the works of men, because they make a pudder and
a noise for finer clothes, and larger room, and sweeter morsels, and lower
congees and submissions than their poorer undeceived neighbors have: They
think they are sailing to felicity, because they are tossed up and down: And if
they can play the Jacks among the fishes, or the wolves or foxes in the flocks
of Christ, or if they can attain to the honor of a Pestilence, to be able to
do a great deal of ^urt, they are proud of it, and look as high ^s if they saw
neither the Grave nor Hell, ^or knew how quickly they must be taken down, and
laid so low, that [ the Righteous shall see it, and fear, and laugh at them,
saying, Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength, but trusted in ^he
abundance of his riches, and strength^ed himself in his wickedness* Psalm. 52.^,
7. [Behold, these are the ungodly that ^rosper in the world, and increase in
rich^s; surely they are set in slippery places, and cast down to destruction
and brought to desolation as in a moment; and utterly consumed with terrors; As
a dream when one awaketh, so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shall despise
their image, Psalm. 73. Though while they lived they blessed themselves, and
were praised by m^n; yet when they die they carry nothing away; their glory
shall not descend after them; like sheep they are laid in the grave: death
shall feed on them, and the upright shall have dominion over them in the
morning; Man in honor abides not; he is like the beasts that perish; This
their way is their folly; yet their posterity approve their sayings, Psalm. 49.
As the proverb is, At last the wolfs skin is brought to the market, and the
Foxes to the Furrier. They shall find that God is not afraid to lay the hand of
Justice on the stoutest of them, and will be as bold with silk^n shining
gallants, as with the poorest worms; and will spit in the face of that man's
glory, who durst spit in the face of the Glory of his Redeemer; and will
trample upon the interest which is set up against the interest of Christ. The
jovial world do now think that self-study is too Melancholy a thing: and they
choose to be distracted for fear of being melancholy: and will be Mad in
Solomon's sense, that they may be wise and happy in their own: Eccles. 2.2. The
heart of fools is in the house of mirth, and the heart of the wise in the house
of mourning, Eccles. 7.4. and yet there is most Joy in the Hearts of the wise,
and least solid peace in the hearts of fools: They know that conscience has so
much against them, that they dare not hear its accusations and its sentence:
They dare not look into ^he hideous dungeon of their hearts: nor per^se the
accounts of their bankrupt souls, nor ^ead the history of their impious
unprofitable ^ives, lest they should be tormented before ^^e time: They dare
not live like seri^us men, l^st they should lose thereby the ^lights of bruits.
O sinful men! against that light, both natural and supernatural, (...) they
offend! They see how all things haste ^way; The names of their predecessors are
^^ft as a warning to them; every corpse ^^at is carried to the grave, being
dead, yet ^eaketh: and every bone that is thence ^^st up, does rise as a
witness against their ^^xury and lust: and yet they will have ^^eir wills and
pleasure while they may, ^^atever it cost them: and they will set ^^eir houses
on fire that they might have one merry blaze, and warm them once before they
die.

O Madam, how happy are you (if one on earth may be called happy,) that have
looked home so often and so seriously, that now you can dwell at home in peace,
and need not, as the ungodly, be a terror to your self, nor run away from your
self, nor seek a place to hide you from your self: when impious vagrants have
so abused their Consciences, that they dare not converse with them, nor meet
them alone or in the dark! what a mercy is it, that in the great Reconciler you
are reconciled to your Conscience, and that it does not find you out as an
enemy, but is a messenger of peace and of good tidings to you! That you need
not the smiles of great ones to refresh you, nor pompous entertainments,
complements, plays or sports to recreate you and drive away your sorrows; but
that you can find more blessed and delectable company and employment at home;
That you can daily retire into your self, and there peruse a richer treasure,
than bodily eyes on earth can see; and there be taken up with a far more
contenting satisfactory employment, and a more fruitful and pleasant converse
and recreation, than any creature in Court or Country can afford: That your
Joy is laid up where the hand ^f violence cannot touch it; and that they that
can deprive you of estate, and liberty, and ^^fe, yet cannot take your comfort
from you. That when fleshly unthrifts love not home, because all is spent, and
they can expect no ^etter entertainment there than want, con^^sion, chiding and
distress, you can with^^aw from a coufused troublesome world, in^^ a
well-furnished and adorned soul, reple^shed with the precious fruits of the
Spirit, ^^d beautified with the image of your Lord!

Madam, what sweet and noble employ^ent have you there, in comparison of that
which worldlings are troubled with abroad! ^here you may read the sentence of
your ^^stification, as foregoing and foreshewing (...) public final sentence
of your Judge: ^^ere you can converse with God himself, (...) in his vindictive
Justice, but as he is ^^ve: For the love that dwells so plen^^fully in you,
does prove that God dwel^^^h in you, and you in him, 1 John 4.7, (...) 16.
There you may converse with Christ ^ur head, that dwells in you by faith,
^hes. 3.17. and with the Holy Ghost who ^^elleth in you, and has communion
with (...), by the beams of his illuminating, san^^^fying, Confirming and
comforting grace: There, as in his Temple you are speaking o^ his Glory, (1
Cor. 3.16, 17. and 6.19 with Psalm. 29.9) and rejoicing in his holy praise, and
remembering what he has done for your soul: There you can peruse the Records of
his Mercy, and think with gra^titude and delight, how he did first illumi^nate
you, and draw and engage your hear^ unto himself: what advantage he got upon
you, and what iniquity he prevented by the mercies of your education, and how
he secretly took acquaintance with you in your youth* How he delivered you from
worldly fleshly snares; how he caused you to savor the things of the Spirit:
how he planted you i^ a sound well ordered Church, where h^ quickened and
conducted you by a lively faithful Ministry, and watered his gifts by their
constant powerful preaching of his word where Discipline was for a defense, an^
where your heart was warmed with the communion of the Saints, and where you
learned to worship God in spirit and in truth; and where you were taught so
effectually by God to discern between the precious and the vile, and to love
those that are born of God whom the world knows not, that no subtil^ties or
calumnies of the Serpent can unteach it you, or ever be able to separate you
from ^^at love. You may read in these sacred ^^cords of your Heart, how the
Angel of (...) Covenant has hitherto conducted you, ^^rough this wilderness
toward the land of ^^omise; how he has been a cloud to you in (...) day, and
a pillar of fire by night; how (...) Lord did number you with the people that
(...) his flock, his portion, and the lot of his in^^^itance: and led you about
in a desert land, ^^^tructed you, and kept you as the apple of (...) eye.
(Deuteronomy. 32.9.10.) His Manna ^^th compassed your tent: his doctrine has ^^^pped
as the rain, and his words distilled as (...) dew; as the small rain upon the
tender (...), and as the showers upon the grass, (v. 2.) (...) his beloved you
have dwelt in safety by (...); and the Lord has covered you all (...) day
long, ( c. 33.12.) when storms have (...), he has been your refuge; and when
(...) compassed you on every side, he has (...) you as in his pavilion, and
his Angels ^^ve pitched their tents about you, and born (...) up: you have been
fortified in troubles, (...) enabled comfortably to undergo them: (...) war
and in peace; in your native country (...) in foreign lands; among your
friends (...) among your enemies; in Court and Coun^^^; in prosperity and
adversity, you have ^^^nd that there is none like the God of Israel, who rides
upon the heaven i^ your help, and his excellency on the sky* The Eternal God
has been your refuge and underneath are the everlasting arm^ (Deuteronomy. 34.26,
27.) You may remembe^ the mercies of your younger years, of you^ married state,
and of your widdow-hood your comforts in your truly Noble Lord though troubled
and interrupted by his death yet increased by the consideration of his
fe^licity with Christ; your comfort in you^ hopeful issue, though abated by the
injur^ of Romish theft, which stole one of the Rose^ of your Garden, that they
might boast of the sweetness when they called it their own: ((...) may well
say, stole it, when all the chea^ was performed by unknown persons in the dark;
and no importunity by you or (...) could procure me one dispute or conference
i^ her hearing, with any of the seducers, be^fore her person was stolen away.)
Though comforts conveyed by creatures must have their pricks, yet your
experience has partly taught you (and more will do) that by all the mixtures
of sower and bitter ingredients your Father does temper you the most whole^some
composition; He chasteneth you for your profit, that you may be partaker o^ his
Holiness (Heb. 12.10.) and the leas^ degree of Holiness cannot be purchased at
too dear a rate. His rod and staff have comforted you: and whatever are the
beginnings, the End will be, the quiet fruit of Righteousness, when you have
been exercised therein: And though man be mutable, and friends, and flesh, and
heart have failed you, yet God is still the strength of ^our heart, and your
portion for ever, Psalm. ^3.26. O the variety of learning that is ^ontained in
the secret writings of a sanctified heart! The variety of subjects for the most
^ruitful and delightful thoughts, which you ^ay find recorded in the inwards of
your ^oul! How pleasant is it there to find the ^haracters of the special Love
of God, the ^^eaments of his Image, the transcript of (...) Law, the harmony of
his gifts and graces, ^^e witness, the seal and the earnest of his spirit, and
the foretasts and beginnings of ^ternal Life! As Thankfulness abhors ^^livion,
and is a Recording grace, and keep^^h Histories and Catalogues of Mercies; so
(...) it a Reward unto it self; and by these Re^^rds it furnishes the soul
with matter for ^he sweetest employments and delights; Is it (...) pleasant to
you there to Read, how God ^^th confuted the objections of distrust? how (...)
he has condescended to your weakness, and pardoned you when you could not
easily forgive your self? how often he has entertained you in secret with his
Love? and visited you with his consolations? How near him sometimes you have
got in fervent prayer, and serious meditation? And when for a season he has
hid his face, how soon and seasonably he returned? How often he has found you
weeping, and has wiped away your tears? and calmed and quieted your troubled
soul? How he has resolved your doubts, and expelled your fears; and heard your
prayers? How comfortably he has called you His Child; and given you leave, and
commanded you to call him Father; when Christ has brought you with boldness
into his presence! How sweet should it be to your remembrance, to think how the
Love of Christ has sometime exalted you above these sublunary things! How the
Spirit has taken you up to Heaven, and showed to your faith the Glory of the
New Jerusalem, the blessed company of those Holy spirits that attend the
Throne of the Majesty of God, and the shining face of your glorified Head! By
what seasonable and happy Messengers he has sent you the Cluster of Grapes as
the first fruits of the land of promise! and commanded you often to Take and Eat
the Bread of Life? How often he has reached to your thirsty soul the fruit of
the Vine, and turned it sacramentally into his blood, and bid you drink it in
remembrance of him, till he come and feast you with his fullest Love, and
satisfy you with the pleasure and presence of his Glory.

But the volumes of mercy written in your heart, are too great to be by me
transcribed. I can easily appeal to you that are acquainted with it, whether
such Heart-employment be not more pleasant and more profitable, than any of the
entertainments that flashy wit, or gaudy gallantry, or merriments, luxurit, or
preferments can afford? Is it not better converse with Christ at home, than
with such as are described, Psa. 12. abroad? To dwell with all that blessed
retinue, Gal. 5.22, 23. than with Pride, Vainglory, Envy, Dissimulation,
Hypocrisy, Falsehood, time-wasting, soul-destroying pleasures, to say nothing
of the filthiness which Christian years abhor the mention of, and which God
himself in time will judge, Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5, 6. Heb. 13.4. and the rest recited,
Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. If ungodly persons do find it more unpleasant to converse at
home, no wonder, when there is nothing but darkness and defilement; and when
they have put God from them, and entertained Satan, so that their hearts are
like to haunted houses, where terrible cries and apparitions do make it a place
of fear to the inhabitants. But if their souls had such blessed inhabitants as
yours; could they meet there with a reconciled God, a Father, a Savior and a
sanctifier; had they souls that kept a correspondency with Heaven, it would not
seem so sad and terrible a life, to dwell at home, and withdraw from that noise
of vanity abroad, which are but the drums and trumpets of the devil, to
encourage his deluded followers, and drown the cries of miserable souls. Your
dearest friends and chiefest treasure, are not abroad in Court or Country; but
above you, and within you; where then should your delightful converse be, but
where your friends and treasure are? Matthew. 6.21. Phil. 3.20. Col. 3.1, 2, 3,
4. When then is almost nothing to be found in the conversation of the world,
but discord and distraction, and confusion, and clamours, and malice, and
treachery, is it not better to retire into such a heart, where notwithstanding
infirmities and some doubts and fears; there is order, and concord, and
harmony, and such Peace, as the world can neither give nor take away? O blessed
be the hand of Love, that blotted out the names of Honor, and Riches, and
Pleasures, and carnal interest, and accommodations, from your heart; and
inscribed his own in Characters never to be obliterate! That turned out
Usurpers, and so prepared and furnished your heart, as to make and judge it
such, as no one is worthy of it but himself. O what a Court have you chosen for
your abode? How high and Glorious! how pure and holy! unchangeable and safe!
How ambitiously do you avoid ambition? How great are you in the lowliness of
your mind? How high in your Humility? Will no lower a place than Heaven content
you to converse in? (For Heart-converse and Heaven-converse are as much one, as
beholding both the Glass and Face:) Will no lower correspondents satisfy you
than the Host of Heaven? Cannot the company of imperfect mortals serve your
^urn? Nay, can you be satisfied with none below the Lord himself? Well, Madam,
if you will needs have it so, it shall be so: What you judge BEST FOR YOU,
shall be yours: what you had rather be, ^ou are: and where you had rather
dwell, ^ou shall: and seeing you have understood that One thing is necessary,
and have ^hosen the Good part, it shall not be taken from you, Luke 10.41, 42.
Having first sought the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, you shall have
such Addionalls as will do you good, Matthew. 6.33. Romans 8.28. Psalm. 84.11. You
have learned to know while God is yours, how little of the Creature you need,
and how little addition it makes to your happiness (You are Wise enough if you
live to God; and honorable enough if you are a member of Christ; and rich
enough if you are an heir of heaven; and beautiful enough if you have the image
of God: and yet having made your choice of these, how liberally has God cast
in as overplus, the inferior kind; which you find in losing them? As if he had
said t^ you, as to Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 1.11. [Because this was in thine heart,
and thou ha^^ not asked riches, wealth or honor, no^ the life of thine
enemies, neither yet ha^^ asked long life; but have asked Wisdom and knowledge
for thy self -- Wisdom and Kowledge is granted to thee; and will give thee
Riches, and wealth, and ho^nour -- ]; as if God would convin^^ even flesh
itself that none are like the ser^vants of the Lord: And when the envio^ one
has said, that You serve not God so naught, though he has been permitted
(...) put forth his hand, and touch you in your dearest friends and relations;
your peace, your habitation and estate, yet has he so restrained him, and
supported you, as may easily convince you that the Worst of Christ is better
than the Best of the World, or Sin.

I have purposely been long in opening the felicity of Heart-converse, as a
matter of your own experience, both for the exciting of you to a life of
Thankfulness to God, and that this undigested Treatise which you have drawn out
into the light, may come to your hands with some supply, in that part of the
Application which does most concern you: And because your Name may draw the
eyes of many others to read this Preface, I shall add here a few Directions to
those that would be well acquainted with themselves, and would comfortably
converse at home.

Direct. 1. Let him not overvalue or mind the deceitful world, that would have
fruitful converse with God and with himself: Trust not such a cheater, as has
robbed so many thousands before us; especially when God and common experience
do call out to us to take heed: The study of Riches, and rising, and
reputation, and pleasures agrees not with this study of God, and of our
hearts: And though the world will not take acquaintance with us, if we come not
in their fashion, nor see us, if we stand not on the higher ground; yet it is
much better to be unknown to others, than to our selves: Though they that live
upon the trade, do think there is no fishing like the Sea, yet those that take
it but on the by, will rather choose the smaller waters, where though the fish
be less, yet few are drowned, and made a prey to the fish that they would have
catched. A retirement therefore must be made, from the inordinate pursuit of
worldly things, and the charms of honors, riches, and delights: And if some
present loss do seem to follow, it is indeed no loss, which tends unto gain.
He will catch no fish that will not lose his fly. Me thinks they that
sincerely pray [Load us not into temptation,] should not desire to have bolts
and bars between God and them, and to dwell where salvation is hardliest
attained! Desire not to be planted in any such place, (though it seem a
Paradise,) where God is most unknown, and used as a stranger, and where Saints
are wonders, and examples of serious piety are most rare, and where a Heavenly
Conversation is known but by reports, and reported of according to the malice
of the Serpent, and represented but as fancy, hypocrisy or faction: where sin
most prospers, and is in least disgrace; and where it is a greater shame to
be a Saint than to be a swine; a serious Christian, than a seared stupefied
sensualist: Bless you from that place where the weeds of vice are so rank, as
that no good plant can prosper near them: where gain is Godliness; and impiety
is necessary to acceptable observance; and a tender Conscience, and the fear of
God, are characters of one too surly and unplyable to be countenanced by men;
where the tongue that nature formed to be the Index of the mind, is made the
chiefest instrument to hide it; and men are so conscious of their own
incredibility, that no one does believe or trust another: where no words are
Heart-deep, but those that are spoken Against Christ's cause and interest, or
for their own; where a vile person is honored, and those contemned that fear
the Lord: Bless you from the place where truth is intolerable, and untruth
cloaked with its name: where holiness is looked at as an Owl or enemy, and yet
hypocrisy must steal its honor from it: where he is a Saint that is less
wicked than infamous transgressors; and where Dives life is blameless
temperance; and where Pride, Idleness, Fullness of bread, and filthy fornication
and lasciviousness, are the infirmities of Pious and excellent persons: where
great sins are small ones, and small ones are none; and where the greatest must
have no reproof, and the Physicion is taken for the greatest enemy: where
chafe is valued at the price of wheat, and yet the famine is of choice: where
persons and things are measured by Interest; and duty to God derided as fully,
when ever it crosses the wisdom of the world, and hated as some hurtful thing
when it crosses fleshly men in their desires: And where Dives Brethren are
unwarned; and none are more secure and frolic, than those that to morrow may
be in Hell; and as at the Gladiators sports, none complain less than those that
speed worst, quia caesi silent, spectatores vociferantur. Old Travelers are
usually most addicted to end their days in solitude; Learn to contemn the world
at cheaper rates than they; Neither hope, nor wish to live an Alexander, and
die a Socrates; A Crowd or concourse, though of the greatest, where is the
greatest tumult of affairs, and confluence of temptations, is not the safest
place to die in: and I have most mind to live where I would die. Where men are
Barbari moribus, etsi non natione; Christians in Name, and infidels in
Conversation: the sweetness of their Christian names will not preserve them or
you from the danger of their unchristian lives: It was not the whole of Lots
deliverance to be saved from the flames of Sodom, but it was much of it to be
freed from their malicious rage, and filthy grievous conversations: The best
medicine against the Plague, is to keep far enough from the place that has it.
The Proverb says, He shall have fleas that will lie with the dogs. Desire not
that condition, where all seem friends, but none are friends indeed; but they
that seem to be your servants, are by flattery serving themselves upon you:
Where few persons or things are truly represented; but men are judged of by the
descriptions of their enemies, and the Lambs have the skins and names of
Wolves: and the best are odious when bold calumniators load them with odious
accusations. In a word, desire not the place, where the more men seek, the less
they find, and the more they find, the less they have: and the more they have,
the less they do enjoy: Where the more are their provisions the less are their
supplies: the more their wealth, the more their want: the more their pleasure,
the less their Peace: the greater their Mirth, the less their Joy: the greater
their confidence, the less their safety: Where the great Mistake about their
Happiness, their Best, their End, does make their lives a constant error, and
death a doleful disappointment: He must needs lie crooked that has so short a
bed.

Direct. 2. Keep all clean and sound within; that there may be little of
loathsomeness to disaffect you, or terror to frighten you from your selves; It
is a frightfull thing to be much conversing with a guilty soul, and hearing the
accusations of a conscience not cleansed by the blood of Christ: And it is an
unpleasant thing to be searching in our wounds, and reading the history of a
life of folly; especially of wilful sin, and of ungrateful neglect of offered
grace. Make not such work for your self, if you love it not. We make our beds
ill, and then we are aweary of them, because they are so hard: Our Comforts are
more in our own hands then in any others: The best friend or Pastor cannot do
so much to promote them, nor the greatest enemy so much to destroy them as our
selves. If we will surfeit, and make our selves sick, we must endure it. If
Wasps and Vipers be our guests, no wonder if we dwell not quietly at home; and
if we sit not at ease, when we carry thorns about us. Folly and Concupiscence
breed our misery: It is the smoke of our own corruptions that troubles our
eyes, and the scent and smart of our ulcerated minds that most annoyeth us. We
cannot waste our Peace, and have it. Turk and Pope, and all the terrible names
on earth, are not so terrible deservedly to a sinner as his own: The nearest
evil is the most hurtful evil: If a scolding Wife be such a continual dropping,
and troublesome companion, as Solomon tells us, what then is a distempered,
troubled mind, and a chiding conscience? It is pity that man should be his own
afflicter, but so it is: And, as the proverb is, he has great need of a fool,
that will play the fool himself; so I may say, He has great need of a
tormenter, that will be a tormenter to himself. Folly, and lust, and rashness,
and passion are sorry keepers of our ^eace: Darkness and filth do make a
dunge^n, and not a delightful habitation of our ^earts: God would take pleasure
in them, if ^e kept them clean; and would walk with ^s in those gardens, if we
kept them dressed: But if we will defile his Temple, and make (...) unpleasing
unto him, he will make it un^leasing unto us. Terror and trouble are ^he shadow
of sin, that follow it, though the ^un shine never so brightly. If we carry ^re
in our clothes, we shall smell it at the ^ast. Keep close to God: obey his
will: ^ake sure of your Reconciliation and Adoption: keep clear your Evidences:
and grieve not the holy Spirit which seals you, and must comfort you: And
then it will do you good to look into your heart, and there you shall find the
most delightful company; and the Spirit that you have there entertained, will
there entertain you with his joys.

But if disorder have prevailed and made your Hearts a place of trouble, yet
fly not from it, and refuse not to converse with it: For though it be not at
the present a work of pleasure, it is a work of Necessity, and may tend to
pleasure in the end: Conversing wisely and faithfully with a disordered
troubled heart, is the way to make it a well ordered and quiet heart.

Direct. 3. In judging of your present state and actions, let one eye be
always on the end: This will both quicken you to be serious in the duty, and
direct you in all particular cases to judge aright. As the approach of death
does convince almost all men of the necessity of studying themselves, and
calls them to it from all other studies; so the considerate foresight of it,
would do the like in better time* And it is the End that communicates the Good
or Evil to all things in the way: an^ therefore as they have relation to the
End* they must be judged of. When you peruse your actions, consider them as
done by one that is entering into Eternity, and as those that must all be opened
in a clearer light. If we separate our actions in our considerations from their
ends, they are not of the same signification, but taken to be other things then
indeed they are. If the Oaths, the Lies, the Slanders, the Sensuality and
filthiness of impure-sinners, had not relation to the loss of Heaven, and to
the pains of Hell, they were not matters of that exceeding moment as now they
are: And if the Holiness, Obedience and Watchfulness of believers, had no
relation to the escaping of Hell fire, and the attainment of eternal life, they
would be of lower value then they are. The more clearly men discern that God is
present, that judgment is at hand, that they are near to Heaven or Hell, where
millions have already received their reward, the more seriously will they
study, and the better will they know themselves.

Direct. 4. Though you must endeavor to judge your self truly as you are, yet
rather incline to think meanly, then highly of your self, and be rather too
suspicious, then too presumptuous. My reasons for this direction are, Because
man's nature is generally disposed to self-exalting; and pride, and self-love
are sins so common and so strong, as that it is a thing of wondrous difficulty
to overcome them, so far as to judge our selves impartially, and to err as
little in our own cause, as if it were another: and because self-exalting has
far more dangerous effects, then self-abasing, supposing them to exceed their
bounds. Prudent humility i^ a quieting grace, and avoideth many storms and
tempests, which trouble and shake the peace of others. It makes men thankful
for that little as undeserved, which others repine at as short of their
expectations: It tells the sufferer that God does afflict him much less then
he deserves: and causes him to say, I will bear the indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him (Micah 7.9.) It teaches us a cautelous
suspicion of our own understandings, and a just submission to those that are
wiser than ourselves: When Pride keeps out Wisdom, by keeping out the
knowledge of our ignorance. And as Pliny tells us of some Nations, where they
are grey-headed in their Infancy, and black-headed when they are old; So Pride
makes many wise so soon, that they never come to be truly wise: They think in
youth that they have more than the wisdom of age, and therefore in age they
have less then what beseemed them in youth. Every hard report or usage is ready
to break a proud man's heart: when contempt does little disquiet the hum^le,
because they judge so meanly of themselves. The proud are frequently disturbed,
because they climb into the seats of others: when humility sits quietly, and no
one bids it ^ise, because it knows and keeps its own ^lace. Therefore it is
that true contrition ^aving once told us of our folly to the Heart, ^oth make
us walk more circumspectly while ^e live: And that no man is better re^olved
then he that was once in doubt, and that no man stands faster, than he that
has ^ad a fall: and no man is more safe, then he that has had most assaults.
If you love your ^afety, desire not either to be, or to seem too ^igh. Be
little in your own eyes, and be con^ent to be so in the eyes of others. As for
worldly Greatness, affect neither the thing, ^or the reputation of it: Look up
if you ^lease, to the tops of Steeples, Masts and Mountains: but stand below if
you would ^e safe. Though the Chimney be the highest ^art of the house; it is
not the cleanest or ^he sweetest part: it is scorcht more with ^he fire, and
suffocated with the smoke than ^ther parts. And for spiritual endowments,
^esire them, and improve them: but desire not inordinately the reputation of
them: It sel^dom increases a man's Humility, to be reputed Humble: And though
Humility he^^ you to bear applause, yet the remnants of pri^^ are ready to take
fire, and other sins to get ad^vantage by it.

Direct. 5. Improve your self-acquain^tance to a due apprehension of what is
mo^^ suitable, most profitable, and necessary for you, and what is most
hurtful, unsuitabl^ and unnecessary. He that has taken a ju^^ measure of
himself, is the better able (...) judge of all things else. How suitable wi^^
Christ and grace appear, and how unsuitabl^ will worldly pomp appear, to one
that trul^ knows himself? How suitable will serio^^ fervent worship appear, and
how unsuitab^^ the ludicrous shows of Hypocrites? And (...) pair of eyes will
be valued above many pa^^ of spectacles: and one pair of legs before (...) pair
of crutches, by one that is not a stra^^ger to himself. He that takes grass and
pr^^vender to be his best and most delightful fo^^ has sure forgotten that he
is a man, an^ takes himself to be but a beast, or else (...) would not choose
the food of a beast, nor us^ himself as a beast. If a man knew arig^^ the
capacity and tendency of the Reasonab^^ nature, and the evil of sin, and the
necessit^ and distress of an unrenewed soul, what sweet, what longing thoughts
would he have of God, and all that tends to the pleasing and en^oying of him?
How little would he think himself concerned in the trivial matters of honor or
dishonor, riches or poverty, favor ^r displeasure, further than as they help
or ^inder him in the things that are of more ^egard? Know your self, and you
will know what to Love, and what to hate; what to ^hoose, and what to refuse;
what to hold, and what to lose; what to esteem, and what to ^ight; what to
fear, and when to be courageous and secure: the curing the dotage thus, would
^ure the night walks of the dreaming, va^^ant world: And they that find that
mu^^ck cures not the Stone or Gowt, would know that mirth* and gallantry, and
vainglory, ^re no preservatives from Hell, nor suffici^^t cure for a guilty
soul: And that if an ^^king head must have a better remedy than (...) golden
Crown, and a deaseased body, a ^ore suitable cure than a silken suit, a
di^^ased soul does call for more.

Direct. 6. Value not your self by muta^e Accidents, but by the essence and
sub^^^nce of Christianity. A man's life con^^teth not in the abundance which he
pos^^sseth, Luke 12.15. Paul knew better what he said, when he accounted all
but loss and dung for the knowledge and fruition of Jesus Christ (Phil. 3.7,
8.) then they that dote on it as their felicity: And is a man to be valued,
applauded, and magnified for his dung, or for his personal endowments? Is that
your perfume, that stinketh in the nostrils of men of sounder senses? Judge not
of the person by his apparel, when the foolishest and the worst may wear the
same: The Master and inhabitants honor the house more than the house does the
Master and inhabitants. All the wit and learning in the world, with all the
Riches, Honor and applause, yea and all the civility and winning deportment,
will not make a Christian of an Infidel or Atheist, nor a happy of a miserable
man; As nothing will make a man honorable indeed, that has not the use of
Reason, which differenceth m^^ from bruits; so nothing will make or pro^^ him
holy or happy or safe, that has not the Holy Image of God, which must
difference his children from his enemies: If he be unsanctified, and be not a
new creature, and have not the spirit of Christ within him* he is an Atheist,
or Infidel, or an ungodly wretch, let him be never so rich, or great* or
honorable. And as a harlot is never beautiful in the eyes of the wise and
chaste, so a wicked man is never happy in the eyes of any but his phrenetick
society.

Direct. 7. Think not that a few seldom hasty thoughts will bring and keep you
in ^cquaintance with your self. It must be diligent observation, and serious
consideration that must accomplish this. Many a man walks where he does not
dwell. A transi^nt salute is not a sign of intimate familiari^y. It is enough
sometime to step into your ^eighbours house for a charitable visit; but ^ou
must dwell in your own; Be more busy and ^ensorious at home then the proud and
the ma^icious are abroad: and be as seldom and tender (...) censuring others as
such Hypocrites are in ^ensuring themselves. Put on your spectacles (...) home,
when you are reading over the Re^ister of your consciences; but wear them ^^t
as you walk the streets; but take up ^ith so much knowledge of ordinary
passen^ers as you can have without them. Think ^^t that you are unconcerned in
the danger or ^^fety of your neighbor, but remember that ^^u are more
concerned in your own. Its ^ere most reasonable to say, that charity ^^gins at
home, when self-neglect will dis^ble you to help another. And if sometimes ^^ur
falls or frailty do find you matter for purging, griping, troublesome thoughts,
and interrupt your sweeter, comfortable meditations, refuse not the trouble
when you have made it necessary: Its many a sad and serious thought that the
Ministers of Christ have for the cure and safety of their flocks: and should
not the people have as serious thoughts for themselves? None foul their hands
(says the Proverb) about their own work* They that bring in the filth, should
not refuse to sweep it out. We must not cast all the foul and troublesome work
upon our Nurses, as long as we can help our selves. Your Reason, your Wisdom,
care and diligence* are more your Own than any ones else; an^ therefore should
be more used for your self then for any. And if after much thoughtfulness, and
labor, you find your heart to b^ no whit better, yet Labor and Believe. (...)
is not the last blow of the axe alone, that cut^ down the Tree, though it fall
not till the last: The growth of Grace, as of plant^ and fruits, and flowers,
is not perceived (...) immediate inspection. There is much go^^ obtained when
we discern it not: And no^thing is more certain, than that honest dil^^gence is
never lost in the things of God an^ our salvation. It is worth all our labor,
(...) we grow no better, to keep our spark from going out, and to see that we
grow no worse: And the preventing of Evil, is here an excellent Good. Many a
thousand eat and drink, that never hope to grow any fatter or stronger than
they are: It is not nothing to be sustained for our daily work and to have our
oil renewed daily as it wastes. The mill gets by going, says the Proverb,
though it stir not from the place. O keep the Heart with all diligence, for out
of it are the issues of life, Prove. 4.23. Actions receive their specification
and quality from the Heart. Death and Life are in the power of the tongue,
Prove. 18.21. but the tongue is in the power of the Heart.

Direct. 8. Let not your self-knowledge be merely speculative, or affective,
but also Practical. Be not contented that you know what you are, and what you
have ^one, nor that your Heart is much Affected with it: but let all tend to
Action, to mend what is amiss, and to maintain, improve and increase what is
good: and let the next ^uestion be, What am I now to do? or What must I be for
time to come? It is a lamentable ^istake of many that tire themselves with
^^riving to make deep affecting impressions on their hearts, and when they have
got much ^^rrow, or much joy, they think they have done the greatest matter,
and there they stop: But Affections are the spring that must move to Action;
and if you proceed not to your Duty, Affection is much lost; And if with
smaller Affection or passion you can steadfastly and resolutely cleave to God,
and do your Duty, you have the principal thing, and are accepted: Not that
outward Actions are accepted without the Heart; but that there is most of the
Heart, where there is most of the Estimation and Will, though less of Passion:
and there is most of Will, where there is most Endeavor: and inward Action is
the first part of Obedience: And without these, no speculations will avail:
However you find your Heart, be up and doing in the use of means, to make it
better, and wait on God for further grace.

Direct. 9. Manage your self-acquaintance prudently, cautelously, and with the
help of your skillful friend or Pastor. Think not that it is a work that you
need no Helper in. If you mistake in your Accounts, and put down a wrong sum,
and call your self confidently what you are not, or deny Gods graces, when ever
through Melancholy or distemper you cannot find them, and pass false
conclusions against Gods mercies and your self, this were to turn a duty into a
sin and snare.

And you must do it seasonably: Melancholy persons are most incapable of it,
who do nothing but pore upon themselves to little purpose: such must do more of
other Duty, but lay by much of this till they are more capable, and make much
use of the Judgment of their Guides: And weaker Heads must take but a due
proportion of time for self searching Meditations, lest they contract that
troublesome disease: Duties must be used with profitable variety, and all done
under good advice. But young persons, and those that are yet unconverted, have
need to fall upon it without delay; and to follow it till they have made sure
their calling and election, 2 Pet. 1.10. O what a dreadful thing it is, for a
man to come rawly and newly to the study of his soul, as a thing that he is
unacquainted with, when sickness is upon him, and death at hand, and he is
ready to pass into another world! To be then newly to ask, What am I? and What
have I done? and Whither am I going? and What will become of me for ever? is a
most fearful state of folly.

Direct. 10, Terminate not your knowledge ultimately in your self: but pass up
unto God in Christ, and to the blessed privileges of the Saints, and the
joyful state of Endless Glory, and there let your meditations be most frequent
and most sweet: But of this elsewhere.

Madam, I have added these Directions not principally for you that have learnt
the Art, but for your hopeful Sons and Daughters, who must be taught these
things betimes, and for your friends who will be invited hither for your sake.
They that know you not, will think I have taken too much liberty, and spoken
too much both of you, and to you; But I appeal from such: They that know not
how easily you can pardon any one, except your self, will aggravate the
weaknesses which your charity will cover. I was purposely the longer because
the Treatise is defective; And if one Kingdom do not hold us, and I should see
your face no more on earth, yet till we meet in the Glorious Everlasting
Kingdom, we shall have frequent converse by such means as these,
notwithstanding our corporal distance: And as I am assured of a room in your
frequent prayers, so I hope I shall remain,

Madam, Your faithful Servant, and Remembrancer at the Throne of Grace,
Richard Baxter.
August 25. 1661.
Postscript.
Madam,
SInce the writing of this Epistle, finding you under the afflicting hand of
God, thought meet to remember you of what ^ou know, that God thus traineth up
his ^hildren for their Rest: whom he Loves, ^e chasteneth, and scourges every
son whom he receives: If we endure chasten^^g, God deals with us as with
children: and if we be without chastisement whereof (...) are partakers, then
we are bastards and ^ot sons, Heb. 12.6, 7, 8. The same flesh ^^at would be
pleased, will grudge when it (...) displeased: and that which is our entice^^g
enemy in prosperity, will be our ^^sturbing enemy in adversity: As fleshly
^inds misjudge of the law and service of ^od, and cannot be subject because of
the ^mity against him, Romans 8.7. so do they ^^sjudge of his chastisements: And
so far (...) they participate of this disease, the best ^^ll be repining, and
tempted to unworthy ^oughts of God. Even innocent nature ^oth to suffer; Christ
himself says, If it be thy will, let this cup pass from me: An^ nature so far
as it is corrupted, is yet much more averse, because the Flesh is more
in^ordinately desirous of its ease, and passion more turbulent when it is
denied, and the soul has less apprehension and relish (...) that Love of God,
which is the cause an^ End, and should sweeten all to a Recon^ciled
well-composed mind: and it is als^ less satisfied in the will of God, and it is
le^^ subject to it: and patience is defective b^^cause of the weakness of the
Graces the should support us. Besides which also, tenderness of spirit, and
overmuch sensib^^lity, fears and trouble, are ordinary effec^ of the weak and
tender nature of man especially of the more weak and tend^^ sex: And when all
these concur (t^^ averseness of the most innocent nature, t^^ remnants of sin,
and the special tenderne^^ of your nature and sex,) your burden and trial is
much the greater, and yo^ grief must needs be much the mo^^ But, I beseech you,
remember, that yo^ have not to do with an Enemy, but a F^^ther that knows
what he does, a^^ means you no hurt, but that which is t^^ fittest means to
your good, and to yo^ scaping greater hurt; that loves you (...) less in the
greatest of your pain and danger, than in the greatest of your prosperity and
peace: that you have a Head in Heaven that was partaker with us of flesh and
blood, that he might deliver us from our bondage which we are in through the
fear of death, who was made perfect by suffering; and is not ashamed to call us
Bre^hren; being in all things made like unto us, that he might be a merciful
and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, ^o make reconciliation
for our sins: who ^n that he himself has suffered being tempted, is able to
succor them that are ^empted, Heb. 2.10, 11, 14, 15, 17, 18. We have not an
High Priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was
in all points tempted or tried ^s we are, but without sin: He that himself in
the days of his flesh, did offer up prayers and supplications, with strong
cry^ng and tears to him that was able to save him from death, ( Heb. 5.7.) will
not be angry if his servants complain and cry ^o him in their suffering: He
that cried ^ut, My God, My God, why have thou for^aken me! will pity his poor
distressed ^embers, and not forsake them, when they ^hink themselves forsaken;
And if they go beyond their bounds in their complainings, he will not therefore
disregard their moans; But he that honored the patience of Job, though he so
passionately curse^ the day of his birth, will love the faith an^ patience of
his people, notwithstanding the mixtures of unbelief and impatience* He is
ready with his gracious excuse* Matthew. 26.41. The spirit is willing, bu^ the
flesh is weak; And he considers that our strength and flesh is not of stone
or brass, Job 6.12. He will therefore revive the spirit of the contrite, and
wi^^ not contend for ever, nor be always wroth lest the spirit should fail
before him, and the souls which he has made, Isai. 57.15, 16. And though no
chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous: yet the end is
that he may make u^ partakers of his Holiness; and afterwar^ it yields the
peaceable fruits of righteousness to them that are exercised thereby, Heb.
12.10, 11. Blessed is the man that endures temptation; for when he is tried he
shall receive the Crown of Life, which God has promised to them that love him,
Jam. 1.12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest O Lord, and teach him out
of thy Law, that thou may give him rest from the days of adversity un^ill
the pit be dug for the wicked; For the lord will not Cast off his people,
neither will he forsake his inheritance, Psalm. 94.12, 13, 14.

Madam, if nothing in all the world be more certain, that that there is a God,
who ^s true and just, and delights in his people when they are lowest in the
world: If nothing be more sure than that there is a Heaven for persevering
penitent believers: ^hen are our Arguments for the comfort of Gods afflicted
ones, no fancies, but ^etcht as from the highest excellencies, so from the
surest realities that ever were presented to the understanding of a man: And
though the best of Saints have been ^ut to wrestle with the temptations that
^rise from the adversity of Believers, and ^he prosperity of the wicked; yet
this is still ^he result of all their perplexing thoughts; Truly God is good to
Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart: Though sometime their feet are
almost gone, and their paths do well nigh slip, and they are ready to say, We
have cleansed our hearts in vain, and washed our hands in innocence; for all
the day are we plagued, and chastened every morning; yet they soon learn in the
sanctuary of God, that the wicked are set in slippery places, and cast down
into destruction, and brought to desolation as in a moment, and utterly
consumed with terrors; as a dream when one awaketh, so the Lord when he
awaketh, will despise their image, Psalm. 73. But mark the perfect man, and
behold the upright: for the End of that man is peace, Psalm. 37.37. Because
sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of
the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil: But though a sinner do evil an
hundred times, and his days be prolonged: yet surely I know that it shall be
well with them that fear God, which fear before him, Eccles. 8.11, 12. If not
here, yet certainly at last all shall say, Verily there is a Reward for the
righteous, Psalm. 58.11. Rest therefore in the Lord, and wait patiently for him:
Commit your way to him: Trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass: For the
needy shall not always be forgotten: the expectation of the poor shall not
perish for ever, Psalm. 9.18. How happy are you that God does thus save you from
the temptations of prosperity, which you see befool and undo so many before
your eyes! and that you are not left in the number of those, that are men of
the world, which ^ave their portion in this life! Psalm. 17.14. and are given up
to their own hearts lusts, ^o walk in their own counsels, Psalm. 81.12. and must
hear at last, Remember that thou ^n thy life time receivedst thy good things]
^ut that here you have your evils, and shall be comforted when the
now-prospe^ous wicked are tormented, Luke 16.25. ^f heaven be enough to make
you a felicity, and Eternity be long enough for your frui^^on of it, then never
think hardly of God ^or any of his chastisements: Lazarus re^enteth not there
that he was poor: nor Job that he was covered with sores, nor David that he
washed his couch with tears, and that his sore ran and ceased not: The long^st
of our sorrows will there be reviewed ^s short in respect of our endless joys;
and the sharpest of our pains as nothing ^o those pleasures: Madam, experience
^s well as faith assures me, that it is good ^^r us that we are afflicted; And
though ^^r the sake of others, I shall earnestly ^eseech the Lord, that he will
not unseaso^ably remove such as you from this un^orthy generation; yet I doubt
not but ^our removal, and sufferings in the way, ^ill advantage you for your
Everlasting Rest. And for my self, I desire, that my lo^^ may still fall with
those that follow Christ through tribulation, bearing the cross, and crucified
to the world, and waiting for his appearance, desiring to be absent from the
body, and present with the Lord; and not with those that are fed as beasts for
the slaughter, and prosper a while in their iniquity, till sudden destruction
come upon them, and at last their sins do find them out; when the wicked shall
be turned into Hell, and all the nations that forget God, Psalm. 9.17. Numb.
32.23. 1 These. 5.3. Phil. 3.19. And that these words of life may be engraven
upon my heart, [Psal. 63.3. Thy loving kindness is better than life] Psalm.
73.26. [ My flesh and my heart fails; but God is the strength of my heart,
and my portion for ever,] Romans 8.28. [ All things work together for good to
them that love God] Joh. 14.19. Because I live, ye shall live also.] Col. 3.3,
4. Our life is hid with Christ in God: When Christ who is our Life, shall
appear, then shall we also appear with him in Glory:] and that I may be fit for
the Title of the Beloved Apostle, Rev. 1.9. (though as a servant to you and the
Church of God,)

Your Brother and Companion in tribulation, and in the Kingdom and Patience of
Jesus Christ. Rich. Baxter.
Nov. 1. 1661.
To my dearly beloved the Inhabitants of the Borough and Parish of
Kederminster in Worcestershire.
AS I never desired any greater preferment in this world, than to have
continued in the work of my Ministry among you, so I once thought my days would
have been ended in that desired station: But we are unmeet to tell God how he
shall dispose of us; or to foreknow what changes he intends to make. Though you
are low in the world, and have not the Riches which cause men's estimation with
the most, I see no probability that we should have been separated till death,
could I but have obtained leave to preach for nothing.

But being forbidden to preach the Gospel in that Diocese, I must thankfully
take the liberty which shall anywhere else be vouchsafed me: And while I may
enjoy it, I take it not for my duty to be over querulous, though the wound that
is made by my separation from you be very deep. And though to strangers it will
seem probable that such severity had never been exercised against me, but for
some heinous crime, yet to you that have known me, I shall need to say but
little in my defense. The great crime which is openly charged on me, and for
which I am thought unworthy to preach the Gospel, (even where there is no other
to preach) is a matter that you are unacquainted with, and therefore, as you
have heard me publicly accused of it, I am bound to render you such an account
as is necessary to your just information and satisfaction.

It pleased the Kings Majesty, (in the prosecution of his most Christian
resolution, of uniting his differing subjects by the way of mutual approaches
and abatements) to grant a Commission to twelve Bishops and nine assistants on
the one side, and to one Bishop and eleven other Divines and nine assistants on
the other side, to treat about such alterations of the Liturgy, as are
necessary to the satisfying of tender consciences, and to the restoring of
unity and peace. My experiences in a former Treaty (for Reconciliation in
matter of Discipline) made me entreat those to whom the nomination on the one
side was committed, to excuse me from the service which I knew would prove
troublesome to my self, and ungrateful to others; but I could not prevail. (But
the Work it self, I very much approved, as to be done by fitter and more
acceptable persons.) Being commanded by the Kings Commission, I took it to be
my duty to be faithful, and to plead for such Alterations as I knew were
necessary to the assigned ends; thinking it to be treachery to his Majesty that
entrusted us, and to the Church and cause for which we were entrusted, if under
pretense of making such Alterations as were necessary to the two forementioned
ends, I should have silently yielded to have [ No Alterations] or [ next to
none.] In the conclusion (when the chief work was done by writing) a Committee
of each part, was appointed to manage a Disputation in presence (by writing
also.) Therein those of the other part formed an Argument, whose Major
proposition was to this sense (for I have no copy) [ Whatsoever book enjoyneth
nothing but what is of it self lawful, and by lawful authority, enjoyneth
nothing that is sinful:] We denied this proposition; and at last gave diverse
Reasons of our denial; among which one was that [ It may be unlawful by
Accident, and therefore sinful] You now know my crime; It is my concurring with
learned, reverend Brethren, to give this Reason of our denial of a proposition:
Yet they are not forbidden to preach for it, (and I hope shall not be;) but
only I. You have publicly heard, from a mouth that should speak nothing but
the words of Charity, Truth, and Soberness, (especially there) that this was [
a desperate shift that men at the last extremity are forced to] and inferring [
that then neither God nor man can enjoin without sin.] In City and Country this
sounds forth to my reproach. I should take it for an act of clemency to have
been smitten professedly for nothing, and that it might not have been thought
necessary to afflict me by a defamation, that so I might seem justly afflicted
by a prohibition to preach the Gospel. But indeed is there in these words of
ours so great a crime? Though we doubted not but they knew that our Assertion
made not Every evil accident, to be such as made an Imposition unlawful, yet we
expressed this by word to them at that time, for fear of being misreported: and I
told it to the Right Reverend Bishop when he forbad me to preach, and gave this
as a reason: And I must confess I am still guilty of so much weakness, as to be
confident that some things not evil of themselves, may have Accidents so evil,
as may make it a sin to him that shall command them. Is this opinion
inconsistent with all Government? Yea I must confess my self guilty of so much
greater weakness, as that I thought I should never have found a man on earth,
that had the ordinary reason of a man, that had made question of it; yea I
shall say more then that which has offended, viz. that whenever the commanding
or forbidding of a thing indifferent is like to occasion more hurt than good,
and this may be foreseen, the commanding or forbidding it is a sin. But yet
this is not the Assertion that I am chargeable with, but that [ some Accidents
there may be that may make the Imposition sinful;] If I may ask it without
accusing others, how would my crime have been denominated if I had said the
contrary? Should I not have been judged unmeet to live in any Governed society?
It is not unlawful of it self to command out a Navy to Sea: But if it were
foreseen that they would fall into the enemies hands, or were like to perish by
any accident, and the necessity of sending them were small, or none, it were a
sin to send them. It is not of it self unlawful to sell poison, or to give a
knife to another, or to bid another do it: but if it were foreseen that they
will be used to poison or kill the buyer, it is unlawful; and I think the Law
would make him believe it that were guilty* It is not of it self unlawful to
light a candle or set fire on a straw; But if it may be foreknown, that by
another negligence or wilfulness, it is like to set fire on the City, or to
give fire to a train and store of Gunpowder, that is under the Parliament
house, when the King and Parliament are there: I crave the Bishops pardon, for
believing that it were sinful to do it, or command it: Yea or not to hinder it
(in any such case,) when Qui non vetat peccare cum potest, jubet. Yea though
going to Gods public worship be of it self so far from being a sin, as that it
is a duty, yet I think it is a sin to command it to all in time of a raging
pestilence, or when they should be defending the City against the assault of an
enemy. It may rather be then a duty to prohibit it. I think Paul spoke not any
thing inconsistent with the Government of God or man, when he bid both the
Rulers and people of the Church, not to destroy him with their meat for whom
Christ dyed: and when he says that he has not his Power to destruction, but
to Edification. Yea there are Evil Accidents of a thing not evil of it self,
that are caused by the Commander: and it is my opinion that they may prove his
commad unlawful.

But what need I use any other Instances then that which was the matter of our
dispute? Suppose it never so lawful of it self to kneel in the Reception of the
Sacrament, if it be imposed by a penalty that is incomparably beyond the
proportion of the offense, that penalty is an Accident of the command, and
makes it by accident sinful in the Commander: If a Prince should have Subjects
so weak as that all of them thought it a sin against the example of Christ, and
the Canons of the general Councils, and many hundred years practice of the
Church to kneel in the act of Receiving on the Lords days, if he should make a
Law that all should be put to death that would not kneel, when he foreknew that
their consciences would command them all, or most of them, to die rather than
obey, would any man deny this command to be unlawful by this accident? Whether
the penalty of ejecting Ministers that dare not put away all that kneel, and of
casting out all the people that scruple it, from the Church, be too great for
such a circumstance, (and so in the rest,) and whether this, with the
lamentable state of many congregations, and the divisions that will follow,
being all foreseen, do prove the Impositions unlawful which were then in
question, is a case that I had then a clearer call to speak to, then I have
now. Only I may say that the ejection of the servants of Christ from the
Communion of his Church, and of his faithful Ministers from their sacred work,
when too many Congregations have none but insufficient or scandalous teachers,
or no preaching Ministers at all, will appear a matter of very great moment, in
the day of our Accounts, and such as should not be done upon any but a
Necessary cause, where the benefit is greater then this hurt (and all the rest)
amounts to.

Having given you (to whom I owe it) this account of the cause for which I am
forbidden the exercise of my ministry in that Country, I now direct these
Sermons to ^our hands, that seeing I cannot teach you ^s I would, I may teach
you as I can. And (...) I much longer enjoy such liberty as this, (...) will be
much above my expectation.

My dearly beloved, stand fast in the lord; And fear ye not the reproach of
men, ^ither be afraid of their revilings: For ^e moth shall eat them up like a
garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool: but ^^e righteousness of the
Lord shall be for ever, (...) his salvation from generation to genera^^on, Isa.
51.7, 8. If I have taught you (...) doctrine of error or impiety, of
^^sobedience to your Governors in lawful ^^ings, of schism or uncharitableness,
^^learn them all, and renounce them with ^^nitent detestation: But if
otherwise, ^eseech you mark them which cause ^^visions and offenses, contrary
to the doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them: (...) they are such as
serve not our Lord ^^sus Christ, but their own b^lly; and by (...) words and
fair speeches deceive the ^^rts of the simple, Romans 16.17. If any all speak
against Truth or Godliness, member what you have received; and (...) little any
adversary could say, that ^er made such assaults upon you, while I (...) with
you: and that it is easy for any man to talk confidently when no man must
contradict him. I denied no man liberty upon equal terms, to have said his
worst against any doctrine that ever (...) taught you. And how they succeeded,
I need not tell you: your own stability tells the world. As you have maintained
true Catholicism, and never followed any sect, so I beseech you still maintain
the ancient faith, the Love of every member of Christ, and common charity to
all, your Loyalty to your King your peace with all men: And let no^ draw you
from Catholic Unity to (...) faction, though the declaiming against Faction
and Schism should be the devi^ by which they would accomplish it. A^^ as the
world is nothing, and God is all, (...) all that are sincere believers; so let
(...) worldly interest seem regardable to yo^ when it stands in any opposition
to Christ but account all loss and dung for him, (...) 3.8. And if you shall
hear that I yet suf^^^ more than I have done, let it not be yo^ discouragement
or grief; For I doubt (...) but it will be my crown and joy: I (...) found no
small consolation, that I (...) not suffered, for sinful, or for small and
in^^^^ferent things: And if my pleading agai^^^ (...) ejection of the Ministers
of Christ, and the excommunicating of his member, ^^r a ceremony, and the
divisions of his church, and the destruction of Charity ^^all be the cause of
my suffering (be it ever so great,) it shall as much rejoice ^^e to be a
suffering witness for CHARI^Y and UNITY, as if I were a Mar^^r for the Faith. I
participate with Paul (...) an expectation and hope, that Christ shall (...)
magnified in my body whether by life or ^^ath: and as to live will be Christ,
so to (...) will be gain; Only let your conversation (...) as it becomes the
Gospel of Christ; that ^hether I ever see you more, or be absent ^till the
joyful day) I may hear of your ^^fairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with
(...) mind striving together for the faith of ^he Gospel; and in nothing
terrified by your ^dversaries, which is to them an evident ^^ken of perdition,
but to you of salvation, and that of God, if to you it shall be given (...) the
behalf of Christ, not only to ^^lieve on him, but also to suffer for his ^^ke,
Phil. 1.20, 21, 27, 28, 29. But let (...) injury from inferiors provoke ^ou to
dishonor the Governors that God himself has set over you. Be meek and
patient; the Lord is at hand; Honor all men; Love the Brotherhood: Fear God*
Honor the King: For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put
(...) silence the ignorance of foolish men, 1 Pet* 2.15, 17. It is soon enough
for you an^ me, to be justified at the bar of Christ (by himself that has
undertaken it) against all the Calumnies of malicious men. Til^ then let it
seem no greater a matter the^ indeed it is, to be slandered, vilified or abused
by the world. Keep close to hi^ that never fails you, and maintain you^
integrity, that he may maintain the joy that none can take from you. Farewell
(...) dear brethren, who are my glory and joy the presence of our Lord Jesus
Christ his coming (1 These. 2.18, 19.)

Your faithful, though unwo^^thy Pastor, Rich. Baxte^
Nov. 11. 1661.
The Contents.
THE Text opened, p. 1 Self-knowledge what; and of how many sorts, p. 4 How far
it is shame to be Ignorant of our selves, p. 7 The Mischiefs of Self-ignorance,
1. It cherishes Atheism, p. 11 ^. Causes Ignorance of the Life to come, p. 15
^. And of the Evil of sin, p. 17 ^. It keeps the soul from true Humiliation,
p. 18 ^. It makes Christ undervalued, p. 19 ^. It makes a Holy Conversation
vilified, p. 20 ^. It makes men cheated by the world, p. 22 ^. It causes
Pride, p. 24 9. It makes men run into Temptations, p. 2^ 10. It makes
Temptations prevalent, p. 2^ 11. It makes men quarrel with Gods (...) and
Ministers, p. ^^ 12. It destroys Charity, p. 3^ 13. It is the cause of
Church-division^ p. 3^ 14. It makes men troublers of the State, p. 3^ 15. It
causes Errors, p. 4^ 16. It makes men unjust, p. 4^ 17. It makes men
unthankful, ibid 18. It is an enemy to true peace and joy p. 4^ 19. It makes
men repine at Gods providen^ p. ^^ 20. It makes men lose their Time, and
ne^^lect preparation for death, p. 4^
Use.
Self-ignorance detected and reproved, p. 4^ Discovered by some Effects: 1. By
men's (...) humbledness, p. 5^ 2. By the abounding of Hypocrisy, p. 6^ 3. By
the love of flattery, and impatience^ plain reproof, p. 6^ 4. By men's
partiality, p. 6^ 5. When every man would be a Rule to other^ p. 7^ 6. By the
great change that approaching death, or other awaking Providence make, p. 75
^. By men's quarrelling with others in their sufferings, and overlooking the
great cause in themselves, p. 82 The discovery prosecuted, p. 87
Motives.
^. If you know not your selves, you cannot Repent, p. 93 ^. Nor be duly
sensible of your misery, ibid. ^. Nor indeed be Christians, p. 97 ^. You will
not know what to do with your selves, p. 108 ^. You will not know how to apply
the Word, p. 116 ^. Nor how to Confess or Pray, p. 118 ^. Nor how to give
thanks, p. 125 ^. Nor how to receive the Lords Supper, p. 129 ^. All your
studies will be irrational, preposterous and impertinent, p. 130 ^0. You will
be much unusefull to others, p. 140 ^1. You cannot well proceed to know
extrinsick things, p. 143 12. How many and necessary things have yo^ to know
about your selves, p. 148 Exhortation, p. 15^ Caution against excessive
studying of ou^ selves, p. 15^ Who need this Caution, p. 15^ Information: Why
the sincere can discours^ so fully and savourily about Heart-affairs* p. 16^
And why they are so full in prayer, and other^ so empty, p. 17^ The Excuses of
the prayerless answered p. 17^ Why the upright are so prone to self-accusin^ p.
1^^
Motives to the Ungodly.
1. If you know not your selves, you kn^^ not whether you must dwell in Heaven
(...) Hell, p. 1^^ 2. All shall shortly know themselves p. 1^^ How useful a
Companion Conscience is converse with, p. 19^ 3. Its Satan's chief design to
keep you (...) ignorant, p. 20^ Yet some can go on in known mise^^ p. 2^^ A
threefold Despair, p. 218 In what cases the sincere may go in sin against
knowledge, p. 220 But ordinarily self-knowledge would do much p. 122
Information: Why faithful Ministers search so deep, and speak so hardly of
unrenewed souls, p. 235 Questions to the unsanctified, p. 257 What Christianity
is, and who sincere in the Covenant, p. 267 Who certainly unregenerate, p. 266
Exhortation to the Regenerate.
To know 1. Their Sin, 2. Their Graces. 1. For want of Self-knowledge: 1. You
confess not sin as you ought to God or man, p. 276 ^. You pray not against it,
or for grace as you ought, p. 277 ^. You are negligent in your watch, p. 281
Seek not help, ibid. Lie in unobserved sins, ibid. In General, When sin is most
unobserved, p. 289 Particularly; 1. The Self-ignorant little think while they
are Orthodox, what errors they may fall into, p. 292 Or in adversity, what sins
prosperity may draw forth, p. 294 3. Or how soon the Resolutions of affliction
may decay, and come to nothing, p. 298 4. Or when the heart is warm and
heavenly, how quickly it may cool and fall to earth, p. 303 (True Marks of
Grace, p. 304) 5. And in prosperity they little think what sins Adversity may
detect or occasion, p. 316. 6. Or what Pride may appear in those th^^ are
humble, p. 319. 7, Some of the greatest sins of Christians (...) little
observed and lamented: As 1, (...) remnants of Infidelity, p. 32^ 2. The great
imperfection of Love to God, p. 323 3. And want of Love to one another, p. 324
8. The insinuations of selfishness in all that w^ do, p. 32^ 9. The eruption of
passions that seemed mor^tified, p. 34^ 10. Affections mixed with carnality,
which seemed purely spiritual. p. 33^ Caution against overmuch suspicion or
ac^cusation of our selves, p. 33^ 2. Sin surpriseth more dangerously: 3. An^
the Remedy is neglected, through self-ignorance, p. 337 2. What Hinders
Believers from knowing their Graces. 1. The sense of the Contraries, p. 338 2.
The smalness of Grace. p. 341 3. Not judging by sure Marks: the Essentials of
Holiness: what they are, p. 343 What Marks uncertain, p. 345 What sin
consistent with true grace, p. 347 4. Overlooking what we have, by looking at
what we ought to be, p 349 5. Judging upon disadvantage: 1. Surprising our
selves unpreparedly. 2. Judging in passion, of Fear or Grief. 3. When helps are
absent. 4. When our Bodies are melancholy, or otherwise unfit, p. 350 6.
Refusing the former Judgment of our sincerity, if we have not a continued
sight of grace, p. 353 7. The variety and confusion of the souls operations,
ibid.
Motives to labor to know our Sanctification.
1. It is a most excellent sort of knowledge, p. 354. 2. It is a most
delightful felicitating knowledge, p. 355 3. It might sweeten every place and
state, p. 357 4. It would much help our Belief of Scripture, p. 357 5. And our
Trusting on God in all straits, p. 359 6. And our cheerful progress in
Religion, p. 361 7. It may keep you from the terrors of the doubting, p. 362 8
And sweeten all your other mercies, p. 363 9. And debilitate temptations to
sensua^ pleasures, p. 36^ 10. And sweeten all the service of God, p. 36^ 11.
And kindle Love to God, p. 372 12. Its necessary to a life of Thankfulness, p.
377 13. You will not else live to the Glory of the Gospel, p. 383 14. It will
make all sufferings easy, p. 385 As 1. Scorns, p. 38^ 2. Opposition, 3.
Slanders, p. 38^ 4. Imprisonment and banishment, p. 39^ 5. Personal and family
crosses, p 39^ 6. Death, p. 39^
The Hindrances of Self-acquaintance (...) 1. External, 1. Ministers
unskilfulness and unfaithfulness, p. 402 Direct. 1. Live under a skillful
faithful Pastor, p. 411 In what cases to use their personal helps, p. 418
Objections against Ministers personal helps, answered, p. 419 Quest. How far a
doubting person may rest in the judgment of a Minister about the state of his
soul, p. 429 The Direction applied to both sorts, p. 435 Hind. 2. Prosperity
and flattery. Direct. 2. Desire not much Prosperity, and detest flatterers. p.
457 Hind. 3. Conversing only with bad men, p. 461 Direct. 3. Converse with
Heavenly Exemplary Christians. p. 466 2. Internal Hindrances; 1. Pride, p. 470
Direct. 1. Come to Christ as little Children. p, 473 Hind. 2. An unreasonable
love of present ease, p. 475 Direct. 2, Look to the time to come, and be not
too tender of present trouble, p. 477 Hind. 3. Self-love blinds, p. 481
Direct. 3. Bring your minds to a just impartiality, p. 483 Hind. 4. Nst
observing the heart in trial, but taking it only at the best, p. 488 Caution:
When and how to judge our selves. p. 490 Direct. 4. Judge of your Habitual
state by your actions, p^ 494
ERRATA.
PAge 228: l. 29. for gain r. game: p. 229. l. 29. for having r. have: p. 147
l. 17. r. relevetur: l. 22. r. sanabat: p. 236. l. 2. r. Impenitent sinner! p.
247. l. 5. for juggling r. jingling: p. 288. l. 25. r. it is: p. 29^. l. 20. r.
preservative: p. 334. l. 24 for more r. mere: p 340 l. 25. r. if it were: p.
341. l. 2. for as r. is, l. 6. dele that, p. 349. l. 4 for after r. ofter, p.
351. l. 8. r. all that, p 353. l. 10. for over r. our, p. 307. l. 17. for
bodily r. boldly, p. 375. l. 17. r. has set you, p. 383. l. 2^. r. is it to,
p. 381. l. 28. r. fitteth, p. 387. l. 8. r. prosperity, p. 407 l. 26. for
natives r. Na^ions, p. 411. l. 3. r. wh^^ it is, p. 428. l. 6. dele in, p. 434.
l. 9. r. its, l. 13. r. he is not, p. 448. l. 21. r. put him, p. 452. l. 14. r.
of one, p. 46^. for are r. hear^, and for hear r. are p. 476. l. 19. r.
inconsiderate, p. 485. l. 1. corrigentis.

THE Mischief of Self-ignorance, AND Benefit of Self-acquaintance.
2 COR. 13.5. Know ye not your own selves --?]


THE Corinthians being much abused by false-teachers, to the corrupting of
their faith and manners, and the questioning of the Apostles Ministry, he
acquainted them in my Text with an obvious remedy for both these maladies; and
lets them know, that their miscarriages call them to question themselves,
rather then ^o question his authority or gifts, and that if they find Christ in
themselves, they must acknowledge him in his ministry.

He therefore first most importunately urges them to the mediate duty of
Self-examination: [Examine your selves, Whether you be in the faith: Prove your
own selves:] Self-examination is but the Means of Self-knowledge. This
therefore he next urges, and that first in General; and this by way of
Interrogation, [Know ye not your own selves?] and then more particularly he
tells them, what it is of themselves, that it most concerns them to know, [
How that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates.] As if he should say,
[Alas, poor souls; you have more cause to question your selves then me: Go too
therefore, examine and prove your selves. It is a shame for a man to be
ignorant of himself. Know ye not your own selves? Either Christ is in you, by
faith, and by his Spirit, or he is not. If he be not, you are yet but
Reprobates, that is, disapproved of God, and at present in a forsaken, or
condemned state your selves; (which is a conclusion that you will be loath to
admit, but more concerns you:) If Christ be in you, it was by the means of my
ministry; and therefore that ministry has been powerful and effectual to you;
and you are my witnesses; the seal of my ministry is upon your own souls;
Christ within you, bears me witness, and therefore of all men, you have least
cause to question or quarrel with my ministry.]

This Paraphrase opening all that may seem difficult in the Text, I shall
immediately offer you a double Observation, which the words afford us; first,
as considered in themselves, and then as respecting the inference for which
they are premised by the Apostle.

The first is, that [ All men should know themselves: or, It is a shame for a
man to be unacquainted with himself.]

The second is, that [ Not knowing our selves is the cause of other errors: or,
The knowledge of our selves, would much con^uce to the Cure of many other
errors.]

In handling this, I shall show you, 1. What (...) is to know our selves. 2.
How far it is, ^^r is not, a shame to be ignorant of our ^elves. 3. What evils
follow this Ignorance ^f our selves, and what benefits self-know^^dge would
procure. 4. How we should ^^prove this doctrine by Application and ^^actice. Of
the first but briefly.

I. SElf-knowledge is thus distinguished according to the object. 1. There is a
Physical self knowledge: when a man knows what he is as a man; What his soul
is, and what his body, and what the compound called man. The Doctrine of Man's
Nature, or this part of Physics, is so necessary to all, that it is first laid
down even in the Holy Scriptures, in Genesis chapter 1, 2, 3. before his Duty is
expressed. And it is presupposed in all the moral passages of the word, and in
all the preaching of the gospel; The Subject is presupposed to the Adjuncts.
The Subjects of Gods Kingdom belong to the Constitution; and therefore to be
known before the Legislation, and Judgment, which are the parts of the
Administration. Morality always presupposes nature. The Species is in order
before the separable Accidents. Most ridiculously therefore does Ignorance
plead for it self against Knowledge, in them that cry down this part of
Physics, as Humane Learning, unnecessary to the Discipl^^ of Christ. What
excellent holy Meditations of Humane nature do you find often in (...) and in
David's Psalms, Ps. 139. concluding (...) the praise of the incomprehensible
Creator, ver. 14. [ I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully
made: Mavelous are thy works; and that my soul knows right well.]

2. There is a Moral Self-knowledge, very necessary. And this is, The knowing
of our selves in Relation to Gods Law, or to his Judgment. The former is the
knowledge of our selves in respect of our Duty: the second, in respect of the
Reward or Punishment. And both of them have respect to the Law of Nature, and
Works, or to the Remedying Law of Grace.

The Ethical knowledge of our selves, or that which respects the Precept and
our Duty, is twofold: The first is, as we have performed that Duty; The second,
as we have violated the Law by nonperformance or transgression: The first is,
the knowledge of our selves as Good; the second as Evil. And both are either
the knowledge of our Habits (good or evil) or of our Acts; How we are Morally,
Inclined, disposed, or habituated; or what, and how we have Done; We must know
the Good estate of our Nature that we were created in; the Bad estate of
sinful nature that we are fallen into; the actual sin committed against the
Law of nature; and what sin we have committed against the Law of Grace: and
whether we have obeyed the call of the Gospel of salvation, or not. So that as
man's state considered Ethically, is threefold, Institutus, Destitutus, and
Restitutus: Infirmatus, Deformatus, and Reformatus; the state of Upright
nature; the State of Sin, Original and Actual; and the state of Grace; we must
know what we are in respect to every one of these.

And as to the Judicial knowledge of our selves, that is, as we stand related
to the Promises, and Threatenings, the Judgment, the Reward, and Punishment; we
must know first, what is due to us according to the Law of Nature, and then
what is due to us according to the tenor of the Law of Grace. By the Law of
Nature or of Works, Death is the Due of fallen mankind; but no man by it can
lay claim to Heaven. All men are under its curse or condemnation, till pardoned
by Christ; but no man can be Justified by it. By the Promise of the Gospel, all
true Believers renewed and sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, are Justified,
and made the sons of God, and heirs of everlasting glory. To know whether we
are yet delivered from the condemnation of the Law; and whether our sins are
pardoned or not; and whether we are the children of God, and have any part in
the Heavenly Glory; is much of the self-knowledge that is here intended in the
Text, and that which most nearly concerns the solid comfort of our souls.

II. BUt is all self-ignorance a shame, or dangerous? Answ. 1. It is no other
shame then what is common to humane frailty, to be ignorant of much of the
mystery of our Natural Generation Constitution, Integrall parts, and
Temperament. There is not a nerve, or artery* or vein, nor the breadth of a hand
from head to foot, but has something unknown to the most excellent Philosopher
on Earth. This little world called Man, is a compound of wonders. Both Soul and
Body have afforded matter of endless controversy, and voluminous Disputations,
to the most Learned men; which will not admit of a full decision, till we are
past this state of darkness and mortality.

2. There are many Controversies about the nature, derivation and punishment of
Original sin, which a humble and diligent Christian may possibly be ignorant of.

3. The degrees of Habitual sin, considedered simply, or proportionably and
respectively to each other, may be much unknown to many that are willing and
diligent to know: And so may diverse actual sins; such as we know not to be sin,
through our imperfect understanding of the Law; and such as through frailty in
a crowd of actions, escape our particular observation. And the sinfulness or
Aggravations of every sin are but imperfectly known and observed by the best.

4. The Nature and beauty of the Image of God, as first planted on created man,
and since Restored to man Redeemed: the manner of the Spirits acccess,
operation, testimony and inhabitation; are all but imperfectly known by the
wisest of Believers.

The frame or admirable composure or contexture of the New-man in each of the
renewed faculties; the connection, order, beauty and special use of each
particular grace, are observed but imperfectly by the best.

5. The very uprightness and sincerity of our own hearts, in Faith, Hope, Love,
Repentance and Obedience, is usually unknown to Incipients, or young beginners
in Religion; and to the weaker sort of Christians, how old soever in
profession, and to melancholy persons, who can have no thoughts of themselves
but sad and fearful, tending to despair; and to lapsed and declining
Christians; and also to many an upright soul, from whom in some cases of
special trial, God seems to hide his pleased face. And though these infirmities
are their shame, yet are they not the Characters or Prognostics of their
misery, and everlasting shame.

6. The same persons must needs be unacquainted with their Justification,
Reconciliation, Adoption, and Title to everlasting blessedness, as long as they
are uncertain of theie sincerity. Yea, though they uprightly examine
themselves, and desire help of their Guides, and watch and pore continually
upon their hearts and ways, and daily beg of God to acquaint them with their
spiritual condition; they may yet be so far unacquainted with it, as to pass an
unrighteous judgment on themselves, and condemn themselves when God has
justified them.

But 1. To be totally ignorant of the excellency and capacity of your immortal
souls; 2. To be void of an effectual knowledge of your sin and misery, and need
of the Remedy; 3. To think you have saving grace, when you have none; that you
are regenerate by the Spirit, when you are only sacramentally regenerate by
Baptism; that you are the members of Christ, when it is no such matter; that
you are Justified, Adopted, and the Heirs of Heaven, when it is not so; all
this is doleful and damnable unacquaintedness with yourselues.

To be unacquainted with a state of Life, when you are in such a state, is sad
and troublesome, and casts you upon many and great inconveniences. But to be
unacquainted with a state of Death, when you are in it, does fasten your
chains, and hinder your recovery. To be willing and diligent to know your
state, and yet be unable to attain to assurance and satisfaction, is ordinary
with many true Believers: But to be ignorant of it, because you have no grace
to find, and because you mind not the matters of your souls, or think it not
worth your diligent consideration or enquiry, this is the case of the miserable
despisers of salvation.

III. THE Commodities and Incommodities to be mentioned, are so many and great,
that many hours would not serve to open them as they deserve.

1. Atheism is cherished by self-ignorance. The knowledge of our selves as men
does notably conduce to our knowledge of God. Here God is known but darkly, and
as in a glass, 1 Cor. 13.12. and by his Image; and not as face to face. And,
except his Incarnate and his written word, what Glass reveals him so clearly
as the soul of man? We bear a double Image of our Maker: His Natural Image in
the nature of our facuities; and his Moral Image in their Holy qualifications,
in the nature of grace, and frame of the new man. By knowing our selves it is
easy to know, that there is a God; and it much assisteth us to know, what he
is, not only in his Attributes and Relations, but even in the Trinity it self.
He may easily know that there is a Primitive Being and Life, that knows he
has himself a Derived Being and Life. He must know that there is a Creator,
that knows he is a creature. He that finds a capacious Intellect, a Will,
and Power in the creature, and that is conscious of any Wisdom, and Goodness in
himself, may well know that formaliter or eminenter all these are infinite in
the first cause that must thus have in it self whatsoever it does communicate.
He that knows that he made not, and preserves not himself, may well know
that he is not his Own, but his that made him and preserves him, who must
needs be his Absolute Proprietary and Lord. He that knows that he is an
Intellectual free agent, and therefore to act Morally, and therefore to be
moved by Moral means, and that he is a sociable creature, a member of the
Universe, living among men, may well be sure, that he is made to be a subject,
and Governed by Laws, and by moral means to be directed and moved to his End:
and therefore that none but his Absolute Lord, the Infinite Wisdom, Goodness,
and Power, can be his Absolute and Highest Sovereign. He that is convinced that
he is, he lives, he hops and enjoys all that's good, from a Superior Bounty,
may be sure that God is his Principal Benefactor. And to be [ The First and
Infinite Being, Intellect, Will, and Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and Cause of all
things; the Absolute Owner, the most Righteous Governor, and the most Bounteous
Benefactor,] this is to be [ GOD.] This being the Description of him that is so
called: such a Description as is fetched from his Created Image [Man,] and
expressed in the terms that himself has chosen, and used in his word, as
knowing that if he will be understood by man, he must use the Notions and
Expressions of man: And though these are spoken but Analogically of God, yet
are there no fitter conceptions of him that the soul of man in flesh is capable
of. So that the Atheist carries about him that Impress and Evidence of the
Deity, which may convince him, or condemn him for his Foolishness and Impiety.
He is a Fool indeed, that says in his Heart, There is no God (Psalm. 14.1.)
when that Heart it self in its Being, and Life, and Motion is his Witness: and
Soul and Body with all their faculties, are nothing but the Effects of this
Almighty Cause: And when they prove that there is a God, even by questioning or
denying it; being unable without him so much as to deny him, that is, to think,
or speak, or be. As if a fool should write a Volume to prove that there is no
Ink or Paper in the world; when it is Ink and Paper by which he writes.

And whether there be no representation of the Trinity in Unity in the Nature
of man, let them judge that have well considered, how in One Body there are the
Natural, Vital and Animal parts, and spirits: And in One Life or Soul, there
are the Vegetative, Sensitive and Rational faculties; And in One Rational Soul
as such, there are an Intellect, Will, and Executive power, Morally perfected
by Wisdom, Goodness and Promptitude to well doing. As in one Sun there is Light
and Heat, and Moving force. So that man is both the Beholder and the Glass; the
Reader and the Book: He is the Index of the Godhead to himself: Yea, partly of
the Trinity in Unity: Of which says August. de Trinit. lib. 1. [ Nec
periculosius alicubi erratur, nec laboriosius aliquid quaritur* nec fructuosius
invenitur, quam Trinitas. We need not say, Who shall go up into Heaven: says
Seneca himself by the light of nature, Prope Deus est; tecum est: Intus est;
sacer intra nos Spiritus; sed and bonorum malorumque nostrorum observator and
custos: Hic prout a nobis tractatur, ita nos tractat ipse: Bonus vir sine Deo
nemo est.] God is nigh us; with us; within us; A holy spirit resideth within
us; ^he observer of our evil and good, and our ^^eserver: He uses us as he is
used by us: ^o good man is without God.] says August. (...) Deus est in seipso
sicut a and o: in mundo ^^cut rector and author: in Angelis sicut sapor ^
decor: in Ecclesia sicut paterfamilias in ^omo: in animo sicut sponsus in
thalamo: (...) justis sicut adjutor and protector: in reprobis, ^^cut pavor and
horror.] God is in himself as ^he Alpha and Omega; in the world as its ^overnor
and Author: in Angels as their ^weetness and comeliness: in the Church as ^he
master of the family in his house: in the ^^ul, as the Bridegroom in his
bedchamber: (...) the righteous, as their helper and prote^^or, etc.] And as
all declares him, so all should praise him: Hunc itaque men's diligat, ^^ngua
canat, manus scribat atque in his san^tis studiis fidelis animus se exerceat.
Aug.] Let the mind be exercised in loving him, ^he tongue in singing him, the
hand in wri^ing him; let these holy studies be the be^^evers work.]

2. He that knows himself, may certain^^ know, that there is another life of
Happi^ess or Misery for man to live, when this (...) ended. For he must needs
know that his ^oul is capable of a spiritual and glorious ^elicity with God,
and of immaterial objects and that time is as nothing to it, and transitory
creatures afford it no satisfaction or Rest: and that the Hopes and Fears of
the Life to come, are the Divine engines by which the Moral Government of the
world is carried on; and that the very nature of man is such, as that without
such Apprehensions, Hopes and Fears, he could not in a connaturall way be
Governed, and brought unto the End to which his Nature is inclined and adapted;
But the world would be as a Wilderness, and men as bruits. And he may well know
that God made not such faculties in vain, nor suited them to an end which
cannot be attained, nor to a work which would prove but their trouble and
deceit: He may be sure that a mere probability or possibility of an everlasting
Life, should engage a reasonable creature in all possible diligence in Piety
and Righteousness and Charity to attain it: And so Religion and holy
endeavors, are become the duty of man as man; there being few such Infidels or
Atheists to be found on earth, as dare say, They are sure there is no other life
for man. And doubtless whatsoever is by Nature and Reason made man's Duty, is
not delusory and vain: Nor is it Reasonable to think that Falsehood, frustration
and deceit, are the ordinary way by which mankind is Governed by the most wise
and Holy God. So that the end of man may be clearly gathered from his Nature:
forasmuch as God does Certainly suit his works unto their proper use and ends.
It is therefore the ignorance of our selves that makes men question the
Immortality of souls: And I may add, it is the Ignorance of the nature of
Conscience, and of all Morality, and of the reason of Justice among men, that
makes men doubt of the discriminating Justice of the Lord, which is hereafter
to be manifested.

3. Did men know themselves, they would better know the evil and odiousness of
sin. As poverty and sickness are better known by feeling then by hearesay: so
also is sin. To hear a discourse or read ^ Book of the Nature, Prognostics
and Cure of the plague, consump^ion, or dro^sie, does little affect us, while
we seem ^o be sound and safe our selves: But when we find the malady in our
flesh, and perceive the danger, we have then another manner of knowledge of it.
Did ^ou but see and feel sin as it is in your ^earts and lives, as often as you
read and ^eare of it in the Law of God, I dare say sin would not seem a
jesting matter, not would those be censured as too precise, that are careful
to avoid it, any more then they that are careful to avoid infectious diseases,
or crimes against the Laws of man, that hazard their temporal felicity or
lives.

4. Its want of self-aquaintance that keeps the soul from kindly Humiliation:
That men are insensible of their Spiritual calamityes, and lie under a load of
unpardoned sin and Gods displeasure, and never feel it, nor loath themselves
for all the abominations of their hearts and lives, nor make complaint to God
or man with any seriousness and sense. How many hearts would be filled with
wholesome grief and care, that now are careless and almost past feeling? and
how many eyes would stream forth tears that now are dry, if men were but truly
acquainted with themselves? It is self-knowledge that causes the solid peace
and joy of a Believer: as conscious of that Grace that warranteth his peace and
joy. But it is self-deceit and ignorance that quieteth the presumptuous, that
walk as carelessly, and sleep as quietly, and bless themselves from Hell as
confidently when it is ready to devour them, as if the bitterness of death
were past, and hypocrisy would never be discoverred.

5. It is unacquaintednes with themselves that makes Christ so undervalued by
the unhumbled world: that his Name is reverenced but his office and Saving
grace are disregarded. Men could not set so light by the Physicion, that felt
their sickness, and understood their danger. Were you sensible that you are
under the wrath of God, and shall shortly and certainly be in Hell, if a Christ
received by a hearty working, purifying faith, do not deliver you, I dare say,
you would have more serious, savory thoughts of Christ, more yearnings after
him, more fervent prayers for his healing grace, and sweet remembrance of his
love and merits, example, doctrine and inestimable benefits, then lifeless
hypocrites ever were acquainted with.

Imagine with what desires and expectations the diseased, blind and lame cried
after him for healing to their bodies, when he was on earth. And would you not
more highly value him, more importunately solicit him for your souls, if you
knew your selves?

6. It is unacquaintednes with themselves that makes men think so unworthily of
a Holy Heavenly Conversation; and that possesses them with foolish prejudice
against the holy Care and diligence of believers: did men but value their
immortal souls, as Reason itself requires them to do, is it possible they
should venture them so easily upon everlasting misery, and account it
unnecessary strictnes in them that dare not be as desperately venturous as
they, but fly from sin, and fear the threatenings of the Lord? Did men but
consideratly understand the worth and concernment of their souls, is it
possible they should hazard them for a thing of naught, and set them at sail
for the favor of superiors, or the transitory pleasures and honors of the
world? Could they think the greatest care and labor of so short a life to be
too much for the securing of their salvation? Could they think so many studious
careful days, and so much toil to be but meet and necessary for their bodies;
and yet think all too much that is done, for their immortal souls? Did men but
practically know that they are the Subjects of the God of Heaven, they durst
not think the diligent obeying him to be a needless thing, when they like that
Child or servant best, that is most willing and diligent in their Service. Alas
were men but acquainted with their weakness, and sinful failings when they
have done their best, and how much short the hoylest Persons do come of what
they are obliged to by the Laws and mercies of the Lord, they durst not make a
scorn of diligence, nor hate or blame men for endeavoring to be better, that
are sure at best they shall be too bad. When the worst of men, that are
themselves the greatest neglecters of God and their salvation, shall cry out
against a Holy life and making so much a do for Heaven, (as if a man that lies
in bed should cry out against working too much or going too fast) this shows
men's strangeness to themselves. Did the careless world but know themselves, and
see where they stand, and what is before them, and how much lies on this inch of
time; did they but know the nature and employment of a soul, and why their
Creator did place them for a little while in flesh, and whither they must go
when time is ended, you should then see them in that serious frame themselves
which formerly they dislikt in others: and they would then confess that if any
thing in the world deserved seriousness and diligence, it is the pleasing of
God, and the saving of our souls.

7. It is for want of acquaintance with themselves, that men are so deceived by
the vanities of the world: that they are drowned in the love of pleasures and
sensual delights: that they are so greedy for Riches, and so desirous to be
higher then those about them, and to wast their days in the pursuit of that
which will not help them in the hour of their extremity. Did the voluptuous
sensualist know aright that he is a Man, he would not take up with the
pleasures and felicity of a bruit; nor enslave his Reason to the violence of
his Appetite. He would know that there are higher pleasures which beseem a Man:
even those that consist in the well being and integrity of the soul, in peace
of Conscience, in the favor of God, and Communion with him in the Spirit, and
in a holy life, and in the fore-thoughts and Hopes of endless Glory.

Did the Covetous worldling know himself, he would know that it must be another
kind of Riches, that must satisfy his soul, and that he has wants of another
nature to be supplied; and that it more concernneth him to lay up a treasure in
Heaven, and think where he must dwell for ever, then to accommodate his
perishing flesh, and make provision with so much a do, for a life that posteth
away while he is providing for it: he would rather make him friends with the
Mammon of unrighteousness, and lay up a foundation for the time to come, and
labor for the food that never perishes, then to make such a stir for that
which will serve him so little a while: that so he might hear, [ Well done thou
Good and faithful servant, etc.] rather then [ Thou fool this night thy soul
shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be which thou have
provided.]

Self-knowledge would teach Ambitious men, to prefer the calmest safest
station, before the highest; and to seek first the Kingdom of God and its
righteousness, and to please him most carefully that has the Keys of Heaven
and Hell: and to be content with food and raiment in the way, while they are
Ambitious of a higher Glory. It would tell them, that, so dark and frail a
creature should be more solicitous to Obey then to have Dominion; and that
large Possessions are not the most congruous or desirable Passage, to a narrow
grave; and that it is the highest dignity to be an heir of Heaven. Would men
but spend some hours time, in the study of themselves and seriously consider
what it is to be a Man, a sinner, a Passenger to an endless life, an expectant
of so great a change, and withal to be a professed Believer, what a turn would
it make in the cares, and the desires, and conversations of the most?

O amatores mundi (inquit Angust.) cujus rei gratia militatis? -- Ibi quid nisi
fragile plenum periculis? et per qu^t pericula pervenitur ad majus periculum?
percant haec omnia, et dimittamus haec vana et inania, conferamus nos ad solam
inquisitionem eorum quae finem non habeant.] i. e. What strive you for, O
worldings? What Is here but a brittle glass full of dangers? and by how many
dangers must you come to greater dangers? Away with these vanities and toys,
and let us set our selves to seek the things that have no end]

8. It is for want of self-acquaintance that any man is Proud. Did men
considerately know what they are, how quickly would it bring them low? Would
corruptible flesh that must shortly turn to loathsome rottenness, be stout and
Lordly and look so high and set forth it self in gaudy ornaments, if men did
not forget themselves? Alas, the way forgets the end: the outward bravery
forgets the dirt and filth within: the stage forgets the undressing room.
Did Rulers behave themselves as those that are subjects to the Lord of all, and
have the greatest need to fear his judgment, and prepare for their account:
did Great ones live as men that know that Rich and poor are equal with the
Lord, who respects not persons; and that they must Speedily be levelled with
the lowest, and their dust be mixed with the Common earth; what an alteration
would it make in their deportment and affairs? and what a mercy would it prove
to their inferiors and themselves? If men that swell with pride of parts, and
overvalue their knowledge, wit or elocution, did know how little indeed they
know, and how much they are ignorant of, it would much abate their pride and
confidence. The more men know indeed, the more they know to humble them. It is
the Novices that being lifted up with Pride do fall into the Condemnation of
the Devil. 1 Timothy 3.6. They would loath themselves if they knew themselves.

9. It is self-ignorance that makes men rush upon Temptations, and choose them,
when they customarily pray against them. Did you Know what tinder or gunpowder
lodges in your natures, you would guard your eyes and ears and appetites and
be afraid of the least spark: you would not be indifferent as to your company
nor choose a life of danger to your souls, for the pleasing of your flesh; to
live among the snares of honor or beauty and bravery, or sensual delights:
you would not wilfully draw so near the brinke of Hell, nor be nibbling at
the bait, nor looking on the forbidden fruit, nor dallying with allurements,
nor hearkening to the Deceiver, or to his messengers. It is ignorance of the
weakness and badness of your hearts, that makes you so confident of your
selves, as to think that you can hear any thing, and see any thing, and
approach the snare, and treat with the Deceiver, without any danger,
self-acquaintance would cause more fear and self-suspicions.

If you should escape well a while in your self-chosen dangers, you may catch
that at last that may prove your woe.

Nemo sese tuto periculis offerre tam crebro potest.
Quem saepe transit casus, aliquando invenit.
Seneca. Temptation puts you on a combat with the powers of earth, and flesh
and Hell! And is toil and danger your delight? Nunquam periculum sine periculo
vincitur] says Seneca: Danger is never overcome without danger; Its necessary
valor to charge through all, which you are in: But its temerarious
foolhardiness to seek for danger, and invite such enemies when we are so weak:
Says Augustine; Nemo sibi proponat and dicat, habere volo quod vincam: hoc est,
dicere, vivere desidero and volo sub ruina.] Goliah's [give me man to fight
with,] is a prognostic of no good success. Rather foresee all your dangers to
avoid them. Understand where each temptation lies, that you may go another
way, if possible. Castitas periclitatur in deliciis; humilitas in divitiis;
pietas in negotiis; veritas in multiloqiuo; charitas in hoc mundo.] says Bern.
[Chastity is endangered in delights: humility in riches; piety in businesses;
truth in too much talk; and charity in this world.] Alas did we but think what
temptations did with a Noah, a Lot, a David, a Solomon, a Peter; we would be
afraid of the enemy and weapon that such worthies have been so wounded by, and
of the quicksands where they have so dangerously fallen. When Satan durst
assault the Lord himself; What hope will he have of such as we? When we
consider the millions that are blinded, and hardened and damned by temptations,
are we in our wits if we will cast our selves into them? [ Praeceps est, qui
transire contendit, ubi conspexerit alios cecidisse: Et vehementer infraenis
est, cui non incutitur timor alio pereunte. Aug.

10. Self-acquaintance would confute Temptations, and easily resolve the case
when you are tempted. Did you considerately know the preciousness of your
souls, and your own concernments, and where your true felicity lies, you would
abhor allurements, and encounter them with that argument of Christ, Mark. 8.36,
37. What shall it profit a man, if he win the world and lose his soul? or what
shall a man give in exchange for his soul?] The fear of man would be conquered
by a greater fear; as ^he Lord commands, Luke 12.4, 5. [ And I say unto you,
my friends; Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no
more that they can do: But I will forewarn you whom you shall fear: Fear him
which after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell: Yea, I say unto you:
Fear him.]

11. It is unacquaintedness with themselves, that makes men quarrel with the
word of God, rejecting it when it suits not with their deceived reason, and to
be offended with his faithful Ministers, when they cross them in their
opinions or ways, or deal with them with that serious plainness, as the weight
of the Case, and their necessity does require. Alas, Sirs, if you were
acquainted with your selves, you would know that the holy Rule is strait, and
the crookedness is in your conceits and misapprehensions; and that your frail
understandings should rather be suspected then the word of God; and that your
work is to learn and obey the Law, and not to censure it, James 4.11. And that
quarrelling with the holy word which you should obey, will not excuse but
aggravate your sin; nor save you from the condemnation, but fasten it and make
it greater. You would know that it is more wisdom to stoop, then to contend
with God: and that it is not your Physicians, nor the medicine that you should
fall out with, nor desire to be delivered from, but the disease.

12. Self-acquaintance would teach men to be Charitable to others, and cure the
common censoriousness, and envy, and malice of the world. Has thy neighbor
some mistakes about the disputable points of doctrine, or doubtful modes of
Discipline or Worship? Is he for the opinion, or form, or Policy, or Ceremony,
which thou dislikest? or is he against them when thou approvest them? or afraid
to use them, when thou think them laudable? If thou know thy self, thou
dare not break charity or peace for this. Thou dare not censure or despise
him: But wilt remember the frailty of thy own understanding, which is not
infallible in matters of this rank; and in many things is certainly mistaken,
and needs forbearance as well as he. Thou would be afraid of inviting God or
man to condemn thy self, by thy condemning others; and would think with thy
self, (...) every error of no more importance in ^^rsons that hold the
Essentials of Religion, ^^d conscionably practice what they know, ^ust go for
Heresy, or make men Sectaries, (...) cut them off from the favor of God, or
^^e Communion of the Church, or the pro^^ction of the Magistrate, and subject
them ^o damnation, to misery, to censures and re^roach: alas, what then must
become of so ^^ail a wretch as I? of so dark a mind, ^f so blameable a heart
and life? that am ^^ke to be mistaken in matters as great, ^here I least
suspect it? It is ignorance of themselves, that makes men so easily think ^ll
of their brethren, and entertain all hard ^r mis-reports of them, and look at
them so ^trangely, or speak of them so contemp^uously and bitterly, and use
them so uncompassionately, because they are not in ^ll things of their opinion
and way. They consider not their own infirmities, and that they teach men how
to use themselves. The falls of brethren would not be over-aggravated, nor be
the matter of insulting or contempt, but of compassion, if men knew themselves.
This is employed in the charge of the Holy Ghost, Gal. 6.1, 2. [ Brethren, if a
man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such a one in the
spirit of meekness, considering thy self lest thou also be tempted: Bear ye one
another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.] The Pharisee that sees
not the beam of mortal formality and hypocrisy in his own eye, is most
censorious against the motes of tolerable particular errors in his brothers
eye. None more uncharitable against the real or supposed errors or slips of
serious Believers, then Hypocrites that have no saving serious faith and
knowledge, but place their Religion in Opinion and outside shows, and wholly
err from the path of Life.

13. It is ignorance of themselves that makes men Divide the Church of Christ,
and pertinaciously keep open its bleeding wounds, and hinder Concord, and
disturb its peace. How far would self-acquaintance go to the Cure of all our
discords and divisions? Is it possible that the Pope should take upon him the
Government of the Antipodes, even of all the world, (and that as to Spiritual
Government, which requires more personal attendance, then secular,) if he knew
himself, and consequently his natural incapacity, and the terror of his account
for such an Usurped charge? Self-acquaintance would depose their Inquisitions,
and quench their flames; and make them know what spirit they are of, that
inclines not to save men's lives, but to destroy them, Luke 9.55, 56. Did they
know themselves, the Papists durst not multiply new Articles of faith, and
ceremonies and depart from the ancient simplicity of the Gospel, and turn the
Creed or Scripture into all the Volumes of their Councils, and say, All these
decrees or determinations of the Church are necessary to salvation; and so make
the way of life more difficult, if not impossible (had they indeed the Keys)
by multiplying of their supposed Necessaries. Did they but know themselves
aright, it were impossible they should dare to pass the sentence of damnation
on the far greatest part of the Christian world, because they are not subject
to their pretended Vice-Christ. Durst one of the most leprous corrupted sort of
Christians in the world unchurch all the rest that will not be as bad as they,
and condemn all other Christians as Heroticks for Schismatics, either for
their adhering to the truth or for errors and faults, far smaller then their
own? Did they know themselves and their own corruptions, they durst not thus
condemn themselves, by so presumptuous and blind a condemnation of the best and
greatest part of the Church of Christ, which is dearest to him, as purchased by
his blood. If either the Protestants or the Greeks, or the Armenians,
Georgians, Syrians, Egyptians, or Ethiopian Churches, be in as bad and
dangerous a case as these Usurping Censurers tell the world they are, what then
will become of the tyrannous, superstitious, polluted, blood-thirsty Church of
Rome?

What is it but Self-ignorance that perverteth the unsettled among us, and sends
them over to the Roman tents? No man could rationally become a Papist, if he
knew himself. Let me prove this to you in these four Instances.

1. If he had but the knowledge of his Natural senses, he could not take them
to be all deceived (and the senses of all other as well as his) about their
proper object; and believe the Priests that Bread is no Bread, or Wine no Wine,
when all men's senses testify the contrary.

2. Some of them turn Papists because they see some differences among other
Christians, and hear them call one another by names of contumely and reproach*
and therefore they think that such can (...) no true Churches of Christ: But if
th^^ knew themselves, they would be acquainted with more culpable errors in
themselves, then those for which many others are reproached; and see how
irrational a thing it is to change their Religion upon the scolding words or
slanders of another; or which is worse, upon their own uncharitable censures.

3. Some turn to the Papists as apprehending their Ceremonious kind of
Religion, to be an easier way to Heaven then ours: But if they knew themselves,
they would know that it is a more solid and spiritual sort of food that their
nature does require, and a more searching Physic that must cure their
diseases; and that shells and chaff will not feed, but choke and starve their
souls.

4. All that turn Papists must believe, that they were unjustified and out of
the Catholic Church before, and consequently void of ^he Love of God, and
special grace: For they receive it as one of the Romish Articles, that out of
their Church there is no salva^ion. But if these persons were indeed before
ungodly, if they knew themselves, they would find that there is a greater
matter ^ecessary, then believing in the Pope, and ^urning to that faction; even
to turn to God by faith in Christ, without which no opinions or profession can
save them. But if they had the Love of God before, then they were Justified and
in the Church before; and therefore Protestants are of the true Church, and it
is not confined to the Roman subjects. So that if they knew this, they could
not turn Papists without a palpable contradiction.

The Papists fugitives tell us, we are us true Ministers, nor our Ministry
effectual and blessed of God. What need we more then imitate Paul, when his
Ministry was accused, and call them to the Knowledge of themselves [Examine
your selves, whether ye be in the faith? Prove your selves: Know ye not your
own selves: how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates?] If they
were ungodly and void of the Love of God, while they were under our Ministry,
no wonder if they turn Papists: For its just with God that those that receive
(...) the Love of the truth that they may be saved, be given over to strong
delusions to believe a lie,] 2 These. 2.10, 11. But if they received themselves
the Love of God in our Churches by our Ministry, they sha^^ be our witnesses
against themselves.

And it is others as well as Papists th^^ would be kept from Church divisions,
if they did but know themselves. Church Governors would be afraid of laying
things unnecessary as stumbling blocks before the weak and of laying the Unity
and Peace of the Church upon them; and casting out of the Vineyard of the Lord,
and out of their Communion all such as are not in such unnecessary or little
things, of their opinion or way. The words of the great Apostle of the
Gentiles, Romans 14.15. so plainly and fully deciding this matter, would not have
stood so long in the Bible, as non-dicta or utterly insignificant, in the eyes
of so many Rulers of the Churches, if they had known themselves, as having need
of their Brethrens charity and forbearance. [ Him that is weak in the faith
receive you; but not to doubtful disputations: For one believes that he may
eat all things; another that is weak eats herbs: Let not him that eats
despise him that eats not, (much less destroy him or excommunicate him) and
let not him which eats not, judge him that eats: For God has received him.
Who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his own Master he stands
or falls; yea he shall be holden up; for God is able to make him stand. One
man esteems one day above another; another esteems every day alike: let
every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. -- ver. 13. [ Let us not
therefore judge one another any more: but judge this rather that no man put a
stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his brothers way. -- ver. 17. For
the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness and peace and joy
in the Holy Ghost. 18. For he that in these things serves Christ, is
acceptable to God and approved of men.] Chap. 15.1. [ We then that are strong
ought to bear with the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves]
v. 7. [ Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the
glory of God.] Self-acquaintance would help men to understand these precepts;
and be patient with the weak when we our selves have so much weakness; and not
to vex or reject our brethren for little or unnecessary things, lest Christ
reject or grieve us that have greater faults.

Self-acquaintance also would do much to heal the dividing humor of the
people: and instead of separating from all that are not of their mind, they
would think themselves more unworthy of the Communion of the Church, then the
Church of theirs.

Self-acquaintance makes men tender and compassionate, and cures a censorious
contemptuous mind. It also silenceth passionate contentious disputes, and makes
men suspicious of their own understandings, and therefore forbids them
intemperately to condemn dissenters. It also teaches men to submit to the
faithful directions and Conduct of their Pastors; and not to vilify, forsake
and disobey them, as if they were above them in understanding, and fitter to be
Guides themselves; so that in all these respects, it is Ignorance of themselves
that makes men troublers of the Church, and the Knowledge of themselves would
much remedy it.

14. And it is Ignorance of themselves also that makes men troublers of the
State. A man that does not know himself, is unfit for all society; If he be a
Ruler he will forget the Common-good, and instead of Clemency and Justice will
violently exercise an impe^ious Will. If he be a subject, he will be Censuring
the actions of his Rulers, when distance and disacquaintance makes him an
^ncompetent Judge. He will think himself ^itter to Rule then they, and whatever
they ^o, he imagines that he could do it better. And hence come suspicions,
and murmurrings against them, and Corah's censures, [ Ye take too much upon
you: Are not all the people holy?] Were men acquainted with themselves, their
weaknesses, their concernments and their duties, they would rather enquire
whether they obey well, then whether their Superiors Rule well; and would
think the lowest place to be most suitable to them; and would quiet themselves
in the discharge of their own duty, making supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and thanksgiving for all men; for Kings, and for all that are in
authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty; for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.] 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3. It would quiet all the seditions, and tumults of the world, if
men were well acquainted with themselves.

I confess, seditions seem to rise from a too great knowledge and regard of our
selves, and of our own commodity. Aliquid commune tuum facere, est seditionis
and discordiae principium; To appropriate common benefits to our selves, is the
spring of discord and sedition. But here as in other things self-seeking comes
from self-ignorance, and tends to self-deceit and disap^ointment. The End of
contendings answer ^ot the promises, that selfishness and passion ^ake men in
the beginnings.

Si aeterna semper odia mortales agant
Ne caeptus unquam cedat exanimis furor.
^ed arma faelix teneat, infaelix pereat.
Nihil relinquent bella --
Seneca. And then, -- En quo discordia cives
Perduxit miseros, en queis consevimus agros.


15. Self-acquaintance would end abundance of Controversies, and very much help
^en to discern the truth. In the Controversy of Freewill or humane power; to
know our selves as we are Men, would be to know that we have the Natural Power
and Freedom consisting in the self-determining faculty and principle. To know
our selves as sinful, would certify us how much we want of the Moral Power
which consists in Right inclinations, and the Moral Liberty from vicious
dispositions and habits. Would time permit, I might show it in the instances of
Original Corruption, of the Nature of Grace, of Merit, of the Cause of sin, and
many other controversies, how much error is promoted by the Ignorance of our
selves.

16. Self-acquaintance makes men both Just and Merciful. One cannot be so
much as a Good Neighbor without it; not yet a faithful friend. It will teach
you to put up injuries, and to forgive; as remembering that you are like to be
injurious to others, and certainly are daily so to God; and that it is no great
fault that's done against such poor unworthy persons as our selves (if it had no
higher a respect then as to us.) It is such only that [ with all lowliness, and
meekness, and long-suffering forbear one another in love] Ephesians. 4.2. and [
Recompense to no man evil for evil] Romans 12.17. and [be not overcome of evil,
but overcome evil with good] ver. 21. He that is drawn to passion and revenge,
is overcome, when he seems to overcome by that Revenge. It teaches us to
forgive, to know that much is forgiven us by Christ, or at least, what need we
have of such forgiveness. Ephesians. 4.31, 32. [ Let all bitterness and wrath and
anger and clamor and evil speaking be put away from you with all malice: And be
ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for
Christ's sake, has forgiven you.] O that this lesson were well learnt.

17. Self-acquaintance will teach us the right estimate of all our Mercyes:
When we ^^ow how unworthy we are of the least; ^^d what it is we principally
need; it will ^^ach us Thanskfulness for all; and teach (...) which of our
mercies to prefer. Men ^^ow not themselves, and their own ne^^ssities; and
therefore they slight their ^^iefest mercies, accounting them burdens; ^^d are
unthankful for the rest.

18. Self-acquaintance is necessary to the (...) Peace and Comfort of the soul.
Securi^^ and stupidity may quiet the ungodly for a ^hile, and Self-flattery may
deceive ^^e Hypocrite into a dream of Heaven. ^ut he that will have a durable
Joy, ^ust find some matter of Joy within ^im, as the effects and evidence of
the Love of ^od, and the prognostics of his endless love: ^o know what Christ
has suffered, and ^one, and merited, and promised, is to ^now the General and
principal ground of ^ur Rejoicing; But something is wanting to ^ake it Peace
and Joy to us, till we find the ^ruits of his Spirit within us, without which
^o man can be his, Romans 8.9. Gal. 5.16, ^7, 22, 24, 25. [ If a man think
himself (...) be something when he is nothing, he de^eiveth himself; But let
every man prove ^is own work, and then shall he have rejoicing (...) himself
alone, and not in another.]

Gal. 6, 3, 4. The seal and witness and beginnings of Life, must be within you,
if you will know that you are the Heirs of Life*

19. Self-ignorance causes men (...) misinterpret and repine at the providence
o^ God, and to be froward under his mo^^ righteous judgments: Because men know
not what they have deserved, or what they are, and what is good for them;
therefore they know not the reason and intent of providence: and therefore they
quarrel with their Maker, and murmur as if he did them wrong. When self
acquintance would teach them to justify God in all his dealings, and resolve
the blame of all into themselves. The Nature of man does tea^^ all the world,
when any hurt is do^^ to Societyes or persons, to enquire by whose Will as well
as by whose hands, it was perpetrated; and to resolve (...) the Crimes that are
committed in the world unto the Will of man, and there to leave the guilt and
blame, and not to excuse the Malefactors upon any pretense of the concurse, or
predetermination of the first o^ any superior cause: And to justify the Judge
and executioner that takes away men's lives, or their estates; as long (...)
themselves are proved to deserve it. And ^^rely the Knowledge of the Nature and
^ravity of man, should teach us to ^^ale as equally with God, and finally
^^solve all guilt and blame into the Free and Vitiated Will of man. Humbling
self-^^owledge makes us say with Job. chapter 40.4. Behold, I am vile, what Shall
I answer ^^ee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth:] and when God is glorifying
himself on ^ur relations or our selves by his judge^ents, it teaches us with
Araon to hold ^ur Peace, Lev. 10.3. and to say with ^^li, [It is the Lord; let
him do what ^^emeth him good] 1 Samuel 3.18. And ^ith David, 2. Sam. 15.25. [ If
I shall ^^nd favor in the eyes of the Lord he will ^ring me again, and show
me it, and his ^abitation: But if he thus say, I have no ^elight in thee;
behold here am I, let him ^o to me as seems good to him.] And as ^he
afflicted Church Mic. 7.9. [ I will ^eare the indignation of the Lord, because
I ^ave sinned against him.] Even a Pharaoh when affliction has taught him a
little to know himself will say [ The Lord is Righ^eous, and I and my people
are wicked] Exodus 9.27. when Rehoboam and his Princes are humbled, they say
[The Lord is Righteous] 2. Chron. 12.6. see Ezr. 9.15.

20. Lastly, it is for want of the Kno^^ledge of ourselves, that precious Time
(...) so much lost, and hastening Death no (...) prepared for. Did we carry
still about us the sensible Knowledge of our Necessity, our Mortality and the
unconceiva^^^ change that is made by Death, we should then live as men that are
continually waiting for the coming of their Lord; and as if we still beheld our
graves. For we carry about us, that sin and frailty, such corruptible flesh,
as may tell us of Death as plainly as a Grave or Skeleton. So great so
unspeakably necessary a work as the serious diligent preparation for our end,
could not be so sottishly neglected by the ungodly, did they thoroughly and
feelingly know what it is to be a Mortal man, and what to have an immortal
soul, what it is to be a sinner, and what to pass into an endless life of Joy
or Misery.

And thus I have showed you some of the fruits, both of the Knowledge and
Ignorance of our selves: even in our Natural and Moral and Political
capacityes; (though it be the second that is directly intended in the Text,)
which may help you in the Application.

Use.
ANd now I may suppose that the best of you all, the most Honorable, the ^ost
Learned, the most Religious (of them (...) dare affirm it) will acknowlidge,
that I want not sufficient Reason to urge you, with the Question in my Text [
Know ye ^ot your own selves?] Judge by the forementioned effects, whether
self-acquaint^nce, even in the most weighty and ne^estary respects, be common
among pro^essed Christians. Does he duly know himself as he is a man, that
doubts of a Deity whose Image is his very essence, (...) though not the
Moral Image that must ^e produced by renewing Grace)? Or he that doubts of a
particular Providence, ^f which he has daily and hourly expe^ience? Or he that
doubts of the Immor^ality of his soul, or of the Life to come, which is the
end of his Creation and en^owments, and is legibly engraven on the Nature and
faculties of his soul? Do they Morally know themselves, that make a ^est of
sin; and make it their delight? that ^ear it as the lightest burden, and are
not so much humbled by all the distempers an^ miseryes of their souls, as they
would (...) by a leprosy, an imprisonment or disgra^^ that have as cold
unthankful thoughts of Christ and of his grace and benefits as (...) sick
stomach of a feast? That complemen^ with him at the door; but will not be
persuaded to let him in; unless he will come upon their terms, and will dwe^^
with their unmortifyed sin, and be a servant to their flesh, and leave them
their worldly prosperity and delights, and sa^ them for these complements and
leaving of the flesh, when sin and the world (...) cast them off?

Do those men truly know themselves that think they need not the Spirit of
Christ for Regeneration, conversion and sanctification, nor need not a diligent
Holy life, nor to be half so careful and serious for their salvation, as they
are for a shadow of hap^piness in the world? That would without entreaty bestir
themselves, if their hou^^ were on fire, or they were drowning (...) the water,
or were assaulted by a thi^^ or enemy; and yet think he is too troublesome and
Precise that entreats them (...) bestir themselves for Heaven, and (...) quit
themselves like men for their Salva^^^on, and to look about them and spare no
pains, for the escaping everlasting misery; when this is the time; the only
time, when all this must be done, or they are utterly undone for ever.

Do they know themselves, and what they want, and what indeed would do them
good, that itch after sensual beastiall delights, and glut their flesh, and
please their appetites and lusts, and wast their time in needless Sports and
long for honor and greatness in the world, and study for preferment more then
for Salvation, and think they can never stand too high nor have too much; As if
it were so desirable to fall from the highest pinnacle, or to dye forsaken by
that, for which they ^orsook the Lord.

Do our feathred, powdered, gaudy gal^ants, or our frizled, spotted, wanton
dames, ^nderstand what it is that they are so proud ^f, or do so carefully trim
up and a^orn? Do they know what flesh is, as ^hey would do, if they saw the
comlyest ^f their companions, when he has layn (...) month or twelvemonth in
the grave; Do ^hey know what sin is, as a sight of Hell ^ould make them know,
or the true Be^^efe of such a state? If they did, they would think that another
garb, does better beseem such miserable sinners; and that persons in their case
have something else to mind and do, then toyishly to spruce up themselves, like
handsome pictures for men to look upon; and something else to spend their hours
in, then dalliance and complements and unnecessary ornaments; and that the
amiable and honorable beauty, and comeliness, and worth consists in the Holy
Image of God, the wisdom and Heavenly endowments of the soul, and in a
Heavenly, charitable, righteous conversation, and good works; and not in a
curious dress or gaudy attire, which a fool may wear as well as a wise man,
and a carcass as well as a living man, and a Dives that must lie in Hell, when
a Lazarus may lie in sores and rags.

Do they know themselves, that fear no snares, but choose the life of greatest
temptations and danger to their souls; because it is highest or has most
provision for the flesh? and that think they can keep in their candle in the
greate^^ storms, and in any company maintain their innocence? And yet cannot
understand so much of the will of God* nor of their own Interest and necessity
and danger, as to resist a temptation when it comes, though it offer them but
the most inconsiderable trifle, or the most sordid and unmanly lust.

Do they know themselves, that are prying into unrevealed things, and will be
wise, in matters of Theology above what is written? that dare set their shallow
brains, and dark unfurnished understandings, against the infallible word of
God; and question the truth of it, because it fuiteth not with their lame and
carnal apprehensions; or because they cannot reconcile what seems to them to
be contradiction: nor answer the objection of every bold and ignorant infidel:
In a word, when God must not be God unless he please them, nor his word be true
unless it be all within the reach of them, that never employed the time and
study to understand it, as they do to understand the Books that teach them
Languages, Arts, and Sciences, and treat of lower things. And when Scripture
truth must be called in question, as often as an ignorant eye shall read it, or
an unlearned graceless person misunderstand it: when Offenders that should
bewail and reform their own transgressions of the Law shall turn their
accusations against the Law and call it too precise or strict, and believe and
practice no more then stands with their obedience to the Law of sin, and will
quarrel with God, when they should humbly learn, and carefully obey him: and
despise a life of holy obedience in stead of practicing it; and in effect
behave themselves as if they were fitter to Rule themselves and the world, then
God is; and as if it were not God but they, that should give the Law and be the
Judge; and God were the Subject, and man were God. Do you think that sinful
creeping worms, that stand so near the Grave and Hell do know themselves, when
they think or speak or live at such rates, and according to such unreasonable
arrogancy? Do they know themselves, that reproach their brethren for humane
frailties, and difference of opinion in modes and circumstances, and errors
smaller then their own? And that by calling all men Heretics, Sectaries, or
Shismaticks that differ from them, do tempt men to turn Infidells or Papists,
and to take us all for such as we account each other? And that instead of
Receiving the weak in faith whom God receives, will rather cast out the
faithfullest Laborers, and cut off Christ's living members from his Church, then
forbear the imposing of unnecessary things? I dare say, were it not for
unacquaintedness with our brethren and our selves, we should put those in our
bosoms as the beloved of the Lord, that now we load with censures and titles
of reproach: and the restoring of our charity would be the restoring of our
Unity. If blind men would make Laws for the banishment of all that cannot read
the smallest characters, you would say, they had forgot themselves. Nay when
men turn Papists or Separatists and fly from our Churches, to shun those that
perhaps are better then themselves, and to get far enough from the smaller
faults of others, while they carry with them far greater of their own: when
people are apter to accuse the Church then themselves, and say the Church is
unworthy of their Communion rather then that they are unworthy the communion of
the the Church, and think no room in the house of God is clean and good enough
for them, while they overlook their own uncleanness; when men endure an
hundred Calumnies to be spoken of their brethren, better then a plain
reprehension to themselves; as if their persons only would render their actions
justifyable, and the reprover culpable; Judge whether these men are well
acquainted with themselves.

What should we go further in the search; when in all ages and countries of the
world the Unmercifullness of the Rich, the Murmuring of the poor, the hard
usage by Superiors, the disobedience of inferiors, the commotions of the state,
the wars and rebellions that disquiet the world, the cruelty covered with
pretenses of Religion, the unthankfullness for Mercyes, the murmuring under
afflictions, too openly declare that most men have little knowledge of
themselves, To conclude, when we see that none are more self-accusing and
complaining then the most sincere, and none more self-justifying and confident
then the ungodly careless souls, that none walk more heavily then many of the
heirs of life, and none are merrier then many that must lie in Hell for ever:
that all that a Minister can say, will not convince many upright ones of their
integrity, nor any skill or industry or interest suffice to convince most
wicked men that they are wicked; nor if our lives lay on it, we cannot make
them see the necessity of Conversion, nor know their misery till feeling tell
them it is now too late: when so many walk sadly and lamentingly to Heaven;
and so many go fearlesly and Presumptuously to Hell, and will not believe it
till they are there; by all this judge, what work self-ignorance makes in the
world.

(...) is many a man's Motto, that is a stranger to himself. As the house may be
dark within that has the sign of the sun hanging at the door. Multi
humilitatis umbram, pauci veritatem sectantur, says Hieron. A blind man may
commend the sun, and dispute of Light. A man may discourse of a country that he
knows not. Its easy to say, Men should know themselves and out of the Book or
brain to speak of the matters of the Heart: But indeed to know ourselves as
men, as sinners, as Christians, is a Work of greater difficulty, and such as
few are well acquainted with: Shall I go a little further in the discovery of
it?

1. Whence is it that most are so unhumbled; so great and good in their own
esteem; so strange to true contrition and self-abhorrence; but that they are
voluntary strangers to themselves? To loath themselves for sin, to be little in
their own eyes, to come to Christ as little children, is the case of all that
know themselves aright, Ezekiel. 20.43. and 6.9. Math. 18.3, 4. 1. Sam. 15.17. And
Christ made himself of no reputation, but took upon him the form of a servant,
and set us pattern of the most wonderful humiliation that ever was performed,
to convince us of the necessity of it, that have sin to humble us, when he had
none. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, 9. Learn of me; for I am meek and lowly, Matthew 11.28.
And one would think, it were a lesson easily learnt by such as we that carry
about us within and without, so much sensible matter of humiliation. Says
Augustine de Verb. Dei. [Discite a me, non mundum fabricare, non cuncta
visibilia and invisibilia creare, non miracula facere, et mortuos suscitare,
sed quoniam mitis sum, and humilis corde] Had Christ bid us learn of him to
make a world, to raise the dead, and work miracles, the lesson had been
strange: but to be Meek and lowly is so suitable to our low condition, that if
we knew ourselves we could not be otherwise.

To be holy without Humility, is to be a man without the essentialls of Nature,
or ^o build without a Foundation [Quisine hu^ilitate Virtutes congregat, quasi
in ventum ^^iverem portat] says Greg. in Psalm. 3. ^oenit: It is but carrying
dust into the wind, to ^ink to gather commendable qualities without ^umility.
It is the contrite heart that is the ha^^tation and delight of God on earth;
the ^cceptable sacrifice; Isa. 57.15. and 66.2. Psalm. ^1.17. Tanto quis vilior
Deo, quanto pre^osior sibi: Tanto preciosior Deo, quanto ^^opter eum vilior est
sibi] says Greg. Mor. (...) that humbles himself shall be exalted, and (...)
that exalts himself shall be brought (...). We must not overvalue our selves,
(...) we would have God esteem us, we must be (...) and loathed either in his
eyes or our (...). [Solet esse specificum electorum, says ^reg. Mor. quod de
se semper sentiunt infra ^am sunt, It is specificall to the Elect to ^ink
meanlyer of themselves then they are* ^^cta facere, and inutiles se reputare,
as Ber^^rd speaks. But I urge you not to err in ^ur humility, nor humilitatis
causa men^i, as August. It were low enough, if we ^ere as low, in our own
esteem, as we are deed: which self-acquaintance must pro^^re. Quanto quis minus
se videt, tanto ^nus sibi displicet; says Greg. Et quanto ^^joris gratiae
lumen percipit, tanto magis reprehensiblem se esse cognoscit] He is lea^^
displeased with himself, that least knows himself: and he that has the
greatest ligh^ of grace, perceives most in himself to be reprehended.
Illumination is the first part of Conversion, and of the new creature: An^
self-discovery is not the least part of Ilumination. There can be no Salvation
without it, because no humiliation* says Bernard in Canti^* [scio neminem
absque sui cognitione salvari, ^ qua nimirum matter salutis humilitas orit^, and
timor Domini.]

But how rare this is, let experience determine: To have a poor habitation, ^
poor attire, and perhaps of choice (though that is not usual) is much more
comm^^ then a humble soul, [sed tumet animus, (...) squallore habitus, ut
Hier.] and multo (...) deformior est superbia, quae latet sub (...) busdam
signis humilitatis, inquit Idem, It (...) the most ill favored Pride, that
stea^^ some rags of humility to hide its sham^ And says Hierom truly [ Plus
est ani^^ de posuisse quam cultum: difficilius arrog^^tia quam auro caremus,
autgemmis, Its easy^^ to change our clothing then our mind, (...) to put off a
gaudy habit then our self fl^^tering tumifyed hearts. Many a one (...) live
quietly without gold rings and jewel^ ^r sumptuous houses and attendance, that
cannot live quietly without the esteem and ^pplause of men, nor endure to be
accounted ^s indeed he is. Says Ambrose, Qui pauper^ate contentus est, non est
contentus injuria. -- Et qui potest administrationes contem^ere, dolet sibi
aliquem honorificentia esse prae^^tum.]

O therefore as you would escape Divine ^ontempt and the most desperate
precipitati^n, know your selves. For that which cast ^ngells out of Heaven,
will keep you out, if (...) prevail. As Hugo acutely says, Superbia in ^^aelo
nata est, sed immemor qua via inde ^ecidit, illuc postea redire non potuit]
Pride ^as bred in Heaven (no otherwise then as ^eath, in Life,) but can never
hit the way ^hither again, from whence it fell. Open ^he windows of our breast
to the Gospell-^^ght, to the Laws conviction, to the ^^ght of reason, and then
be unhumbled if ^ou can. [ Quare enim superbit cinis and tre^a? says Origin:
oblitus quid erit, and quam ^agili vasculo contineatur, and quibus ster^ribus
immersus sit, and qualia semper pur^^menta de sua carne projiciat] Nature is
(...), but sin and wrath are the matter ^f our great humiliation, that have
made (...) miserably lower.

2. The abounding of Hypocrisy shows how little men are acquainted with
themselves. I speak not here of that gross Hypocrisy which is always known
to him that has it, but of that close Hypocrisy, which is A professing to be
what we are not, or to believe what we believe not, or to have what we have
not, or to do what we do not. What Article of the faith do not most among us
confidently profess? What Petition of the Lords prayer will they not put up?
Which of the Commandments will they not profess their obedience to? While the
stream of their conversation testifies, that in their hearts there is none of
the Belief, the Desire, or the Obedience in sincerity which they profess* Did
they know themselves, they would be ashamed of the vanity of their profession,
and of the miserable want of the things professed; and that God who is so nigh
their mouths is so far from their hearts. If you heard an illiterate man
profess, that he understands all the Languages and Sciences, or a beggar
boasting of his wealth, or a parrot taught to say that he is a Man; would you
take any of these to be the words of one that knows himself? Quid est vita
Hypocrita (inquit Gregor.) ^isi quaedam visio phantasmatis, quae hic ^stendit
in imagine, quod non habet in veri^ate? Sure they are in the dark that spend
their days in dreaming visions: But they have their eyes so much on the
beholders, that ^hey have no leisure to peruse themselves: They are so careful
to be esteemed good, that they are careless of being what they seem. Quo magis
exterius hominibus place^nt, eo se interius aspicere neg^^^unt, to^osque se in
verbis prximorum (...), and ^anctos se esse astimant, quia (...) haberi (...)
hominibus pensant, ut Gregor. Mor.

Especially if they practice not the vitio^^ ^nclinations of their hearts, they
think ^hey have not the vice they practice (...) and that the Root is dead
because it is winter^ when it is the absence of temptations and ^ccasions, and
not of vicious habits, o^ ^nclinations, that smooths their lives with seeming
innocence, and keeps their sins from breaking forth to their own ^r others
observation. Multorum, quae im^ecillia sunt, latent vitia, says Seneca;
in^^rumenta illis explicandae nequitiae desunt. ^ic tuto serpens pestifer
tractatur, dum riget ^rigore; non desunt tamen illi venena, sed ^^rpent: ita
multorum crudelitas, luxuria and ambitio] The feeble vices of many (...) there
are wanting instruments of drawing forth their wickedness. So a poisonous
serpen^ may be safely handled, while he is (...) with cold, and yet it is not
because he has no venom, but because its stupifyed: so (...) it with the
cruelty, luxury and ambiti^^ of many.] The knowledge of your selves is the
bringing in of light into your soul^, which will awaken you from the hypocrites
(...), and make such appariti^^ ^^nish. Come near this fire, and the pain of
hypocrisy will melt away*

3. The common impatience of plain reproof, and the love of flattery, shows us
ho^ much self-ignorance does abound. Mo^^ men love those that have the highest
estim^^tion of them, be it true or false. They (...) seldom offended with any
for overvaluing them. They desire not much to be accounted Well when they are
Sick, nor Rich when they are Poor, but to be accounted wise though they are
foolish, and godly whe^^ they are ungodly, and honest and faithful when they
are deceitful and corrupt, this is a cou^tesie that you must not deny them*
they take it for their due: They Will never (...) you Heretics for such Errors as
these* And why is it, but because they err them^^lves, about themselves, and
therefore ^ould have others do so too.

Nimis perverse seipsum amat, qui and ^lios vult errare, ut error suus lateat:
^ith August. He too perversely loves him^^lf, that would have others err to
hide his ^^ror. A wise man loves himself so well, that he would not be
flattered into Hell, ^or die as Sisera or Sampson, by good ^ords, as the
harbingers of his woe. He ^^veth his Health so well, that he thinks ^ot the
sweetness or color of the fruit, motive sufficient to encourage him to a
^^rfeit. He loves ingenuous Penitence so ^ell, that he cannot love the
flatterers voice, that contradicts it. Faithful reprovers ^re the messengers
of Christ, that call us to ^epentance, that is, to Life: Unfaithful ^^atterers
are the messengers of the Devil, ^o keep us from Repentance, and harden us
(...) impenitency, unto Death: If we know ^ur selves, we shall know that when
we ^re over-loved and over-praised as being ^ore learned, wise, or holy then we
are, it (...) not we that are loved and praised; for ^e are not such as that
Love or praise ^pposeth us to be. Says August. [Vos ^^ui me multum diligitis,
si talem me asseri^^, ut nunquam me in scriptis meis errasse dicatis, frustra
laboratis; non bonam (...) sam suscepistis: facile in eo, me ipso jud^^
superamini. Quoniam non mihi placet, (...) a charissimis talis esse existimor,
qualis (...) sum. Profecto non me, sed pro me ali^^ sub meo nomine diligunt; si
non quod sum, (...) quod non sum diligunt.] It pleased him (...) to be
accounted unerring in his writing^ and to be taken by his friends to be (...)
he was not; which is not to love him, (...) another under his name. He that
knowe^^ himself, perceives how much of the Commendation is his due, and how
much he (...) lay just claim to: and knows it is a dishonor to own the
honor that is not his (...) He loves not to be belyed by a praiser, a^^ more
then by a dispraiser; lest Truth a^^ He be both abused. Vices, like Worms, a^^
bred and crawl in the inward parts, (...) seen, unfelt of him, that carries
them abo^^ him: And therefore by the sweet meats (...) flattery and sensuality
they are ignorant^^ fed: But its bitter medicines that (...) kill them: which
those only will endure that know they have them, and what they are.
[Lenocinantur dulcia delictis: a^st^^^ vero and fortia virtutibus sunt amica.]
(...) speak bitterly, says the impatient sinner (...) the plain reprover, but
such are sweet (...) excellent men that meddle not with the sore. But its bitter
things that are wholesome to your souls; that befriend your virtues; and kill the
worms of your corruption, which sweet things cherish, says Hierom in Eccles.
[Si cujus sermo non pungit, sed ^blectationem facit audientibus, ille sermo
^^on est sapiens, Sermons not piercing, but ^leasing, are not wise. But, alas,
men fol^ow the Appetite of their vices, not only ^n choosing their meat, and
drink and ^ompany and recreations, but also in the ^hoice of the Church that
they will hold ^ommunion with, and the Preachers, that ^hey will hear: and they
will have the ^weet, and that which their corruption lov^th, come on it what
will. [ Libenter enim ^uod delectat, audimus, and offendit omne, quod ^^lumus,]
says Hierom: Nay, Pride has ^ot so great dominion that flattery goes ^r due
civility; and he is accounted Cy^ical or morose that uses it not. To call ^^en
as they are (even when we have a call (...) do it) or to tell them of their
faults ^ith necessary freedom, though with the ^reatest love and caution and
deprecation (...) offense, is a thing that most, especially ^reat ones, cannot
digest: A man is sup^osed to rail, that speaks without flattery; and to
reproach them that would save them from their sins. Says Hiero^ [Adeo regnat
vitium adulationis, quod^^ est gravissimum, quia humilitatis ac benevol^ntiae
loco ducitur, ita fit ut qui adula^^ nescit, aut invidus, aut superbus
reputet^^] that is, [ the vice of flattery now so reigns and which is worst,
goes under the name of humility and good will, that he that knows not how to
flatter, is reputed envious (...) proud.] Indeed some men have the wit to hate
a feigned Hypocritical flatterer, and also modestly to take on them to disown
the excessive commendations of a friend: But these mistaken friendly flatterers
do seldo^ displease men at the heart. [ Quanqu^^ respondeamus nos indignos, and
calidus (...) or a perfundat, tamen ad laudem suam ^^ma intrinsecus laetatur,
Hieron.] We (...) say we are unworthy, and modestly blush; be within, the heart
is glad at its own commendation.] Says Seneca [Cito nobis place^^^^, si
invenimus, qui nos bonos viros dica^^, qui prudentes, qui sanctos: Non suum
modica laudatione contenti; quicquid in (...) adulatio sine pudore congessit,
tanquam de^^tum prendimus: optimos nos esse and sanctissimos affirmantibus
assentimur, cum scia^^ saepe illos mentiri:] that is, [ We soon please our
selves to meet with those that call us good men, wise and holy: And we are not
content with a little praise: Whatever flattery heapeth on us without shame, we
lay hold on it as due; we assent to them that say we are the best and most
holy, when we often times know our selves that they lie.] All this is for want of
the true knowledge of themselves. When God has acquainted a sinner effectually
with himself, he quickly calls himself by other names, then flatterers do:
With Paul he says, [ We our selves were sometime foolish, disobedient, serving
diverse lusts and pleasures, Tit. 3.3.] And Act. 26.11. that he was mad against
the Saints in persecuting them. He then speaks so much against himself, that if
tender Ministers and experienced friends, did not think better of him then he
of himself, and persuade him to more confortable thoughts, he would be ready to
despair, and think himself unworthy to live upon the earth.

4. Judge also how well men know themselves, when you have observed, what
different apprehensions they have, of their own faults and of other men's: and
of those that are suitable to their dispositions, interests or examples, and
those that are against them. They seem to judge of the actions by the persons,
and not of the persons by the actions. Though he be himself a sensualist, a
worldling, drowned in Ambition and Pride, whose heart is turned away from God,
and utterly strange to the mystery of Regeneration and a heavenly life, yet
all this is scarce discerned by him, and is little troublesome, and less odious
then the failings of another, whose heart and life is devoted unto God. The
different opinions, or modes and circumstances of worship, in another that
truly fears God, is matter of their severer censures and reproach, then their
own omissions, and aversness and enmity to holiness, and the dominion of their
deadly sins. It seems to them more intolerable for another to pray without a
Book, then for themselves to pray without any serious belief, or love, or holy
desire, without any feeling of their sins, or misery or wants; that is, to pray
with the lips without a heart; to pray to God without God, even without the
knowledge or love of God, and to pray without prayers. It seemed to the
Hypocritical Pharisees, a greater crime in Christ and his Disciples, to violate
their Traditions, in not washing before they eat, to break the Ceremonious rest
of their Sabbath by healing the diseased, or plucking ears of corn, then in
themselves to hate and persecute the true believers and worshippers of God, and
to kill the Lord of life himself. They censured the Samaritans for not
worshipping at Jerusalem: but censured not themselves for not worshipping God,
that is a Spirit, in Spirit and in Truth. Which makes me remember the course of
their successors, the Ceremonious Papists; that condemn others for Heretics,
and fry them in the flames, for not believing that Bread is no Bread, and Wine
is no Wine, and that Bread is to be adored as God; and that the souls of dead
men know the hearts of all that pray to them in the world at once; and that the
Pope is the Vice-Christ, and Sovereign of all the Christians in the world; and
for reading the Scriptures and praying in a known tongue, when they forbid it;
and for not observing a world of Ceremonies; when all this enmity to Reason,
Piety, Charity, Humanity, all their Religious Tyranny, Hypocrisy, and Cruelty,
do seem but holy zeal and laudable in themselves. To lie, dissemble, forswear,
depose and murder Princes, is a smaller matter to them when the Pope dispenses
with it, and when it tends to the advantage of their faction, which they call
the Church, then to eat flesh on Friday or in Lent, to neglect the Mass, or
Images, or Crossing, etc.

And it makes me remember Bishop Halls Description of An Hypocrite [He turns
all gnats into Camells, and cares not to undo the world for a circumstance.
Flesh on Friday is more abominable to him, then his neighbors bed: He abhors
more not to uncover at the name of Jesus, then to swear by name of God, etc.]
It seems, that Prelates were guilty of this in Bernards days, who says, [
Praelati nostri calicem linquunt, and Camelum deglutiunt: dum majora
permittentes, minora discutiunt. Optimi rerum aestimatores, qui magnum in
minimis, and parvam aut nullam in maximis adhibent diligentiam.] i. e. [ Our
Prelates strain at a gnat, and swallow a Camel, while permitting greater
matters, they discuss (or sift) the less: Excellent estimators of things
indeed, that in the smallest matters employ great diligence; but in the
greatest, little or none at all.] And the cause of all this partiality is, that
Men are unacquainted with themselves. They love and cherish the same
corruptions in themselves, which they should hate and reprehend in others. And
says Hierom [Quomodo potest praeses Ecclesiae auferre malum de medio ejus, qui
in delictum simile corruerit? aut qua liberate corripere peccantem potest, cum
tacitus ipse sibi respondeat, eadem se admisisse quae corripit:] i. e. [ How
can a Prelat of the Church, reform the evil that is in it, that rusheth into
the like offense? Or with what freedom, can he rebuke a sinner, when his
conscience secretly tells him, that he has himself committed the same faults
which he reproves?]

Would men but first be acquainted with themselves, and pass an impartial
judgment on the affections and actions that are nearest them, and that most
concern them, they would be more competent, and more compassionate Judges of
their brethren, that are now so hardly used by them. Its excellent advice that
Austin gives us, Quum aliquem reprehendere nos necessitas coegerit, cogitemus,
utrum tale sit vitium, quod nunquam habuimus; and tunc cogitemus nos homines
esse, and habere potuisse, vel quod tale habuimus and jam non habemus; and tunc
memoria tangat communis fragilitatis, ut illam correctionem non odium sed
misericordia praecedat: Sin autem invenerimus nos in eodem vitio esse, non
objurgemus, sed ingemiscamus, and ad aequaliter deponendum invitemus.] i. e. [
When necessity constrains us to reprove any one, let us think whether it be
such a vice as we never had our selves: and then let us think that we are men*
and might have had it: Or if we once had such but have not now, then let the
remembrance of common frailty touch us, that compassion and not hatred may lead
the way to our reproof: But if we find that we have the same vice our selves,
let us not chide, but groan, and move (or desire) that we may both equally lay
it by.]

5. It shows how little men know themselves, when they must needs be the Rule
to all other men, as far as they are able to command it; and that in the
matters that men's salvation depends on, and in the smallest, tender,
disputable points; and even in those things where themselves are most unfit to
judge. In every controverted point of doctrine, (though such as others have
much better studied then themselves) he that has strength to suppress all
those that differ from him, must ordinarily be the umpire; so is it even in the
modes and circumstances of Worship. Perhaps Christ may have the honor to be
called the King of the Church, and the Scripture have the honor to be called
his Laws: but indeed it is they that would be the Lords themselves; and (...)
is their Wills and Words that must be the ^aws; and this under pretense of
sub^erving Christ, and interpreting his Laws; ^hen they have talked the utmost
for Coun^ils, Fathers, Church, Tradition, it is themselves that indeed must be
all these; ^or nothing but their own conceits and Wills must go for the sense
of Decrees, or Canons, Fathers or Tradition. Even they that hate the power and
serious practice of Religion, would fain be the Rule of Reli^ion to all others:
And they that never ^new what it was to worship God in Spirit and truth, with
delight and love and ^uitableness of soul, would needs be the Rule of Worship
to all others, even in ^he smallest Circumstances and Ceremonies. And they
would be the Governors of the Church, or the Determiners of its mode of
Government, that never would be ^rought under the Government of Christ
themselves. If it please them better to spend ^he Lords day in Plays or Sports,
or com^lement or idleness, then in learning the will of God in his word, or
worshipping ^im, and begging his mercy and salvation. and seriously preparing
for an endless life, they would have all others do the like. If their full
souls loathe the honey comb, and they are aweary of being instructed above a^
hour, or twice a day; they would have all others forced to their measure, that
they may seem as diligent as others, when others are compelled to be as
negligent as they. Like a queasie-stomackt Lady, that ca^ eat but one sllender
meal a day, and therefore would have all her servants and tenants eat no more,
or if they do, accuses them of excess. If the Emperor of Constantinople make a
Law, that no subject shall be suffered in his dominions, that will not be
conformable to him in time, and quality and measure, for meats and drink, and
sleep, and speech, and exercise; it would be an honorable misery, and uniform
calamity and ruin to his subjects. Alas, did men but know themselves, the
weakness of their understandings, the sinful byas that personal interest and
carnal inclinations have set upon their wills, they would be less arrogant and
more compassionate, and not think by making themselves as Gods, to reduce the
unavoidable diversities that will be found among mankind, (...) a Unity in
Conformity to their minds and wills, and that in the matters of God and of
^^lvation; where every man's conscience (...) is wise and faithful, will be
tenacious of (...) interest (of God and of his Soul) ^^ch he cannot sacrifice
to the will of any. (...) be so just as not to mistake and misre^^t me in all
this; as if I pleaded for li^^tinism or disorder, or spoke against ^^vernment
Civil or Ecclesiastical; when (...) only private Ambition, uncharitable^^^s,
and cruelty; and Papal usurpations (...) the Church and consciences of men,
(...) I am speaking of; which men, I am (...), will have other thoughts of,
when (...) has made them know themselves, then (...) have while passion
hinders them (...) knowing what spirit they are of: They (...) then see, that
the weak in faith should ^^ve been received; and that Catholic ^^ity is only
to be founded in the Uni^^rsal Head, and End, and Rule.

6. The dreadful change that's made upon (...) minds, when misery or
approaching death ^akes them, does show how little they (...) themselves
before. If they have ^^ken the true estimate of themselves in ^^eir prosperity,
how come they to be so ^^ch changed in adversity? Why do they ^^gin then to cry
out of their sins, and of (...) folly of their worldliness and sensuality; and
of the vanity of the hono^^ and pleasures of this life? Why do the then begin
to wish, with gripes of cons^^^ence, that they had better spent their pr^^cious
time, and minded more the matte^ of eternity, and taken the course as th^^ did
whom they once derided, as mak^ more ado then needs? Why do they the tremble
under the apprehensions of the unreadiness to die, and to appear before (...)
dreadful God, when formerly such though did little trouble them? Now there is
(...) such sense of their sin or danger upon their hearts. Who is it now that
ever he^^ such lamentations and self-accusations fr^^ them, as then its likely
will be heard? (...) same man that then will wish with Bal^^am, that he might
die the death of the rig^^teous, and that his latter end might be as (...) will
now despise and grieve the righteo^^* The same man that then will passionate
wish that he had spent his days in (...) preparations for his change, and lived
(...) strictly as the best about him, is now (...) much of another mind, that
he percei^^ no need of all this diligence; but thi^^ it is humorous or timorous
superstition, (...) at least that he may do well enough (...) out it. The same
man that will th^^ (...) [Mercy, Mercy, O Mercy Lord, to a ^^^arting soul,
that's laden with sin, and ^^mbleth under the fear of thy judgment,] (...) now
perhaps an enemy to serious earnest ^^ayer, and hates the families and persons
^^at most use it; or at least is prayerless, (...) cold and dull himself in his
desires, and (...) shut up all with a few careless custo^^ry words, and feel no
pinching necessity (...) awaken him, importunately to cry and ^^ve with God.
Does not all this show (...) men are befooled by prosperity, and (...)
acquainted with themselves, till danger or ^^^amity call them to the bar, and
force ^^em better to know themselves?

Your mutability proves your ignorance ^^d mistakes. If indeed your case be
now (...) good as your present confidence or se^^rity do import, lament it not
in your ^^versity: fear it not when Death is cal^^^g you to the bar of the
impartial Judge! (...) not out then of your ungodliness and ^^suality: of your
trifling hypocrisy, ^^ur slight contemptuous thoughts of ^od, and of your
casting away your Hopes (...) Heaven, by wilful negligence and de^^es! If you
are sure that you are now in ^^e right, and diligent serious believers in ^^e
wrong, then stand to it before the Lord: set a good face on your cause if it be
good Be not down in the mouth when it is tri^^ God will do you no wong: If your
(...) be good, he will surely justify you, (...) will not mar it: Wish not to
dye the dea^^ of the Righteous: say not to them, G^^^ us of your oil, for our
lamps are gone ou^* Mat. 25.8. If all their Care, and Love (...) Labor, in
seeking first the Kingdom of G^^ and its Righteousness, be a needless thing
wish not for it in your extremity, but (...) it needless then. If fervent
prayer may b^ spared now, while prayer may be heard, (...) a few lifeless words
that you have learn^ by rote may serve the turn, then call (...) on God when
answering is past, seek him not when he will not be found, Prove. 1^ 27, 28.
When your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction as a whirlwind^ when
distress and anguish come upon you.] Cry not [ Lord, Lord open unto us] when
the door is shut. Matthew. 25.10, 11. (...) them not [ foolish] then that slept,
b^^ them that watched, if Christ was mistaken* and you are in the right, Matthew.
25.2, and Prove. 1.22.

O Sirs, stand but at the bedside of one of these ungodly careless men, and
hea^ what he says of his former life, of his ap^roaching change, of a Holy or
a carnal ^ourse, whether a Heavenly or Worldly life (...) better, (unless God
have left him to that ^eplorate stupidity, which an hours time will put an end
to) Hearken then whether ^e think that God or the world, Heaven or ^arth, Soul
or body be more worthy of ^ans chiefest care and diligence; and then judge
whether such men did know themselves ^n their health and pride, when all this
talk would have been derided by them as too pre^ise, and such a life accounted
over-strict and ^eedless, as then they are approving and wish^ng they had
lived: When that Minister or ^riend should have once been taken for ^ensorious,
abusive, self-conceited and unsufferable, that would have talked of them ^n that
language as when Death approaches, they talk of themselves; or would have
spoke as plainly, and hardly of them, as they will then do of themselves. Does
^ot this mutability show how few men now have a true knowledge of themselves?

What is the Repentance of the living, and the Desperation of the damned, but a
declaration that the persons Repenting and Despairing, were unacquainted with
themselves before? Indeed the erroneous Despair of men while Grace is offered
them, comes from Ignorance of the Mercy of God, and willingness of Christ to
receive all that ar^ willing to return: But yet the sense of sin and misery,
that occasioneth this erroneous Despair, does show that men were before
erroneous in their presumption and self-esteem. Says Bernard in Cant. [Vtraq^^
Cognitio, Dei scilicet and tui, tibi necessari^ est ad salutem, quia sicut ex
notitia tui venit in te timor Dei, atque ex Dei notitia itidem amor; sic e
contra, de ignorantia (...) superbia, ac de Dei ignorantia venit desperatio]
that is, [ Both the knowledge of God and of thy self is necessary to salvation*
because as from the Knowledge of thy self, the Fear of God comes into thee,
and Love from the knowledge of God: so on the contrary from the Ignorance of
thy self comes pride, and from the Ignorance of God comes Desperation.] Quid
est sapientia (inquit Seneca?) Semper idem Velle, and idem Nolle^^ At non
potest idem semper placere nisi rectum] Wisdom appears in always Willing*
and always Nilling the same thing: but its only Right and Good that can
always please.

Poor men that must confess their sin and misery at last, would show a more
seasonable acquaintance with themselves, if they would do it now, and say with
the Prodigal, [ I will go to my Father and say to him, Father I have sinned
against Heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.] In
time this Knowledge, and confession may be saving. Even a Seneca could say,
without the Scripture [ Initium est salutis, notitia peccati; Nam qui peccare
se nescit, corrigi non vult. Ideo quantum potes, teipsum argue. Inquire in te:
accusatoris primu^ partibus fungere; deinde judicis; novissime deprecatoris.]
i. e. [ The knowledge of sin, is the beginning of recovery (or health:) For he
that knows not that he sins, will not be corrected. Reprehend thy self
therefore as much as thou can. Inquire into thy self: First play the part of
an Accuser, then of a Judge: and lastly of one that asks pardon.]

It is not because men are Innocent or Safe, that we now hear so little
confession or complaint: but because they are sinful and miserable in so great
a measure, as not to Know or Feel it: [ Quare vitia ^ua nemo confitetur (inquit
Seneca?) Quia ^tiam nunc in illis est. Somnium narra^e, vigilantis est; and
vitia sua confiteri, ^anitatis judicium est.] i. e. [ Why does no ^an confess
his vices? Because he is yet in them. To tell his dreams is the part of a ^an
that is awake: and to confess his faults, is a sign of health.] If you call a
Poor man Rich, or a deformed person beautiful, or a vile ungodly person
virtuous, or an ignorant Barbarian learned, will not the hearers think, you do
not know them? And how should they think better of your knowledge of your
selves, if any of you that are yet in the flesh, will say you are spiritual?
and those that hate the Holiness, and Justice, and Government of God, will say
they love him? or those that are in a state of Enmity to God, and are as near
to Hell, as the Execution is to the Sentence of the Law, will persuade
themselves and others, that they are the Members of Christ, the children of
God, and the heirs of Heaven? and take it ill of any that would question it,
though only to persuade them to make it sure, and to take heed what they trust
to, when endless Joy or Misery must be the issue?

7. Does it not manifest how little men know themselves, when in every
suffering that befalls them, they overlook the Cause of all within them, and
fall upon others, or quarrel with every thing that stands in their way. Their
contempt of God does cast them into some affliction, and they quarrel with the
Instruments, and meddle not with the mortal cause at home. Their sin finds them
out, and testifies against them; and they are angry with the ^od, and repine
at Providence, as if God himself were more to be suspected of the Cause then
they. Yea, it is become with many a serious doubt, Whether God does not
Necessitate them to sin; and, Whether they omit not duty merely because he will
not give them power to perform it; and, Whether their sin be any other then a
Relation unavoidably resulting from a Foundation laid by the hand of God
himself. Do men know themselves, that will sooner suspect and blame the most
Righteous, Holy God, then their own unrighteous carnal hearts? Man drinks up
iniquity like water; but there is no unrighteousnes with God. Says Innocent,
[Conceptus est homo in foetore luxuria, quodque deterius est, in labe peccati;
natus ad laborem, timorem, dolorem, etc. Agit prava, quibus offendit Deum;
offendit proximum; offendit seipsum; agit turpia, quibus polluit famam, polluit
personam, polluit conscientiam: Agit vana, quibus negligit sana; negligit
utilia; negligit necessaria.] Man is conceived in the filth or stink of luxury
(or lust,) and which is worse, in the stain of sin: born to labor, fear, and
pain, etc. He does that which is evil, to the offense of God; his neighbor and
himself: He does that which is filthy, to the polluting of his fame, his person
and his Conscience: He does that which is vain, neglecting what is sound and
profitable, and necessary.] And is not such a frail and sinful wight, more
likely to be the cause of sin then God? and to be culpable in all the ill that
does befall us?

And it shows that men little know themselves, when all their complaints are
poured out more fluently on others then themselves. Like sick stomachs that
find fault with every dish, when the fault is within them: Or like pained,
weak, or froward children; that quarrel with every thing that touches them,
when the cause is in themselves. If they want Peace, Content or Rest, they lay
the blame on this place or that, this or that person, or estate: They think if
they had their mind in this or that, they should be well: And therefore they
are still contriving for somewhat, whch they want; and studying changes or
longing after this or that; which they imagine would work the Cure: When, alas
poor souls, the (...), the sickness, the want is in themselves. It is a wiser
mind, a better, more holy, heavenly Will, that's wanting to them; without which
nothing in the world will solidly content and comfort them. Seneca can teach
them this much by the light of Nature [ Non longa peregrinatione, nec locorum
varietatibus, tristitiam mentis gravitatemque discuties: animum debes mutare,
non coelum: licet vastum trajeceris mare, sequuntur te, quocunque perveneris,
vitia. Quid miraris tibi peregrinationes non prodesse, cum te circumferas?
Premit te eadem causa quae expulit. Quid terrarum juvare novitas potest? Quid
cognitio urbium aut locorum? In irritum cedit ista jactantia. Onus animi
deponendum est, non ante tibi ullus placebit locus. Vadis huc and illuc, ut
excutias incidens pondus, quod ipsa jactatione incommodius fit: sicut in navi
onera immota minus urgent, inaequaliter convoluta citius eam partem, in quam
incumbunt, demergunt. Quicquid facis, contra te facis: and motu ipso noces
tibi: aegrum enim concutis. At cum istud exemeris malum omnis mutatio loci
jucundus fiet. In ultimas expellaris terras licet, in quolibet Barbariae angulo
colloceris, hospitalis tibi illa qualiscunque seeds erit. Magis Quis veneris,
quam Quo, interest.] that is, [ It is not by long travels, or by change of
places, that you can discuss the sadness and heaviness of the mind. Its the
Mind, and not the Climate that you should change: though you pass the vastest
sea, your vices will follow you whithersoever you go. Why marvellest thou that
travels avail thee not, when thou carriest about thy self? The same cause that
drove thee away, does follow thee. What can the novelty of countries avail? Or
the knowledge of Cities and places? This tossing up and down is vain; Its the
load of thy mind, that must be laid down: Till that be done, no place will
please thee: Thou go up and down to shake off a burden that's fastened on
thee; which even by thy motion does become more troublesome. As in a ship the
settled weight is least troublesome, when things unequally thrown together, do
sink the part in which they lie. What thou do, thou do it against thy self;
and hurtest thy self by the very motion; For thou shakest a sick person: But
when once thou have taken out of thy self the evil, every change of place will
be pleasant. Though thou be expelled into the remotest lands; or placed in any
corner of Barbary, it will be however to thee a seat of hospitality; It more
concerns thee to know Who (or What) thou art thy self that come thither,
then Whither it is that thou come.]

Did you know your selves in all your griefs, its there that you would suspect
and find your malady, and there that you would most solicitously seek the cure.

BY this time, if you are willing, you may see, where lies the disease and
misery of the world and also what must be the cure. Man has lost himself, by
seeking himself: He has lost himself in the loss of God. He departed from
God, that he might enjoy himself: and so is estranged from God and himself. He
left the Sun, and retired into darkness, that he might behold himself, and not
the Light; and now beholds neither himself nor the light: For he can not
behold himself but by the Light. As if the Body should forsake the Soul and
say, I will no longer serve another, but will be my own: what would such a
selfish separation procure but the converting of a Body into a loathsome
Carcass, and a senseless clod? Thus has the Soul dejected it self, by turning
to it self, and seperating from God: without whom it has neither Life, nor
Light nor Joy. By desiring a selfish kind of Knowledge of Good and evil,
withdrawing from its just dependence upon God, it has involved it self in Care
and misery, and lost the quieting delighting Knowledge which it had in God. And
now poor man is lost in error: He is stragled so far from home, that he
knows not where he is, nor which way to return, till Christ in mercy seek
and save him, Math. 18.11. Luke 19.10.

Yet could we but get men to know that they do not know themselves, there were
the greater hope of their recovery. But this is contrary to the nature of their
distemper. An eye that is blinded by a suffusion or Cataract, sees not the
thing that blinds it: It is the same Light that must show them themselves,
and their ignorance of themselves: Their self-ignorance is part of the
self-evill which they have to know. Those troubled souls that complain that
they know not themselves, do show that they begin at least to know themselves.
But a Pharisee will say [ Are we blind also?] Joh. 9.40. They are too blind to
know that they are blind. The Gospel shall be rejected, the Apostles
persecuted, Christ himself abused and put to death, the Nation ruined,
themselves and their posterity undone by the Blindness of these Hypocrites,
before they will perceive that they are Blind, and that they know not God or
themselves. Alas the long calamityes of the Church, the distempers and
confusions in the state, the lamentable divisions and dissensions among
believers, have told the world, how little most men know themselves; and yet
they themselves will not perceive it. They tell it aloud to all about them, by
their self-conceitedness and cruelty, uncharitable censures, reproaches and
impositions, that they know not themselves, and yet you cannot make them know
it. Their afflicted brethren feel it to their smart; the suffering grieved
Churches feel it; thousands groan under it, that never wronged them: and yet
you cannot make them feel it.

Did they well know themselves to be Men, so many would not use themselves like
beasts; and care so little for their most noble part. Did they know themselves
aright to be but Men, so many would not set up themselves as Gods: They would
not arrogate a Divine authority in the matters of God, and the Consciences of
others, as the Roman Prelates do: Nor would they desire so much that the
observation, reverence, admiration, love and applause of all should be turned
upon them; nor be so impatient when they seem to be neglected; nor make so
great a matter of their wrongs, as if it were some Deity that were injured.

O what a change it would make in the world, if men were brought to the
knowledge of themselves? How many would weep, that now laugh, and live in mirth
and pleasure? How many would lament their sin and misery, that now are
Pharisaically confident of their integrity? How many would seek to faithful
Ministers for advice, and enquire what they should do to be saved, that now
deride them, and scorn their counsel, and cannot bear their plain reproof or
come not near them? How many would ask directions for the cure of their
unbelief, and pride and sensuality, that now take little notice of any such
sins within them? How many would cry day and night for mercy, and beg
importunatly for the life of their immortal souls, that now take up with a few
words of course instead of serious fervent prayer? Do but once know your
selves aright, know what you are, and what you have done, and what you want,
and what is your danger; and then be prayerless and careless if you can: Then
sit still and trifle out your time, and make a jest of holy diligence, and put
God off with lifeless words and complements if you can. Men could not think so
lightly and contemptuously of Christ, so unwor^hily and falsely of a holy life,
so delightfully of sin, so carelessly of Duty, so fearlesly of Hell, so
senslesly and atheistically of God, and so disregardfully of Heaven, ^s now
they do, if they did but thoroughly know themselves.

ANd now, Sirs, me thinks, your consciences should begin to stir, and your
thoughts should be turned inwards upon your selves, and you should seriously
consider, what measure of acquaintance you have at home, and what you have done
to procure and maintain such acquaintance. Has Conscience no Use to make of
this Doctrine, and of all that has been said upon it? Does it not reprove you
for your self neglect, and your wanderings of mind, and your aliene,
unnecessary fruitless Cogitations? Had you been but as strange to your familiar
friend, and as regardless of his acquaintance, correspondencie and affairs, as
too many of you have been of your Own, you may imagine how he would have taken
it, and what Use he would have made of it: some such Use it beseems you to
make of estrangedness to your selves. Would not he ask, [What is the matter
that my friend so seldom looks at me? and no more minds me or my affairs?
What have I done to him? How have I deserved this? What more beloved company or
employment has he got?] You have this and much more to plead against your
great Neglect and Ignorance of your selves.

In order to your conviction and reformation, I shall first show you some of
those Reasons, that should move you to Know your selves, and consequently
should humble you for neglecting it: and then I shall show you, what are the
Hindrances that keep men from self-acquaintance, and give you some Directions
necessary to attain it.

In general consider, it is by the Light of knowledge that all the affairs of
your souls must be directed: And therefore while you know not your selves, you
are in the dark, and unfit to manage your own affairs. your Principal error
about your selves will have influence into all the transactions of your lives,
you will neglect the greatest duties, and abuse and corrupt those which you
think you do perform. While you know not yourselves, you know not what you do,
nor what you have to do, and therefore can do nothing well. For instance.

1. When you should Repent of sin, you know it not as in yourselves, and
therefore cannot savingly Repent of it. If you know in general, that you are
sinners, or know your gross and crying sins, which Conscience cannot overlook,
yet the sins which you know not because you will not know them, may condemn
you. How can you Repent of your Pride, Hypocrisy, Self-love, Self-seeking,
your Want of love and fear, and trust in God, or any such sins which you never
did observe? Or if you perceive some sins, yet if you perceive not that they
reign and are predominant, and that you are in a state of sin, how can you
Repent of that estate which you perceive not? Or if you have but a slight and
superficial sight of your sinful state and your particular sins, you can have
but a superficial false Repentance.

2. If you know not yourselves, you cannot be duly sensible of your misery.
Could it be expected that the Pharisees should lament, that they were of their
Father the Devil, as long as they boasted that they were the Children of God?
Joh. 8.41, 44. Will they lament that they are under the wrath of God, the curse
of the Law, and the bondage of the Devil, that know not of any such misery
that they are in, but hope they are the heirs of heaven? What think you is the
reason, that when Scripture tells us that few shall be saved, and none at all
but those that are new creatures, and have the Spirit of Christ, that yet there
is not one of many that is sensible that the case is theirs? Though Scripture
peremptorily concludes, that They that are in the flesh cannot please God, and
that To be carnally minded is death, Rom, 8.6, 7, 8. and that Without holiness
none shall see God, Heb. 12.14 and that all They shall be damned that believe
not the truth but have pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.12. and that
Christ will come in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God,
and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished
with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord and the glory of
his power, when he shall come to be glorified in his saints and admired in all
them that do believe. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9, 10. And would not a man think that
such words as these should waken the guilty soul that does believe them? and
make us all to look about us? I confess it is no wonder, if a flat Atheist or
Infidel should slight them and deride them! But is it not a wonder if they
stir not those, that profess to believe the word of God, and are the men of
whom these Scriptures speak. And yet among a thousand that are thus condemned
already; (I say, by the word, that is the Rule of Judgment even condemned
already; For so God says, Joh. 3.18.) how few shall you see that with penitent
tears lament their misery? How few shall you hear, with true remorse, complain
of their spiritual distress, and cry out as those that were pricked at the
heart, Act. 2.37. Men and Brethren, what shall we do? In all this Congregation,
how few hearts are affected with so miserable a case? Do you see by the tears,
or hear by the complaints of those about you, that they know what it is, to be
unpardoned sinners, under the wrath of the most holy God! And what is the
matter that there is no more such lamentation? Is it because there are few or
none so miserable? Alas! no. The Scripture, and their worldly, fleshly, and
ungodly lives, assure us of the contrary. But it is because men are strangers
to themselves. They little think that its themselves, that (...) the terrible
threatenings of God do men. Most of them little believe or consider, what
Scripture says; But fewer consider what Conscience has to say within, when
once it is awakened, and the curtain is drawn back, and the light appears.
The first Proposition infers not the conclusion; And the Assumption they
overlook. Did all that read and hear the Scriptures know themselves, I Will tell
you how they would hear and read it. When the Scripture says, [To be carnally
minded is death: and if ye live after the flesh ye shall dye,] Romans 8.8, 13.
the guilty hearer would say [ I am carnally minded: and I live after the flesh
therefore I must Turn or Die.] When the Scripture says [Where your treasure
is, there will your hearts be also] Mat. 6.21. The guilty conscience would
assume [ My heart is not in Heaven, therefore my treasure is not there.] When
Scripture says [ Except ye be converted and become as little children, ye
shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 18.3. and Except a man be
regenerate and born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3.3,
5. and [ If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed
away, behold all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. and [ If any man have not
the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, Romans 8.9.] The guilty hearer
would assume [ I was never thus converted, regenerate, born again* and made a
new creature: I have not the Spirit of Christ: therefore I am none of his, and
cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, till this change be wrought upon me.]
When the Scripture says [ Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge, Heb.
13.4.] The guilty hearer would say, [ How then shall I be able to stand before
him?]

Yea, did but Hearers know themselves, they would perceive their danger from
remoter principles, that mention the dealing of God with others. When they hear
of the judgment of God upon the ungodly, and the enemies of the Church, they
would say [ Except I Repent, I shall likewise perish] Luke 13.3, 5. When they
hear that [ Judgment must begin at the house of God] They would infer [ What
then shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of God?] And when they
hear that [ The Righteous are scarcely saved] They would think [ Where then
shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?] 1 Pet. 4.17, 18.

3. If you know not your selves, you cannot be Christians: you cannot have a
practical belief in Christ: For he is offered to you in the Gospel, as the
remedy for your Misery; as the ransom for your enthralled souls; as the
propitiation for your sin, and your peacemaker with the Father; without whose
merit, satisfaction, righteousness, and intercession, your guilty souls can
have no hope. And can you savingly value him in these respects, if you know not
that sin and misery, that guilt and thraldom, in which your need of Christ
consists? Christ is esteemed by you according to the judgment you pass upon
your selves.

They that say they are sinners, from a general brain-knowledge, will
accordingly say Christ is their Savior and their hope, with a superficial
Belief, and will honor him with their lips with all the titles belonging to
the Redeemer of the world: But they that feel that they are deadly sick of sin
(...) the very heart, and are lost for ever if he do not save them, will feel
what the name of a Savior signifies, and will look to him as the Israelites
to the brazen Serpent, and cast themselves at his feet, for the (...) of grace,
and will yield up themselves (...) be saved by him, in his way. An uneffectual
knowledge of your selves, may make you believe in a Redeemer, as all the City
do of a Learned able Physicion, that will speak well of his skill, and resolve
to use him when necessity constrains them, but at present they find no such
necessity. But an effectual sight and sense of your condition, will bring you
to Christ, as a man in a Dropsy or Consumption comes to the Physicion, that
feels be must have help or die. Says Bernard, [Filium Dei non reputat Jesum,
qui ipsius non terretur comminationibus, etc.] You will not take the Son of God
for a Savior, if you be not affrighted by his threatnings] And if you perceive
not that you are lost, you will not heartily thank him that came to seek and
save you. [ Non consolantur Christi lahcrymae cachinnantes^, non consolantur
panni ejus ambulantes in stolis; non consolantur stabulum and praesepe amantes
primas Cathedras in Synagogis.] says Bernard [Christs tears do not comfort
them that laugh: his rags do not comfort them that (love to) walk in robes: his
stable and manger comfort not them that love the highest seats in the
Synagogues.] Can you seek to Christ to take you up, till you find that you have
fallen and hurt you? Will you seek to him to fetch you from the gates of hell,
that find not that you are there?

But to the self-condemning soul that knows it self, how welcome would a
Savior be? How ready is such a soul for Christ? Thou that judge thy self art
the person that must come to Christ to Justify thee. Now thou art ready to be
healed by him, when thou find that thou art sick, and dead: Have thou
received the sentence of death in thy self? Come to him now and thou shall have
life, John 5.40. 1 John 5.11. Art thou weary and heavy laden? Come to him for
rest: Come and fear not; for he bids thee come, Matthew 11.27, 28. Do thou
know that thou have sinned against Heaven and before God, and art not worthy to
be called a Son? Do but cast thy self then at his feet, and tell him so, and
ask forgiveness, and try whether he will not welcome and embrace thee, pardon
and entertain thee, cloth thee and feast thee, and rejoice over thee as one
that was lost, and is found; was dead, and is alive, Luke 15. For he came to
seek and to save that which was lost, Luke 19 10. While thou said, I am rich
and increased in goods, and have need of nothing, and knew not that thou art
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind and naked; thou would not buy
the tried Gold that thou might be rich, nor his whiterayment that thou
might be clothed, that the shame of thy nakedness might not appear; nor
Christ's eye salve that thou might see, Rev. 3.17, 18. But now thou art poor
in Spirit, and find that thou art nothing, and have nothing, and of thy self
can do nothing that is acceptably good. John 15.5. and that of thy self thou
art insufficient to think any thing that is good, 2 Cor. 3.5. now thou art
readier for the help of Christ, and a patient fit for the tender healing hand
of the Physicion. Whilst thou said, God, I thank thee that I am not as other
men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, nor as this Publican, thou wast
further from Christ and Justification, then now thou stand as afar off, and
dare scare look up to heaven, but smitest on thy breast and say, Lord be
merciful to me a sinner, Luke 18.11, 12, 13, 14. Not that extortioners,
unjust, adulterers, or any that are ungodly, are justified or can be saved,
while they are such: Nor that a smiting on the breast, with a [ Lord be
merciful to me a sinner] will serve their turn while they continue in their
wicked lives: But when thou art brought to accuse and condemn thy self, thou
art prepared for his grace that must renew and justify thee. None sped better
with Christ, then the woman that confessed her self a dog, and begged but for the
childrens crumbs: And the Centurion that sent friends to Christ to mediate for
him, and as being unworthy to come himself, and unworthy that Christ should
enter under his roof: For of the first Christ said [ O woman, great is thy
faith: be it unto thee even as thou wilt] Mat. 15.27, 28. And of the second he
says with admiration [ I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel, Luke
7.6, 7, 8.9.] Though thou art ready to deny the title of a child, and to number
thy self with the dogs, yet go to him and beg his crumbs of mercy. Though thou
think that Christ will not come to such a one as thou, and though thou beg
prayers of others, as thinking he will not hear thy own, thou little think
how this self-abasement and self-denial prepares thee for his tenderest
mercies, and his esteem. When thou art contrite (as the dust that is trodden
underfeet) and poor, and tremblest at the Word, then will he look at thee with
compassion and respect, Isa. 66.2. [ For thus says the high and lofty one that
inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy; I dwell in the high and holy place:
with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of
the humble and to revive the heart of the contrite ones: For I will not contend
for ever, neither will I be always wroth; for the spirit should fail before
me, and the souls which I have made, Isa. 57.15. When thou art using the
self-condemning words of Paul, Romans 7.14. to 25. [ I am carnal, sold under sin:
what I would, that do I not; and what I hate, that do I. For I know that in me,
that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing -- I find a law, that when I would
do good, evil is present with me. -- A Law in my members warring against the
Law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin -- ] when thou
criest out with him [ O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me, from the
body of this death;] thou art then fitter to look to thy Redeemer, and use the
following words [ I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.] When thou did
exalt thy self, thou wast obnoxious to the storms of Justice, which was
engaged to bring thee low: But now thou humblest thy self, thou lie in the
way of Mercy, that is engaged to exalt thee, Luke 14.11. and 18.14. Mercy
looks downard, and can quickly ^pie a sinner in the dust; but cannot leave
him there, nor deny him compassion and relief. Art thou cast out as helpless,
wounded by thy sin, and neglected by all others that pass by? Thou art the
fittest object for the skill and mercy of him that washes sinners in his
blood, and tenderly binds up their wounds, and undertakes the perfecting of
the cure, though yet thou must bear the Surgeons hand, till his time of perfect
cure be come, Luke 10.33, 34, 35. Now thou perceivest the greatness of thy sin
and misery, thou art fit to study the greatness of his mercy: and with all
Saints (to strive) to comprehend, what is the breadth, and length, and depth,
and height, and to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge, Ephesians.
3.18, 19. Now thou have smitten upon the thigh, and said, What have I done?
Jerem. 31.19. and 8.6. thou art fitter to look unto him that was wounded and
smitten for thy transgressions, and to consider what he has done, and
suffered: how he has born thy grief and carried thy sorrows, and was bruised
for thy iniquities; the chastisment of our peace was laid upon him, and we are
healed by his stripes* All we like sheep have gone astray: we have turned every
one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of (...) all,
Isa. 53.4, 5, 6, etc. Art thou in doubt whether there be any forgiveness for
thy sins? and whether there be any place for Repentance? Remember that Christ
is exalted by Gods right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentnace
unto Israel and forgiveness of sins Act. 5.31. And that he himself has spoken
it, that [ All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men,] except
the Blasphemy against the Spirit. Math. 12.32. And this Forgiveness of sins
thou art bound to believe as an Article of thy Creed: that it is purchased by
Christ, and freely offered in the Gospel. Mercy did but wait all this while,
till thou wast brought to understand the want and worth of it, that it might be
thine. When a Peter that denies Christ with oaths and cursing, goes out and
weepeth, he speedily finds mercy from him without, that he but now denied
within. When so bloody a persecuter as Paul finds mercy, upon his prostration
and confession; and when so great an offender as Manasseh is forgiven upon his
penitence, in bonds; when all his witchcraft, Idolatry and crueltyes are
pardoned, upon a repentance that might seem to have been forced by a grievous
scourge; what sinner that perceives his sin and misery, can question his
entertainment if he come to Christ. Come to him sinner, with thy load and
burden; Come to him with all thy acknowledged unworthyness: and try whether he
will refuse thee. He has professed that [ (...) that comes to him, he will in
no wise (...) out] Joh. 6.37. He refused not his very murderers, when they were
pricked at the heart and enquired after a remedy, Act. 2.37. And will he
refuse thee? Has our Physicion poured out his blood to make a medicine for
distracted sinners? and now is he unwilling to work the cure? [ Fusus est
sa^guis medici, and factum est medicament^^ frenetici] says Augustine. O
siner! (...) thou art brought to know thy self, know Christ also, and the cure
is done. Let thy thoughts of the Remedy be deeper and larger and longer then
all thy thoughts of thy Misery? It is thy sin and shame if it be not (...) Why
will thou have twenty thoughts of sin and misery, for one that thou have of
Christ and mercy? when mercy is so large and great and wonderful as to triumph
over misery: and Grace abounds much more where sin has abounded, Rom, 5.20.
[ Inspice vulnera pendentis, sanguinem m^rientis; pretium redimentes;
cicatrices re^^^gentis. Caput habet inclinatum ad oscular dum; cor apertum ad
diligendum; brac^id extensa ad amplexandum, totum cor^^^ expositum ad
redimendum] says Augusti^^ [Behold the wounds of Christ as he is hang^^g; the
blood of him dying, the price of him ^^deeming, the scars of him rising. His
Head (...) bowed to Kiss thee: his heart open to love ^^ee; his arms open to
embrace thee; ^is whole body exposed to redeem thee.]

[ Homo factus est hominis Factor; ut sugeret ^^bera regens sydera; ut esuriret
Panis; ut ^^^eret Fons; dormiret Lux; ab itinere via ^^tigaretur; falsis
testibus Veritas occul^retur; Index viv^rum and mortu^rum a ju^^^ce mortali
judicaretur; ab injustis justi^^a damnaretur; flagellis disciplina caedore^^ur;
spinis botr^s coronaretur; in ligno ^undamentum suspenderetur; virtus
infir^aretur; salus vulneraretur; vita ^oreretur] says Aug. that is, [ The
Maker ^f man was made man; that he might suck ^^e breasts that rules the
stars; that Bread ^ight hunger; the Spring (or fountain) might ^hirst; the
Light might steep; the Way ^ight be weary in his journey; that the Truth might
be hidden by false witnesses: That the Judge of quick and dead might be ^udged
by amortal judge: Justice might be condemned by the unjust; Discipline might
(...) scourged* the Cluster of grapes might be ^rowned with thorns; the
Foundation might be hanged on a tree; that Strength ^ight be weakened; that
Health might be wounded; and that Life it self might dy^. This is the
wonderful mystery of Love which will entertain the soul that come to Christ,
and which thou must study (...) know when thou know thy self. But (...) then
all these will be riddles, to thee, o^ little relished: and Christ will seem to
thy neglecting heart to have dyed and done (...) this in vain:

And hence it is, that as proud, ungodly sensual men, were never sound
Believers, so they oft-times fall from that opinionative common faith which
they had, and of all me^ do most easily turn Apostates: It being just with God
that they should be so far forsaken as to vilifye the remedy, that would not
know their sin and misery, but love it and pertinaciously hold it as their
felicity.

4. If you Know not your selves, you will not know what to do with your selves,
nor to what end and for what work you are to live. This makes the Holy work
neglected, and most men live to little purpose, wasting their days in matters
that them selves will call impertinent when they come to die: as if they were
good for nothing else. Whereas if they knew them selves, they would know that
they are made and fitted for more noble works. O man, if thou ^ere acquainted
well with thy faculties ^^d frame, thou would perceive the ^ame of God thy
Maker, to be so deeply ^^graven in thy nature, even in all thy parts and
powers, as should Convince thee that ^^ou wast made for him; that all thou art
and (...) thou have, is nothing worth, but for his ^^rvice: As all the parts
and motions of (...) clock or watch, are but to tell the hour (...) the day.
Thou would know then the ^eaning of Sanctification and Holiness: that it
signifies but the Giving God his ^wn; and is the first part of Justice;
without which, no rendering men their due can ^^ove thee Just: Thou would
then know ^^e unreasonableness and injustice of ungod^^ness and all sin: And
that to serve thy ^^eshly lusts and pleasures with those noble ^^culties that
were purposely formed to love and serve the Eternal God, is more ^^bsurd and
villainous, then to employ the ^ighest officers of the King, in the sweep^ng of
your chimneyes, or the serving of ^our swine. Remember it, unreasonable,
^cutish man, the next time thou art going to thy lusts and sensual de^^ghts.
It is no wiser a course thou ^akest: It is no more honorable or ^ust: but as
much worse, as God is to be preferred to a King; and as thy (...) is worse then
the serving of thy swi^e, O man, did thou but know thy self and see what
employment thy facultyes are made, thou would lift up thy head, and seriously
think, who holds the reins? who keepe^ thy breath yet in thy nostrills, and
continues thee in life? And where it is that thou must shortly fix thy
unchangeable abode; And what is now to be done in preparation for such a day?
Os homini sublime dedit, etc. Thou would know that thou had not that
Reason, and that will and executive power, to roll in the earth, and be but a
cunning kind of beast, that has wit to play the fool, and can ingeniously live
below understanding; and do that with argument which other bruits can do
without it: Thou would know that thy higher faculties were not made to serve
the lower (...) thy Reason to serve thy sensual delight* the horse was not
made to ride the man, nor the master to follow and attend the d^g. O man! had
thou not lost the Knowledge of thy self, thou would be so far from wondering
at a Holy life, that thou would look upon an unholy person as a monster, and
would hear the derider^ and opposers of a holy life, as thou would hear him
that were deriding a man because he is not a swine, or were reproaching men of
honor and learning, because they live not as an Ass.

I confess, my soul is too apt to lose its lively sense of all these things:
But when ever it is awake, I am forced to say, in these kind of meditations,
[If I had not a God to know and think on, to Love and honor, to seek and serve,
what had I to do with my understanding, will and all my powers? What should I
do with life and time? What use should I make of Gods provisions? What could I
find to do in the world, that is worthy of a man? Were it not as good lie
still, and sleep out my days and professedly do nothing, as to go dreaming
with a seeming seriousness, and wander about the world as in my sleep, and do
nothing with such a troublesome stir, as sensual worldly persons do? Could not
I heave played the beast without a Reasonable free-working soul? Let them turn
from God, and neglect the conduct of the Redeemer, and disregard the holy
approaches and breathings and workings of the soul toward its beloved Center
and felicity, that know not what an immortal soul is, or know how else to employ
their facultyes, with satisfaction or conttent unto themselves. I profess here
(...) in his presence that is the Father of spirits* and before Angels and men,
I do not, (...) know not what else to do with my soul that is worth the doing,
but what is subservient to its proper object, its end and everlasting Rest. If
the Holy service of God and the preparation for Heaven, and making after Christ
and happiness, be forbidden me, I have no more to do in the world, that will
satisfy my Reason, or satisfy my affections, or that as a man or a Christian
I can own. And its as good not live, as to be deprived of the uses and the ends
of Life. Though my Love and Desires are infinitely below the Eternal Goodness,
and Glory, which they should prosecute and embrace, yet do my little tastes, and
dull desires, and cold affections consent unfeignedly to say, Let me have God
or nothing: Let me know him and his will, and what will please him, and how I
may enjoy him: or O that I had never had an understanding to know any thing!
Let me remember him; or O that I had never had a memory! Let me Love him and be
belo^ed of him; on O that I had never had such a thing as Love within me! Let
me hear his teachings, or have no ears: Let me serve him with my riches, or let
me have none: and with any interest and honor, or let me be despised] Its
Nothing that he gives not Being to: And its Useless that is not for his Glory
and his will. If God have nothing to do with me, I have nothing to do with my
self, nor the world has nothing to do with me.

Let dark and dreaming, doting sinners declare their shame, and speak evil of
what they never knew, and neglect the Good they never saw; let them that know
not themselves or God, refuse to give up themselves to God, and think a life of
sensuality more suitable to them. But Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance on me. Psalm. 4. and let me no longer be a man, nor have Reason or
any of thy talents in my trust, then I shall be Thine, and live to Thee. I say
as Bernard [ Dig^^s plane est morte, qui tibi Christ rec usat vivere; and qui
tibi non sapit, desipit; and qui curat esse nisi propter te, pro ni hilo (...)
and nihil est. Propter teipsum Deus fecisti ^^ia; and qui esse vult sibi, and
non tibi, ^^^sse incipit inter omnia.] [Worthy is that (...), O Christ, to die,
that refuses to live (...) thee: and he that is not wise to thee, is (...) a
fool; and he that cares to Be unless it be for thee, is good for nothing, and
is nothing. For thy self O God have thou made all things; and he that would Be
to himself and not thee, among all things begineth to be Nothing.]

5. If you know not your selves, you know not how to apply the word of God,
which you read or hear; you know not how to use either promises or
threatenings, to the benefit of your souls: Nay you will misapply them to you
hurt. If you are unregenerate and know it not, you will put by all the calls of
God, that invite you to come in and be converted, and think that they belong to
grosser sinners, but not to you. All the descriptions of the unsanctified and
their misery, will little affect you; and all Gods threatenings to such will
little move you; for you will think they ar^ not meant of you; you will be
Pharisaically blessing your selves when you should b^ pricked at the heart and
laid in Contritio^ at the feet of Christ: you will be thank^ing God that you
are not such as indee^ you are; you will be making application (...) the
threatenings to others, and pitying (...) when you should lament your selves*
(...) will be thundering when you should (...) trembling; and speaking that
evil of (...) that is your own; and convincing others of that which you had
need to be convinced of; and wakening others by talking in your sleep; and
calling other men hypocrites, proud, self-conceited, ignorant and other such
names that are indeed your own; you will read or hear your own condemnation,
and not be moved at it, as not knowing your own description when you hear it,
but thinking that this thunderbolt is levelled at another sort of men. All the
words of Peace and Comfort, you will think are meant of such as you. When you
read of Pardon, Reconciliation, Adoption, and right to everlasting Life, you
will imagine that all these are yours. And thus you will be dreaming-rich and
safe, when you are poor and miserable, and in the greatest peril. And is it
not pity that the celestial undeceving Light should be abused to so dangerous
selfdeceit? and that Truth itself should be made the furtherance of so great an
error? And that the eyesalve should more put out your eyes^ Is it not sad to
consider that you should now be emboldened to presumption, by that very word
which (unless you be conver^ed) will judge you to damnation? And that
self-deceit should be increased, by the glass of verity that should undeceive
you?

How can you know what promise or threatening does belong to you, while you know
not what state your souls are in: Can you tell what Physic to take, till your
disease be known? or choose your plaster till you know your sore?]

6. If you know not yourselves, you know not how to confess or pray. This makes
men Confess their sins so seldom and with so little remorse to God and man;
you hide them because they are hidden from yourselves; and therefore God will
open them to your shame: whereas if they were opened to you, they would be
opened by you, and covered by God. Says Augustine [ Non operui, sed aperui ut
operires; Non caelavi, ut tegeres: Nam quando homo detegit, Deus tegit. Cum
homo caelat, Deus nudat: Cum homo agnoscit, Deus ignoscit] [I did not cover,
but open that thou may cover: I concealed not, that thou might hide. For
when man discloseth, God covers: When man hides, God makes bare: when man
confesses, God forgiveth.] For want of self-acquintance it is that men
hypocritically confess to God in a way of custom, the sins which they will
deny or excuse to man; and will tell God formally of much, which they cannot
endure to be told of seriously by a reprover: or if they confess it generally
with a seeming humility to others, they cannot bear that another should
faithfully charge it upon them, in order to their true humiliation and
amendment [ Indicia verae confessionis sunt, si ut unusquisque se peccatorem
dicit, id de se dicenti alteri non contradicat. Nam non peccator sed justus
videri appetit, cum peccatorem se quisque nullo arguente confitetur; superbia
quippe vitium est, ut quod de se fateri quis sua sponte dignatur, hoc sibi dici
ab aliis dedignetur] says Bernard. [It is the sign of true Confession if, as
every one says he is a sinner, he contradict not another that says it of him.
For he desires not to seem a sinner, but Righteous, when one confesses
himself a sinner when none reproves him. It is the vice of Pride for a man to
disdain to have that spoken to him of others, which he stuck not to confess of
his ow^ accord concerning himself.]

A (...) for prayer, it is men's ignorance of (...) that makes prayer so little
in (...): Hunger best teaches men to beg. (...) would be ofter on your knees,
if you ^ere ofter in your hearts. Prayer would not ^eem needless, if you knew
your needs. Know your selves and be prayerless if you can* When the Prodigal
was convinced, he presently purposes to Confess and Pray. When Paul was
converted, Ananias has this evidence of it from God [ Behold he prayeth] Act.
9.11. Indeed the inward part of prayer, is the motion of a returning soul to
God: says Hugo [Oratio est piae mentis and humilis ad Deum conversio, fide,
spe, and charitate subnixa.] Prayer is the turning of a pious humble soul to
God, leaning upon faith, hope and love.] It is [Oranti subsidium, Deo
sacrificium, daemonibus flagellum] The relief of the Petitioner, the sacrifice
of God, the scourge of Devils.]

And self-knowledge would teach men how to pray. Your own hearts would be the
best Prayer-books to you, if you were skillful in reading them. Did you see
what sin is, and in what Relation you stand to God, to Heaven and Hell, it
would drive you above your beads and lifeless words of course, and make you
know that (...) pray to God for pardon and salvation (...) not a work for a
sleepy soul: says (...), [ Ille Deo veram Orationem exhibet (...) metipsum
cognoscit, quia pulvis sit; (...) videt, qui nihil sibi virtutis tribuit, (...)
He offers the truest prayer to God, (...) knows himself, that humbly sees
he is but dust, and ascribes not virtue to himself, etc.] Nothing quenches
prayer more, then to be mistaken or mindless about our selves. When we go from
home, this fire goes out; But when we return, and search our hearts, and see
the sins, the wants, the weaknesses that are there, and perceive the danger
that is before us, and withal the glorious hopes that are offered us, here is
fuel and bellows to inflame the soul, and cure it of its drowsiness and
dumbness. Help any sinner to a clearer light to see into his heart and life,
and to a livelyer sense of his own condition, and I warrant you he will be more
disposed to fervent prayer, and will better understand the meaning of those
words, Luke 18.1. [ That men ought always to pray and not to faint.] and 1
These. 5.17. Pray without ceasing.] You may hear some impious persons now
disputing against frequent and fervent prayer, and saying, What need all this
ado? But if you were able to open these men's eyes, and show them what is within
them and before them, you would quickly answer all their arguments, and
convince them better then words can do, and put an end to the dispute. You
would set all the prayerless families in Town and Country, Gentlemen's and poor
men's, on fervent calling upon God, if you could but help them to such a sight
of their sin and danger, as shortly the stoutest of them must have. Why do they
pray, and call for prayers, when they come to die, but that they begin a little
better to know themselves? They see then that youth and health and honor are
not the things, nor make them not so happy, as befooling prosperity once
persuaded them. Did they believe and consider what God says of them, and not
what flattery and self-love say, it would open the mouths of them that are most
speechless. But those that are born deaf, are always dumb. How can they speak
that language with desire to God, which they never learned by faith from God or
by knowledge of themselves?

And self-knowledge would teach men what to ask. They would feel most need of
spiritual mercies, and beg hardest for them; and for outward things, they would
ask but for their daily bread; and not be foolishly importunate with God for
that which they know not to be suitable or good for them. [ Fideliter
supplicans Deo pro necessitatibus hujus vitae, and miserecorditer auditur, and
miserecorditer non auditur. Quid enim infirmo sit utilius magis novit medicus
quam agrotus] says Prosper. Its mercy to be denied sometimes when we pray for
outward things: Our Physician, and not we must choose our Physic, and
prescribe our diet.

And if men knew themselves, it would teach them on what terms to expect the
hearing of their prayers. Neither to be accepted for their merits, nor yet to
be accepted without that faith, and Repentance, and desire, that seriousness,
humility, and sincerity of heart, which the very nature of Prayer to God does
contain or presuppose. He that names the name of Christ, must depart from
iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. and must wash himself and make him clean, and put away
the evil of his doings from before the eyes of God, and cease to do evil, and
learn to do well; Isa. 1.16, 17. As knowing that though a Simon Magus must
Repent and Pray, Acts 8.22. and the wicked in forsaking his way, and thoughts,
and returning to the Lord, must seek him while he may be found, and call upon
him while he is near] Isa. 55.6, 7. and the prayers of a humbled Publican are
heard, when he sets his prayer against his sins; Yet if he would cherish his
sin by prayer, and flatter himself into a presumption and security in a wicked
life* because he uses to ask God forgiveness; i^ he thus regard iniquity in
his heart, God will not hear his prayers, Psalm. 66.18. and we know that such
impenitent sinners God hears not, John 9.31. And thus the prayers of the
wicked as wicked, (which are not a withdrawing from his wickedness* but a
bolster of his security, and as a craving of protection and leave to sin) are
but an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.8. and 28 9. Ferrum prius extrahendum,
The bullet, the thorn must be first got out, before any medicine can heal their
wounds. Says Augustine [Plus Deo placet latratus canum, mugitus boum,
grunnitus porcorum, quan cantus clericorum luxuriantium] [The barking of dogs,
the lowing of beasts, the grunting of swine, does please God better then the
singing of luxuriant Clergy men.] Did men know themselves, and who they have to
do with in their prayers, they would not go from Cards, and Dice, and gluttony,
and fornication, and railing, lying or reviling at the servants of the Lord, to
a few hypocritical words of prayer, to salve all till the next time, and wipe
their mouth^, as if one sin had procured the forgiveness of another. Nor would
they shut up a day ^f worldliness, ambition, sensuality or ^rofaneness, with a
few heartless words of confession and supplication; or with the words of
penitence while their hearts are impenitent, as if when they have abused God by
sin, they would make him amends or reconcile him by their mockery. Nor would
they think to be accepted by Praying for that which they would not have; for
holiness when they hate it, and for deliverance from the sins which they would
not be delivered from; and would not have their prayers granted.

7. If you know not your selves, it will unfit you for Thanksgiving: Your
greatest Mercies will be least esteemed: And the lesser will be misesteemed:
And while you are unthankful for what you have, you will be absurdly thanking
God for that which indeed you have not.

What inestimable Mercies are daily trodden under feet by sinners, that know
not their worth, because they know not their own necessities! They have Time to
Repent, and make preparation for an endless life: But they know not the worth
of it, but unthankfully neglect it, and cast it away on the basest vanities: As
if worldly cares, or wicked company, or fleshly lusts, or Cards or Dice or
revellings, or idleness, were exercises in which they might better improve it,
then the works of Holiness, Justice and Mercy, which God has made the business
of their lives. Or as if the profits, and pleasures and vain glory of this
world, did better deserve it, then their Creator, and their own souls, and the
Heavenly inheritance. But if their eyes were opened to see where they stand,
and what they are, and what are their dangers and necessities, how thankful
would they be for one year, one month, one day, one hour to Repent and cry to
God for Mercy! and how sensibly would they perceive that a hundred years time
is not too long, to spend in serious preparation for eternity?

They have now the faithful Ministers of Christ, inviting them in his name to
come to him and receive the riches of his grace, and beseeching them in his
stead to be reconciled unto God, (Mat. 22. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20.) But they stop
their ears, and harden their hearts, and stiffen their necks, and love not to
be disturbed in their sins, but are angry with those that are sollicitous for
their salvation, and revile them as too precise and strict, that tell them of
the One thing needful, and persuade them to choose the better part, and tell
them where their sin will leave them. They take them for their friends that
will encourage them in the way that God condemns, and be merry with them in
the way to endless sorrow, and flatter them into security and impenitency till
the time of grace be past; but they hate them as their enemies that faithfully
reprove them, and tell them of their folly, and call them to a safer better
way. Alas, Sirs, there would not be so many Nations, Congregations, and Souls
now left in darkness and misery by their own doing, having driven away the
Mercy of the Gospel, and thrust their faithful Teachers from them, if they
knew themselves. Men would not triumph in their own calamity, when they have
expelled their faithful Teachers, (the dust of whose feet, the sweat of their
brows, the tears of their eyes, and the fervent prayers and groans of their
hearts must witness against them,) if they knew themselves. They would not be
like a mad man that glories that he has beaten away his Physician and his
friends, and is left to himself, if they knew themselves. When they have the
earnest Calls of the Word without, and convictions and urgings of the Spirit of
God, and their Consciences within, they would not wilfully go on, and cast
these mercies at their heels, if they knew themselves.

They have leave to join in the Communion of Saints, and to enjoy the benefit
of holy Society in prayer, and conference, and mutual love and spiritual
assistance, and in the public worship of God: but they pass these by, as
having more of trouble and burden, then of mercy, because they little know
themselves.

And their inferior Mercies of Health, and Wealth, and food, and raiment, and
friends, and accommodations, they misesteem and misuse: and value them but as
provision for the flesh, and the satisfaction of their sensual and inordinate
desires, and not as their necessary provision for their duty in the way to
Heaven! And therefore they are most thankful for their greatest snares: For
that honor and abundance which are stronger temptations, then they can
overcome: For those fleshly contentments and delights, which are the enemies of
grace, and the prison of their noblest faculties, and the undoing of their
souls. If they could for shame speak out, they would thank God more for a
whore, or a succesfull gain, or the favor of their earthen gods, or for
preferment, or commodity, lands or houses, then ever they did for all the
offers of Christ and grace, and all the invitations to a holy life. For there
is much more joy and pleasure in their hearts for the former then the latter.

And Self-ignorance will also corrupt your Thanksgiving, and turn it into sin
and folly. Is it not shame and pity to hear an unpardoned enemy of Holiness,
and of God, to thank God that he is Justified and Reconciled to God, and
Adopted to be his child, and made a member of Jesus Christ? And to hear a
carnal unregenerate person give thanks for his Regeneration and Sanctification
by the Holy Ghost? As it is to hear a leper give thanks for perfect health, or
a fool or mad man thank God for making him wiser then his neighbors. Is it not
pity to hear a miserable soul thank God for the Grace which he never had* and
one that is near eternal misery to thank God for making him an heir of Glory! O
how many have thankt God Pharisaitally for the pardon of their sins, that must
for ever suffer for those sins! How many have thanked him for giving them the
assured hopes of Glory, that must be thrust out into endless misery! As I
having known many, that by their friends and by the^^selves have been flattered
into consi^^^ hopes of life, when they were ready (...) die, have thankt God
that the were (...) well, and the worst was past; which in (...) eyes of
judicious standers by, was not (...) least aggravation of their sad and
deplo^^^ble state. Methinks it is one of the sad^dest spectacles in the world
to hear a (...) thanking God for the assurance of salva^^^on, that is in a
state of condemnation, and like to be in Hell for ever! These absurdities could
not corrupt your highest du^ties, and turn them into sin, if you knew your
selves.

A man that knows his own necessiti^^ and unworthiness, is thankful for a
little to God and man. Mercy is as no mercy, when there is no sense of need or
misery. [Sapienti notum est quanti res quaeque taxanda sit] says Seneca.
Therefore God uses to humble them so low in the work of conversion, whom he
means ever after to employ (...) the magnifying of his grace. And then that
which is folly and hypocrisy from a Pharisee, will be an acceptable sacrifice
from a humbled grateful soul; and he that by Grace is differenced from other
men, may (modestly) thank God that he is not as other men. For had he nothing
more to thank God for, then the ungodly world, he would be rejected and perish
with the world: And if he have more then the world, and yet be no more
thankful then the world, he would be guilty of greater unthankfulness then the
world. [Non est superbia elati, sed confessio non ingrati: and habere te
cognosce, and nihil ex te habere; ut nec superbus sis, nec ingratus: Dic Deo
tuo, quoniam sanctus sum quia sanctificasti me: quia accepi, nonquae habui;
quia tu dedisti, non quae ego merui] says Augustine, [This is not the Pride of
one lift up, but the acknowledgement of one that's not unthankful: Know that
thou have, and know that thou have nothing of thy self; that thou may neither
be proud, nor yet unthankful. Say to thy God, I am holy, fer thou have
sanctified me: for I have received what I had not; and thou have given me what
I deserved not.] The Thanksgiving of a faithful soul, is so far from being
displeasing to God as a Pharisaical ostentation, that it is a great and
excellent duty, and a most sweet and acceptable sacrifice, Psalm. 50.14.23.
Offer unto God thaenksgiving -- He that offers praise, Glorifieth me.]

8. And as to the Lords Supper, what work they are there like to make that are
unacquainted with themselvelves, you may conjecture from the nature of the
work, and the command of self-examination and self-judging. Though some may be
wellcomed by Christ, that have faith and love, though they doubt of their
sincerity, and know not themselves to be children of God; yet none can be
welcome that know not themselves to be sinners condemned by the Law, and
needing a Savior to Reconcile and Justify them. Who will be there humbled at
the feet of Grace, and thankful for a Redeemer, and hunger and thirst for
Sacramental benefits, that knows not his own unworthiness and necessities? O
what inestimable mercy would appear in a Sacrament to us, in the offers of
Christ and saving grace, and communion with God and with his Saints, if our
appetites were but quickened by the knowledge of our selves?

9. And I beseech you consider, whether all your studies, and learning and
employments, be not irrational, preposterous and impertinent, while you study
not first to know your selves? You are nearest to your selves, and therefore
should be best acquainted with your selves. What should you more observe then
the case of your own souls! and what should you know better then what is within
you, and what you carry still about you, and that which me thinks, you should
always feel? even the bent of your own estimations and affections; the
sicknesses of your souls; your guilt, your wants and greatest necessities. All
your Learning is but the concomitant of your dotage till you know your selves.
Your wisest studies are but the workings of a distracted mind, while you study
not your selves, and the things of everlasting consequence. The wise man was
but derided by the standers by, that fell over head into a ditch, whilst he was
busily taking the height of a Star. To study whether it be the Sun or Earth
that moves, and not consider what motion is predominant in thy soul and life,
is a pitiful preposterous study: To think more what stars are in the
firmament, then what Grace is in thy heart; and what planet reigns, then what
disposition reigns in thy self; and whether the Spirit or flesh have the
dominion, is but to be learnedly besides thy self.

-- Illum ego jure
Despiciam, qui scit quanto sublimior Atlas
Omnibus in Lybia sit montibus; hic tamen idem
Ignoret quantum ferrata distet ab arca.
Is it not a laborious madness to travail into far Countries, and compass Sea
and land, to satisfy a curiosity; and to be at so much cost and pains to know
the situation, government, and manners, of the Cities and Countries of the
world, and in the mean time to be utterly strange at home, and never bestow one
day or hour in a serious survey of heart and life! To carry about a dark,
unknown, neglected soul, while they are traveling to know remotest things that
less concern them? Me thinks it is a pitiful thing, to hear men ingeniously
discoursing of the quality, laws and customs of other Nations, and of the
affairs of Princes, and Commonwealths, and of the riches and commodities of
Sea and land, and to be mute when they should express their acquaintance with
themselves, either in confession and prayer to God, or in any humble,
experimental conference with men. To trade abroad, and utterly neglect the
trade of godliness at home. To keep correspondency with persons of all degrees,
and to have no correspondence with themselves. To keep their shop-books and
accounts with diligence, and never regard the Book of Conscience, nor keep
account of that for which they must ere long be accountable to God. Its a
pitiful thing to see men turn over voluminous histories, to know what has
been done from the beginning of the world, and regard no more the history of
their own lives, nor once look back with penitent remorse upon their ungodly
careless Conversations, nor say, What have we done? To see men have
well-furnish't Libraries, and read over a multitude of Books, and never read
the state and records of their souls!

Quid juvat immensos scire atque evolvere casus,
Si facienda fugis; si fugienda facis?
It makes you but objects of wonder and compassion, to read Laws and Records,
and understand all Cases, and never endeavor to understand the Case of your
immortal souls! To counsel others for their temporal estates, and never
understand your own spiritual state! To study the mysteries of Nature, and
search into all the works of God, except your selves, and that which your
happiness or misery does depend on! To study the nature, and causes and signs
of bodily diseases, and their several remedies, and never study the diseases of
your own souls, nor the precious remedy which Mercy has provided you. To cure
the sicknesses of other men's bodies; and never feel a stony, proud or sensual
heart, nor use any care and industry for the cure! To know the matters of all
Arts and sciences, to be able to discourse of them all to the admiration of the
hearers, is but an aggravation of thy lamentable folly, if thou be all this
while a stranger to thy self, and that because thou art mindless of thy souls
condition. You would but laugh at such a Learned fool that knew not how to
dress himself, or eat or drink or go, and yet could talk of the profoundest
speculations in Metaphysics or other sciences. It is more necessary to know
your selves, your sin, your duty, your hopes, your dangers, then to know how to
eat, or drink, or cloth your selves. Alas, it is a pitiful kind of
knowledge, that will not keep you out of Hell; and a foolish wisdom that
teaches you not to save your souls. Per veram scientiam itur ad disciplinam;
per disciplin^m ad bonitatem; per bonitatem ad beattiudinem, says Hugo. Till
you know your selves, the rest of your knowledge is but a confused dream: When
you know the thing, you know not the end, and use and worth of it.
Self-knowledge will direct you in all your studies, and still employ you on
that which is necessary, and will do you good, when others are studying but
unprofitable impertinent things; and indeed are but [ proud, knowing nothing
(when they seem to excel in knowledge) but d^ting about questions and strifes
of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds and destitute of the truth, that take gain
for godliness,] 1 Timothy 6.4, 5. Self-knowledge will help you in all your
studies, to know, Quo ordine, quo studio, quo fine unumquodque scire oporteat.
Quo ordine; ut illud prius, quod maturius movet ad salutem: Quo studio; ut
illud ardentius, quod vehementius ad amorem: Quo fine; ut non ad inanem gloriam
and ostentationem, sed ad tuam and aliorum salutem] says Bernard. You will
know in what order, with what study, and to what end every thing should be
known: In what order, that that may go first, that most promoteth our
salvation: with what study or desire; that we may know that most ardently,
which most vehemently provokes Love: To what end; that it be not for vain
glory and ostentation, but for your own and other men's salvation.]

And as it is our selves and our own affairs that are nearest to us, and
therefore first in order to be known; so it is our selves that we have a
special charge of, and that we are most obliged to study and to know, and it is
our own condition and soul-affairs that most concern us. Though Sun and Moon,
and earth, be not little things in themselves; yet the knowledge of them is a
small inconsiderable matter to thee in comparison of the knowledge of thy self.
The words even of Seneca are so pungent on this subject, that I shall recite
some of them to shame those professed Christians that are so much short of a
heathen. [ Quid ad virtutem viam sternit syllabarum enarratio, verborum
diligentia, and fabularum memoria, and versuum lex and modificatio? Quid ex his
metum demit, cupiditatem fraenat?] What furtherance to virtue is the enarration
of syllables, the diligence of words, the remembering of fables, and the law and
modification of Verses? What of these takes away fear, and bridleth
concupiscence? Metiri me Geometer docet latifundia: potius doceat quomodo
metiar quantum homini satis sit: Docet quomodo nihil perdam ex finibus meis: at
ego discere volo quomodo totum hilaris amittam. Scis rotunda metiri: si artifex
es, metire hominis animum; dic quam magnus, dic quam pusillus sit. Scis quae
recta sit linea: quid tibi prodest si quid in vita rectum sit ignoras?] The
Geometrian teaches me to measure spacious grounds: let him rather teach me to
measure how much is sufficient for a man: He teaches me how I may lose nothing
of my possessions: But that which I would learn is, how I may lose all with a
cheerful mind. Thou can measure rounds; if thou be an artist, measure the
mind of man; tell me how great it is, or how little or low. Thou know a
strait line: and what the better art thou if thou know not what is right or
strait in thy own life?] Hoc scire quid proderit, ut solicitus sim, quum
Saturnus and Mars e contrario stabunt? -- Illa liberalium artium consectatio
molestos, intempestivos, verbosos, sibi placentes facit, and ideo non discentes
necessaria, quia super-vacua didicerunt] [What good will it do me, that I
should be solicitous to know when Saturn and Mars will stand in opposition? --
This diligent study of the liberal arts, does make men troublesome,
unseasonable, wordy, self-pleasing, and such as therefore learn not things
necessary, because they have learned things superfluous.]

When our nearer greater works are done, then those that are more distant will
be seasonable, and useful, and excellent in their proper places. When men
understand the state and affairs of their souls, and have made sure of their
everlasting happiness, they may then seasonably and wisely manage Political and
Oeconomical affairs, and prudently order and prosecute their temporal
concernments: when they first seek the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness,
subordinate things may be seasonably considered. But for a man to be taken up
about matters of Law, or Trade, or Pleasure, when he minds not the matters of
his salvation; and to study languages, Arts and Sciences, when he studieth not
how to escape damnation, is not to be Learned, but to dote; nor to be
honorably or prudently employed, but to walk as a noctambulo, a man in a
dream, and live besides the Reason of a man, as well as below the faith of a
Christian: These seemingly wise and honorable worldlings, that labor not to
know what state and relation they stand in toward God, and his Judgment, do
live in a more pernicious distraction then he that is disputing in mood and
figure while his house is burning over his head, or he that is learning to
fiddle or dance, when he is assaulted by an enemy, or to be tried for his life.

Even works of charity seem but absurd preposterous acts, in those that are not
charitable to themselves. To be careful to feed or cloth the bodies of the
poor, and senseless of the nakedness and misery of your own souls, is an
irrational distracted course of Mercy: As if a man should be diligent to cure
another of a boil, while he minds not the plague or leprosy upon himself: or
should be busy to pull a thorn out of another finger, and senseless of a st^b
that's given himself in the bowels or at the heart. To Love your self, and not
your neighbor, is selfish, unsociable and uncharitable. To Love neither your
neighbor nor your self, is inhumane: To Love your neighbor and not your self
is preposterous, irrational, and scarcely possible. But to Love first your self
(next God,) and then to Love your neighbor as your self, is regular, orderly,
Christian Charity.

10. Consider also, that the Ignorance of your selves, does much unfit you to
be useful unto others. If you are Magistrates, you will never be soundly
faithful against the sin of others, till you have felt how hurtful it is to
your selves. If you are Ministers, you will scarce ever be good at
heart-searching work, till you have searched your own: Nor will you know the
deceitfulness of sin, and the turnings and windings of the crooked Serpent,
till you have observed them in your selves: Nor will you have due compassion on
the ignorant, impenitent, ungodly, unconverted, or on the tempted, weak,
disconsolate souls, till you have learned rightly to be affected with sin and
misery in your selves. If men see a Magistrate punish offenders, or hear a
Minister reprove them, that is as bad or worse himself, they will but deride
the Justice of the one, and reproofs of the other, as the acts or words of
blind partiality and hypocrisy; and accoast you with a Medice cura teipsum,
Physician heal thy self: with a Loripidem rectus derideat, Aethiopem abbus,
etc. -- and a Primus jussa subi, etc. and a Qui alterum incusat probri, ipsum
se intueri oportet] First sweep before your own door. Its ridiculous for the
blind to reproach the pur-blind: Qua in aliis reprehendis, in teipso maxim
reprehende. Reprehend that more in thy self, which thou reprehendest in
another. The eye of the soul is not like the eye of the body, that can see
other things, but not it self. There are two evils that Christ notes in the
reproofs of such as are unacquainted with theselves, in Math. 7.3, 4.
Hypocrisy and Unfitness to reprove. [Why beholdest thou the mote that is in
thy brothers eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thy own eye? Or how
will thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the moat out of thine eye, and
behold, a beam is in thy own eye? Thou Hypocrite, first cast the beam out of
thine own eye, and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the moat out of thy
brothers eye.] Thy own vices do corrupt thy judgment, and cause thee to excuse
the like in others, and to accuse the virtue that in others is the condemner of
thy vice, and to represent all as odious that is done by those that by their
piety and reproofs are become odious to thy guilty and malicious soul. Do
thou hate a holy heavenly life, and art void of the love of God, and of his
servants? Have thou a carnal, dead, unconverted heart? art thou a presumptuous,
careless, worldly wretch? Have thou these beams in thy own eye? and art thou
fit to quarrel with others that are better then thy self, about a Ceremony or a
Holy day, or a circumstance of Church Government or Worship, or a doubtful
controverted opinion? and to be pulling these motes out of thy Brothers eye?
(Yea, rather would pull out his eyes, to get out the mote:) First get an
illuminated mind; and a renewed sanctified heart; be acquainted with the Love
of God, and of his Image; and cast out the beam of infidelity, ungodliness,
worldliness, sensuality, malice and hypocrisy, from thine own eye; and then
come and play the Oculist with thy brother, and help to cure him of his lesser
involuntary errors and infirmities. Till then the beam of thy sensuality and
impiety will make thee a very incompetent Judge, of the mote of a different
opinion in thy brother. Every word that thou speak in condemnation of thy
brother, for his opinion or infirmity, is a double condemnation of thy self for
thy ungodly, fleshly life. And if thou will needs have judgment to begin at
the house of God, for the failings of his sincere and faithful servants, it
may remember thee to thy terror what the end of them shall be that obey not the
Gospel of God: And if you will condemn the righteous for their lamented
weaknesses, where think you the ungodly and the sinner shall appear? 1 Pet.
4.17, 18.

11. If you begin not at your selves, you can make no progress to a just and
edifying knowledge of extrinsick things. Man's self is the Alphabet or Primer of
his learning. Non pervenitur ad summa nisi per inferiora. You cannot come to
the top of the stairs, ^f you begin not at the bottom. Frustra cor^dis oculum
erigit ad videndum Deum, qui ^^ondum idoneus est ad videndum scipsum: Prius
enim est ut cognoscas invisibilia spiritus tui, quam possis esse idoneus (...)
cognoscendum invisibilia Dei; and si non potes te cognoscere, non praesumas
appre^endere ea quae sunt supra te (inquit. Hug. de Anim.) i. e. [In vain does
he lift up his heart to see God, that is yet unfit to see himself. For thou
must first know the invisible things of thy own spirit, before thou can be
fit to know the invisible things of God. And if thou can not know thy self,
presume not to know the things that are above thy self.] You cannot see the
face which it represents, if you will not look upon the glass which
represents it. God is not visible, but appears to us in his creatures; and
especially in (...) selves. And if we know not our selves, w^ cannot know God
in our selves. [Praecipu^ and principale est speculum ad videndum Deum animus
rationalis intuens scipsum (in^^ Hug.) The principal glass for the beholdin^ of
God, is the Reasonable soul beholding it self*

And you will make but an unhappy progress in your study of the Works of God*
if you begin not with your selves. Yo^ can know but little of the Works of
Nature* till you know your own nature: And you can know as little of the Works
of Grace* till self-acquaintance help you to know the nature and danger of
those diseases that Grace must cure. The unhappy error (...) presumptuous
students, about their ow^ hearts, misleadeth and perverteth them in the whole
course of their studies; that by all, they do but profit in misapplied notions
and self-deceit. Its a lamentable fight to see a man turning over Fathers and
Councils, and diligently studying words and notions, that is himself in the
gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, and never knew it, nor studieth the
cure. And its a pitiful thing to see such in a Pulpit, teaching the people to
know the mysteries of salvation, that know not, nor ever labored to know, what
sins are predominant in their own hearts and lives; or Whether they stand
before God in a justified or a condemned state! To hear a poor unsanctified
man, as boldly treating of the mysteries of sanctification, as if he had felt
them in himself: and a man that is condemned already, and stays but a while
till the stroke of death, for final execution, to treat as calmly of judgment
and damnation, as if he were out of danger; and exhorting others to escape the
misery which he is in himself, and never dreameth of it! This shows how sad a
thing it is for men to he ignorant of themselves. To see men run out into
damnable and dangerous errors on each hand, some into the proud
self-conceitedness of the Phanaticks, Enthusiasts and Libertines, and some into
contempt and scorn of holiness, and every one confident even to rage in his own
distractions; this does but show us, whither men will go, that are unacquainted
with themselves.

This also makes us so troubled with our auditors, that when they would learn
the truth that should convert and save them, are carping and quarrelling with
us, and hear us as the Pharisees and Herodians heard Christ, to catch him in
his words, Mark. 12.13. As if a dying man in a consumption, imagining that he
is well* should go to the Physicion to make a jest of him, or seek to ruin
him for telling him that he is sick. And how frowardly do they reject the
wisest counsel, and cast the medicine with unthankful indignation into the
face of the Physicion? And they must tell us themselves what medicine must be
given them, what doctrine, and what administrations they must have. But
self-acquaintance would teach them to understand that of Augustine [Novit
medicus quid salutiferum, quidve contrarium petat aegrotus. Aegroti estis,
nolite ergo dictare quae vobis medicamnia velit opponere.]

Yea, they that will not be directed or healed by us, will blame us if others
be not healed, and hit the Minister in the teeth with the errors and faults of
his unteachable hearers. Though we do our best in season and out of season, and
they cannot tell us what we have neglected on our part that was like to do the
cure (though I confess we are too often negligent:) and though we succeed to
the conversion of many others; yet must we be reproached with the disobedience
of the impenitent! as if it were not grief enough to us, to have our labors
frustrate, and see them obstinate in their sin and misery, but we must also be
blamed or derided for our calamity!

Fecerit and postquam quicquid jubet ipsa medendi
Norma, nisi valeat subitoque revixerit aeger,
Murmurat insipiens vulgus, linguaq, loquaci,
Et loquitur de te convitia, talia jactans,
Hen mihi, quam stultum est medicorum credere nugis!
As if they knew not the power of the disease; and what a wonder of mercy it is
that any and so many are recovered.

Non est in medico semper reveletur ut aeger;
Interdum docta plus valet art malum.
None would die if Physicions could cure all: And none would perish if
Ministers could save all. Rhetor non semper persuadebit, nec medicus semper
sanabat, says the Philosopher. They cast away the medicine, and then blame the
Physicion. Crudelem vel infalicem medicum intemeperans eger facit. An
intemperate unruly patient makes the Physician seem cruel or unsuccesfull.

12. Lastly consider but how many, how great and necessary things concerning
your selves you have to know, and it will show you how needful it is to make
this the first of your studies. To know what you are as men; with what
faculties you are endowed, and to what use; for what end you live; in what
Relation you stand to God and to your fellow creatures; what duties you owe;
what sin is in your hearts; and what has been by commission and omission in
your lives; what humiliation, contrition and repentance you have for that sin;
Whether you have truly entertained an offered Christ; and are renewed and
sanctified by his spirit; and unreservedly devoted to God, and resolved to be
entirely his: Whether you Love him above all, and your neighbors as your
selves; Whether you are Justified and have forgiveness of all your sins;
Whether you can bear afflictions from the hand, or for the sake of Christ, even
to the forsaking of all the world for the hopes of the heavenly everlasting
treasure; how you perform the daily works of your relations and callings;
Whether you are ready to die, and are safe from the danger of damnation. O did
you but know how it concerns you to get all these questions well resolved,
you would find more matter for your studies in your selves, then in many
volumes. You would then perceive that the matters of your own hearts and lives,
are not so lightly and carelessly to be past over, as they ordinarily be by
drowsy sinners: To consider but Quid, Quis, Qualis sis; Quid in natura, Quis
in persona, Qualis in vita (ut Bern.) would find you no small labor. And it
would redound (says another) in utilitatem sui, charitatem proximi, contemptum
mundi, amorem Dei: to our own profit, charity to our neighbor, the contempt of
the world, and the love of God.

If you have but many and weighty businesses to think on in the world, you are
so taken up with care, that you cannot turn away your thoughts. And yet do you
find no work at home, where you have such a world of things to think on, and
such as of all the matters in the world, do nearliest concern you?

Having showed you so much Reason for this duty, let me now take leave to
invite you all, to the serious study of your selves. It is a duty past all
controversy agreed on by heathens as well as Christians, and urged by them in
the general, though many of the particulars to be known are beyond their
light: It brutifyeth man to be ignorant of himself. Man that is in honor and
understands not (himself especially) is as the beasts that perish. Psalm.
49.20. says Boethius, [Humana natura infra bestias redigitur, si se nosse
desierit: Nam caeteris animantibus sese ignorare natura est; hominibus vitio
venit] Its worse then beastly to be ignorant of our selves, it being a vice in
us, which is nature in them.

Come home you wandering self-neglecting souls; Lose not your selves in a
wilderness or tumult of impertinent, vain, distracting things; your work is
nearer you; The country that you should first survey and travail, is within
you; from which you must pass to that above you: when by losing your selves in
this without you, you will find your selves before you are aware, in that below
you. And then (as Gregory speaks) he that was stultus in culpa, a fool in
sining, will be sapiens in poena, wise in suffering! you shall then have time
enough to review your lives, and such constraining help to know your selves, as
you cannot resist. O that you would know but a little of that now, that then
you must elss know in that overwhelming evidence which will everlastingly
confound you! And that you would now think of that for a timely cure, which
else must be thought of endlesly in despair. Come home then, and see what work
is there. Let the eyes of fools be in the corners of the earth! Leave it to
men besides themselves, to live as without themselves, and to be still from
home, and waste that time in other business, that was given them to prepare for
life eternal. [ Laudabilior est animus, cui nota est infirmitas propria, quam
qui ea non perspecta, mania mu^di, vias syderum, fundamenta terrarum, and
fastigia caelorum scrutatur] inquit August. [The soul is more laudable that
knows its own infirmity, then he that without discerning this does search
after the compass of the world, the courses of the stars, the foundations of
the earth, and the heights of the heavens.] Do thou delight in the mysteryes
of nature? consider well the mysteryes of thy own. Mirantur aliqui altiudines
montium, ingentes fluctus mari^, altissimos lapsus fluminum, and Oceani
^^bitum, and gyros syderum, and relinquunt seipsos, nec mirantur]. says
Augustine [ some men admeire the heights of mountains, the huge waves of the
sea, the great falls of the rivers, the compass of the Ocean and the circuit of
the stars, and they pass by them themseves without admiration] The compendium
of all that thou studyest without thee, is near thee, even within thee, thy
self being the epitome of the world. If either necessiry or duty, nature or
grace, reason or faith, internal inducements, external repulses, or eternal
attractives and motives, might determine of the subject of your studies and
contemplations, you would call home your lost distracted thoughts, and employ
them more on yourselves and God.

But before I urge this duty further, I must prevent the misapplication of some
troubled souls; I must confess it is a grievous thing for a guilty soul to
judge it self, and see its own deformity and danger: And I observe many
troubled humbled souls, especially where melancholy much prevails, are
exceeding prone to abuse this duty, by excess and by misdoing it: Though
wandering minds must be called home, we must not run into the other extreme,
and shut up our selves, and wholly dwell on the motions of our own distempered
hearts: Though straggling thoughts must be turned inward, and our hearts must be
watched, and not neglected; yet must we not be always poreing on our selves,
and neglect the rest of our intellectual converse: To look too long on the
running of a stream will make our eyes misjudge of what we after look on, as if
all things had the same kind of motion: To look too long on the turning of a
wheel, will make us vertiginous, as if all turned round. And to pore too long
on the disordered motions, the confused thoughts, the wants, the passions of
our diseased minds, will but molest us, and cast us into greater disquiet and
confusion. The words of Anselme notably express the streights that Christians
are here put to [ O nimis gravis angustia, si me inspicio, non tolero meipsum:
si non inspicio, nescio meipsum: si me considero, terret me facies mea: si me
non considero, fallit me damnaetio mea; si me video, horror est intolerabilis:
si non video, mors est i^e^tabilis.] [O grievous straight! If I look (...) my
self, I cannot endure my self: if I look not into my self I cannot know my
self. If I consider my self, my own face affrighteth me: if I consider not my
self, my damnation deceives me: If I see my self, the horror is intolerable*
if I see not my self, death is unavoidable.]

In this straight we must be careful to avoid both extremes; and nether
neglect the study of our selves, nor yet exceed in putting on our selves. To be
carelessly ignorant of our selves, is to undo our selves for ever: To be too
much about our selves, is to disquiet rather then to edyfie our selves; and to
turn a great and necessary duty into a great unnecessary trouble.

Consider, 1. that we have many other matters of great importance to study and
know when we know our selves. We must chiefly study God himself; and all the
Books of Scripture, Nature and Governing providence which make him known. What
abundance of great and excellent Truths, have we in all these to study. What
time, what industry is necessary to understand them? And should we lay out all
this time about our own hearts and actions, which is but one part of our study.
What sinful omis^^ons should we be guilty of in the ne^^ecting of all these! It
is indeed but the ^^rying of our talent of understanding, (...) confine it to
so narrow a compass as our ^^lves, and to omit the study of God, and ^is word
and works, which are all with ^elight and diligence to be studied.

We have also Christ and his Gospel myste^ies and benefits to study. We have
the ^hurches case, its dangers, sufferings, and ^eliverances to study: We have
the state of ^ur neghbours and brethren to consider of: The mercyes, and
dangers, and sufferings both of their souls and bodies: we have our enemies to
think of with due compassion: and our duty to all these.

2. And as it is negligence and omission to be all at home, and pass by so
great a part of duty; so is it a double frustration of our labor, and will
make even this study of ourselves to be in vain. 1. We cannot come by all our
study to the true knowledge of our selves, unless we also study other things
besides our selves. For we are Related to God, as his creatures, as his Own, as
his subjects and as his dependant children, as his Redeemed, and his sanctified
ones, (or such as should be such) And if we know not God as Creator, Redeemer
and Sanctifyer; as our Owner, Ruler and ^^^nefactor; and know not what his
creation Redemption, sanctification, his Title Gover^^ment and Benefits mean,
it is not possi^^^ that we should know our selves. Mutual ^^^lations must be
known together, or neither (...) be known.

2. And if we could know our selves, an^ know no more, it were but to know
Nothing, and lose that knowledge. For this (...) but the entrance into
wisdom, and the means and way to higher knowledge. Th^^ learning of our
Alphabet or Primer is lost* if we learn no further; you are therefore (...)
study and know your selves that you may advance to the knowledge of Christ and
his grace, and be acquainted which the Remedy of all that you find amiss at
home: and that by Christ you may be brought unto the Father, and know God as
your happiness and rest; you are not your own ultimate ends, and therefore must
go further in your studyes then yourselves.

3. We shall never attain to Rectitude or solid comfort and content, unless
our studyes go further then ourselves. For we are not the Rule to our selves,
but crooked lines! and cannot know what is right and wrong, if we study not the
Rule as well as ^ur selves. And alas, we are diseased, miserable sinners. And
to be always looking on so sad a spectacle, can bring no peace or comfort to
the mind. To be still looking on the sore, and hearing only the cry of
conscience, will be but a foretaste of Hell. When we would be humbled and have
matter of lamentation, we must look homeward, where the troubling thorns and
nettles of corruption grow. But if we would be comforted and lift up, we must
look higher, to Christ and to his promises, and to everlasting life: our garden
bears no flowers or fruits that are so cordial.

This much I have spoke by way of Caution, 1. That you may not think I am
driving you into the extreme of solitude, and confining or imprisoning you at
home. 2. Because some scarce know how to avoid a fault, without running into
another on the other side the way: nor how to understand the right use of a
doctrine, but are turning it into an abuse, and building sin upon the
foundation of righteousness.

Two sorts of persons have great need of this caution, that they dwell not too
much on themselves. One is poor Melancholy people that can think of almost
nothing else: Their distemper disposes them to be always poring on
themselves, and fir^^ their thoughts on their sin and misery and searching into
all their own miser^ ages, and making them worse then inde^^ they are: You
cannot call off their though^ from continual self-condemning, and (...) on
their own misdoings and unhappiness* They have a God, a Christ, a heaven, a
treasure of precious promises to meditate on (...) and they cannot hold their
thoughts to these, (unless as they aggravate their sin and sorrows,) but live
as if they had nothing to think on but themselves; and were made to be their
own tormentors: day and night even when they should labor, and when they
should sleep, they are busy in a fruitless vexation of themselves* These poor
afflicted souls have need to be called from the excessive study of themselves.

Another sort is, those Christians that are wholly taken up in enquiring
whether they have saving grace or not; while they neglect that exercise of
their grace, in doing all the good they can to others, and following on the way
of faithful duty, which might do more to their assurance, then solitary trials.

The former sort by overdoing in this one ^art of their work, disable
themselves to ^ll the rest. They tire and distract their ^inds, and raise such
fears as hinder their ^nderstandings, and cast their thoughts unto such
confusion, that they quite lose ^he command of them, and cannot gather them up
for any holy work: Yea while ^hey study nothing but themselves, they ^^se even
the knowledge of themselves: ^hey gaze so long upon their faults and ^ants,
till they can see nothing else; and ^now no apprehenosins but dark and sad; and
wilfully unlearn the language of thanks^iving and praise; and the burden of all
their thoughts and speeches, is, Miserable and Undone: as if there were for
them ^o mercy, no help, no hope, but they were ut^^rly forsaken and cast off by
God.

The other sort, do so exceed in the measure of that self-love, which in it
self is ^ood, that they neglect the study of the Love of God; And are still
thinking what ^hey are and have been; when they should ^onsider what they must
be. They spend ^o much time in trying their foundation, that ^hey can make but
little progress in the ^uilding. They are lik Musicians that will ^pend all the
day in setting Instruments in ^^^ne; Or like a Mower that spends most of his
time in whetting. They are all (...) preparing their tools while they should
(...) working! And putting on their (...) and preparing their weapons, when
th^^ should be fighting: And enquiring which (...) the way, while they should
be travelli^^* They leave undone too much of their (...) without doors while
they confine themsel^^^ to that within: And that within goes on (...) worse,
because they neglect that with^^^ doors, which should further it. When th^^
should instruct the ignorant, exhort (...) obstinate, confirm the weak, or
co^^fort the afflicted, they are complaining (...) their own ignorance,
obstinacy, weakne^^ or affliction; and help not others bec^^^^ they feel such
need of help themselves* As if they were like beggars, that had no^thing to
give, but must live by asking and receiving: They understand not that its (...)
of the mysteries of godliness, that teaching others does inform themselves, and
the Light which they bring in for others, will serve themselves to work by; and
that reproving others does correct themselves: and exhorting others does
prevail with themselves* and persuading the obstinate wills of others* does
tend to bend and resolve their (...) and that comforting others does tend to
(...) and raise themselves: Their own spirits may be a little revived, by the
very smell of the Cordials they prepare for others. In this case, Giving is
both Begging and Receiving. Doing good is not the least effectual kind of
prayer: And that we may be so employed, is not the smallest mercy. Many a one
has thus grown rich by giving: Many a one has convinced himself by confuting
his own objections from another: And many a one has raised and comforted
himself, by offering comfort to others that have the same infirmities; and have
banished their own ^^cessive doubts and fears, by frequent compassionate
answering the same in others whose sincerity they have less suspected then
their own.

None thrive more then they that grow in the Sun shine of Gods blessing: And
God blesses those most that are most faithful in his work: And the work of
Love* is the work of God. To do good, is to be most like him: And they that are
most like him, do best please him. In subordination to Christ, in whom we are
accepted, we must by his spirit be made thus acceptable in our selves: We must
be amiable if we will be loved. And those that God loves best, and is most
pleas^^ with, are like to receive most p^en^^ously from his Love. It is
necessary therefore to our own safety, and holiness, and consolation, that we
look much abroad at the necessities of others, and study our brethren, and the
Church of God, as well as our selves: That we look not every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of others, Phil. 2.4.

There may be somewhat of inordinate selfishness, even about our souls: And
sinful selfishness is always a losing course. As he that will be a self-saver
in point of estate, or honor, or life, takes the ready way to lose them (
Mat. 16.15.) so he that for the saving of his soul, will confine all his care
and charity to his own soul, takes not the way indeed to save it. We keep not
our selves; We quicken not; We comfort not; We save not our selves; but only as
agents under Christ, manuring the land, and sowing the seed, to which he alone
can give the blessing: It is not therefore our inordinate self-studying that
will do it: With all our care, without his blessing, we cannot add one cubit to
the stature of our graces: Therefore it must needs be our safest course, to be
as careful and faithful as we can in duty, and lay out most of our study to
please him; and then if we come not to assurance of his love, or discern not
his image and grace upon us, ye^ we must trust him with our souls, and leave
the rest to his Care and Goodness, that has undertaken that none shall be
losers by him, nor be ashamed or frustrate of their hopes, that wait upon him,
and obey him: Let us commit the keeping of our souls to him in well doing, as
unto a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4.19. As the eyes of servants look to the hand
of their Masters -- so our eyes (in a way of duty) must wait upon the Lord our
God, till he have mercy upon us, Psalm. 123.1, 2. And though we grow weary of
crying, and our throat be dried, and our eyes fail while we wait for God,
(Psalm. 69.3.) yet our hope is only in him, and therefore we must continue to
wait upon him, Psalm. 39.7. And they that wait for him shall not be ashamed,
Isa. 49.23.

It is not the pretended necessity of one work, that will excuse him that has
many as necessary to do: Especially when they are conjunct in nature and
necessity, and must go together, to attain their end. Concerning God, as we may
well say that we must Love and serve him only, and none but him, because we
must Love nothing but for his sake, and as a means to him the End of all: and
so while it is God in all things that we Love, we are more properly said to
Love God then the Creature by that act, because he is the Ultimate first
intnded end, and principal object of that Love; And as the means, as a means,
has its essence in its relation to the End; so the Love of the means, as such,
is accordingly specified: And so we may say of our study and Knowledge of God,
that nothing but God is to be studied or known: because it is God in the
creature that must be studied: It is a defective Similitude (as all are) to
say, [ As it is the face that we behold the glass for:] For God is more in the
creature then the face in the glass. But though all the means be united in the
End, yet are they various among themselves. And therefore though we must study,
know and Love nothing but God; yet must we study, know and Love many things
besides our selves: The means that are many, must all be thought on. More
strings must be touched then one (how near soever) if we will have any Music.
More Letters must be learned than [ I,] or we shall never learn to read.

All men will confess that to confine our charity to our selves, and to do good
to no others, is unlike a Christian: To deny to feed and clothe our Brother in
his need, is to deny it unto Christ: And it will be no excuse, if we were able,
to say, I laid it out upon my self. And the objects of our charity must be the
objects of our thoughts and care: And it will not suffice for our excuse, to
say, [ I was taken up at home; I had a miserable soul of my own to think on.]

And yet if these self-studying souls, that confine almost all their thoughts
unto themselves, would but seek after God in themselves, and see his grace, and
benefits, it were the better: But poor souls, in the darkness of temptation,
they overlook their God; and most of their study of themselves, is to see Satan
and his workings in themselves: To find as much of his image as they can, in
the deformities or infirmities of their souls; but the image of God they
overlook, and hardly will acknowledge. And so, as noble objects raise the soul,
and amiable objects kindle love, and comfortable objects fill it with delight;
and God, who is all in One perfection, does elevate and perfect it, and make it
happy; so inferior objects do depress it; and ugly loathsome objects fill it
with distaste and loathing; and sad and mournful objects turn it into grief;
And therefore to be still looking on our miseries, and deformities, must needs
turn calamity and woe into the temperament and complexion of the soul.

This much I thought needful to be spoken here to prevent misunderstanding and
misapplication: that while I am pressing you to study and know your selves, I
may not encourage any in extremes, nor tempt them to make an ill use of so
great and necessary a doctrine: And indeed the observation of the sad calamity
of many poor drooping afflicted souls, that are still poreing excessively on
their own hearts, commanded me not to overpass this caution. And yet when I
have done it, I am afraid lest those in the contrary extreme, will take
encouragement to neglect themselves, by my reprehensions of those that are so
unlike them.

And therefore I must add, to save them from deceit; 1. That it is but a very
few that are faulty in overstudying themselves, in comparison of the many
thousands that err on the other hand in the careless neglecting of themselves.
2. And that it is symptomatically and effectively far more dangerous, to study
your selves too little, then too much. Though it be a fault here to exceed, yet
it is for the most part a sign of an honest heart to be much at home, and a
sign of an Hypocrite to be little at home and much abroad. Sincerity makes men
censurers of themselves. For it makes them more impartial, and willing to know
the truth of their condition: It cures them of that folly that before made
them think that presumption shall deliver them, and that they shall be
Justified by believing promises of their own, though contrary to the word of
God; yea by believing the promises of the Devil, and calling this a Faith in
Christ: They are awakened from that sleep in which they dreamed that winking
would save them from the stroke of Justice, and that a strong conceit that they
shall not be damned, will deliver them from damnation; and that they are safe
from Hell if they can but believe that there is no Hell, or can but forget it,
or escape the fears of it. These are the pernicious Conclusions of the ungodly,
discernable in their lives, and intimated in their presumptuous reasonings,
though too gross to be openly and expressly owned: And therefore they are
undisposed to any impartial acquaintance with themselves.

But grace recovereth men from this distraction; and makes them know that the
Judgment of God will not follow the conceits of men; and that the knowledge of
their disease is necessary to their cure; and the knowledge of their danger is
necessary to the prevention; and that its the greatest madness to go on to
Hell, for fear of knowing that we are in the way; and to refuse to know it, for
fear of being troubled at the news.

And an upright soul is so far fallen out with sin, that he takes it seriously
for his enemy; and therefore is willing to discover it in order to its
destruction; and willing to search after it in order to a discovery.

And he has in him some measure of the heavenly illumination, which makes him
a child of light, and disposes him to love the light, and therefore comes to
it that his deeds may be made manifest, Joh. 3.21. Hypocrites are quick-sighted
in discovering infirmities of others; but at home they shut the windows, and
draw the curtains, that they may not be disturbed or frightened in their sin;
Thieves and sleepers choose not light: Darkness suits the works of darkness. It
is a good sign when a man dare see his own face in the glass of Gods word; and
when he dare hear his conscience speak. I have ever observed it in the most
sincere-hearted Christians, that their eye is more upon their own hearts and
lives, than upon others: and I have still observed ^he most unsound professors
to be least cen^orious and regardfull of themselves, and ^ardly drawn to
converse at home, and to ^ass an impartial judgment on themselves.

HEnce therefore you may be informed of the reason of many other dif^erences
between sincere Believers and the ^ngodly. As 1. Why it is that the sincere ^re
so ready to discourse about matters of ^he heart; and that they so much relish
^^ch discourse; and that they have so much (...) say when you come to such a
subject. ^t is because they know themselves in some ^ood measure. They have
studied, and ^re acquainted with the Heart; And therefor can talk the more
sensibly of what is ^ontained in a book which they have so ^ften read, and are
so conversant in. ^alk with them about the matters ^f the world, and perhaps
you may ^ind them more simple and ignorant then many of their neighbors; But
when you ^alk about the Corruptions of the heart, and the secret workings of
them; the mat^er, and order, and government of the thoughts, and affections,
and passions; (...) wants and weaknesses of believers; the n^^ture and workings
of inward temptation^ the ways of grace, and of the exercise (...) each grace;
the motions and operation of the spirit upon the heart; the breathi^^ of Love
and desire after God; the a^^dresses of the soul to Christ by fait^ and
dependence on him, and receivi^^ from him; about these secret matters (...) the
Heart, he is usually more able in d^^^course, then many learned men that are
(...) sanctified.

And hence it is that upright self-obs^^^ving souls are so full in prayer, and
(...) to pour out their hearts so enlargedly ^^^fore the Lord, in confessing
their sins, (...) petitioning for grace, and opening the necessities, and
thanking God for spirit^^^ mercies! Some that are themselves acquai^^^ed with
themselves, and the workings (...) grace, despise all this, and say, It is but
(...) ability to speak of the things which they (...) most used to. I doubt not
but mere ac^quired abilities and custom may advan^^ some hypocrites, to pray in
the languag^ of experienced Christians. And I doubt no^ but natural
impediments, and want of use, an^ of right education, may cause many to (...)
^onvenient expressions, that have true de^^res. But the question is, from
whence it ^^mes to pass, that so great a number of those that are most careful
and diligent ^or their souls, are so full in holy conference ^^d prayer, when
very few others that ex^^ll them in learning and natural parts, ^ave any such
ability? And doubtless the ^hief reason is, that the care and study of ^hese
Christians, has been most about their ^piritual estate; And that which they
set their hearts upon, they use their tongues upon: Generally it cannot be
imagined, why they should use themselves to those ^tudies and exercises which
procure those ^bilities, but that they highlyest esteem, and most seriously
regard the matters that concern their salvation, which are the subject. I doubt
not but God bestows his gifts upon men in the use of means, and that it is
partly use that makes men able and ready in these services of God: But what
reason can be given, why one part of men use themselves to such employments,
and another part are unable through disuse, but that some do set their hearts
upon it, and make it their business to know themselves, their sins and wants
and seek relief, when by the others all this is neglected. Some hypocrites may
be moved by lower ends, both in this and in other duties of Religion; but
that is no rule for our judgeing of the intentions of the generality, or of any
that are sincere. As a man that has lived in the East or West Indies, is (...)
to discourse of the places and people which he has seen, and perhaps another
by a Map or history may say somewhat of the same subject, though less
distinctly and sensibly; but others can say nothing of it: so a man of holy
experience in the mysteries of sanctification, that is much conversant at home,
and acquainted with his own heart, is able (if other helps concur) to speak
what he feels, to God and man, and from his particular observation and
experience, to frame his prayers and spiritual conference; and an hypocri^^
from Reading and common observation, may do something affectedly that is like
it: but careless self-neglecting worldlings are usually dumb about such
matters, and hear you as they do men of another Country, that talk in a
language which they do not understand, or at least cannot make them any answer
in.

But if any of you will needs think more basely and maliciously, of the cause
of holy prayer and conference in believers, let us leave them for the present
(to the Justification of him that gave them the spirit of supplication which
you reproach,) and let us only enquire what is the Reason that men that can
discourse as hansomely as others, about worldly matters, have nothing to say
(beyond a few cold affected words, which they have learnt by rote) either to
God or man, about the matters of the soul, the methods of the spirit, the
workings of a truly penitent heart, or the elevations of faith, and the
pantings of desire after God. Why are you dumb when you should speak this
language, and frequently and delightfully speak it? Is it because your Reason
is lower then those men's that do speak it, whom you despise? and that you are
naturally near kin to idiots? No; you are wise enough to do evil: You can talk
of your trades, your honors or employments, your acquaintance and
correspondencies all the day long; You are more wordy about these little
things, then the Preachers themselves that you count most ^edious are about the
greatest. You are ^uch longer discoursing of your delusory ^oyes, then the
Lovers of God, whose souls ^ong after him, are in those Prayers, which trouble
you with their length: Many a time have I been forced to hear your dreaming
incoherent dotage: how copious you are in words that signify no greater
matters then flesh pleasing, or fancifull honour^ and accomodations; I had
almost said, the^^ chaff, or straw or dirt. One may he^^ you from morning to
night, from day to day, discoursing in variety of company, on various subjects,
with freedom and plausible ingenuity; And when all is se^ together, it is but a
hodge podge of earth and flesh and windy vanity, a frothy puddle. A^ the
ridiculous Orator, Magno Conatu and hiatu nihil dicitis: You strein and gap^ an
hour or a day together to say nothing* set all the words of a day together, and
peruse them at night, and see what they are worth: There Is little higher then
visible materials, (that I say not, then the dunghill or your shadows,) then
meat and drink, and play and complement, then houses, or lands, or domineering
affections o^ actions, in many hours or days discourse. I think of you
sometime, when I see how ingeniously and busily children do make up their
babies of clouts, and how seriously they talk about them, and how every (...)
and clout is matter of employment and dis^ourse, and how highly they value
them, and ^ow many days they can unweariedly ^pend about them. Pardon my
compari^on: If you repent not of your discourses and employments more then
they, and do not one day call your selves far worse fools then them, then let
me be stigmatized with the most contumelious brand of folly.

It is not then your want of Natural faculties and parts that makes you mute in
the matters of God and your salvation, when men of meaner naturals then you do
speak of those things with the greatest freedom and delight.

And sure it is not for want of an inge^nous education: As you would take it
ill to be thought below them in natural endowments, so much more in those
acquisitions and furniture of the mind, which comes by breeding and due culture
of your Naturals. You would disdain in these to be compared with many poor
rusticks and mechanics, that are almost as fluent in speaking of the great
things of immortality, as you are in talking of your transient occurrences,
your sublunary felicities, and the provisions of your Appetites and your Skins.
What then can be the cause of this dumb disease, but that you are unacquainted
with your selves? and as you have not a New Birth, and a Divine Nature, and the
Spirit of Christ, to be either the spring and principle or the Matter of your
discourse; so you have not the due knowledge of your sin and misery, which
should teach you the language of serious Penitents, before you have the
language of justified Believers.

If you say again, It is because we have not been used to this kind of speech.
I answer, And whence is it that you have not been used to it? If you had know
the Greatness and Goodness of the Lord, as sensibly as they, would not you have
used to Pray to him and speak of him as well as they? If you had known and
considered your sin, and wants, and miseries, or dangers, as well as they,
would you not have been used to beg mercy, pardon and relief, and to complain
of your distress as much as they? If you did as highly value the matters of
Eternal consequence as they do, and laid them to heart as seriously as they,
would not your minds and hearts have appeared in your speeches, and made you
use your selves to prayer and holy conference as well as others?

If you say, that many have that within them which they are not able to
express, or which they think not meet to open unto other, I answer.

1. As to Ability, its true of those that have the Impediments of some Natural
disability, or excessive bashfulness, Melancholy or the like disease; and of
those that are so lately converted, that they have not had time to learn and
use themselves to a holy language: But what is this to them that are of as good
natural parts and free elocution as other men, and suppose themselves to have
bin true Christians long?

2. And as to the point of Prudence which is pleaded for this silence, it is so
much against Nature, and so much against the word of God, that there is no
room at all for this pretense, unless it be for inferiors or such as want an
opportunity to speak to their superiors, or to strangers; or unless it be only
for some particular omissions when the thing would be unseasonable.

Nature has made the tongue the index of the mind: especially to express the
matters of most urgency and concernment. Do you keep silent ordinarily the
matters which you highliest esteem? which you oftenest think of? which you take
your life and happiness to consist in? and which you are deeplyest affected
with, and prefere before all other matters of the world? What a shameful
pretense is it, for those that are dumb to Prayer and holy conference, for want
of any due sense of their condition, or Love to God, which should open their
lips, to take on them it is for want of tongues or because their Prudence
directs them to silence? When they hold not their tongues about those
matters, which they must confess are ten thousand fold less regardable; they
can discourss unwearyedly about their wealth, their sport, their friend, their
honor, because they Love them; And if a man should here tell them, that the
Heart is not to be opened or exercised by the tongue, they would think he knew
not the natural use of Heart or Tongue: And yet while they pretend to love God
above all, they have neither skill nor will to make expression of it; you
strike them dumb when you turn the stream of conference that way; and you may
almost as well bid them speak in a strange language, as Pray to God from the
sense of their necessities, and yet they say, their Hearts are good.

Let the word of God be judge whether a Holy experienced Heart should hide
itself and not appear in Prayer and holy conference by the tongue. 1 Thessalonians.
5.17. Pray continually: Luke 18.1. Christ spoke a parable to this end, that men
ought always to pray and not wax faint. Phil. 4.6. Be careful for nothing:
but in every thing by Prayer, and supplication with thanksgiving let your
requests be made known unto God.

And How they must Pray, you may gather from 2 Chronicles. 6.29. In case of dearth,
Pestilence, blasting, mildew, locusts, caterpilers, enemies, sicknesses or
sores, [ Then what prayer or supplication soever shall be made of any man, or
of all the people, when every one shall know his own sore, and his own grief,
and shall spread forth his hands in this house, then hear thou from Heaven,
etc.] I am not speaking of the Prescribed Prayers of the Church, nor denying
the lawfullness of such in private. But if you have no words but what you say
by rote, and pray not from the knowledge of your own particular sore and
grief, it is because you are too much unacquainted with yourselves, and
strangers to those Hearts where the greatest of your sores and griefs are
lodged.

And whether Good Hearts should be opened in holy Conference, (as well as
Prayer) you may easily determine from the command of God* 1 Pet. 4.10.11. [ As
every man has received the gift, so minister the same one to another, as good
stewards of the manifold grace of God] If any man speak, let him speak as the
oracles of God. Ephesians 4.29. [ Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your
mouth, but that which is good, to the use of edifying, that it may minister
grace unto the hearers] Heb. 3.13. [ exhort one another daily while it is
called To day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfullnes of sin.]
Psalm. 37.30, 31. [ The mouth of the Righteous speaks wisdom, and his tongue
talks of judgment: The Law of his God is in his heart etc] Psalm. 71.8. Let my
mouth be filled with thy Praise and with thy honor all the day. Pro. 10.11.
The mouth of a Righteous man is a Well of life] 21. The lips of the Righteous
feed many] And Christ himself decideth it expressly, Math. 12.34.35. [ Out of
the abundance of the Heart the mouth speaks: A good man out of the good
treasure of his heart brings forth good things;

For a man that has no Heart to Prayer or Holy conference, but loathes them
and is weary of them, and had rather talk of fleshly pleasures, to pretend that
yet his Heart is Good, and that God will excuse him for not expressing it, and
that it is his Prudence, and his freedom from Hypocrisy, that makes his
tongue to be so much unacquainted with the goodness of his Heart, this is but
to play the Hypocrite to prove that he is no Hypocrite: and to cover his
Ignorance in the matters of his Salvation, with the expression of his Ignorance
of the very nature and use of Heart and Tongue, and to cast by the Laws of
God, and his own duty, and cover this impiety with the name of Prudence. If
Heart and Tongue be not used for God, what do you either with a Heart or Tongue?

The case is plain, to men that can see that it is your strangness to your
selves, that is the cause that you have little to say against yourselves, when
you should confess your sins to God; and so little to say for your selves, when
you should beg his grace; and so little to say of your selves, when you should
open your hearts to those that can advise you: But that you see not that this
is the Cause of your Dumbness, who see so little of your own corruptions, is
no wonder while you are so strange at home. Had you but so much knowledge of
yourselves as to see that it is the strangeness to your selves that makes you
so prayerless and mute, and so much sense as to complain of your darkness, and
be willing to come into the light, it were a sign that light is coming in to
you, and that you are in a hopeful way of cure. But when you neither know
yourselves, nor know that you do not know yourselves, your Ignorance and Pride
are like to cherish your Presumption and impiety, till the Light of grace, or
the fire of Hell have taught you better to know your selves.

2. And here you may understand the reason why people fearing God are so apt to
accuse and condemn themselves, to be too much cast down; and why they that
have cause of greatest joy, do sometimes walk more heavily then others. It is
because they know more of their sinfulness, and take more notice of their
inward corruptions and outward failings, then presumptuous sinners do of
theirs. Because they know their faults and wants, they are cast down; But when
they come farther to see their interest in Christ and grace, they will be
raised up again. Before they are converted, they usually presume, as being
ignorant of their sin and misery: In the infancy of grace they know these, but
yet languish for want of more knoledge of Christ and mercy. But he that knows
fully both himself and Christ, both misery and mercy, is humbled and comforted,
Cast down and exalted. As a man that never saw the sea, is not afraid of it;
and he that sees it but a far off, and thinks he shall never come near it,
is not much afraid of it: he that is drowned in it, is worse then afraid: and
he that is tossed by the waves, and doubts of ever coming safe to harbor, is
the fearful person: he that is tossed but has good hopes of a safe arrival,
has fears that are abated or overcome with hope: but he that is safe-landed
is past his fears. The first is like him that never saw the misery of the
ungodly: the Second is like him that sees it in general, but thinks it does
not belong to him: the third is like the damned that are past remedy: the
fourth is like the humbled doubting Christian, that sees the danger, but does
too much question or forget the helps; the fifth is like the Christian of a
stronger faith, that sees the danger, but withal sees his help and safety:
the sixth is like the glorified saints, that are past the danger.

Though the doubting Christian know rot his sincerity, and therefore knows
not himself so well as the strong believer does, yet in that he knows his
sinfullness and unworthyness, he knows himself better then the presumptuous
world.

These two Remarkes, with the foregoing Caution, having interposed (some what
out of place) I now return to prosecute my Exhortation, that no matters may
seem so sweet, so honorable, so great, or necessary, as to pass with you for
excuses for the neglecting of the most diligent and impartial study of
yourselves.

All persons to whom I can address this Exhortation, are either Godly or
ungodly; in the state of sin, or in the state of Grace. And both of them have
need to study themselves.

I. And to begin with the unrenewed carnal sort, it is they that have the
greatest need, to be better acquainted with themselves. O that I knew how to
make them sensible of it; If any thing will do it, me thinks it should be
done by acquainting them how much their endless state is concerned in it. In
order hereunto let me yet add to all that is said already, these few
considerations;

1. If you know not yourselves, you know not whether you are the children of
God, or not: nor whether you must be for ever in Heaven or Hell; no nor whether
you may not within this hour behold the angry face of God, which will frown
you into damnation. And is this a matter for a man of Reason to be quietly and
contentedly ignorant of? It is a business of such unspeakable concernment, to
know whether you must be everlastingly in Heaven or Hell, that no man can spare
his cost or pains about it, without betraying and disgracing his
understanding: you are sure you shall be here but a little while: Those Bodies
you all know, will hold your souls but a little longer: As you know that you
that are now together here attending, must presently quit this room and be
gone; so you know that when you have staid a little longer, you must quit this
world, and be gone into another. And I think there is not the proudest of you
but would be taken down, nor the most sluggish or dead-hearted but would be
awakened, if you knew that you must go to endless misery, and that your dying
hour would be your entrance into Hell. And if you know not your selves, you
know not but it may be so. And to know nothing to the contray, would be
terrible to you if you well considered it, especialy when you have so much
cause to fear it. O Sirs, for a man to sit here sencelesly in these seats,
that knows not but he may burn in Hell for ever, and knows not because he is
blind and careless; how unsuitable is it to the principle of self love and self
preservation? and how much unbeseemi^^ the Rational Nature, to have no (...) or
care, when you look before you, unto the unquenchable fire and the utter
darkness where, as the Heathen Poet speaks, Nec mortis poenas mors altera
finiet huju^*
Horaque erit tantis ultima nulla malis.


If any of you think that all these matters are to be put to the adventure,
and cannot now be known, you are dangerously mistaken. As you may certainly
know by Scripture and the Light of Nature, that there is a future Life of joy
to the Godly* and of misery to the wicked, so may you know by a faithful
trial of yourselves, to which of these at present you belong, and whether you
are under the promise or the threatening; know yourselves, and you may know
whether you are Justified o^ Condemned already, and whether you are the Heirs
of Heaven or Hell. Surely he that comfort his servants with the Promise of
Glory to all that Believe and are new creatures, and sanctified by his spirit,
did suppose that we may know whether we Believe and are renewed and sanctified
or not: Or else What comfort can it be to us? If blinded Infidels, have no
means to quiet themselves but their unbelief, and a con^eit that there is no
such Life of misery, ^hey have the most pitiful O piate to ease them in the
world: and may as well think ^o become immortal, by a confident con^eit that
they shall never die. If they befoole themselves with the ordinary Questions [
where is Hell: and what kind of fire is it? etc] I answer them with Augustine [
Melius ^st dubitare de occultis, quam litigare de ^^^certis: Illum quippe
divitem in ardore ^oenarum, and illum pauperem in refrigerio gandiorum esse
intelligendos non dubito: sed quomodo intelligenda illa flamma in inferno, ille
sinus Abrahae, illa divitis lingua, ille digitus pauperis, illa sitis tormenti,
illa stilla refrigerii, vix fortasse a mansuete quarentibus, contentiose antem
sectantibus nunquam invenitur] that is, [ It is better to be in doubt about
things that are hidden from us, then to quarrel about things that are
uncertain to us. I am past doubt that we must understand that that Rich man
was in the heat of Pain, and the Poor man in a refreshing place of Joys: But
how to understand that flame in Hell, that bosom of Abraham, that tongue of
the Rich man, that finger of the poor man, that thirst of torment, that drop
for cooling or refreshment, perhaps will hardly be found by the most humble
enquirers, but never by contentious strivers.

So that I may conclude that the greatness and dreadfullness of the case,
should make every person that has an eye to see, an ear to hear, and a Heart
to understand, to Read and enquire and consider, and never rest till they know
themselves, and understand where it is that they are going to take up their
abode to everlasting.

2. Consider, that All men must shortly know themselves. Presumption will be
but of short continuance. Be never so confident of being saved without Holiness,
you will speedily be undeceived. If the Spirits illumination do not convince
and undeceive you, Death will undoubtedly do it at the furthest. Thousands and
Millions know their sin and misery now when it is too late, that would not know
it when the remedy was at hand; sinners, your souls are now in darkness: your
Bodies are your dungeon: But when Death brings you out into the open Light, you
will see what we could never make you see. O how glad would a faithful
minister of Christ be, if by any information he could now give you half the
Light that you shall then have, and now make you know at the Heart with the
feeling of Repentance, that which you must else quickly know, even at the Heart
with the feeling of despair; sirs, I hope you think not that I speak mere
fancies to you, or any think that is questionable and uncertain: you can not
say so without denying your selves to be Christians; no nor without
contradicting the light of Nature, and debasing your souls below the Heathen
who believe an immortality of souls in a different state of Joy or mtsery in
the Life to come: And if you are once below Heathens, what are you better then
Bruit beasts? Better in your natural faculties and powers, as being not made
Bruites by your Creator: But worse as to the use of them, and the consequents
to yourselves, because you are voluntary self-abusing Bruites. But to live here
as a Bruit, will not make you die and be hereafter as a Bruit: To belive you
shall die as a Beast, will not prevent the miserable life of an impenitent
sinner. It will not make your souls to be Mortal, to believe they are
mortal; no more then it will make a beast to be Immortal, if he could but
think so. The coffin-maker and the grave-maker, if they never read a Book, can
tell you that it is no controversy whether you must go hence. And Faith and
Reason can both assure you, that your souls lie not down with your Bodies in
the dust, nor are annihilated by the falling of your earthly tabernacle; no
more then the spirits when the glass is broken that held them, or then your
Bodies are annihilated when you put off your clothes, or rise out of your beds:
Or then the bird is annihilated that is got out of the shell: or the infant
that is by nature cast out of the womb: nor no more then the Angels that
appeared to the Apostles or others, were annihilated when they disappeared: Or
(if I must speak more suitably to the ungodly) no more then the Devil that some
time appears in a bodily shape is annihilated when that appearance vanishes.
As I suppose there is never a person in all this populous city that was here
but seven-score years ago; so I suppose there is none of you that are here to
day, that expect to be here so long a time: They are gone before you into a
world where there is no presumption or security: and you are going after them
and are almost there. As easily as you set here, I tell you all, you are going
after them apace, and are almost there:

O Sirs, that world is a world of Light. To the damned souls it is called
Outer darkness, because they have none of the Light of Glory or of Comfort: But
they shall have the Light of a self-accusing, self-tormenting Conscience that
is gone out of the darkness of self-ignorance and self-deceit, and is fully
cured of its slumber and insensibility.

Do you now take a civilized person for a Saint? you will not do so long.

Does the Baptism of water only go with you now for the Regeneration of the
Spirit? It will not be so long: you will shortly be undeceived.

Does a ceremonious Pharisee thank God for the sincerity and Holiness which he
never had? He will shortly be taught better to know the nature of Holiness and
sincerity, and that God Justifyeth not all that Justify themselves.

Does a little formal heartless, Hypocritical devotion, now cover a sensual,
worldly mind? The cover will be shortly taken off, and the nakedness and
deformity of the Pharisee will appear.

Does the name of a christian, and the heartless use of outward ordinances, and
that good esteem of others, now go for Godlyness and saving grace? The
Autumn is at hand, when these leaves will all lie in the dirt, and will go
for fruit no longer.

Do you take it now for true Religion to be hot for lust, and pride, and gain,
and cold for God and you Salvation? and to obey God so far as will stand with
your outward prosperity, and as the flesh, or your other Masters will give
leave? This is an Opinion that never accompanied any man beyond the grave.

Do you think to be saved by all that devotion, which gives God but the
leavings of the flesh and world, and by a Religion that gives him but the outer
rooms (when pleasure and gain are next your hearts) and that makes him but an
underling to your Covetousness and Ambition? Think so if you can, when you are
gone hence.

Cannot the Preacher now make the ungodly to know that they are ungodly, the
unsanctified to know they are but carnal, and the Pharisee to know that his
Religion is Vain? Death can convince the awakened soul of all this in a moment.

You can choose whether you will believe us: but Death will so speak as to be
believed. You must be Voluntary in knowing your misery now: but then you shall
know it against your wills. You must open the windows, or must open your eyes,
if you will see your selves by the Light which we bring to you: But Death
irresistibly throws open all. To say in pride and obstinacy, [ I will not
believe it] will now serve turn to quiet your consciences, and make you seem as
safe as any: But when God says You shall feel it, your unbelief is
uneffectual: It can then torment you, but it can no longer ease you. There Is
then no room for [ I will not believe it.] God can without a word persuade you
of that which you were resolved you would never be persuaded of.

This day while you all sit here in the body, you are every one affected
according as you apprehend your state to be, whether it be indeed as you
apprehend it, or not: But when Death has opened you the door into eternity,
you will be all affected with your conditions as they are indeed.

To day, you are here quiet because you think your souls are safe: and some are
troubled that think they are in a state of misery: and its like that some on
both sides are mistaken: and the quiet of one, and the disquiet of another, may
arise for want of the knowledge of your selves: But Death will rectify both
these errors: and then if you are unsanctified, no false opinions, no unbelief,
no confident conceits of your integreity, will abate your desperation, or give
any ease to your tormented minds: Nor will there be any doubts, or fears or
despairing self-afflicting thoughts to disquiet those that Christ has
justified, or a bate their Joys.

O how many thousands will then think much otherwise of themselves then they
now do! Death turns you out of the company of flatterers; and calls you out of
the world of error, where men laugh and cry in their sleep: and brings you
among awakened souls, where all things are called by their proper names, and
all men are taken by themselves to be as they are indeed. Serious Religion is
not there a derision; nor Loving and seeking and serving God with all the heart
and soul and might, is not there taken for unnecessary preciseness. Holiness is
not there called humor or Hypocrisy: Nor is the Pharisaical Ceremonious
Hypocrite, taken for a man of the most prudent, safe and moderate Religion. God
judges not as man, by outward appearances; but with righteous judgment: that
which is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God, Luke
16.15. And he will make you then to judge of your selves as he has judged you.
Though Wisdom now be Justified but of her children, it shall then be Justified
by all: Not by a sanctifying, but a constrained involuntary tormenting light:
And though now men can believe as well of themselves, as self-love and the
quieting of their consciences does require; yet then they will have lost this
mastery over their own conceits.

O therefore beloved Hearers, seeing you are all going into an unresistibly
convincing Light, and are almost in that world where all must fully know
themselves: Seeing nothing is covered that shall not be revealed, nor hid that
shall not be made known (Mat. 10.26.) and no unsanctified Hypocrite does
flatter himself into such high presumption, but a dying hour will take him
down, and turn it all into endless desperation, if true Conversion prevent it
not; I beseech you be more conversant with Conscience, then you have been: Be
ashamed that a wanton sot, that knows nothing better then flesh to adorn and
to be careful of, should bestow more hours in looking into the Glass, then you
bestow to look into Gods Word and your own Hearts; yea more in a year, then you
have thus bestowed in all your lives.

O that you knew what a profitable companion Conscience is for you to converse
with. You would not then think your selves so solitary as to be destitute of
company and employment, while you have so much to do at home, and one in your
bosom that you have so much business with.

And it is a necessary and inseparable companion: If the wise of your bosom
should be a shrew, you must not therefore be a stranger to her, because of
nearness, necessity and business. If Conscience should give you some foul
words, and chide you when you had rather be flattered; yet there is no running
from it for more pleasant company: Home is homely: Its there that you must
dwell: Conscience is married to you: Please it on safe terms as well as you
can: but do not think to overrun it: For it will follow you; or you must return
to it home again, when you have gone yout furthest, and done you worst. You
have taken Conscience for better and for worse. There is no expectation of a
divorce: no not by Death: It will follow you to Eternity. And therefore O be
not strange to Conscience, that will be your Comforter or Tormenter at the hour
of death; that can do so much to make sickness and all suffering light or
grievous; and to make death welcome or terrible to you: Fly not from conscience
that must dwell with you for ever.

O foolish sinners! do you want company and business to pass away your time?
Are you fain to go to Cards or Dice to waste this treasure, which is more
precious then your money? Do you go to an Alehouse, a Playhouse, or other
such Pest house to seek for company and pastime: (I say not, to Bedlam; for
that's as much more honorable then your sinful society, as the place that
cures or restrains the mad, is better then that which makes them mad.) Do
you forget what company and business you have at home. As you love your peace
and happiness, instead of conversing with vain, lascivious, or ungodly persons,
O spend that time in converse with your Consciences. You may there have a
thousand times more profitable discourse. Be not offended to give Conscience a
sober faithful answer, if it ask you, What you have done with all your Time?
and how you have lived in the world? and how you have obeyed the calls of
grace? and how you have entertained Christ into your hearts? and whether you
have obeyed him or his enemy? and whether you have been led by the spirit or
the flesh? and what forwardness the work of your salvation is in, for which you
came into the world? and what assurance you have of your Justification and
Salvation? and what readiness to die? Think it not presumption in Conscience
thus to examine you: Though you have perhaps unthankfully disdained to be thus
examined by your Pastors, your external Guides, whose office it is to help you,
and watch for your souls; yet do not disdain to be accountable to your selves.
Accountable you must be ere long to God: And that friend that would help you to
make ready such accounts, on which so great a weight depends, me thinks
should be welcomed with a thousand thanks. Ministers and Conscience should be
acceptable to you, that come on so necessary a work.

The chidings of Conscience are more friendly language then the flattery of
your ignorant or proud associates: and should be more grateful to you then the
laughter of fools, which is like the crackling of thorns in the fire, (Eccles.
7.6.) Thy own home though it be a house of mourning, is better for thee then
such a sinful house of mirth. Hear but what Conscience has to say to you. No
one will speak with you, that has words to speak, which nearlyer concern you.
I beseech you, Sirs, be more frequent and familiar with Conscience then most
men are. Think not the time lost, when you walk and talk with it alone. Confer
with it about your endless state, and where you are like to be for ever; and
what way you are in; and what thoughts you will have of your sins and duties,
of the world and God, of yielding or overcoming at the last. Is there no sense
in this discourse? Thou art dead and senseless if thou think so. Is idle talk
and prating better? I hope you are not so distracted as to say so. If you have
not blinded, deceived or bribed it, I tell you, Conscience has other kind of
discourse for you; more excellent and necessary things to talk of, then
wantons, or worldlings, or pot-companions have. Its better be giving Conscience
an account, what business thou have had so often in such company; and how thou
would have looked, if death had found thee there? then without leave from from
God or Conscience, to go thither again.

The thriving way is neither to be still at home, nor still abroad; but to be
at home when homework is to be done; and to be abroad only for doing and for
getting good, in a way of diligent Christian trading; and to bring that home
that is got abroad: but never to go abroad upon loytering, vain, expensive
occasions. When you have done with Conscience, converse with others that your
business lies with, and go abroad when its for your Masters work: but go not
upon idle errands: converse not with prodigal Wasters of your time, and enemies
to your souls.

One time or other Conscience will speak, and have a hearing: the sooner the
better: Put it not off to a time so unseasonable as Death; I say not
unseasonable for Conscience to speak in; but unseasonable for it to begin to
speak in; and unseasonable for those terrible words that need a calmer time for
answer; and unseasonable for so many things and so great, as self-betrayers use
to put off until then, which need a longer time for due consideration and
dispatch.

3. And I beseech you consider, with what amazing horror it must needs surprise
you, to find ox a sudden and unexpe^^edly when you die, that all is worse with
^ou then you imagined or would believe? After a whole life of confident
presumpti^n, to be suddenly convinced by so dread^ull an experience, of your so
long and wilful a mistake! To find in a moment, that you have flattered your
souls, into so desperate a state of woe! To see and feel all the selfish cavils
and reasonings confuted, in one hour, which the wisest and holiest men on
earth, could never beat you from before! O Sirs, you know not now, what a day,
what a conviction, that will be! You know not what it is for a guilty soul to
to pass out of the Body, and find it self in the plague of an unsanctified
state, and hated of the Holy God, that never would know it till it was too
late. You know not what it is to be turned by Death into that world of spirits,
where all self-deceit is detected by experience: and all must undergo a
righteous judgment; where blindness and self-love can no more persuade the
miserable that they are happy; the unholy that they are sanctified; the fleshly
minded men that they are spiritual; the lovers of the world, that they are the
Lovers of God: Men cannot there believe what they list: nor take that for a
truth which makes for their security, be it never so false* Men cannot there
believe that they are accepted of God, while they are in the bonds of their
iniquity; or that their hearts are as good as the best, while their tongues and
lives are opposite to goodness; or that they shall be saved as soon as the
godly, though they be ungodly.

Its easy for a man to hear of waves, and gulfs and shipwreck that never saw
the Sea; and without any fear to hear of battles, that never saw the face of an
enemy: and without any trouble to hear of sickness and tormenting pains, and
burning, and cutting off of limbs, that never felt or saw such things. Its
easy for you here in these seats, in the midst of health and peace and
quietness, to hear of a departing soul, and where it shall appear, and what it
shall there see, and how great a discovery Death will make: But O Sirs, when
this must be your case (as you know it must be, alas, how speedily!) these
matters then will seem considerable: They will be new and strange to those that
have heard of them an hundred times, because they never heard of them sensibly
till now. One of those souls that have been here before you, and have past that
way into eternity, have other thoughts of these things than you have! O how do
^^ey think now, of the fearless slumber and stupidity of those that they have
^eft behind? What think they now of those that wilfully fly the light, and
flatter themselves in guilt and misery, and make light of all the Joys and
torments of the other world? Even as the damned Rich man in Luke 16. thought of
his poor Brethren, that remained in prosperity and presum^^ion upon earth, and
little thought what ^ompany he was in, what a sight he saw, and what he did
endure!

Poor careless souls, you know not now what it is, for the ungodly to see that
they are ungodly, by the unresistible light of another world: and for the
unholy to feel in Hell that they are unholy, and to be ^aught by flames and the
wrath of the Almighty, what is the difference between the sanctified and the
carnal, between an obedient and a rebellious life: While you sit here, you
little know these things: You see them not: you feel them not: and the Lord
grant you may never so know them by woeful experience: that you may escape such
a knowledge, is the end of all that I am saying to you: But that will not be,
but by another kind of knowledge, even the knowledge of Belief and serious
Consideration.

For your souls sake therefore come into the Light, and try your selves, and
huddle not over a work of such unspeakable consequence, as the searching of
your hearts and judging of your spiritual state? O be glad to know what you are
indeed! Put home the question, Am I sanctified or not? A^ I in the Spirit or in
the flesh? Be glad of any htlp for the sure resolution of such doubts. Take not
up with slight and venturous presumptions. It is your own case: your nearest
and your greatest case: All lies upon it: Who should be so willing of the
plainest dealing, the speediest and the closest search as you? O be not
surprised by an unexpected sight of an unrenewed miserable soul at death. It it
be so, see it now, while seeing it may do good: If it be not so, a faithful
search can do you no harm, but comfort you by the discovery of your sincerity.
Say not too late, I thought I had been born again of the Spirit, and had been
in a state of grace? I thought I had been a child of God, and reconciled to him
and Justified by faith! O what a heart-tearing word would it be ^o you, when
time is past, to say, I thought ^t had been better with me!

4. Consider also, that It is one of Satan's ^rincipal designs for your
damnation, to keep ^ou ignorant of your selves. He knows if he can but make you
believe, that you ^ere Regenerate when you are not, you will never seek to be
regenerate: And that if he can make you think that you are Godly, when you are
ungodly, and have the spirit of Christ while you are servants to the flesh, he
may defeat all the labors of your Teachers, and let them call on you to be
Converted till their hearts ache, to no purpose, but leave you as you are: He
knows how light you will set by the Physicion, if he can but make you believe that
you are well! and how little care you will take for a pardon, if you think that
you need it not, or have one already. In vain may we call on you till we are
hoarse to Turn, and become New creatures, and give up your selves to Christ, if
you think that you are good Christians, and are in the way to Heaven already.

And when you know before hand, that here lies the principal game of the
Deceiver, and that it will be his chief contrivance, to keep you unacquainted
wi^^ your sin and danger, till you are (...) recovery, one would think there
should (...) no need to bid you be diligent to know your selves.

5. And I beseech you consider also, th^^ Without this design there is no
likelihood th^^ Satan could undo you: If he keep you not Ignorant of your
selves, he is never like to keep you in his power: You come out of his Kingdom
when you come out of darkness. He knows that if once you did but see how near
you stand to the brink of Hell, you would think it time to change your standing.

There is a double principle in Nature, that would do something toward your
Repentance and recovery, if your eyes were opened to see where you are.

1. There is since the seduction and ruin of man, by Satan's temptations, an
Enmity put into the whole Nature of man against the Whole Satanical Serpentine
Nature: so that this Natural enmity would so much conduce to your deliverance,
as that you would not be contented with your Relation, if you knew that you are
the drudges of the Devil; nor would you be charmed unto sin so easily, if you
knew that it is he ^^deed that does invite you; nor would ^ou dance after his
pipe; or take his bait, (...) you perceived indeed that it is his: no ^^nguage
would be so taking with you, which you knew were uttered by his voice. (...)
would do much to affright you from ^is service, if you knew that it is he
indeed that sets you on work, and is gratify^d by it. He keeps men in his
bondage ^y making them believe that they are free: ^e persuades men to obey
him, by per^wading them that it is God that they ^bey: And he draws them to
Hell, by making them believe that they are follow^ng Christ to Heaven; or at
least, that they ^re following the inclination of their nature in a pardonable
infirmity.

2. And the Natural principle of self-love ^ould in order to self-preservation
do much ^o drive you from your sinful state, if ^ou did but know what a state
it is. There (...) no man so far hates himself as to be willing to be damned.
You cannot choose ^nhabitation in Hell: Such a place can never be desired. Sure
he that cannot choose ^ut fly from an enemy, or a bear that did pursue him, or
fly from fire or water or pestilence when he perceives his danger, would fly
from Hell, if he perceived his danger.

I beseech you all that are secure in an unsanctified state, do but look
inwards, and help me in preaching this doctrine to you^ hearts, and tell your
selves, whether you do not think; that your state is good, and that you are the
children of God as well as others; and that though you are sinners, yet your
sins are pardoned by the blood of Christ, and that you shall be saved if you
die in the state that you are in? And are not these thoughts the Reason why you
venture to continue in your present state, and look not after so great a change
as Scripture speaks of as necessary?

And I pray you deal plainly with your hearts, and tell me, you careless
sinners, young or old, that sit here as quietly as i^ all were well with you;
If you did but know that you are at this hour unregenerate, and that without
Regeneration there i^ is no Salvation; If you did but know that you are yet
carnal and unholy, and tha^ without Holiness none shall see God; If yo^ did but
know that you are yet in a stat^ of Enmity to God while you call him Father,
and of Enmity to Christ while you call him your Savior, and of Enmity to the
Holy Spirit while you call him your sanctifyer; If you did but know that your
sins are unpardoned, and your souls unjustified, and that you are condemned
already, and shall certainly be damned if you die as you are, could you live
quietly in such a state? Could you sleep, and eat and drink quietly, and follow
your trades, and let time run on, without repenting and returing unto God, if
you knew that you are past hope, if death surprise you in this condition? For
the Lords sake Sirs, rouse up your selves a little, and be serious in a
business that concerns you more then ten thousand natural lives, and tell me,
or rather tell your selves, If you did but know that while you sit here, you
are unrenewed, and therefore under the curse of God, and in the bondage of the
Devil, and are hasting toward perdition, and are gone for ever, if you be not
sanctified and made new creatures before you die; could you then put off this
Sermon with a sleepy careless hearing, and go home and talk of common matters,
and no more mind it, as you have done by Sermons until now? Could you forbear
going alone and there bethinking your selves, O what a sinful, dreadful
condition are we in! What will become of us if we be not regenerate before we
die! Had we no Understandings? no Hearts? no life or sense? that we have
lingered so long, and lived so carelessly in such a state? O where had we been
now if we had died unregenerate! How near have we been often to Death? how many
sicknesses might have put an end to life and hope? Had any of them cut off the
slender thread that our lives have hanged on so long, and had we died before
this day, we had been new in Hell without remedy. Could any of you that knew
this to be your case, forbear to betake your selves to God, and cry to him in
the bitterness of your souls, [ O Lord, what Rebels, what wretches have we
been? We have sinned against Heaven and before thee, and are (...) more worthy
to be called thy children! O how sin has captivated our understandings, and
conquered our very sense, and made us live like men that were dead as to the
Love and service of God, and the work of our salvation, which we were created
and redemned for! O Lord have mercy upon these blinded senseless miserable
souls! Have mercy upon these despisers and abusers of thy mercy! O save us or
we perish! Save us from our sins, from Satan, from thy curse and wrath! Save,
us or we are undone and lost for ever! Save us from the unquenchable fire, from
the worm that never dies! from the bottomless pit, the outer darkness, the
horrid gulf of endless misery! O let the bowels of thy compassion yearn over
us; O save us for thy Mercy sake; Shut not out the cries of miserable sinners.
Regenerate, renew and sanctify our hearts; O make us new creatures! O plant
thine Image on our souls, and incline them toward thee, that they may be
wholly thine; O make us such as thou command us to be; Away with our sins,
and sinful pleasures, and sinful company! We have had too much, too much of
them already! Let us now be thine, associated with them that Love and fear
thee; employed in the works of Holiness and obedience all our days! Lord, we
are willing to let go our sins, and to be thy servants: or if we be not make us
willing.]

What say you Sirs, if you knew that you were this hour in a state of
condemnation, could you forbear making haste with such confessions* complaints
and earnest supplications to God?

And could you forbear going presently to some faithful Minister or godly
friend, and telling him your case and danger, and begging his advice, and
prayers, and asking him, what a poor sinner must do to be recovered, pardoned
and saved, that is so deep in sin and misery, and has despised Christ and
grace so long? Could you tell how to sleep quietly many nights more, before you
had earnestly sought out for help, and made this change? How could you choose
but presently betake your selves to the company, and converse, and examples of
the godly that are within your reach! (For when ever a man is truly changed,
his friendship, and company is changed, if he have opportunity.) And how could
you choose but go and take your leave of your old companions, and with tears
and sorrow tell them how foolishly and sinfully you have done, and what wrong
you have done each others souls, and entreat them to repent and do so no more,
or else you will renounce them, and fly from their company as from a Pesthouse?

Can a man forbear thus to fly from Hell, if he saw that he is as near it as a
condemned Traitor to the Gallows? He that will beg for bread, if he be hungry,
and rather (...) by shame, then famish, would beg for grace, if he saw and felt
how much he needs it: (And seeing it, is the way to feel it) He that will
seek for medicines when he is sick, and would do almost any thing to escape a
temporal death, would he not seek out to Christ the remedy of his soul, if he
knew and felt, that otherwise there is no recovery; and would he not do much
against eternal death? Skin for skin, and all that a man has, he will give for
this life;] was a truth that the Devil knew and makes use of in his
temptations. And will a man then be regardless of his soul, that knows he has
an immortal soul? and of life eternal, that knows his danger of eternal death?

O Sirs, it is not possible, but the true knowledge of your state of sin and
danger would do very much to save you from it. For (...) a wilfull-chosen
state. All the Devi^^ (...) Hell cannot bring you to it, and (...) you in it
against your will. You (...) willing of the sin, though unwilling of (...)
punishment: And if you truly knew (...) ^unishment and your danger of it, you
^^uld be the more unwilling of the sin: for God has affixed punishment to sin
for this end, that they that else would love the Serpent, may hate it for the
sting: W^ll you not say, He is a beast and not a man that will avoid no danger
but what he sees? Foreseeing is to a man, what seeing is to a beast: If he see
it before his eyes, a beast will not easily be driven into a Cole-pit or a
gulf: he will draw back and strive if you go about to kill him. And is he a
man, or some monster that wants a name, that will go on to Hell, when he sees
it as it were before him? and that will continue in a state of sin, when he
knows he must be damned in Hell for ever, if he so continue to the end? Indeed
sin is the deformity and monstrosity of the soul. He is a monster of Blindness
that sees not the folly and peril of such a state, and that a state of
Holiness is better* He is a monster of stupidity that finds himself in such a
state, and does not feel it, but m^^^th light of it; And he is monster (...)
fullness that will not stir when he (...) himself in such a case, and seek for
(...) and value the remedy, and use the (...) and forsake his sinful course
and (...), till further mercy take him up and (...) him home, and make him
welcome (...) one that was lost but now is found, was (...) but is alive.

I do not doubt for all these expostulations, but some men may be such
monsters, as thus to see that they are in a state of wrath and misery, and yet
continue in it.

As 1. Such as have but a glimmering insufficient sight of it, and a
half-belief, while a greater belief and hope of the contrary, (that is,
Presumption) is predominant at the heart: But these are rather to be called men
ignorant of their misery then men that know it; and men that believe it not,
then men that do believe it, as long as the Ignorance and Presumption is the
prevailing part.

2. Such as by the rage of appetite and passion are hurried into deadly sin,
and so continue, when ever the tempter offers them the (...), against their
Conscience, and some ap^^ehension of their misery. But (...) commonly a
prevalent self-(...) within encouraging and (...) them in their sin, and
telling (...) the reluctancies of their consci^^^^ (...) the spirits strivings
against the (...) their fits of remorse are true (...); and though they are
sinners, they (...) they are pardoned, and shall be (...) so that these do not
know themselves (...)

3. Such as by their deep engagements to the world, and love of its prosperity,
and a custom in sinning, are so hardened, and cast into a slumber, that though
they have a secret knowledge or suspicion that their case is miserable, yet
they are not wakened to the due consideration and feeling of it: and therefore
they go on as if they knew it not: But these have not their knowledge in
exercise: It is but a candle in a dark lanthorn, that now and then give^ them a
convincing flash, when the right side happens to be toward them, or like
lightning that rather frightens and amazeth them then directs them. And (as I
said of the former) as to the act, their self-ignorance is the predominant
part, and therefore they cannot be said inde^^ to know themselves. Now and then
a ^^^vinced apprehension, or a fear, is not (...) of their minds.

4. Such as being in youth or (...) do promise themselves long life, (...)
others that foolishly put away (...) day (...) death, and think they have yet
(...) before them; and therefore though^ (...) convinced of their misery, and
kn^^ ^hey must be Converted or Condemned, (...) yet delay, and quiet themselves
with purposes to Repent hereafter, when Death ^ra^es near and there is no other
remedy, but they must leave their sins, or give up all their hopes of Heaven.
Though these know somewhat of their present misery, it is but by such a flashy
uneffectuall knowledge, as is before described: and they know little of the
wickedness of their hearts while they confess them wicked. Otherwise they could
not imagine that Repentance is so easy a work to such as they, as that they
can perform it when their hearts are further hardened, and that so easily and
certainly as that their salvation may be ventured on it by delays. Did they
know themselves, they would know the backwardness of their hearts, and manifold
difficulties should make them see the madness of delays and of longer
resisting and abusing the grace of the spirit that must convert them if ever
they be saved.

5. Such as have light to show them their misery, but live where they hear not
the discovery of the Remedy, and are left without any knowledge of a Savior.
I deny not but such may go on in a state of misery though they know it, when
they know no way out of it.

6. Such as Believe not the Remedy though they hear of it, but think that
Christ is not to be believed in as the Savior of the world.

7. Such as Believe that Christ is the Redeemer, but believe not that he will
have mercy upon them, as supposing their hearts are not qualifyed for his
salvation, no^ ever will be, because the day of grace i^ past, and he has
concluded them under a sentence of reprobation; and therefore thinking that
there is no hope and that their endeavors would be all in vain, they cast off
all endeavors, and give up themselves to the pleasurs of the flesh, and say,
It is as good be damned for some thing or for a greater mattter, as for a less.

So that there are three sorts of Despair that are not equally dangerous 1. A
Despair of pardon and salvation arising from Infidelity, as if the Gospel
were not true, nor Christ a Savior to be trusted, with our souls, if
predominant, is damnable. 2. A Despair of pardon and salvation* arising from a
misunderstanding of the Promise, as if it pardoned not such sins as ours, and
denied mercy to those that have sinned so long as we; this is not damnable
necessarily of it self, because it implies faith in Christ; and not
Infidelity but misunderstanding hinders the apply^^^g comforting act: And
therefore this ^ctuall personal despair, is accompanied ^ith a General actual
Hope and with a parti^ular personal, vertual Hope. 3. A Despair (...) pardon
and salvation, upon the misun^erstanding of ourselves, as thinking both ^^at we
are gracless, and always shall be so, because of the blindness and hardness of
our ^earts: of this Despair I say as of the for^er, it is joined with faith
and with General and Virtual Hope: and therefore is not the Despair that of
its self condemns. Many may (...) saved that are too much guitly of it.

But if either of these two later sorts shall so far prevail as to turn men
off ^^om a Holy to a fleshly worldly interest and ^^fe, and make them say, [
We will take ^ur pleasure while we may, and will have ^^^thing for our souls
before we lose them] and do accordingly; this kind of Desperati^^ is damnable
by the effects, because it ^akes men off the means of life, and gi^eth them up
to damning sins.

Thus I have showed you of seven sorts of persons, that may know themselves,
their sin and danger, with such an uneffectuall partial knowledge a I have
described, and yet continue in that sin and misery.

And in two cases even sound Believer many possibly go on to sin, when they
(...) the sin: and not only see the danger of (...) but despairingly think it
greater then it i^ As 1. in case of common unavoidable fa^^ings, infirmites,
and low degrees of grace we are all imperfect: and yet we all kno^ that it is
our duty to be perfect (as perfect^^on is opposed to sinful, and not to
inn^^cent imperfection) And yet this knowled^^ makes us not perfect. We know
we (...) be more humbled, and more believing, an^ more watchful, and Love God
more, an^ fear and trust him more, and be mo^^ fruitful, and diligent, and
obedient an^ zealous: and yet we are not What we (...) we should be in any of
these. In these (...) all live in sin against knowledge: else (...) should be
all as good as we know we oug^^ to be, which no man is. And if thro^^^
temptation any of us should be ready (...) despair because of any of these
infirmity (...) because we cannot Repent, or Love God watch, or Pray, or Obey
more perfectly or as we should, yet Grace cease not (...) be Grace, though in
the least degree, beca^^^ we are ready to despair for want of (...) Nor will
the sincerity of this spark, (...) grain of Mustard seed, be unsucces^^^ (...)
to our salvation, because we think so, and ^ake ourselves to be unsincere, and
our sancti^^cation to be none; Nor yet because we cannot be as obedient and
good as we ^now we should be. For the Gospel says ^ot [ He that knows he
has faith or sin^^rity, shall be saved: and he that knows (...) not, shall
be damned: or he that is less ^^ly or obedient then his conscence tells him he
should be, shall be damned] But he that Be^ieveth and Repents, shall be
saved, whether ^e know it to be done in sincerity or no: and he that does not,
shall be damned, though ^e never so confidently think he does. So that in the
Degrees of Holiness and obedience, all Christians ordinarily sin against
knowledge.

2. And besides what is ordinary, some extraordinarily in the time of a
Powerful temptation go further then ordinarily they do. And some under dull
Phlegmatic melancholy, or choleric diseases or distempers of body, or under a
diseased violent appetite, may transgress more against their knowledge, then
otherwise they would do: when the spirits are flatted, the thoughts confused,
the reason weakened, the passion strengthened, and the executive faculties
undisposed, so that their actions are but imperfectly Humane or Moral
(imperfectly capable of virtue or vice good or evil) it is no wonder here if
poo^ souls not only perceive their sin, but thin^ it and the danger to be
tenfold great^^ then they are, and yet go on against their knowledge, and yet
have (...) grace.

This much I have said both to stay yo^ from misunderstanding what I said
before concerning the Power of conviction (...) conversion (for few Auditoryes
wa^^ hearers that will be still excepting, if Ca^^tion stop not every hole) and
also to (...) you to the fuller understanding of the ^^^^ter its self of which
I treat. But excepti^ ^^^mat regulam in non exceptis, Exception strengthen and
not weaken any Rule (...) proposition, in the points not except^^ Still I say
that out of these cases the (...) knowledge of a sinful miserable state, (...)
so great a help to bring us out of it, (...) its hardly imaginable how
rational me^^ can wilfully continue in a state of su^^ exceeding danger, if
they be but well ac^quainted that they are in it. I know a Har^^ned heart has
an unreasonable obstin^^^ opposition against the means of its (...) recovery:
But yet men have some use (...) Reason and self preserving Love and care, ^r
they are not men (and if they be not (...), they cannot be sinful men) And
though little transient lightnings often come ^o nothing, but leave some men in
grea^er darkness; yet could we but set up a ^^anding Light in all your
consciences, could we fully convince and resolve the unrege^ate that they
cannot be saved in the carnal state and way that they are in, but must be
sanctified or never saved, what hopes should we have that all the subtiltyes
and snares of Satan, and all the pleasures and gain of sin, and all the
allurements of ungodly company could no longer hinder you from falling down at
the feet of mercy, and begging forgiveness through the blood of Christ, and
giving up yourselves in Covenant to the Lord, and speedily and resolutely
betaking yourselves to an holy life! Could I but make you thoroughly known unto
your selves, I should hope that all the unsanctified that hear me, would date
their Conversion from this very day; and that you would not delay till the next
morning, to bewail your sin and misery, and fly to Christ, lest you should die
and be past hope this night.

And does so much of our work and of your recovery lie upon this point and yet
shall we not be able to ac^complish it? Might you be brough^ into the way to
Heaven, if we could b^ persuade you that you are yet out of t^^ way, and will
you be undone, because yo^ will not suffer so small and reasonable part of the
cure as this is? O God forbid O that we knew how to illuminate yo^^ minds so
far as to make you find that yo^ are lost! How ready would Christ be the^ to
find you, and to receive and welcome you upon your return! Here is the first
difficulty, which if we could but overcome, (...) should hope to conquer all
the rest. H^^ we but a wedge to cleave this knot, the rest would the more
easily be done. Could we draw but this one pin of self-deceit* the frame of
Satan's building were like to tumble down. O that any of you that know the
nature of self-deceit, and know the accesses to the inwards of a sinner, and
know the fallacious reasonings of the heart, could tell us but how we might
undeceive them! O that any of you that know the nature of humane understanding,
with its several maladies and their cure, and know the power of saving truth,
could tell us what key will undo this lock! what medicine will cure this
disease, of wilful, obstinate, self-deceiving? Think but on the case of our
poor people, and of ours, and sure you cannot choose but pity both them and
us. We are all professors of the Christian faith, and all say we believe the
word of God: This word assures us that all men are fallen in Adam, and are by
nature children of wrath, and increase in sin and misery, till supernatural
grace recover them. It tells us that the Redeemer is become by office, the
Physician or Savior of souls, washing away their guilt by his blood, and
renewing and cleansing their corrupted natures by his Spirit: It tell us that
he will freely work the cure, for all that will take him for their Physicion,
and will forgive and save them, that penitently fly to him, and value, and
accept, and trust upon his grace: And that, except they be thus made new
creatures, all the world cannot save them from everlasting wrath. This is the
Doctrine that we all believe, or say we do believe: Thus does it open the case
of sinners. We come now, according to our office. and the trust reposed in us,
and we tell our Hearers what the Scripture says of man, and what it commands
us to tell them: We tell them of their fall, their sin and misery; of the
Redeemer, and the sure and free salvation, which they may have if they will but
come to him. But, alas, we cannot make them believe that they are so sick as to
have so much need of the Physicion: and that they are dead, and have need of a
new creation, as to the inclinations of their hearts, and the end and bent and
business of their lives. We are sent to tender them the mercy of Christ, but we
cannot make them believe that they are miserable. We are sent to offer them the
riches, and eye selve, and white raiment of the Gospel: but we cannot make them
know that they are poor, and blind, and naked: We are sent to call them to
Repent and Turn that they may be saved; and we cannot make them know that they
are so far out of the way as to need a change of heart and life. Here they sit
before us, and we look on them with pity, and know not how to help them. We
look on them and think, alas, poor souls, you little see what death will
quickly make you see. You will then see that there is no salvation, by all the
blood and merits of Christ for any but the sanctified; but O that we could now
but make you understand it. We look on them with compassion, and think, Alas,
poor souls, as easily and quietly as you sit here, a change is near. It will be
thus with you but a little while, and where will you be next? We know as sure
as the word of God is true, that they must be converted and sanctified, or be
lost for ever: and we cannot make them believe, but that the work is done
already. The Lord knows, and our consciences witness to our shame, that we be
not half so sensible of their misery, nor so compassionate toward them as we
ought to be: but yet sometimes our hearts melt over them, and fain we would
save them from the wrath to come; and we should have great hopes of the
success, if we could but make them know their danger: It melts our hearts to
look on them and think that they are so near damnation, and never like to escape
it, till they know it, till they know that their corruption is so great, that
nothing but the quickening spirit can recover them, and nothing less then to
become new creatures will serve the turn: But if we would never so fain we
cannot make them know it: O that we knew how to acquaint them with their case?
O that we knew how to get within them, and to open the windows, that the light
of Christ might show them their condition! But when we have done all, we find
it past our power. We know they will be past help in Hell, if they die before
they are regenerate: And could we but get themselves to know it, we could not
but hope that they would better look about them, and be saved: but we are not
able: its more then we can do: We cannot get the grossest worldling, the basest
sensualist, the filthiest letcher, the proudest child of the Spirit of pride,
to know that he is in a state of condemnation, and must be sanctified or be
damned: much less can we procure the formal Pharisee, thus to know himself. We
can easily get them to confess that they are sinners, and deserve damnation,
and cannot be saved without Christ: But this will not serve: The best Saint on
earth must say as much as this comes to. There are converted and uncoverted
sinners: sanctified and unsanctified sinners: Pardoned and unpardoned sinners:
Sinners that are members of Christ, and the children of God, and heirs of
Heaven; and sinners that are not so, but contrary. They must know not only that
they are sinners, but that they are yet unconverted, unsanctified, unpardoned
sinners: not only that they cannot be saved without Christ; but that yet they
have no special interest in Christ: They will not Turn, while they think they
are turned already: They will not so value and seek for Conversion, and
Remission, and Adoption, as to obtain them, while they think they have them all
already. They will not come to Christ that they may have life, while they think
they have part in Christ already. Paul after his Conversion was a sinner, and
had need of Christ: but Paul before his Conversion was an unsanctified,
unjustified sinner, and had no part in Christ: This is the state of sin and
misery that you must come out of, or you are lost: And how can you be brought
out of it, till you know that you are in it?

O therefore that we knew how to make you know it! How should we make poor
sinners see that they are within a few steps of everlasting fire, that we might
procure them to run away from it, and be saved! we cry so often, and lose our
labor, and leave so many in their security and self-deceits, that we are too
discouraged, and remit our desires, and lose our compassion, and our selves
alas grow dull and too insensible of their case, and preach too often as coldly
as if we could be content to let them perish. We are too apt to grow weary of
holding the light to men asleep, or that shut their eyes and will not see by
it. When al^ that we have said is not regarded, and we know not what more to
say then has been said so long in vain, this flats our spirits; this makes so
many of us preach almost as carelessly as we are heard. Regardless sleepy
hearers, make regardless sleepy Preachers. Frequent frustration abateth hope:
And the fervor and diligence of prosecution cease, as hope abateth. This is
our fault: Your insensibility is no good excuse for ours: But its a fault not
easily avoided.

And when we are stopped at the first door, and cannot conquer Satan's out works,
what hopes have we of going further? If all that we can say, will not convince
you that you are yet unsanctified and unjustified, how shall we get you to the
duties that belong to such, in order to the attainment of this desirable state?

ANd here I think it not unseasonable to inform you of the reason why the most
able faithful Ministers of Christ do search so deep, and speak so hardly of
the case of unrenewed souls, as much displeases many of their hearers, and
makes them say, they are too severe and terrible preachers: The zealous
Antinomian says, they are Legalists; and the profane Antimonian says, they
rail, and preach not mercy, but judgment only, and would drive men to despair,
and make them mad. But will they tell God he is a Legalist for making the Law,
even the Gospel Law as well as the Law of Nature, and commanding us to preach
it to the world? Shall they escape the Sentence by reproaching the Lawmakers?
Will not God judge the world? and judge them by a Law? and will he not be just
and beyond the reach of their reproach? O sinner, this is not the smallest part
of thy terror, that it is the Gospel that speaks this terror to thee, and
excludes thee from salvation unless thou be made new: It is mercy it self that
thus condemns thee, and judges thee to endless misery. You are mistaken
Sirs, when you say we preach not Mercy, and say we preach not the Gospel, but
the Law: It is the Gospel that says, Except a man be born again, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven! and that if any man have not the spirit of
Christ, the same is none of his, John 3.3, 5. Romans 8.9. The same Gospel that
says, He that believes shall be saved, says also, that He that believes not
shall be damned, Mark 16.16. Will you tell Christ, the Savior of the world,
that he is not merciful, because he talks to you of Damnation? Mercy it self
when it tells you that There is no condemnation, does limit this pardon to them
that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit,]
Romans 8.1. It is sanctifying Mercy that must save you, if ever you be saved, as
well as Justifying Mercy. And will you refuse this Mercy, and by no entreaty
yield to have it, and yet think to be saved by it? What saved by that Mercy
which you will not have? And will you say, We preach not Mercy, because we tell
you, that Mercy will not save you, if you continue to reject it? To be saved by
Mercy without Sanctification, is to be saved and not saved: to be saved by
Mercy without Mercy: Your words have no better sense then this: And are those
afraid lest Preachers should make them mad by showing them their need of mercy,
that are no Wiser then to cast away their souls upon such senseless
self-contradicting conceits as these?

I beseech you tell us whose words are they think you that say, Without
holiness none shall see God! Heb. 12.14. and that He that is in Christ, is a
new Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. and such like passages which offend you; Are they
ours, or are they Gods? Did we indite the Holy Scriptures, or did the Holy
Ghost? Is it long of us, if there be any words there that cross your flesh, and
that you call bitter? Can we help it, if God will save none but sanctified
believers? If you have any thing to say against it, you must say it to him: We
are sure that this is in his word: and we are sure he cannot lie: and therefore
we are sure its true: We are sure that he may do with his own as he list, and
that he owes you nothing, and that he may give his pardon and salvation to
whom, and upon what terms he please: And therefore we are sure he does you no
wrong. But if you think otherwise, reproach not us that are but messengers: but
prepare your charge, and make it good against your maker, if you dare and can:
you shall shortly come before him, and be put to it to justify your selves: If
If you can do it by recrimination, and can prevent your condemnation, by
condemning the Law and the Judge, try your strength and do your worst.

Ah poor worms! dare you lift up the head, and move a tongue, against the Lord!
Did Infinite Wisdom it self want Wisdom, to make a Law to rule the world? And
did Infinite Goodness want Goodness to deal mercifully, and as was best, with
man! And shall Justice it self be judged to be unjust? And that by you! By such
silly, ignorant, naughty and unrighteous ones as you! As if you had the Wisdom
and Goodness, which you think God wanted when he made his Laws!

And whereas you tell us of preaching terribly to you, we cannot help it, if
the true and righteous Threatenings of God be terrible to the guilty: It is
because we know the Terrors of the Lord, that we preach them, to warn you to
prevent them. And so did the Apostles before us, 2 Cor. 5.11. Either its true
that the unquenchable fire will be the portion of impenitent, unbelieving,
fleshly, worldly, unsanctified men, or it is not true: If it were not true, the
word of God were not true: and then what should you do with any preaching at
all, or any religion! But if you confess it to be true, do you think in reason,
it should be silenced? or can we tell men of so terrible a thing as Hell, and
tell them that it will certainly be their lot, unless they be new creatures,
and not speak terribly to them! O Sirs, it is the wonder of my soul that it
seems no more terrible, to all the ungodly that think they do believe it.
Yea, and I would it did seem more terrible to the most, that it might affright
you from your sin to God, and you might be saved. If you were running
ignorantly into a Cole-pit, would you revile him that told you of it, and bid
you stop if you love your life? Would you tell him that he speaks bitterly or
terribly to you? It is not the Preacher that is the cause of your danger: he
does but tell you of it, that you may escape. If you are saved, you may thank
him: but if you are lost, you may thank your selves. Its you that deal bitterly
and terribly with your selves. Telling you of Hell, does not make Hell: Warning
you of it, is not causing it: Nor is it God that is unmercifull, but you are
foolishly cruel and unmercifull to your selves. Do not think to despise the
patience and mercy of the Lord, and then think to escape by accusing him of
being unmercifull, and by saying, Its terrible doctrine that we preach to you
impenitent sinners; I confess to thee it is terrible, and more terrible then
thy senseless heart imagines, or is yet aware of: One day, if grace prevent it
not, thou shall find it ten thousand times more terrible then thou can
apprehend it now. When thou see thy Judge with millions of his Angels coming
to condemn thee, thou will then say his Laws are terrible indeed. Thou have to
do with a holy, jealous God, who is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. and can such
a God be despised and not be terrible to thee? He is called, The Great, the
Mighty and the Terrible God, Neh. 9.32. Deuteronomy. 7.21. With God is terrible
Majesty, Job 37.22. He is terrible out of his holy place, Psalm. 68.35. He is
terrible to the greatest, even to the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 76.12. Its time
for you therefore to tremble and submit, and think how unable you are to
contend with him: and not revile his word or works because they are terrible,
but fear him for them, and study them on purpose that you may fear and glorify
him: And as David, Psalm. 66.3.5. [ Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy
works! Through the greatness of thy power shall thy enemies submit themselves
unto thee -- Come and see the works of the Lord! He is terrible in his doings
toward the children of men:] Psalm. 99.3. [ Let them praise thy Great and
terrible name, for it is Holy.] And will you reproach God or his word or works,
or Ministers, with that which is the matter of his Praise? If it be terrible to
hear of the wrath of God, how terrible will it be to feel it? Choose not a
state of terror to your selves, and preaching will be less terrible to you.
Yield to the sanctifying work of Christ, and receive his spirit: and then that
which is terrible to others, will be comfortable to you. What terror is it to
the Regenerate (that knows himself to be such) to hear that none but the
Regenerate shall be saved? What terror is it to them that mind the things of
the spirit, to hear of the misery of a fleshly mind, and that they that live
after the flesh shall die? Romans 8.8.13. The word of God is full of terror to
the ungodly: But return with all your hearts to God, and then what word of God
speaks terror to you? Truly Sirs, it is more in your power then ours, to make
our preaching easy and less terrible to you! We cannot change our doctrine,
but you may change your state and lives: We cannot preach another Gospel: but
you may obey the Gospel which we preach. Obey it and it will be the most
comfortable word to you in the world. We cannot make void the word of God: but
you may avoid the stroke by penitent submission. Do you think it is fitter for
us to change our Masters word, and falsify the Laws of God Almighty; or for
you to change your crooked courses, which are condemned by this word, and to
let go the sin which the Law forbids? Its you that must change, and not the
Law. Its you that must be conformed to it, and not the Rule that must be
crookened to conform to you.

Say not as Ahab of Michaiah, of the Minister: [ I hate him, for he prophesies
not Good of me, but Evil,] 1 Kings 22.8. For a Balaam could profess that if the
King [would give him his housefull of silver and gold, he could not go beyond
the word of the Lord his God, to do less or more] Numb. 22.19. or [ to do
either good or bad of his own mind] as he after speaks, Chap. 24.13. What good
would it do you for a Preacher to tell you a lie and say that you may be
pardoned and saved in an impenitent, unsanctified state? Do you think our
saying so, would make it so? Will God falsify his word to make good ours? Or
would he not deal with us as perfidious messengers that had betrayed our trust,
and belyed him, and deceived yout souls? And would it save or ease an
unregenerate man to have Christ condemn the Minister for deceiving him, and
telling him that he may be saved in such a state?

Do but let go the odious sin that the word of God does speak so ill of, and
then it will speak no ill of you.

Alas Sirs, what would you have a poor Minister do, when Gods command does
cross your pleasure? and when he is sure to offend either God or you? Which
should he venture to offend? If he help not the ungodly to know their misery,
he offends God: If he do it, he offends them. If he tell you, that [ All
they shall be damned that believe not the truth, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness.] Your hearts rise against him for talking of Damnation to you:
And yet it is but the words of the Holy Ghost, 2 These. 2.12. which we are bound
to preach! [If he tell you that If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die.] you
will be angry, (especially if he closely apply it to your selves.) And if he do
not tell you so, God will be angry: For it is his express determination, Romans
8.13. And whose anger think you should a wise man choose? or whose should he
most resolutely avoid? The anger of the dreadful God of Heaven, or yours? Your
anger we can bear, if there be no remedy; but his anger is intolerable. When
you have fretted, and fumed, and railed, and slandered us and ou^ doctrine, we
can Live yet; or if you ki^^ the Body, you can do no more: You do but send us
before, to be witnesses against you, when you come to judgment. But who can
Live, when God will pour out wrath upon him? Numb. 24.23. We may keep your
slanders and indignation from our Hearts: but it is the Heart that the
Heart-searching God contendeth with: And who can heal the Heart which he will
break? You may reach the flesh; but he that is a Spirit, can afflict and wound
the Spirit: And a wounded spirit (and wounded by him) who can bear? Prove.
18.14. Would you not your selves say he were worse then mad, that would rather
abuse the Eternal God, then cross the misguided desires of such worms as you?
that would displease God to please you, and sell his Love to purchase yours?
Will you be instead of God to us when we have lost his favor? Will you save us
from him, when he sends for our souls by death, or sentenceth us to Hell by
judgment? Silly souls! how happy were you, could you save your selves! Will
you be our Gods if we forsake our God? What you that are but skinfuls of
corruption? that will shortly be choked with your own filth and phlegm, and by
your friends be laid to rot in silent undiscerned darkness, lest the loathsome
sight or smell of you should annoy them. Blame not God to use them as Enemies
and Rebels, that will change him for such earthen Gods as you. We have One God,
and but One, and he must be obeyed, whether you like or dislike it: There is
one Law giver that is able to save and to destroy, Jam. 4.12. and he must be
pleased, whether it please your carnal minds or not: If your wisdom now will
take the chair, and judge the preaching of the Gospel to be foolishness, or the
searching application of it to be too much harshness and severity, I am sure
you shall come down ere long, and hear his sentence that will convince you,
that the wisdom of the world is foolishness with God, and the foolishness of
God (as Blasphemy dare call it) is wiser then men, 1 Cor. 3.19. and 1.25. And
God will be the final Judge, and his word shall stand when you have done your
worst. The worst that the Serpent can do, is but to hiss a while and put forth
the sting, and bruise our heel: but Gods day will be the brusing of his head,
and Satan shall be bruised under feet, Romans 16.20.

The Sun will shine, and the light thereof discover your deformities, whether
you will or not. And if adulterers or thieves, that love the works of darkness,
will do theit worst by force or flattery, they cannot make it cease its
shining, though they may shut their eyes, or hide themselves in darkness from
it light: Faithful ^eachers are the Lights of the world, Mat. 5.14. They are
not lighted by the Holy Ghost, to be put under a bushel, but on a candlestick,
that they may give light to all that are in the house, ver. 15. What would you
do with Teachers but to Teach you? And what should they make known to you, if
not your selves? Shall not the Physicion have leave to tell you of your
diseases?

Verily Sirs, a sinner under the curse of the Law, unsanctified and unpardoned,
is not in a state to be jeasted and dallied with, unless you can play in the
flames of Hell? Its plain dealing that he needs. A quibbling ^oyish, flashy
Sermon is not the proper medicine for a lethargick miserable soul, nor fit to
Break a stony Heart, nor to bind up a Heart that's kindly broken. Heaven and
Hell should not be talked of in a canting, juggling, or pedanick strain. A
Seneca can tell you that its a Physicion that is skillful, and not one that's
eloquent, that we need. If he have also fine and neat expressions, we will not
despise them; nor overmuch value them: urendum, secandum; Its a cure that we
need; and the means are best, be they never so sharp, that will accomplish it.
Serious reverent Gravity best suiteth with matters of such incomprehensible
concernment. You set not a School-b^y to make an Oration, to give an assaulted
City an allarm, or to call men out to quench a common fire. You may play with
words when the case will bear it: But as dropping of beads is too ludicrous for
one that is praying to be saved from the flames of Hell; so a sleepy, or a
histrionical starched speech, is too light and unlikely a means to call back a
sinner that is posting to perdition; and must be humbled and renewed by the
spirit, or be for ever damned. This is your case, Sirs: And do you think the
playing of a part upon a stage does fit your case. O no! so great a business
requires all the serious earnestness in the speaker that he can use. I am sure
you will think so ere long your selves; And you will then think well of the
Preachers that faithfully acquainted you with your case: and (if they succeed
to your perdition) you will curse those that smoothed you up in your
presumption, and hid your danger, by false doctrine, or misapplication, or
seeming to discover it, indeed did hide it, by an hypocritical light, not
serious mention of it. God can make use of clay and spittle to open the eyes of
men born blind; and of Ramshorns to bring down the walls of Jericho: But
usually he fitteth the means unto the end, and works on man agreeably to his
Nature: And therefore if a blind understanding must be enlightened, you cannot
expect that it should be done by Squibs and Glowworms, but by bringing into
your souls the powerful celestial truth, which shall show you the hidden
corners of your hearts, and the hidden mysteries of the Gospel, and the unseen
things of the other world. If a hardened heart be to be broken, it is not
stroaking, but striking that must do it. It is not the sounding Brass, the
tinkling Cymbal, the carnal mind puffed up with superficial knowledge, that is
the instrument fitted to the renewing of men's souls: But it is he that can
acquaint you with what he himself has been savingly acquainted: The heart is
not melted into Godly sorrow, nor raised to the life of Faith and Love, by the
bubbles of a frothy wit, or by a game at words, or useless notions; but by the
illuminating beams of Sacred Truth, and the attraction of Divine displayed
Goodness communicated from a mind that by faith has seen the Glory of God, and
by experience found that he is Good, and that lives in the Love of God: such a
one is fitted to assist you first in the knowledge of your selves, and then in
the knowledge of God in Christ.

Did you consider what is the office of the Ministry, you would soon know what
Ministers do most faithfully perform their office, and what kind of Teaching
and oversight you should desire: And then you would be reconciled to the Light:
and would choose the Teacher (could you have your choice) that would do most to
help you to know your selves, and know the Lord.

I beseech you judge of our work by our Commission, and judge of it by your own
Necessities. Have you more need to be acquainted with your sin and danger? or
to be pleased which a set of hansome words, which when they are said, do leave
you as they found you; and leave no Light and Life and heavenly Love upon your
hearts: that have no substance that you can feed upon in the review?

And what our Commission is you may find, in many places of the Scripture,
Ezekiel. 3.18, 19, 20, 21. [ When I say unto the Wicked, Thou shall surely die;
and thou give him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his
wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity,
but his blood will I require at thy hand: Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he
turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his
iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul: -- And [ If thou warn the righteous
man, that the righteous sin not, and he does not sin, he shall surely live,
because he is warned, also thou have delivered thy soul.]

And what if they distaste our doctrine? must we forbear? Verse 11. [ Tell
them, thus says the Lord God, whether they will hear, or whether they will
forbear.] So Ezekiel. 33.1. to 10.

You know what came of Jonah for refusing to deliver Gods threatenings against
Nineve.

Christ's stewards must give to each his portion. He himself threatens
damnation to the impenitent, the Hypocrites, and unbelievers, Luke 13.3.5. Mark
16.16. Mat. 24.51. Paul says of himself [ If I yet pleased men, I should not
be the servant of Christ, Gal. 1.10. Patience and meekness is commanded to the
Ministers of Christ, even in the instructing of opposers; But to what end? but
[ that they may escape out of the snare of Devil, who are taken captive by him
at his will.] So that with all our meekness we must be so plain with you, as to
make you know that you are Satan's captives, taken alive by him in his snares,
till God by giving you Repentance shall recover you, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.

The very effice of the Preachers sent by Christ was [ to open men's eyes, and
turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that
they may receive remission of sins, and inheritance with the sanctified by
faith in Christ,] Acts 26.18. which tells you, that we must let men
understand, that till they are converted and sanctified, they are blind, and in
the dark, and in the power of Satan, far from God, unpardoned, and having no
part in the inheritance of Saints.

Christ tells the Pharisees, that they were of their Father the Devil, when
they boasted that God was their Father, John 8.44. And how plainly he tells them
of their hypocrisy, and asks them how they can escape the damnation af Hell,
you may see in Mat. 23.

Paul thought it his duty to tell Elymas, Acts 13.10. that he was full of all
subtilty and mischief, the child of the devil, and the enemy of all
righteousness, a perverter of the right ways of the Lord. And Peter thought
meet to tell Simon Magus, that he had neither part, nor lot in that matter;
that his heart was not right in the sight of God; that he was in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity, Acts 8.21.23.

The charge of Paul to Timothy is plain and urgent, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. I charge
thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the
dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom, Preach the word, be instant in season
and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort.] And to Titus chap. 1.13. Rebuke
them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith.

Judge now whether Minsters must deal plainly or deceitfully with you: and
whether it be the searching healing truth that they must bring you, or a smooth
tale that has no salt or savor in it: And would you have us break these Laws
of God, for nothing but to deceive you, and tell you a ^ie, and make the
ungodly believe that he is godly: or to hide the truth that is necessary to
your salvation? Is the Knowledge of your selves so intolerable a thing to you?

Beloved Hearers, either it is true that you are yet unsanctified, or it is
not: If it be not, it is none of our desire you should think so: We do all that
we can to cure the mistakes of troubled Christians, that think themselves worse
then indeed they are. But if it be true, tell me, Why would you not know it? I
hope it is not because you would not be remembered of your woe, and so tormented
before the time. I hope you think not that we delight to vex men's consciences
with fear; or to see men live in grief and trouble, rather then in well
grounded peace and joy. And if indeed you are yet unregenerate, that is not
long of us that tell you of it, but of your selves that wilfully continue it:
Do we make you ungodly by telling you of your ungodliness? Is it we that hinder
the forgiveness of your sins, by letting you know that they are not forgiven? O
no! We strive for you^ conversion to this end that your sins may (...) forgiven
you; and you hinder the forgi^^^ness of them by refusing to be be convette^
When God forsakes stubborn souls (...) resisting his grace, note how he
expre^^seth his severity against them, Mark 4.1^* That seeing they may see and
not percei^^ and hearing they may hear and not under^stand, lest at any time
they should be converted, and their sins should be forgiven them. You see here,
that till they are converted men's sins are not forgiven them. And tha^ whoever
procures the forgiveness of the^^ sins, must do it by procuring their
Conversion: And that the hindering of their Conversion is the hindering of their
forgiveness* And that blindness of mind is the great hinderance of conversion:
when men do no^ perceive the very things which they see (not knowing the reason
and the sense and end of them, but the outside only:) No^ understand the
things which they hear: And therefore undoubtedly the Teacher that brings you a
Light into your minds, and first shows you your selves, and your unconverted
and your unpardoned state, i^ he that takes the way to your Conversion and
forgiveness: As the forecited Text shows you, Acts 18.26. [ I send thee to
open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light (that they may first
know themselves, and then know God in Jesus Christ) and from the power of
Satan, (who ruled them as their Prince, and captivated them as their Jailer)
unto God (whom they had forsaken as a Guide and Governor, and were deprived of
as their Protector, Portion and felicity;) that they may receive forgiveness of
sins (which none receive but the converted) and an inheritance among them that
are sanctified (for Glory is the inheritance of the Saints alone, Col. 1.12.)
(and all this) through faith that is in me (by believing in me, and giving up
themselves unto me, that by my Satisfaction, Merits, Teaching, Spirit,
Intercession and Judgment, it may be accomplished.)

Truly Sirs, if we knew how to procure your conversion and forgiveness, without
making you know that you are uncoverted and unpardoned, we would do it, and not
trouble you needlessly with so sad a discovery. Let that man be accounted a
butcher of souls, and not a Physicion for them, that delights to torment
them. Let him be accounted unworthy to be a Preacher of the Gospel, that
envieth you your peace and comfort. We would not have you think one jot worse
of your condition then it is. Know but the very truth* what case you are in;
and we desire no more*

And so far are we by this from drivin^ you to Desperation, that it is your
Desperation that we would prevent by it; which can no other way be prevented.
When you are past Remedy, Desperation cannot be avoided: And this is necessary
to your Remedy: There is a conditional Despair, and an Absolute Despair: The
former is necessary to prevent the latter, and to bring you to a state of Hope.
A man that has the toothache, may perhaps despair of being eased without
drawing the tooth; or a man that has a gangrened foot may despair of life,
unless it be cut off: that so by the cure, he may not be left to an Absolute
despair of life. So you must despair of being pardoned or saved without
conversion, that you may be converted, and so have hope of your salvation, and
be saved from final absolute despair. I hope you will not be offended with him,
that would persuade you to Despair of living unless you will eat and drink. You
have no more reason to be offended with him that would have you despair of
being pardoned or saved without Christ, or without his sanctifying Spirit.

HAving said so much of the Necessity of Ministers endeavoring to make
^nregenerate sinners know themselves, I shall next try what I can do toward
it, with those that hear me, by proposing these few Questions to your
consideration.

Quest. 1. Do you think that you were ^ver unsanctified, and in a state of
wrath and condemnation or not? If not, then you are not the offspring of Adam:
you are not then of humane race: For the Scripture tells you that [ We are
conceived in sin.] Psalm. 51.5. And [ That by one man sin entered into the world,
and Death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned]
and that by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation;
Rom 5.12.18. And that [ All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.]
Romans 3.23. [ If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the
truth is not in us, 1 John 1.8.10. And the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23.

And I hope you will confess that you cannot be pardoned and saved without a
Savior; and therefore that as you need a Savior, so you must have a special
interest in him. It is as certain that Christ saves not at all, as that he
saves any: For the same word assures us of the one, and (...) the other.

Quest. 2. But if you confess that once you were children of wrath, my next
Question is, Whether you know how and when you were delivered from so sad a
state? or at least Whether it be done, or not? Perhap^ you will say, It was done
in your Baptism* which washes away Original sin. But granting you that all
that have a Promise of pardon before, have that promise sealed, and that pardon
delivered them by Baptism, I ask you.

Quest. 3. Do you think that Baptism by water only will save, unless you be
also baptized by the spirit? Christ tells you the contrary with a vehement
asseveration* John 3.5. Verily, verily, I say unto thee except a man be born of
water and of the spirit* he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.] And Peter
tells you that it is [ not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the
answer of a good conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 2.21. If therefore you have not
the spirit of Christ, for all your Baptism, you are none of his, Romans 8.9. For
that which is born of the flesh is (but) flesh, and you must be born of the
spirit if you will be spiritual, John 3.6.

I shall further grant you, that many receive the spirit of Christ even in
their infancy, and may be savingly as well as Sacramentally then Regenerate.
And if this be your case you have very great cause to be thankful for it. But
I next enquire of you.

Quest. 4. Have you not lived an unholy carnal life since you came to the use
of reason? Have you not since then delcared, that you did not live the life of
faith, nor walk after the spirit but the flesh? If so, then it is certain that
you have need of a Conversion from that ungodly state, what ever Baptism did
for you: And therefore you are still to enquire whether you have been converred
since you came to age.

And I must needs remember you, that your Infant Covenant made in Baptism,
being upon your parents faith and consent, and no^ your own, will serve your
turn no longer then your Infancy, unless when you come to the use of Reason,
you renew and own that Covenant your selves, and have a personal faith and
Repentance of your own. And whatever you received in Baptism, this must be our
next enquiry.

Quest. 5. Did you ever since you came to age upon sound Repentance, and
renunciation of the flesh, the world and the devil* give up your selves
unfeignedly by faith to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and show by the
performance of this holy Co^venant, that you were sincere in the making of it?

I confess it is a matter so hard to most, to assign the time and manner of
their Conversion, that I think it no safe way of trial* And therefore I will
issue all in this one Question.

Quest. 6. Have you the Necessary parts of the New Creature now? though perhaps
you know not just when or how it was formed in you? The Question is, Whether
you are now in a state of sanctification? and not, Whether you can tell just
when you did receive it? He that would know Whether he be a Man, must not do it
by remembering when he was born, or how he was formed; but by discerning the
Rational nature in himself at present. And though Grace be more observable to
us in its entrance, then Nature (as finding, and entering into, ^ discerning
subject, which Nature does not:) Yet it begins so early with some, and so
obscurely with others, and in others the preparations are so long or notable,
that its hard to say when special grace came in. But you may well discern
Whether it be there, or not? and that is the Question that must be resolved, if
you would know your selves.

And, though I have been long in these exhortations to incline your Wills, I
shall be short in giving you those Evidences of the Holy Life, which must be
before your eyes while you are upon the trial.

In sum, If your very hearts do now unfeignedly consent to the Covenant which
you made in Baptism, and your Lives express it to be a true Consent, I dare say
you are regenerate, though you know not just when you first consented.

Come on then, and let us enquire what you say to the several parts of your
Baptismal Covenant.

1. If you are sincere in the Covenant you have made with Christ. You do
resolvedly Consent, that God shall be your only God, as reconciled to you by
Jesus Christ: Which is, 1. That you will take him for your Owner or your
Absolute Lord, and give up your selves to him as his Own.

2. That You will take him for your Supreme Governor, and Consent to be
subject to his Government and Laws; taking his Wisdom for your Guide, and his
Will for the Rule of your Wills and Lives.

3. That you will take him for your chiefest Benefactor, from whom you receive
and expect all your Happiness, and to whom you owe your selves and all, by way
of Thankfulness: And that you take his Love and favor for your Happiness it
self, and prefer the Everlasting Enjoyment of his Glorious sight and Love in
Heaven, before all the sensual pleasures of the world.

I would prove the necessity of all these by Scripture as we go, but that it is
evident in it self; these three Relations being Essential to God as our God in
Covenant. He is not our God, if not our Owner, Ruler and Benefactor. You
profess all this, when you profess but to Love God, or take him for your God.

2. In the Covenant of Baptism you do profess to believe in Christ, and take
him for your only Savior: If you do this in sincerity, 1. You do unfeignedly
Believe the doctrine of his Gospel, and the Articles of the Christian faith,
concerning his Person, his Offices, and his suffering and works. 2. You do take
him unfeignedly for the only Redeemer and Savior of mankind, and Give up your
selves to be saved by his Merits, Righteousness, Intercession, etc. as he has
promised in his word. 3. You trust upon him and his promises, for the
attainment of your Reconciliation and Peace with God, your Justification,
Adoption, Sanctification, and the Glory of the life to come. 4. You take him
for your Lord and King, your Owner and Ruler by the right of Redemption; and
your grand Benefactor, that has obliged you to Love and Gratitude, by saving
you from the wrath to come, and purchasing eternal Glory for you, by his most
wonderful condescension, life and sufferings.

3. In the Baptismal Covenant, you are engaged to the Holy Ghost. If you are
sincere in this branch of your Covenant, 1. You discern your sins as odious and
dangerous, as the corruption of your souls, and that which displeases the most
Holy God. 2. You see an excellency in Holiness of Heart and Life, as the Image
of God, the rectitude of man, and that which fits him for eternal blessedness,
and makes him amiable in the eyes of God. 3. You unfeignedly desire to be rid
of your sin, how dear soever it has been to you: and to be perfectly
sanctified by the Holy Spirit, by his degrees, in the use of the means which he
has appointed: and you consent that the Holy Ghost as your sanctifier do
purify you and kindle the Love of God in you, and bring it to perfection.

4. In Baptism you profess to renounce the world, the flesh, and the Devil:
that is, as they stand for your Hearts against the Will and Love of God, and
against the Happiness of the unseen world; and against your Faith in Christ
your Savior; and against the sanctifying work of the Holy Ghost. If therefore
you are sincere in this part of your Covenant, you do upon deliberation
perceive all the pleasures, profits and honors of this world to be so vain and
worthless, that you are Habitually resolved, to prefer the Love and favor of
God, and your salvation before them; and to be Ruled by Jesus Christ and his
Spirit and word, rather then by the desires of the flesh, or the worlds
allurements, or the will of man, or the suggestions of the devil: and to
forsake all rather then forsake the Father, the Savior, the Sanctifier to whom
you are devoted, and the everlasting life which upon his promise you have taken
for your Hope and Portion. This is the sense of Baptism, and all this in
profession being Essential to your Baptism, must be Essential to your
Christianity: Your Parents Profession of it was necessary to your infant title
to the outward privileges of the Church: Your own personal profession is
necessary to your continuance of those privileges, and your visible
Christianity and communion with the adult: And the Truth of what you profess,
is necessary to your real Christianity before God, and to your title to
salvation: And this is it that is to be now enquired after. You cannot hope to
be admitted into Heaven, upon lower terms then the sincerity of that profession
with enters you into the Church: While we tell you of no higher matters
necessary to your salvation, then the sincerity of that which is necessary to
Baptism and Christianity, I hope you will not say we deal too strictly with
you. Enquire now by a diligent trial of your hearts, whether you truly consent
to all these articles of your Baptismal Vow or Covenant. If you do, you are
Regenerate by the Spirit: If you do not, you have but the Sacrament of
Regeneration: which aggravateth your guilt, as a violated profession and
Covenant must needs do. And I do not think, that any man worthy to be
discoursed with, will have the face to tell you that any man at the use of
Reason, is by his Baptism, (or any thing else) in a state of Justification and
Salvation, whose heart does not sincerely consent to the Covenant of Baptism,
and whose Life expresses not that consent.

Hence therefore you may perceive that it is a thing unquestionable, that all
these persons are yet unregenerate and in the bond of their iniquity.

1. All those that have not unfeignedly devoted themselves to God, as being not
their own but his. His by the title of Creation, Psalm. 100.3. [ Know ye that
the Lord he is God; it is he that has made us, and not we our selves, we are
his people, and the sheep of his pasture.] And His by the title of Redemption:
for we are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 7.23. And he that unfeignedly takes God
for his Owner, and Absolute Lord, will heartily give up himself unto him; as
Paul says of the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 8.5. They first gave up their own selves
to the Lord, and to us by the will of God.]

And he that entirely gives up himself to God, does with himself surrender all
that he has in desire and resolution. As Christ with himself does give us all
things, Romans 8.32. and adds other things to them that seek first his Kingdom
and its Righteousness, Matthew. 6.33. so Christians with themselves do give up
all they have to Christ.

And he that gives up himself to God, will live to God: And he that takes not
himself to be his Own, will take nothing for his Own: but will study the
interest of his Lord, and think he is best disposed of when he honors him
most, and serves him best, 1 Cor. 6.19.20. [ Ye are not your own, for ye are
bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit,
which are Gods.

If any of you devote not your selves unfeignedly to God, and make it not your
first enquiry, what God would have you be and do, but live to your selves, and
yet think your selves in a state of Life, you are mistaken, and do not know
your selves. What abundance might easily see their miserable condition in this
discovery! Who say in effect [ our lips are our own: Who is Lord over us? Psalm.
12.4.] and rather hate and oppose the interest of God and Holiness in the
world, then devote themselves to the promoting of it! Deuteronomy. 32.6. [ Do ye thus
requite the Lord, ye foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy father that has
bought thee? Has he not made thee, and established thee?]

2. All those are unregenerate and in a state of death, that are not sincerely
subjected to the Governing will of God, but are Ruled by their carnal Interest
and desires; and the word of a man that can gratify or hurt them, can do more
with them then the word of God: To show them the command of a man that they
think, can undo them if they disobey, does more prevail with them then to show
them the command of God that can condemn them unto endless misery: They more
fear men that can kill the body, then God that can destroy both soul and body
in Hell fire. When the lust of the flesh, and the will of man, do bear more
sway then the will of God, its certain that such a soul is unregenerate, Romans
6.3, 4, 6. Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ,
were baptized into his death? therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father,
even so we also should walk in newness of life -- Knowing this, that our old
man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin, -- v. 16. Know ye not that to whom you
yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey,
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?

1 Pet. 4.4.1, 2. Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh,
arm your selves likewise with the same mind: for he that has suffered in the
flesh, has ceased from sin: that he no longer should live the rest of his time
in the flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the will of God.]

3. All those are unregenerate, that depend not upon God as their chiefest
Benefactor: and do not most carefully apply themselves to him, as knowing that
in his favor is life, Psalm. 30.5. and that his loving kindness is better then
life,] Psalm. 63.3. and that to his judgment we must finally stand or fall: but
do ambitiously seek the favor of men, and call them their Benefactors, (Luke
22.25. Matthew. 23.9.) whatever become of the favor of God. He is no child of
God that prefers not the Love of God before the Love of all the world. He is
no heir of heaven, that prefers not the fruition of God in Heaven, before
all worldly glory and felicity, Col. 4.1, 2, 3. If ye be risen with Christ,
seek the things that are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God;
set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth.] The Love of
God is the sum of Holiness; the Heart of the new creature; the perfecting of
it is the perfection and felicity of man.

4. They are certainly unregenerate that Believe not the Gospel, and take not
Christ for their only Savior, and his promises of Grace and Glory as purchased
by his Sacrifice and Merits, for the Foundation of their hopes, on which they
resolve to trust their souls for pardon and for peace with God, and endless
Happiness, Acts 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is
none other Name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.] 1 John
5.11, 12. This is the record that God has given us eternal life, and this life
is in his Son: He that has the Son, has life; and he that has not the Son,
has not life.]

When our Happiness was in Adams hands, he lost it: It is now put into safer
hands, and Jesus Christ the second Adam is become our Treasury. He is the Head
of the Body, from whom each member has quickening influence, Ephesians. 1.22. The
life of Saints is in him, as the life of the tree is in the root, unseen, Col.
4.3, 4. Holiness is a Living unto God in Christ; Though we are dead with
Christ, to the Law, and to the world, and to the flesh, we are alive to God. So
Paul describes our case in his own, Gal. 2.19, 20. I through the Law am dead
to the Law, that I might live unto God: I am crucified with Christ:
nevertheless I live: yet not I, but Christ lives in me: and the life which I
now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me and
gave himself for me,] Romans 6.11. Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead
indeed unto sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.] Christ is
the Vine, and we are the branches: without him we can do nothing: If you abide
not in him, and his words in you, you are cast forth as a branch, and withered,
which men gather and cast into the fire, and they are burnt,] John 15.1, 5, 6,
7. In Baptism you are married unto Christ, as to the external solemnization;
and in spiritual Regeneration your Hearts do inwardly close with him, entertain
him, and resign themselves unto him, by Faith and Love; and by a resolved
Covenant become his own: And therefore Baptism and the Lords Supper are called
Sacraments, because as Soldiers were wont by an Oath and listing their names,
and other engaging Ceremonies to oblige themselves to their Commanders, and
their Vow wa^ called A Sacrament: so do we engage ou^ selves to Christ in the
holy Vow or Covenan^ entered in Baptism, and renewed in the Lords Supper.

5. That person is certainly unregenerate that never was convinced of a
Necessity of Sanctification, or never perceived an excellency and amiableness
in Holiness of heart and life, and loved it in others and desired it himself:
and never gave up himself to the Holy Ghost, to be further sanctified in the
use of his appointed means; desiring to be perfect, and willing to press
forward toward the mark, and to abound in grace. Much less is that person
renewed by the Holy Ghost, that hates Holiness, and had rather be without it,
and would not walk in the fear and obedience of the Lord.

The Spirit of Holiness is that Life by which Christ quickneth all that are his
members. He is no member of Christ that is without it: Romans 8.9. According to
his Mercy, he saves us by the washing of Regeneration and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, Tit. 3.5.

6. That person is unregenerate that is under the Dominion of his fleshly
desires, and minds the things of the flesh above the things of the Spirit;
and has not mortified it so far, as not to live according to it. A carnal
mind, and a carnal life, are opposite to Holiness, as Sickness is t^ Health;
and Darkness unto Light, Romans 8.1. to 14. There is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus, that walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. --
For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh: but they
that are after the spirit, the things of the spirit. For to be carnally minded
is death, but to be spiritually minded is life and peace. Because the carnal
mind is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither
indeed can be: so then they that are in the flesh, cannot please God -- For if
ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if by the spirit ye mortify the
deeds of the body, ye shall live.] [Now the works of the flesh are manifest,
which are, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies,
Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, revellings and such like; of which I tell you
before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. But the fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy,
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance:
against such there is no Law: And they that are Christ's, have crucified the
flesh, with the affections, and lusts, Galat. 5.18. to 25.

7. Lastly, that person is certainly unregenerate, that so far valueth and
loves this world, or any of the carnal accommodations therein, as practically
to prefer them before the Love of God, and the Hopes of Everlasting Glory:
seeking it first, with highest estimation, and holding it fastest; so as that
he will rather venture his soul upon the threatened wrath of God, then his body
upon the wrath of man; and will be religious no further then may consist with
his prosperity or safety in the world, and has something that he cannot part
with for Christ and heaven, because it is dearer to him then they: Let this man
go never so far in Religion, as long as he goes further for the world, and
sets it nearest to his heart, and holds it fastest, and will do most for it,
and consequently loves it better then Christ, he is no true Christian, nor in
a state of grace.

The Scriptures put this also out of doubt* as you may see, Mat. 10.37, 38. and
Luke ^4.26, 27, 33. He that loves Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy
of me, etc. Whosoever does not bear his Cross and come after me, cannot be my
Disciple. Who^ver he be of you that forsakes not all that ^e has, he cannot
be my Disciple. Know ^e not that the friendship of the world, is ^nmity with
God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is the enemy of God,
^am. 4.4. No wonder then if the world must be renounced in our Baptism. [Love
not the world, neither the things that are in the world: If any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15.

You see by this time, what it is to be Regenerate, and to be a Christian
indeed, by what is contained even in our Baptism: and consequently how you may
Know your selves, whether you are sanctified, and the heirs of heaven, or not.

Again therefore I summon you to appear before your consciences: and if indeed
these Evidences of regeneration are not in you, stop not the sentence, but
confess your sinful miserable state, and condemn your selves, and say no
longer, I hope yet that my present condition may serve turn, and that God will
forgive me though I should die without any further change: Thos^ Hopes that you
may be saved without re^generation, or that you are regenerate when you are
not, are the pillars of Satan's for^tress in your hearts, and keep you from the
saving Hopes of the Regenerate, tha^ that will never make you ashamed. Up^hold
not that which Christ is engage^ against: Down it must, either by Gra^^ or
Judgment: and therefore abuse no^ your souls by underpropping such an
ill-grounded false deceitful hope. You have now time to take it down so
orderly and safely, as that it fall not on your heads and overwhelm you not for
ever. But if you stay till death shall undermine it, the fal^ will be great,
and your ruin irreparable* If you are wise, therefore Know your selves in time.

II. I have done with that part of my special Exhortation which concerned the
unregenerate: I am next to speak to those of you that by Grace are brought into
a better state: and to tell you, that it very much concerns you also, even
the best of you to labor to be well acquainted with your selves: and that both
in respect of 1. Your sins and wants, and 2. Your Graces and your duties.

I. Be acquainted with the root and remnant of your sins: with your particular
inclinations and corrupt affections: with their quality, their degree and
strength: with the weaknesses of every grace: with your disability to duty: and
with the omissions or sinful practices of your lives. Search diligently and
deeply; frequently and accurately peruse your hearts and ways, till you
certainly and thoroughly know your selves.

And I beseech you let it not suffice you that you know your states, and have
found your selves in the Love of God, in the faith of Christ, and possessed by
his Spirit. Though this be a mercy worth many worlds, yet this is not all
concerning your selves that you have to know. If yet you say that you have no
sin, you deceive your selves. If yet you think you are past all danger, your
danger is the greater for this mistake. As much as you have been humbled for
sin: as much as you have loathed it, and your selves for it: as often as you have
confessed it, lamented it, and complained and prayed against it, yet it is
alive: Though it be mortified, it is alive. It is said to be mortified as to
the prevalency and reign, but the relicts of it yet survive: were it perfectly
dead, you were perfectly delivered from it, and might say you have no sin: but
it is not yet so happy with you. It will find work for the blood and spirit of
Christ, and for your selves, as long as you are in the flesh. And alas, too
many that know themselves to be upright in the main, are yet so much
unacquainted with their hearts and lives as to the degrees of grace and sin, as
that it much disadvantageth them in their Christian progress. Go along with me
in the careful observation of these following Evils, that may befall even the
regenerate by the remnants of self-ignorance.

1. The work of Mortification is very much hindered, because you know your
selves no better: as may appear in all these following discoveries.

1. You confess not sin to God or man so penitently and sensibly as you ought,
because you know your selves no better. Did you see your inside with a fuller
view, how deeply would you aggravate your sin? How heavily would you charge
your selves? Repentance would be more intense and more effectual: and when you
were more contrite, you would be more meet for the sense of pardon, and for
Gods delight, Isa. 51.15. and 66.2. It would fill you more with godly shame and
self-abhorrence, if you better knew your selves. It would make you more
sensibly say with Paul, Romans 7.23, 24. [ I see another Law in my members
warring against the Law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the Law
of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death!] And with David, Psalm. 38.18. I will declare my
iniquity; I will be sorry for my sin, and 40.12. They are more then the hairs
of my head, and 32.5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I
not hid: I said I will confess my transgressions to the Lord, and thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin.] Repentance is the Death of sin: and the
knowledge of our selves* and the sight of our sins* is the life of Repentance.

2. You pray not against sin, for grace and pardon so earnestly as you should,
because you know your selves no better. O that God would but open these
too-close hearts unto us, and anatomize the relicts of the old man, and show us
all the recesses of our self-deceit, and the filth of worldliness, and carnal
inclinations that lurk within us, and read us a Lecture upon every part; what
prayers would it teach us to indite! That you be not proud of your holiness,
let me tell you Christians, that a full display of the corruptions that the
best of you carry about you, would not only take down self-exalting thoughts,
that you be not lift up above measure, but would teach you to pray with fervor
and importunity, and waken you out of your sleepy indifferency, and make you
cry, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me! If the sight of a Lazar or
cripple or naked person move you to compassion, though they use no words: if
the sight of a man that is gasping for want of your relief, will affect you:
surely the sight of your own deformities, wants and dangers would affect you if
you saw them as they are. How many a sin do you forget in your Confessions that
should have a particular Repentance? and how many wants do you overlook in
prayers, that should have particular petitions for a merciful supply? And how
many are lightly touched, and run over with words of course, that would be
earnestly insisted on, if you did but better know your selves! O that God would
persuade you better to study your hearts, and pray out of that Book when ever
you draw nigh him: that you not might be so like the Hypocrites, that draw near
to him with the lips, when their hearts are far from him. To my shame I must
confess that my soul is too dry and barren in holy supplications to God, and
too little affected with my confessed sins and wants: but I am forced to lay
all in a very great measure upon the imperfect acquaintance that I have at
home; I cannot think I should want matter to pour out before the Lord in
confession and petition, nor so much want fervor and earnestness with God, if
my Heart and life lay open to my view, while I am upon my knees.

3. It is for want of a fuller knowledge of your selves that you are so
negligent in your Christian watch, that you do no better guard your senses;
that you make no stricter a Covenant with your eyes, your appetites, your
tongues: that you no more examine what you think, affect and say: what passes
into your heart or out of it: that you call not your selves more frequently to
account; but days run on, and duties are carelessly performed as of course, and
no daily or weekly reckoning made to conscience of all. The knowledge of your
weaknesses, and readiness to yield, and of your treacherous corruptions that
comply with the enemy, would make you more suspicious of your selves, and to
walk more circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, Ephesians. 5.15. and to look
under your feet, and consider your ways before you were too bold and
venturous. It was the consciousness of their own infirmity, that should have
moved the disciples to watch and pray, Mat. 26.41. [ Watch and pray that ye
enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is
weak.] And all have the same charge, because all have the same infirmity and
danger, [ What I say to you, I say unto all, Watch,] Mar. 13.37. Did we better
know how many advantages our own corruptions give the Tempter, that charge of
the Holy Ghost would awake us all to stand to our arms and look about us: 1
Cor. 16.13. Watch ye, stand fast in the faith: quit you like men, be strong:]
And Ephesians. 6.11, 12, 13, 14. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be
able to stand against the wiles of the Devil: For we wrestle not againts flesh
and blood, but against principalities and powers, against the rulers of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places, etc.] When
men know not whose legs they stand upon they grow heedless of their way, and
quickly slide.

The knowledge of our selves does show us all the advantages of the tempter:
what he has to work upon, and what in us to take his part, and consequently
where he is likest to assault us: and so, puts us into so prepared a posture
for defense, as very much hinders his success. But so far as we do not know
our selves, we are like blind men in sensing, that the adversary may hit in
what part he please: we have so many hidden enemies in our houses, as will
quickly open the door to more. What sin may not Satan tempt a man into, that is
not acquainted with the corruptions and frailties of his own heart?

4. It is for want of Self-acquaintance that we make not out for help against
our sin to Ministers or other friends that could assist us: And that we use the
confirming Ordinances with no more care and diligence. All the abilities and
willingness of others, and all the helps of Gods appoin^ment, will be
neglected, when we should employ them against our sins; so far as
self-ignorance does keep us from discerning the necessity of them.

5. It is for want of a fuller knowledge of our selves, that many lie long in
sins unobserved by themselves: and many are on the declining hand, and take no
notice of it. And how little resistance or mortifying endeavors we are like to
bestow upon unknown or unobserved sins, is easy to conceive. How many may we
observe to have notable blemishes of Pride, ostentation, desire of pre-eminence
and esteem, envy, malice, self-conceitedness, self-seeking, censoriousness,
uncharitableness, and such like, that see no more of it in themselves, then is
in more mortified men? How ordinarily do we hear the Pastors that watch over
them, and their friends that are best acquainted with them, lamenting the
miscarriages, and the careless walking and declining of many that seem
Religious, when they lament it not themselves, nor will not be convinced that
they are sick of any such disease, any more then all other Christians are?
Hence comes the stifness of too many (...) all that can be said to (...) them:
and that they are (...) reproof, and think reprovers (...) wrong: and its well
if it abate not Christian love, and procure not some degree of hatred or
displeasure. Like a man that is entering into a consumption, and takes it for an
injury to be told so, till his languishing and decay convince him. Hence it is
that we have all need to lament in general our unknown sins, and say with David
[Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults.] Psalm
19.12. Hence it is that we can seldom tell men of the most discernable faults,
but they meet us with excuses, and justify themselves.

There are few of us I think, that observe our hearts at all, but find both
upon any special illumination, and in the hour of discovering trials, that
there were many distempers in our hearts, and many miscarriages in our lives,
that we never took notice of before. The Heart has such secret corners of
uncleanness, such mysteries of iniquity, and depths of deceitfulness, that many
fearing God, are strangely unacquainted with themselves, as to the particular
motions and degrees of sin, till some notable providence, or gracious light
assist them in the discovery. I think it not unprofitable here to give you some
instances, of sin undiscerned by the servants of the Lord themselves that have
it, till the light come in that makes them wonder at their former darkness.

In General first observe these two. 1. The secret Habits of sin, being
discernable only by some acts, are many times unknown to us, because we are
under no strong tempta^tion to commit those sins. And its a wonderful hard
thing for a man that has little or no temptation, to know himself, and know
what he should do, if he had the temptations of other men. And O what sad
discoveries are made in the hour of temptation* What swarms of vice break out
in some like vermin that lay hid in the cold of Winter, and crawle about when
they feel the Summers heat! What horrid corruption which we never observed in
our selves before, do show themselves in the hour o^ temptation! Who would have
though^ that Righteous Noah had in the Ark (...) such a heart, as would by
carelessness (...) into the sin of drunkenness? or that right^^ous Lot had
carried from Sodom the seed (...) drunkenness and incest in him? or th^^ David,
a man so eminent in holiness, and a man after Gods own heart, had (...) heart
that had in it the seeds of Adultery and Murder? Little thought Peter, when he
professed Christ, Mat. 16.16. that the^^ had been in him such carnality and
unbelief, as would have so soon provoked Christ to say, Get thee behind me
Satan, thou art an offense unto me: for thou (...) (...) not the things that be
of God, but those that (...) of men, ver. 22.23. And little did he think ^hen
he so vehemently professed his resolu^^on rather to die with Christ then deny
him, ^^at there had been then in his heart the (...) that would bring forth
this bitter ^^it, Mat. 26.74, 75. Who knows what is ^^rtually in a seed, that
never saw the tree, (...) tasted of the fruit?

Especially when we have not only a ^^eedom from temptations, but also the most
^^werful means to keep under vicious habits, (...) hard to know how far they
are mortified (...) the root. When men are among those ^^at countenance the
contrary virtue, and ^here the vice is in disgrace, and where ^xamples of piety
and temperance are still before their eyes: If they dwell in such ^aces and
company, where Authority and ^riendship and Reason do all take part with (...),
and cry down the evil, no wonder (...) the evil that is unmortified in men's
hearts, ^o not much break out to their own or others observations through all
this op^osition. The instance of King Joash is fa^o^s for this: who did that
which was ^ight in the sight of the Lord, all the days ^f ^ehojada the Priest
that instructed him, 2 Kings 12.2. but after his death, when the Princes of
Juda flattered him with their obeisance, he left the house of God and served
Idols, till wrath came upon the land* and was so hardened in sin, as to murde^
Zechariah the Prophet of God, and (...) of that Jehojada that had brought him
out of obscurity, and set him upon the Throne^ even because he spoke in the
name of the Lord against his sin; 2 Chronicles. 24.20, 21, 22.

Who would have thought that it had been in the heart of Solomon, a man so
Wise, so Holy, and so Solemnly engaged to God, by his public professions and
works, to have committed the abominations mentioned, 1 Kings 11.4.?

If you say, that all this proves not that there was any seed or root: of such
a sin in the Heart before: but only that the temptation did prevail to cause
the acts first, and then such habits as those acts did tend to; I answer; 1. I
grant that temptations do not only discover what is in the heart, but also make
it worse when they prevail; and that is no full proof that a man had a proper
habit of sin before, because by temptation he commits the act: For Adam sinned
by temptation without an antecedent habit. 2. But we know the nature of man to
^e now corrupted; and that this corruption (...) virtually or seminally all
sin, disposing ^s to all; and that this disposition is strong enough to be
called a General Habit. When Grace in the sanctified is called [ A Na^ure] 2
Pet. 1.4. there is the same reason ^o call the sinful inclination [a Nature]
^oo; which can signify nothing else then ^ strong and rooted inclination.
Knowing therefore that the Heart is so corrupted, we may well say when the evil
fruit appears, that there was the seed of it before. And the easy and frequent
yielding to the temptation, shows there was a friend to sin within. 3. But if
it were not so, yet that our hearts should be so frail, so defectible, mutable,
and easily drawn to sin, is a part of Self-knowledge necessary to our
preservation, and not to be disregarded. 4. I am sure Christ himself tells us,
that out of the heart proceed the sins of the life, Mat. 15.19. and that the
evil things of evil men come out of the evil treasure of their hearts, Mat.
12.36. And when God permitted the fall of good King Hezekiah, the text says [
God left him to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart, 2 Chronicles.
32.31. that is, that he might show all that was in his heart, so that the
weakness and the remaining corruption of Hezekiahs hear^ were shown in the sin
which he committed.

2. And as the sinful Inclinations are har^ly discerned, and long lie hid till
so^^ Temptation draw them out; so the Act i^self is hardly discerned in any of
its mali^nity, till it be done and past, and the so^^ is brought to a
deliberate review. For while a man is in the act of sin, either hi^
understanding is so far deluded, as to think it no sin in its kind, or none to
him that then commits it, or that its better venture on it then not, for the
attaining of some seeming good, or the avoiding of some evil: or else the
restraining act of the understanding is suspended, and withdrawn; and it
descerneth not practically the pernicious evil of the sin, and forbids not
the committing of it, or forbids it so remisly and with so low a voice, as is
drowned by the clamor of contradicting passion: so that the prohibition is not
heard. And how can it be then expected, that when a man has not wit enough in
use, to see his sin so far as to forbear it, he should even then see it so far
as rightly to judge of himself and it? and that when Reason is low, and
sensuality prevails, we should then have the right use of Reason for
self-discerning? When a storm of passion has blown out the Light, and error
has extinguished it, we are unlikely then to know our selves. When the sensual
part is pleasing it self with its fobidden objects, that pleasure so corrupts
the judgment, that men will easily believe that it is lawful, or that it is
not very bad: So that sin is usually least known and felt, when it is greatest
and in exercise, and one would think should then be most perceptible. Like a
frenzy or madness, or other deliration, that is least known when it is
greatest and most in act, because its nature is destructive to the Reason that
should know it: Like a spot in the eye, that is it self unseen, and hinders
the sight of all things else. Or as the deeper a man's sleep is, the less he
knows that he is a sleep. Somnium narrare vigilantis est, says Seneca. Its
men awake that tell their dreams.

And thus you see that through self-ignorance it comes to pass, that both
secret Habits, and the most open acts of sin are ofttimes little known. A man
that is drunk is in an unfit state to know what drunkenness is: and so is a man
that is in his passion: You will hardly bring him to repentance till it be
allaid: And so is a man in the brutifying heat of lust: or in the childish use
of such recreations as he doteth on (...) or in the ambitious pursuit of his
deluding honors: And therefore abundance o^ unknown sin, may remain in a soul
that labors not to be well acquainted with i^ self.

And as I have showed you this in General, both of Habits and Acts of sin; let
us consider of some Instances in particular, which will yet more discover the
necessity of studying our selves.

1. Little do we think what odious and dangerous errors may befall a person
that now is orthodox! What a slippery mutability the mind of man is liable
unto! How variety of representations causes variety of apprehensions: Like
some pictures that seem one thing when you look on them on one side, and
another thing when on another side; If you change your place; or change your
light, they seem to change. Indeed Gods word has nothing in it thus fitted to
deceive: but our weakness has that which disposes us to mistakes: We are like
an unlearned Judge, that thinks the cause is good which he first hears pleaded
for, till he hear the confutation by the other party, and then he thinks the
other has the best cause, till perhaps he hear both so long, till he know not
whose cause is the best: The person that now is a zealous lover of the Truth,
(when it has procured entertainment by the happy advantage of friends,
acquaintance, Ministers, Magistrates, or common consent being on its side) may
possibly turn a zealous adversary to it, when it loses those advantages: when
a Minister shall change his mind, how many of the flock may he mislead?

When you marry or contract any intimate friendship with a person of unsound
and dangerous principles, how easily are they received?

When the stream of the times and authority shall change, and put the name of
Truth on falsehood, how many may be, carried down the stream?

How zealous have many been for a faithful Ministry, that have turned their
persecutors, or made it a great part of their Religion to revile them, when
once they have turned to some Sect that is possessed by the malicious spirit!
(especially the Papists and Quakers are famous for such language of reproach:
though the former excel the later much in the slandering part, and the later
excel in the open bawling and incivility of speech.)

And O that we could stop here, and could not remember you how faithfully and
honestly some have seemed to love and obey the word of God, and to delight in
the Communion of Saints, that by seducers have been brought to deny the divine
authority of the Scriptures, and to turn their backs on all Gods public
Ordinances of Worship, and excommunicate themselves from the Society of the
Saints, and vilify or deny the works of the spirit in them! Little did these
men once think themselves, whither they should fall, under the conceit of
rising higher: And little would they have believed him that had told them, what
a change they would make. Had these men known themselves in time, and known
what Tinder and Gunpowder was in their hearts, they would have walked more
warily, and its like have escaped the snare: but they fell into it, because they
feared it not. And they feared it not, because they knew not or observed not,
how prone they were to be infected.

2. Little do many think in their adversity, or low estate, what seeds are in
their hearts, which Prosperity would turn into very odious, scandalous sins,
unless their vigilance, and a special preservation do prevent it. Many a man
that in his shop, or at his plough, is censuring the great miscarriages of his
Superiors, does little think how bad he might prove, if he were in the place of
those he censureth. Many a poor man that freely talks against the Luxury, Pride
and Cruelty of the Rich, does little think how like them he should be, if he
had their temptations and estates. How many persons that lived in good repute
for humility, temperance and piety, have we seen turn proud, and sensual and
ungodly, when they have been exalted! I would mention no man's case by way of
insulting or reproach: but by way of compassion, and in order to their
repentance that survive, I must say that this age has given us such lamentable
instances as should make all our hearts to ache and fear, when we consider the
crimes and their effects. Would the persons that once walked with us in the
ways of Peace and Concord, and Obedience, have believed that man that should
have foretold them twenty years ago, how many should be puffed up and deluded
by successes; and make themselves believe by the ebullition of pride, that
Victories authorized them to deny subjection to the higher powers, and by right
or wrong to take down all that stood in their way, and to take the Government
into their own hands, and to depose their rightful Governors? never once
vouchsafing to ask themselves the question that Christ asked, Luke 12.14. [
Man, who made me a Judge, or a divider over you?] as if authority had been
nothing but strength, and he had the best right to Govern that could make the
greatest force to compel obedience. Little were the seeds of all this evil,
discerned in the heart, before prosperity and success did cherish them and
bring them to that which with grief we have long observed. They would have said
as Hazael, Am I a dog that I should do this? if one had told them before, that
when God has charged every soul to be subject on pain of condemnation, and
they had vowed fidelity, they should break all these bonds of commands and
vows, and all because they were able to do it: When they would not justify him
that should do any mischief to themselves, and think it warrantable, because he
was able: when the Ministers of the Gospel, and their dearest friends bore
witness against the sin, the heart could not by all this be brought to perceive
its guilt; or that it was any sin to overturn, overturn, overturn, till they
had overturned all, and left not themselves a bough to stand upon: And how
hardly to this day, do the notable discoverings of God, and the plainness of
his word, and the continued witness of his servants, prevail for kindly true
Repentance! The unrighteous usage of Magistracy and Ministry, and the
licentious indulgence of the open enemies and revilers of both, and of all the
Ordinances and Churches of the Lord, do proclaim aloud to all that that fear
God [ The depths and deceits of the heart are wonderful, and you little think
what an hour of temptation may discover in you, or bring you to: oh therefore
know your selves, and fear, and watch.]

3. A man that in adversity is touched with penitent and mortifying
considerations, and strongly resolves, how holily and diligently he will live
hereafter, if he be recovered or delivered from his suffering, does ofttimes
little think what a treacherous heart he has, and how little he may retain of
all this sense of sin or duty, when he is delivered, and that he will be so
much worse then he seemed or promised, as that he may have cause to wish he had
been afflicted still. O how many sickbed promises are as pious as we can
desire, that wither away and come to almost nothing, when health has scattered
the fears that caused them! How many with that great imprisoned Lord, do, as it
were, write the story of Christ upon their prison walls, that forget him when
they are set liberty! How many are tender-conscienced in a low estate, that
when they are exalted, and converse with great ones, do think that they may
wast their time in idleness and needless, scandalous recreations, and be silent
witnesses of the most odious sins from day to day; and pray God be merciful to
them when they go to the house of Rimmon: and dare scarcely own a downright
servant, or hated and reproached cause of God! O what a preservate would it be
to us in prosperity, to know the corruption of our hearts, and forsee in
adversity what we are in danger of! We should then be less ambitious to place
our dwellings on the highest ground; and more fearful of the storms that there
must be expected. How few are there (to a wonder) that grow better by worldly
greatness and prosperity? Yea how few that held their own, and grow not worse?
And yet how few are there (to a greater wonder) that refuse, or that desire not
this perilous station, rather then to stand safer on the lower ground! Verily,
the lamentable fruits of prosperity, and the mutability of men that make great
professions and promises in adversity, should make the best of us jealous of
our hearts, and convince us that there is greater corruption in them, then most
are acquainted with, that are never put to such a trial. The height of
prosperity shows what the man is indeed, as much as the depth of adversity.

Would one have thought that had read of Hezekiahs earnest prayer in his
sickness, and the Miracle wrought to signify his deliverance (2 Kings 20.2, 3,
9.) and of his written song of praise, Isa. 38. that yet Hezekiahs heart should
so deceive him, as to prove unthankful? You may see by his expressions his high
resolutions to spend his life in the praise of God, Isa. 38.19, 20. [ The
living, the living he shall praise thee, as I do this day: The Fathers to the
children shall make known thy truth. The Lord was ready to save me: therefore
we will sing my songs to the stringed instruments all the days of our life in
the house of the Lord!] Would you think that a Holy man, thus rapt up in Gods
praise, should yet miscarry, and be charged with ingratitude? And yet in 2 Chronicles. 32.25. it is said of him [ But Hezekiah rendered not again according to
the benefit done unto him: for his heart was lifted up: therefore there was
wrath upon him and upon Judah and Jerusalem.] And God was fain to bring him to
a review, and humble him for being thus lifted up: as the next words show, ver.
26. Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart.] O
Sirs, what Christan that ever was in a deep affliction, and has been recovered
by the tender hand of mercy, has not found how false a thing the heart is, and
how little to be trusted in its best resolutions, and most confident promises!
Hezekiah still remained a holy faithful man: but yet thus failed in
particulars and degrees. Which of us can say, who have had the most affecting
and engaging deliverances, that ever our hearts did fully answer the purposes
and promises of our afflicted state* and that we had as constant sensible
thanksgivings after, as our complaints and prayers were before. Not I; with
grief I must say, Not I, though God has tried me many a time. Alas we are too
like the de^^itfull Israelites, Psalm. 78.34. When he slew ^^em, then they
sought him; and they return^^ and enquired early after God: and they ^^membred
that God was their rock, and the (...) God their Redeemer. Nevertheless they
did ^^tter him with their mouth, and they lied ^^to him with their tongues: For
their ^^art was not right with him, neither were ^^ey steadfast in his Covenant.
Prosperity often ^^ews more of the hypocrisy of the unsound, (...) the infirmity
of the upright, then ap^^ared in adversity. When we feel the (...) resolutions
of our hearts to cast off (...) sin, to walk more thankfully and ^^uitfully and
accurately with God then (...) have done, we can hardly believe that ^^er those
hearts shoul lose so much of those ^^fections and resolutions as in a little
time (...) find they do. Alas how quickly and (...) sensibly do we slide into
our former in^^nsibility, and into our dull and heavy ^^uitless course, when
once the pain and ^^ar is gone! And then when the next ^^fliction comes, we are
confounded and co^^ered with shame, and have not the confi^ence with God in our
prayers and cries ^s we had before, because we are conscious of our
covenant breaking and back^liding: and at last we grow so distrustful of our
hearts, that we know not (...) to believe any promises which (...) make, nor
how to be confident (...) any Evidence of grace that is in the^ and so we lose
the comfort of our sincer^^^ and are cast into a state of too much h^^^viness
and unthankful denial of our de^^^est mercies: And all this comes from (...)
foul unexpected relapses and coolings (...) declinings of the heart that comes
not (...) to the promises we made to God in (...) distress.

But if Exaltation be added to Delivera^^^ how often does it make the Reason
dru^^ so that the man seems not the same! If (...) see them drowned in Ambition
or worl^ cares or pleasures; if you see how bol^ they can play with the sin
that once th^^ would have trembled at; how powerf^^^ fleshly arguments are with
them; (...) strangely they now look at plainhea^^^^ zealous, heavenly
Christians, whose (...) they once desired to be in; and how (...) they are
ashamed or afraid, to appear (...) for an opposed cause of Christ, or ope^^ly
to justify the persons that he justifies* As if they had forgot that a day is
comi^^ when they will be loath that Christ shou^^ be ashamed of them, and refuse
to Justif^^ them, when the grand Accuser is pleading for their condemnation. I
say, if you see these men in their prosperity, would you not ask with wonder,
Are these the men that lately in distress, did seem so humble, penitent and
sincere? that seemed so much above these vanities, that could speak with so
much contempt of all the glory and pleasures of the world: and with so much
pity of those vertiginous men, that they now admire.

O what pillars have been shaken by prosperity? what promises broken? what sad
eruptions of Pride and worldliness? What openings and sad discoveries of heart,
does this alluring charming trial make! And why is it that men know not
themselves when they are exalted, but because they did not sufficiently know
themselves, when they were brought low, nor suspected enough the purposes and
promises of their hearts, in the day of their distress!

4. We would little think, when the Heart is warmed and raised even to Heaven,
in holy Ordinances, how cold it will grow again, and how low it will fall down?
And when we have attained the clearest sight of our sincerity, we little think
how quickly all such apprehensions may be lost: and the misjudging soul, that
reckons upon nothin^ but what it sees, or feels at present, man be at as great
a loss, as if it had never pe^^ceived any fruits of the spirit, or lineamen^ of
the Image of God upon it self. Ho^ confident upon good grounds is (...) an
honest heart of its sincerity? How ce^^tain that it desires to be perfectly
Holy* 1. That it would be rid of the nearest deare^ sin. 2. That it loves the
Saints, 3. That (...) loves the light of the most searching Mini^stry. 4. And
loves the most practical sanct^^fying truths. 5. And loves the Ministry (...)
means that have the greatest and most power^full tendency to make themselves
more (...) (all which are certain evidences of since^rity.) How clearly may the
Heart percei^^ all these, and write them down; and (...) ere long have lost the
sight and sense (...) them all, and find it self in darkness an^ confusion, and
perhaps be persuaded th^^ all is contrary with them! And when they read in
their Diary, or Book of Heart ac^counts, that at such a day in examination they
found such or such an Evidence, and such a one at another, and many at a third*
yet now they may be questioning whether all this were not deceit, because it
seem^ ^ontrary to their present sight and feeling! ^or it is present light that
the mind discern^^, by, and not by that which is past and (...), and of which
we cannot so easily ^^dge by looking back. They find in their ^ccounts, At such
a time I had my soul ^^larged in ptayer; and at such a time I ^as full of Joy,
and at another time I had ^rong assurance, and boldness with God, (...)
confidence of his love in Christ, and ^oubted not of the pardon of all my sins,
(...) the Justification or acceptance of my ^erson: But now, no Joy, no
Assurance, no ^oldness, or confidence, or sense of Love and pardon does appear;
but the soul ^^emeth dead and carnal and unrenewed: ^s the same trees that in
Summer are beau^^fied with pleasant fruits and flowers, in Winter are deprived
of their natural ornaments, and seem as dead, when the life is ^etired to the
root. The soul that once ^ould have defied the Accuser, if he had ^old him that
he did not Love the brethren, ^or Love the sanctifying word and means, ^or
desire to be Holy, and to be free from Sin, is now as ready to believe the
accusation, and will sooner believe the tempter, ^hen the Minister that
watches for them (...) one that must give account: Yea now it will turn the
Accuser of it self, and (...) as Satan, and falsely charge it self with the
which Christ will acquit it of. (And (...) Christ be put to Justify us against
our selv^^ as well as against Satan?) The same wo^^ that a well composed
believer has in co^^futing the calumnies of Satan, the sa^^ has a Minister to
do in confuting the fa^^ accusations of disturbed souls against the^ selves.
And how subtle! how obstina^^ and tenacious are they! as if they (...) learned
some of the Accusers art; such (...) the uncharitable and malicious are,
agai^^^ their neighbors, in picking quarrels wi^^ all that they say or do, in
putting the wo^^ construction upon all, in taking ever^ thing in the most
uncharitable sense, in a^^gravating the evil, and extenuating the goo^ in
faining things against them that they (...) not guilty of, and denying or
hiding all that commendable; just such are poor disquiete^ souls against
themselves: so unjust, and (...) censorious, as that if they dealt as ill (...)
others, they would have the more cause for some of these accusations of
themselves.

And there is not a soul so high in jo^ and sweet assurance, but is liable to
fa^ as low as this. And it makes our case to (...) much more grievous then
otherwise it would be, because we know not our selves in the hour of our
Consolations, and think not how apt we are to lose all our joy, and what seeds
of doubts and fears and grief ^re still within us, and what cause we have ^o
expect a change. And therefore when ^o sad a change befalls us, so contrary
^o our expectations, it surprizeth us with ^error, and casts the poor soul
almost unto despair. Then cries the distressed ^^nner, [ Did I ever think to
see this ^ay! Are my hopes and comforts come to ^his! Did I think so long that
I was a child ^f God, and must I now perceive that he ^isowneth me! Did I draw
near him as (...) my Father, and place my hope in his ^elief! and now must my
mouth be stopped with ^nbelief, and must I look at him afar off, and pass by the
doors of mercy with despair! ^s all my sweet familiarity with the godly, and
all my comfortable hours under the pre^ious means of grace, new come to this?]
O how the poor soul here calls it self (...) O vile apostate, miserable sinner!
O that (...) had never lived to see this gloomy day! It ^ad been better for me
never to have known ^he way of righteousness, then thus to have ^lapsed; and
have all the prayers that I ^ave put up, and all the Sermons I have heard, and
the books that I have read, (...) aggravate my sin and misery.] O how ma^ny a
poor Christian in this dark mis-judge^ing case, is ready with Job, to curse the
da^ that he was born, and to say of it, Let it (...) darkness, let not God
regard it from abo^^ neither let the light shine upon it: Let it (...) be
joined to the days of the year: let it (...) come into the number of the
months: -- ^^^cause it shut not up the doors of the womb, (...) hid not sorrow
from mine eyes. Why dy^ I not from the womb? Why did I not give (...) the ghost
when I came out of the belly? (...) did the knees prevent me, or why the (...)
that I should suck? For now should I ha^^ lain still and been quiet --
Wherefore is lig^^ given to him that is in misery and life (...) the bitter in
soul: which long for death, (...) it comes not -- which rejoice ^^^ceedingly,
and are glad when they (...) find the grave. Why is light given (...) man whose
way is hid, and whom God ha^ hedged in! Job 3. Such are the lamentatio^ of
distressed souls that lately were as in the arms of Christ. Their lives are a
burden to them; their food is bitter to them* their health is a sickness to
them: their l^^berty is as a prison to them; their deare^^ relations are become
as strangers; and (...) their comforts are turned into sorrows; and the world
seems to them as a howling wilderness; and themselves as desolate forsaken
souls. They are still as upon the Cross, and will own no titles, but Vile,
unworthy, lost, undone, forlorn and desolate; As if they had learnt no words
from Christ, but [ My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me!

And much of this comes from the Ignorance of our selves in the time of Peace
and Consolation. We are as David, Psalm. 30.6, 7. that says [ In my prosperity
I said, I shall never be moved: Lord, by thy favor thou have made my mountain
to stand strong: But thou hidedst thy face and I was troubled.] One frown of
God, or withdrawing the light of his countenance from us, would quickly turn
our day into night, and cover as with sackcloth, and lay us in the dust.

Take warning therefore dear Christians, you that are yet in the Sunshine of
mercy, and were never at so sad a loss, nor put to groap in the darkness of
mistake and terror. No man is so well in health, but must reckon on it that he
may be sick. When you feel nothing but peace and quietness of mind, expect a
stormy night of fears, that may disquiet you: When you are feasting upon the
sweet entertainments of your Fathers Love, consider that feasting is not like
to be your ordinary diet, but harder fare must be expected. Look on poor
Christians in spiritual distress with compassion: hear their sad complaints,
and the bills for Prayer which they here put up, and join in hearty prayer for
them, and remember that this may prove your case. If you say, To what purpose
should you know before hand, how subject you are to this falling sickness? I
answer, Not to anticipate, or bring on your sorrows; but if it may be to
prevent them: or if that may not be, at least to prevent the extremity and
terror, and to be provided for such a storm. When you are now in health of
body, and not disabled by melancholy or other corruptions of your fantasy, or
passion, nor overwhelmed with the troubles of your mind, you have leisure
calmly to understand the case of such mis-judging and distressed souls: and
accordingly you may avoid the things that cause it: and you may be furnished
with right principles, and with promises, and experiences, and recorded
evidences of grace, and when comfort is withdrawn, you may by such provision
understand, that God changes not, nor breaks his Covenant, nor abates his
Love, when your apprehensions change: And that this is no sign of a forsaken
soul: and that the ceasing of our feast, and withdrawing of the table is not a
turning us out of the family. Expect some sicknesses, and you will the better
know the use of the Physicion, and will lay up promises, and prepare your
cordials: and this will prove an exceeding ease, when the hour of your trial
comes.

And what I have said of the loss of comfort, may be said also of the
diminished and interrupted operations of all grace. We little think in the
vigor of our holy progress, what falls and swonnings and languishings we may
find. When you have access with boldness in prayer unto God, and lively
affections and words at will, and comfortable returns, remember that you may
come to a sadder case; and that many a true Christian has such withdrawings of
the spirit of prayer, as makes them think they are possessed with a dumb devil,
and question whether ever they prayed acceptably at all, and cannot so much as
observe the groanings of the spirit in them, Romans 8.26.

When you are warm and vigorous in the work of God; and find delight in all the
ordinances, remember that you are subject to such sicknesses as may take away
your appetite, and make you say, I have no mind to hear, or read or pray: me
thinks I feel no sweetness in them! I was wont to go up with comfort to the
house of God: I was glad when the Lords Day was come, or nigh: It did me good
to see the faces of the Saints: O the meltings, the strivings, the lively
workings of soul that I have had in their sweet communion! when they have
preached and prayed as full of the Holy Ghost and of faith: But now I do but
force my self to duty: I go to prayer as against my will: I feel small relish
in the word of life.] O how many Christians that little thought of such a day,
cry out that spiritual Death is upon them: that they are Dead to prayer, and
dead to meditation, and dead to holy conference: and that once they thought
they were dead to the world, and now they find they are dead to God. Understand
before that you are liable to this, and you may do much to prevent it: and if
you should fall into a sickness and loss of appetite, you may be able to
difference it from death.

When you are sweetly refreshed at the Table of the Lord, and have there
received a sealed pardon as from Heaven into your bosoms, and have found
delightful entertainment with the Lord, remember that the day may come, when
dullness and unbelief and fears may so prevail, as to make that an Ordinance of
greatest terror to you, and you may sit there in trembling, lest you should eat
and drink your own damnation: and you may go home in fears lest Satan have
there taken possession of you, or lest it have sealed you up to wrath: or you
may fly from that feast which is your due, and Christ invites you to, through
fears lest it belong not to you, and should but harden you more in sin: For,
alas, this sad and sinful case, is too often the case of true believers, that
little feared it in their spiritual prosperity. So that the very high
expectations of such workings of soul, which they cannot often or ordinarily
reach, and the frustrating of those expectations, does so often turn the Table
of the Lord into the bitterness of wormwood, into distracting fears and
troubles, that I cannot tell whether any other part of worship occasion so much
distress to many that are upright at the heart, as this does, which is
appointed for their special consolation.

So when you are clear and vigorous in the Life of faith, and can abhor all
temptations to unbelief, and the beams of sacred Verity in the Scriptures have
showed you that it is the undoubted word of God, and you have quietly bottomed
your soul on Christ, and built your hopes upon his promises, and can with a
cheerful contempt let go the world for the accomplishment of your hopes;
remember yet that there is a secret root of unbelief remaining in you, and that
this odious sin is but imperfectly mortified in the best: and that its more
then possible that you may see the day when the tempter will assault you with
questionings of the word of God, and trouble you with the injections of
blasphemous thoughts, and doubts, whether it be true or not! and that you that
have thought of God, of Christ, of Heaven, of the Immortal state of souls, with
joy, and satisfied confidence, may be in the dark about them, affrighted with
ugly suggestions of the enemy, and may think of them all with troublesome
distracting doubts, and be forced to cry with the Disciples, Luke 17.5. Lord
increase our faith: And as he Mark 9.24. Lord, I believe, help thou my
unbelief. Yea worse then so: some upright souls have been so amazed and
distracted by the Tempter, and their distempered hearts, as to think they do
not believe at all, nor yet are able sincerely to say, Lord, help thou my
unbelief.] When yet at that time, their Fears and their abstaining from
iniquity show, that they Believe the Threatenings, and therefore indeed believe
the word. Now if we did but thoroughly know our selves, when faith is in its
exercise and strength, and consider whither the secret seeds of remaining
unbelief may bring us, being forewarned, we should be fore-armed, and should
fortify our faith the better, and be provided against these sad assaults: And
if the malignant spirit be suffered to storm this fortress of the soul, we
should more manfully resist: and we should not be overwelmed with horror as
soon as any hideous and blasphemous temptations do assault us; (when Christ
himself was not exempted from the most blasphemous temptation, even the
worshipping of the Devil instead of God: though in him there was no sinful
disposition to entertain it, Mat. 4.9.10. John 14.30.)

O watch and pray, Christians, in your most prosperous and comfortable state!
Watch and pray lest ye enter into temptation: For you little think what is yet
within you: and what advantage the deceiver has, and how much of your own to
take his part, and how low he may bring you both in point of Grace and Peace,
though he cannot damn you.

I am troubled that I must tell you of so sad a case, that even the children of
God may fall into, lest by troubling you with the opening of your danger, I
should do any thing to bring you into it. But because self-ignorance and not
being before hand acquainted with it, may do much more, I have timely showed
you the danger with the remedy.

5. Another instance of the darkness even of a Heart that in part is
sanctified, is in the successes of the temptations of Adversity. When we want
nothing, we think we value not the world, and we could bear the loss of all.
But when poverty or danger comes, what trouble and unseemly whining is there,
as if it were by a worldling that is deprived of his Idol, and all the portion
that ever he must have. And by the shameful moan and stir that we make for
what we want, we show more sinful overvaluing of it, and love to it, then
before we observed or would believe. O how confidently and piously have I heard
some inveigh against the Love of the world, as if there had been no such thing
in them; who yet have been so basely dejected, when they have been unexpectedly
stripped of their estates, as if they had been quite undone!

How patiently do we think we could bear affliction, till we feel it! And how
easily and piously can we exhort others unto patience, when we have no sense of
what they suffer! But when our turn is come, alas, we seem to be other men.
Suffering is now another thing; and Patience harder then we imagined. And how
inclinable are we to hearken to temptations, to use sinful means to come out
of our sufferings! Who would have thought that faithful Abraham should have
been so unbelieving as to equivocate in such a danger, and expose the chastity
of his wife to hazard, as we read in Genesis 12.12, 13, 19.? And that he should
fall into the same sin, again on the same occasion, Genesis 20. to Abimelech, as
before he had done with Pharaoh! And that Isaac should after him fall into the
same sin, in the same place! Genesis 26.7. The Life o^ Faith does set us so much
above the fear of man, and show us the weakness and no^thingness of mortal
worms, and the faith^fulness and al-sufficiency of God, that o^ would think the
frowns and threatenings (...) a man should signify nothing to us, wh^^ God
stands by, and gives us such amp^^ promises and security for our confirm^^tion
and encouragement: And yet wh^^ base dejectedness, and sinful compliance^ are
many brought to through the fear (...) man, that before the hour of this
temp^tation, could talk as courageously as any* This was the case of Peter,
before mentioned: and of many a one that has wounde^ conscience, and wronged
their profession by too cowardly a disposition: which if it were fore-known, we
might do more for our confirmation, and should betake our selves in time to
Christ in the use of means for strength. Few turn their backs on Christ, or a
good cause in time of trial, that are jealous of themselves before hand, and
afraid lest they should forsake him: Few fall that are afraid of falling: But
the self-ignorant and self-confident are careless of their way, and it is they
that fall.

6. Another instance that I may give you, (...), in the unexpected appearances
of Pride (...) those that yet are truly humble. Hu^ility speaks in their
confessions, aggrava^^ng their sin, and searching heart and life ^r matter of
self-accusation: They call themselves Less then the least of all Gods ^^ercies:
They are ready with the woman of Canaan, Mat. 15.27. even to own the name ^f
dogs, and to confess themselves unworthy ^f the childrens crumbs, and unworthy
to ^read upon the common earth, or to ^reath in the air, or to live upon the
pati^nce and provisions of God: They will ^pend whole hours, and days of
humilia^ion, in confessing their sin, and bewail^ng their weaknesses and want
of grace, and lamenting their desert of misery: They ^re often cast down so much
too low, that they dare not own the title of Gods children, nor any of his
special grace, but take themselves for mere unsanctified hardened sinners: and
all that can be said will not convince them that they have any saving interest
in Christ: nor hinder them from pouring out unjust accusations against
themselves. And all this is done by them in the uprightness of their hearts,
and not dissemblingly. And yet would you think, that with all this Humility,
there should be any pride? and that the same person should lift up themselves
and resist the^ helps to further Humiliation? Do the^ think in their
dejections, that it is in the^ hearts so much to exalt themselves? I co^^fess
many of them are sensible of the Pride, even to the increase of their
humili^ty: and as it is said of Hezekiah, do humb^^ themselves for the pride of
their hearts, (...) that Gods wrath does not come upon them 2 Chr. 32.26. But
yet too few are so we^ acquainted with the power and rootedness o^ this sin at
the heart, and the workings o^ it in the hour of temptation, as they should be.
Observe it but at such time^ as these, and you will see that break forth* that
before appeared not. 1. When (...) are undervalued and slighted, and meane^
persons preferred before us, and when our words and judgments are made light
of, and our parts thought to be poor and low* when any blot of dishonor is
cast upon us, deserved or undeserved; when we are slandered or reproached, and
used with despite: what a matter do we make of it, and how much then does our
Pride appear in our distaste and offense, and impatience! so that the same
person that can ^our out words of blame and shame against himself, cannot bear
half as much from others without displeasure and disquietness of mind. It would
help us much to know ^his by our selves in the time of our humility, that we
may be engaged to more watchfuless and resistance of our pride.

2. When we are reproved of any disgraceful sin, how hardly goes it down, and
how many excuses have we? how seldom are we brought to downright penitent
confessions? What secret distaste is apt to be rising in our hearts, against
the reprover! And how seldom has he that hearty thanks which so great a
benefit deserves! And would any think in our humilations and large confessions
unto God, that we were so proud! To know this by our selves, would make us more
suspicious and ashamed to be guilty of it.

3. When any preferment or honor is to be given, or any work to be done that
is a mark of dignity, how apt are we to think our selves as fit for it as any,
and to be displeased, if the honor or employment do pass by us!

4. When we are admired, appladed, or excessively esteemed and loved, how apt
are we to be too much pleased with it? which shows a proud desire to be some
body in the world: and that there is much of this venom at the bottom in our
hearts even when we lay our selves in the dust and walk in sackcloth, and pass
the heavi^est judgment on our selves.

7. Another instance of our unacquaintedness with our hearts, and the latent
undiscerned corruption of them, is, our little discerning or bewailing those
secret master sins, which lie at the root of all the rest, and are the life of
the old man, and the cause of all the miscarriages of our lives* As 1. Unbelief
of the truth of the holy Scriptures, of the immortality of the soul, and the
life of joy or misery hereafter, and the other Articles of the Christian faith:
What abundance of Christians are sensible of their unbelief as to the applying
acts of faith that tend to their assurance of their own salvation, that are
little sensible of any defect in the Assenting act, or of any secret root of
unbelief about the truth of the Gospel revelations: And yet, alas, it is this
that weakeneth all our graces: It is this that feeds all our woe! O happy men
were we free from this! What prayers should we put up! What lives should we
lead! how ^atchfully should we walk! with what ^^ntempt should we look on the
allure^ents of the world! with what dis^^in should we think on fleshly lusts!
^^th what indignation should we meet the ^^mpter, and scorn his base
unreasonable ^otions, if we did but perfectly believe the ^^ry truth of the
Gospel, and world to come! ^ow careful and earnest should we be, to ^ake our
calling and election sure! How ^reat a matter should we make of sin, and ^f
helps and hindrances in the way to ^eaven! How much should we prefer that
^^ate of life that furthereth our salvation, before that which strengthens
our snares ^y furthering our prosperity and plea^ure in the world, if we were
not weak or ^^anting in our belief of the the certain ^erity of these things?
Did we better know ^he badness of our hearts herein, it would engage us more in
fortifying the vitals, and ^ooking better to our foundation, and wind^ng up
this spring of faith, which must give life to all right motions of the soul.

2. How insensible are too many of the great imperfection of their love to God!
What passionate complaints have we of their want of sorrow for their sin, and
want of memory, and of ability to pray, etc. when their complaints for want of
Love to God, and more affecting knowledge of him, are so col^ and customary, as
shows us they little observe the greatness of this sinful want* This is the
very heart, and sum, and poy^son of all the sins of our soul and life. S^ much
as a man Loves God, so much he i^ Holy: and so much he has of the spirit and
image of Jesus Christ: and so much he has of all saving graces: and so much he
will abhor iniquity, and so much he will love the commands of God. As Love is
the sum of the Law and Prophets, so should it be the sum of our care and
study through all our lives to exercise and strengthen it.

3. How little are most Christians troubled for want of Love to men! (to
Brethren, neighbors and enemies) how cold are their complaints for their
defects in this, in comparison of other of their complaints! But is there not
cause of as deep humiliation for this sin, as almost any other? It seems to me
that want of Love is one of the most prevalent diseases among us, when I hear
it so little seriously lamented. I often hear people say, O that we could hear
more attentively and affectionately, and pray more fervently, and weep for sin
more plenteously: But how seldom do I hear them say, O that we did love our
Brethren more ardently, and our Neighbors and Enemies more heartily then we
do, and set our selves to do them good! There is so little pains taken to bring
the heart to the Love of others, and so few and cold requests put up for it,
when yet the heart is backward to it, that makes me conclude that Charity is
weaker in most of us then we observe. And indeed it appears so when it comes
to trial: to that trial which Christ will judge it by at last, Mat. 25. When
Love must be showed by any self-denial, or costly demonstration, by parting
with our food and raiment, to supply the wants of others, and by hazarding our
selves for them in their distress, then see how much we Love indeed! Good words
cost little: so cheap an exercise of charity as is mentioned, Jam. 2.15, 16. [
Depart in peace, be warmed, and filled] is an insufficient evidence of the life
of grace; and will do as little for the soul of the giver, as for the Body of
the receiver. And how little hazardous or costly Love is found among us, either
to enemies, neighbors, or to Saints! Did we better know our hearts, there
would be more care and diligence used to bring them to effectual fervent Love,
then to those duties that are of less importance; and we should learn what this
means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, Mat. 9.13. and 12.7. which Christ
sets the Pharisees twice to learn. More instances of greatest duties extenuated
I might add, but I proceed.

8. Another instance of unobserved corruption of the heart, is, The frequent
and secret insinuations of selfishness in all that we do toward God or man:
When we think we are serving God alone, and have cleansed our hearts from
mixtures and deceit, before we are aware, self-interest, or self-esteem, or
self conceit, or self-love, or self-will, or self-seeking do secretly creep in
and mar the work. We think we are studying and preaching, and writing purely
for God, and the common good, or the benefit of souls; and perhaps little
observe how subtly selfishness insinuates, and makes a party, and byasseth us
from the holy ends, and the simplicity and sincerity which we thought we had
carefully maintained: so that we are studying and preaching, and writing for
our selves, when we take no notice of it.

When we enter upon any office, or desire preferment, or riches, or honor in
the world, we think we do it purely for God, to furnish us for his service, and
little think how much of selfishness is in our desires.

When we are doing Justice, or showing mercy, in giving alms, or exhorting the
ungodly to repent, or doing any other work of Piety or Charity, we little think
how much of selfishness is secretly latent in the bent and intention of the
heart.

When we think we are defending the truth and cause of God, by disputing,
writing, or by the sword; or when we think we are faithfully maintaining on one
side order and obedience against confusion and turbulent disquiet spirits, or
the Unity of the Church against division; or on the other hand that we are
sincerely opposing Pharisaicall corruptions and hypocrisy, and tyranny, and
persecution, and are defending the purity of Divine worship, and the power and
spirituality of religion; in all these cases we little know how much of carnal
self may be secretly unobserved in the work.

But above all others, Christ himself, and the Holy Ghost that searches the
hidden things of the heart, has warned one sort to be suspicious of their
hearts; and that is, those that cannot bear the dissent and infirmities of
their brethren in tolerable things, and those that are calling for fire from
heaven, and are all for force and cruelty in religion; for vexing, imprisoning,
banishing, burning, hanging, or otherwise doing as they would not be done by,
proportionably in their own case. He tells his two Disciples, in such a case]
Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of, Luke 9.55. As if he should say,
You think you purely seek my honor in the revenge of this contempt and
opposition of unbelievers, and you think it would much redound to the
propagation of the faith: and therefore you think that all this zeal is purely
from my spirit: But you little know how much of ^ proud, a carnal, selfish
spirit is in these desires! You would fain have me and your selves with me to
be openly vindicated by fire from heaven, and be so owned by Go^ that all men
may admire you, and you may exercise a dominion in the world; and you stick not
at the sufferings and ruin of these sinners, so you may attain your end: but
(...) tell you this selfish cruel spirit, is unlike my spirit which inclines
to patience, for^bearance and compassion.

So Romans 14.1, 2, etc. and 15.1, 2. Him that is weak in the faith, receive ye
-- who art thou that judge another man's servant? Why do thou judge thy
brother, and why do thou set at naught thy brother? We shall all stand before
the judgment seat of Christ. -- Every one of us shall give account of himself
to God -- We then that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak,
and not to please our selves. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his
good to edification. So Gal. 6.1, 2. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a
fault, ye which are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of meekness,
considering thy self lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another burden,
and so fulfill the Law of Christ.]

So also men are foully and frequently mistaken, when they are zealously
contending against their faithful Pastors and their brethren, and vilifying
others, and quenching love, and troubling the Church, upon pretense of greater
knowledge or integrity in themselves: which is notably discovered and
vehemently pressed by the Apostle, James 3.1, etc. where you may see how greatly
the judgment of the spirit of God concerning our hearts does differ from men's
judgment of themselves. They that had a masterly, contentious, envious zeal,
did think they were of the wiser sort of Christians, and of the highest form in
the School of Christ; when yet the Holy Ghost tells them that their wisdom
descended not from above, but was earthly, sensual and divelish, and that their
envy and strife does bring confusion, and every evil work: and that the wisdom
from above is neither unholy nor contentious, but first pure, and then
peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, Jam. 3.17.

You see then how often and dangerously we are deceived, by unacquaintedness with
our selves; and how selfish carnal principles, ends and motives are often mixed
in the actions which we think are the most excellent for wisdom, zeal, and
piety that ever we did perform. O therefore what cause have we to study, and
search, and watch such hearts, and not too boldly or carelessly to trust them!

And it is not only Hypocrites that are subject to these deceitful sins, who
have them in dominion, but true Believers that have a remnant of this carnal
selfish principle continually offering to insinuate and corrupt their most
excellent works, and even all that they do.

9. The strong eruption of those passions that seemed to be quite mortified,
does show that there is more evil lurking in the heart, then ordinarily does
appear. How calmly do we converse together? how mildly do we speak? till some
provoking word or wrong do blow the coals, and then the dove appears to
partake of a fiercer nature, and we can perceive that in the flame, which we
perceived not in the spark. When a provocation can bring forth censorious,
reviling, scornful words, it shows what before was latent in the heart.

10. We are very apt to think those affections to be purely spiritual, which in
the issue appear to be mixed with carnality. Our very love to the Assemblies
and ordinances of worship, and to Ministers, and other servants of the Lord; to
Books, and Knowledge; are ordinarily mixed; and good and bad are strangely
complicate, and twisted together in the same affections and works. And the Love
that begins in the spirit, is apt to degenerate into carnal Love, and to
have too much respect to Riches, or Honor, or personage, or birth, or
particular concernments of our own, and so it is corrupted, as Wine that
turns into Vinegar, before we are aware. And though still there be
uprightness of heart, yet too much Hypocrisy is joined with it, when it is
little perceived or suspected.

And thus in ten Instances I have showed you how much the servants of Christ
themselves may be mistaken or unacquainted with their hearts; and how the work
of mortification is hindered by this covering of so many secret unobserved sins.

But I must here desire you to take heed of running into their extreme, who
hereupon conclude that their hearts being so dark and so deceitful, are not at
all to be understood; and therefore they are still so suspicious of the worst,
as that they will not be persuaded of the grace that plainly works in them,
and will condemn themselves for that which they are not guilty of, upon
suspicion that they may be guilty and not know it: and think that all the sin
that they forbear, is but for want of a Temptation; and that if they had the
same Temptations, they should be as bad as any others.

I would entreat these persons to consider of these truths, for their better
information. 1. Temptations do not only show the evil that is in the heart, but
breed much more, and turn a spark into a flame; as the ^^^iking of the steel
upon the flint does by ^^e collision and tinder, make fire where was ^ne. Adam
was made a sinner by temption.

2. There is no Christian so mortified, but ^^th such remnants of corruption
and con^piscence as would quickly bring forth ^^ynous sins, if Temptations
beyond strength ^ere let loose upon him. What need you ^^re proof then the sad
instances of ^oah, Lot, David, Solomon and Peter? It ^^d not prove that any of
these were ^aceless hypocrites before, because they fell foully by Temptations.
And yet these ^bjectors think they are graceless, because ^^me strong
Temptation might make them ^ll.

3. It is not Gods way of saving men, to ^^ve them so much inward Grace as no
Temp^^tion can overcome, but to preserve and ^^ing them safe to heaven, by
moral sapi^^tial conduct, together with internal ^hanges of their hearts. And
therefore he ^^epeth men from sin, by keeping them from Temptations that are
too strong for them. ^ll humane strength is limited. And there ^^e none on
earth have such a measure of ^race, but a Temptation may be imagined (...)
strong as to overcome them. And if God should let Satan do his worst, the^ must
be extraordinary assistances to pr^^serve us, or we should fall. Bless God he
lead you not into Temptation, but deli^^^ you from the Evil, by keeping you
(...) enough from the snare. This is the (...) of preservation that we are
taught to (...) and hope for.

4. And therefore it is our own duty (...) keep as far from Temptations as we
ca^ and if we have Grace to avoid the sin (...) avoiding the Temptation, we
have such Gr^^ as God uses for the saving of his ow^ Not that he has saving
grace that wo^^^ live wickedly if he were but tempted to (...) by those
ordinary trials that humane ^^^ture may expect: But the soul that p^^^ferreth
God and Glory before the pleasures (...) sin for a season, if it so continue,
shall (...) saved, though possibly there migh have (...) a Temptation so strong
as would have co^^quered the measure of grace that he ha^ if it had not been
fortified with new supplie^* It is therefore more dotage in those th^^ could
find in their hearts to put themselv^^ upon some Temptation, to try whether
the^ are sincere by the success. Avoid temptat^^on, that you may avoid the sin
and punis^^ment. Make not your selves worse on pr^^^ence of discovering how bad
you are. Put ^ot Gunpowder or fuel to the sparks of ^orruption that still
remain in you, on ^retence of trying whether they will burn. ^ll men are
defectible, and capable of every (...), and must be saved from it by that Grace
which works on nature according to that nature, and prevails with Reason by
^eans agreeable to Reason. If we think ^e are wicked, because we find that we
^ave hearts that could be wicked, were they (...) alone, and because we are not
removed (...) far from sin as to be incapable of it, we ^ay as well say Adam
was wicked in his ^^nocency: much more David, Solomon and ^eter before their
falls. It is not he that ^an sin that shall be punished: but he that ^^th sin,
or would sin if he could, and had ^^ther have the sin for its Pleasure or
Com^odity to the flesh, then be free from it, and (...) Holy, in order to
salvation, and the fa^our and pleasing and enjoying of God in ^ndless Glory.

5. Lastly, Let such persons try themselves by their conquest over the
Temptations which ^hey have, and not by imaginary conflicts with all that they
think may possibly at any ^ime assault them. You have still the same ^^esh to
deal with, and the same world and devil that will not let you go to heaven
without Temptation: If the Temptations which you have already, keep you not
from pre^ferring the Love and fruition of God before the Pleasure of the Flesh;
and a life of fait^ and Holiness, before a life of infidelity an^ impiety and
sensuality, so that you ha^^ rather live the former then the latter, I a^ sure
then your Temptations have not kep^ you from a state of grace. And you man be
assured, that for the time to come, (...) you watch and pray, you may escape
the danger of temptation; and that God will increase your strength if he
increase you^ trials: Be not secure, be you never so Holy* Think not that you
have nature that cannot sin, or cannot be tempted to a love (...) sin: But let
him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. There has no temptation
taken you, but such as is moderate, or common to man: but God is faithful, who
will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able; but will with the
temptation als^ make a way to escape, that ye may be able t^ bear it, 1 Cor.
10.13.

And thus I have showed you how self-ignorance hinders the conquest and
mortifying of sin, even in the Godly, and now shall add some further motives.

2. Not knowing our selves, and the se^ret corruptions of our hearts, does make
sin surprise us the more dangerously, and break forth the more shamefully, and
wound our consciences the more terribly. The unsuspected sin has lest
opposition, and when it breaks out does like an unobserved fire, go far before
we are awakened to quench it. And it confounds us with shame, to find our
selves so much worse then we imagined. It overwhelmeth the soul with despairing
thoughts to find it self so bad, when it thought it had been better. It
breeds endless suspicions and fears, when we find our former opinions of our
selves confuted, and that contrary to our expectations we are surprised where
we thought we had been safe: we are still ready to think what ever we discern
that is good within us, that we may as well be mistaken now as we were before.
And thus our present self-ignorance when discovered, may hinder all the
comforts of our lives.

3. Lastly, not knowing our selves, and our particular sins and wants, and
weaknesses, does keep us from a particular application of the promises, and
from seeking those particular Remedies from Christ, which our case requires:
and so our mercies lie by neglected, while we need them an^ do not understand
our need.

And thus I have showed you why yo^ should labor to know your sinfulness.

II. I am next to persuade Believers t^ know their Graces and their hap^piness.
Good is the object of voluntar^ knowledge: but Evil of forced involuntar^
knowledge, unless as the knowledge of ev^^ tends to some Good. Therefore
methink you should be readyest to this part of the study of your selves. And
yet, alas, the presumptuous are not more unwilling t^ know their sin and
misery, then some per^plexed Christians are backward to acknowledge their Grace
and Happiness. How har^ is it to convince them of the tender love of God
toward them, and of the sincerity o^ their Love to him? and to make them
believe that they are dear to God when they loa^^ themselves! how hard is it to
persuade the^ that the Riches of Christ, the promises of the Gospel, and the
Inheritance of the Saints, belong to them! And the Reasons among other^ are
principally these.

1. The remnants of sin are so great, and so active and troublesome, as that
the feeling of these contrary dispositions does hinder them from observing the
operations of ^race. It is not easy to discern the sin^erity of Faith among so
much unbelief, ^r the sincerity of Love where there is so ^uch aversness: or of
Humility where ^here is so much pride: or of Repentance and Mortification,
where there is so much ^oncupiscence and inclination to sin: Espe^^ally when
grace by its enmity to sin does ^ake the soul so suspicious and sensible of
(...)* as that the observation of it turns their ^ind from the observation of
the contrary ^^od that is in them. Health is not obser^ed in other parts, when
the feeling of the ^one, or but a toothache takes us up. The ^^oughts are
called all to the part affected; and sickness and wounds are felt more sen^^bly
then Health. The fears of misery by (...), are easilyer excited, and are more
pas^^onate, then Love and Hope, and all the af^^ctions that are employed in the
prose^ution of good. And in the midst of Fears (...) is hard to feel the matter
of our Joys. ^ear is a tyrant if it exceed, and will not ^ermit us to believe
or observe the cause ^f Hope. Quod nimis metuunt miseri, hoc ^^cile credunt,
and nunquam amoveri putant, ^ith Seneca, What we too much fear, we too ^^sily
believe, and hardly believe that it is gone, and the danger past. These fears
are useful to our preservation: but they too often pervert our judgments, and
hinde^ our due consolation. Qui insidias timet, i^ nullas incidet: nec cito
perit ruina, q^^ ruinam timet. Semper metuendo sapiens vi^tat malum, says
Seneca. He that feare^^ snares, does not fall into them: Nor does (...) quickly
perish by ruin, that fears ruin: (...) wise man escapes evil by always
fearing it. And the Holy Ghost says, Prove. 28.14. Happy is the man that
fears always, but he that hardens his heart shall fall into mischief.]

Moderate Fears then are given to Believers for their necessary preservation*
that walking among enemies and snares, they may take heed and escape them. But
when this passion does exceed, it abuses us* and drowns the voice of Reason:
It makes us believe that every temptation is a sin, and every sin is such as
cannot stand with grace, and will hardly ever be pardoned by Christ. Every sin
against knowledge and conscience, does seem almost unpardonable: and if were
deliberate after profession of religion* it seems to be the sin against the
Holy Ghost. As children and other frightfull persons that fear the Devil by way
of Apparitions, do think in the dark he is ready to lay hold on them, and they
look when they see him: so the fearful Christian, as still thinking that thing
he fears is upon him, or coming upon him. The fear of an unrgenerate
unpardoned state, does make him think he is in it; and that the fear of the
wrath of God does make him think that he is under it; and the fear of damnation
makes him imagine he shall be damned. It is wonderful hard in a frightfull
state, or indeed in any passion that is strong, to have the free use of
Judgment for the knowing of our selves, and to discern any grace, or evidence
or mercy, which is contrary to our fears; Especially when the Feeling of much
corruption, does turn our eyes from the observation of the good, and we are
still taken up with the matter of our disease.

2. Another cause that we hardly know our Graces, is, because they are weak and
small; and therefore in the midst of so much corruption are oft-times hardly
discerned from none. A little faith even as a grain of mustard seed, may save
us: A little Love to God that is sincere, will be accepted; and weak Desires
may be fulfilled: But they are frequently undiscerned, or their sincerity
questioned by those that have them; and therefore bring but little comfort.
Peter's Little faith did keep him from drowning, but not from doubting and
fearing he should be drowned, nor from beginning to sink, Mat. 14.29, 30, 31.
He walked on the water to go to Jesus; but when he saw the wind boisterous he
was afraid, and beginning to sink, he cried saying, Lord save me. And
immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand and caught him, and said unto him, O
thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt!] So the Little faith of the
Disciples kept them from perishing, but not from their fear of perishing, Mat.
8.24, 25, 26. When a great tempest arose, so that the ship was covered with
waves, they cry, Lord save us, we perish: and he says to them, Why are ye
afraid, O ye of little faith? The little faith of the same Disciples entitled
them to the Fatherly protection and provision of God: but it kept them not from
sinful cares and fears, about what they should eat or drink, or wherewith they
should be clothed, as is intimated in Mat. 6.25, 28, 30. Take no thought for
your life, what you shall eat, or drink, or for your body what you shall put on
-- Why take ye thought for raiment? -- If God so clothe the grass of the field,
which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more
clothe you, O ye of little faith? So in Mat. 16.7, 8. The seed that Christ
likeneth his kingdom to, Mat. 13.31. has life while it is buried in the earth,
and is visible while a little seed; but is not so observed as when it comes to
be as a tree. Though God despise not the day of little things, Zech. 4.10. and
though he will not break the bruised reed, or quench the smoking flax, Isa.
42.3. yet our selves or others cannot discern and value these obscure
beginnings, as God does. But because we cannot easily find a little faith and a
little Love when we are looking for it, we take the nonappearance for a
nonexistence, and call it none.

3. Sanctification is often unknown to those that have it, because they do not
try and judge themselves by sure infallible Marks, the Essentials of the new
man; but by uncertain qualifications, that are mutable, and belong but to the
beauty and activity of the soul.

The Essence of Holiness as denominated from the object, is the Consent to the
three Articles of the Covenant of Grace. 1. That we give up our selves to God
as our God and Reconciled Father in Jesus Christ. 2. That we give up our selves
to Jesus Christ as our Redeemer and Savior, to recover us, reconcile us and
bring us unto God. 3. That we give up our selves to the Holy Ghost as our
Sanctifier, to guide and illuminate us, and perfect the Image of God upon us,
and prepare us for Glory.

The Essence of Sanctification as denominated from its opposite objects, is
nothing but our Renunciation and Rejection of the flesh, the World, and the
Devil, of Pleasures, Profits and Honors, as they would be preferred before
God, and draw us to forsake him.

The Essence of Sanctification as denominated from our Faculties which are the
subject of it, is nothing but this preferring of God, and Grace, and Glory
above the said Pleasures, Profits and Honors. 1. By the Estimation of our
Understandings: 2. By the Resolved habituate Choice of our Wills. 3. And in the
bent and drift of our Endeavors in our Conversations. In these three Acts, as
upon the first three objects, and against the other three objects, lies all
that is Essential to Sanctification, and that we should judge of our sincerity,
and title to salvation by, as I before showed.

But besides these there are many desirable qualities and gifts, which we may
seek for, and be thankful for; but are not Essential to our Sanctification.
Such are 1. The knowledge of other Truths besides the Essentials of Faith and
duty; and the soundness of judgment and freedom from error in these lesser
points.

2. A strong memory to carry away the things that we read and hear.

3. A right order of our Thoughts, when we can keep them from Confusion, roving
and distraction.

4. Freedom from too strong affections about the creatures, and from disturbing
passions.

5. Lively Affections and feeling operations of the soul toward God, in holy
duty: and tender meltingt of the heart for sin: which are very desirable, but
depend so much on the temperature of the body, and outward accidents, and are
but the vigor and ^ot the Life and being of the new creature, that we must not
judge of our sincerity by them. Some Christians scarce know what any such
lively feelings are: and some have them very seldom, and I think, no one,
constantly: and therefore if our Peace, or Judgment of our selves, be laid on
these, we shall be still wavering and unsettled, and tossed up and down as the
waves of the sea; Sometimes seeming to be almost in Heaven, and presently near
the gates of Hell: When our state does not change at all as these feelings and
Affectionate motions of the soul do; but we are still in our safe Relation to
God, while our first Essential graces do continue; though our failings,
dullness, weaknesses and wants, must be matter of moderate filial humiliation to
us.

6. The same must be said of all common Gifts, of utterance in conference or
prayer, and of quickness of understanding and such like.

7. Lastly, the same must be said also of all that rectitude of life, and those
degrees of obedience that are above mere sincerity: in which one true Christian
does exceed another; and in which we should all desire to abound; but must not
judge our selves to be unsanctified merely because we are imperfect; or to be
unjustified sinners, merely because we are sinners.

In our judging of our selves by our Lives and Practices two extremes must be
carefully avoided: On the left hand that of the Profane, and of the
Antinomians; The former cannot distinguish between sinners and sinners,
sanctified and unsanctified, Justified and unjustified sinners; and when they
have once conceited that they are in the favor of God, whatever they do, they
say, we are but sinners, and so are the best. The latter teach men, that when
once they are justified, they are not for any sins to doubt again of their
Justified state, lest they should seem to make God changeable.

On the other hand must be avoided this extreme of perplexed doubting
Christians, that make all their sins, or too many of them, to be matter of
doubting, which should be but matter of humiliation.

I know it is a very great difficulty that has long perplexed the Doctors of
the Church, to define what sins are consistent, and what inconsistent with a
state of Holiness and Salvation, (which if any distinguish by the names of
Mortal and Venial, taking the words in no other sense, I shall not quarrel
with them.) At the present I shall say but this for the resolving of this great
and weighty question.

1. It is not the bare Act of sin in it self considered, that must determine
the case: but the Act compared with the Life of Grace, and with true
Repentance. Whoever has the Love of God and Life of Grace, is in a state of
Salvation: And therefore whatever sin consists with the fore-described
Essentials of Sanctification, (viz. The Habitual devotion of the soul to God,
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and the Habitual renunciation of the Flesh, ehe
World and Devil) consists with a state of life. And true Repentance proves
the pardon of all sin: And therefore whatever sin consists with Habitual
Repentance, (which is the Hatred of sin as sin,) and has Actual Repentance
when it is observed, and there is time of deliberation, consists with a state
of Grace. Now in Habitual Conversion or Repentance, the Habitual Willingness to
leave our sins, must be more then our sinful Habitual Willingness to keep it.
Now you may by this, much discern as to particular acts, whether they are
consistent with Habitual hatred of sin. For some sins are so much in the power
of the will, that he that has an Habitual hatred of them, cannot frequently
commit them; And some sins are also of so heinous a nature or degree, that he
that Habitually hates sin, cannot frequently commit them: nor at all, while
his Hatred to them is in Act: And he that truly Repents of them, cannot
frequently return to them: because that shows that Repentance was indeed
either but Superfi^ial, or not Habitual. But some sins are not so great and
heinous, and therefore do not ^o much deterr the soul, and some are not so
fully in the power of a sanctified will (as ^assions, thoughts, etc.) and
therefore may after be committed in consistency with Ha^itual Repentance or
Hatred of sin. To ex^mine particulars, would be tedious and digressive.

2. And I must further answer, that our ^afety, and consequently our Peace and
^omfort lies in flying as far from sin as we ^an: And therefore he that will
sin as much ^s will consist with any sparks of Grace, shall ^ury those sparks
by his sin, and shall not know that he has any Grace, nor have the comfort of
it; as being in a condition unfit for Actual assurance and comfort till he be
brought to Actual Repentance and amendment.

Thus I have showed you, by what you must try your sanctification, if you will
know ^t: which I before proved to you from Scripture: and further may do, when
the occasion will excuse me from the imputation of disproportion and
unseasonableness, ^n repeating the proofs of all that we speak in Explication
or Application of the principal point.

4. Another cause that many Christians are ignorant of their state of Grace, is
their looking so much at what they should be, an^ what others are that have a
high degree (...) grace, and what is commanded as our duty that they observe
not what they have already because it is short of what they ought (...) have.
We are thus too much about o^^^ward mercies too. We mourn more (...) one friend
that is dead, then we rejoice (...) many that are alive: We are more trouble
for one mercy taken from us, then comfort^^ in many that are left us. We
observe (...) diseases and our sores more sensibly then (...) health. David for
one Absalon is so afflicte^ that he wished he had dyed for him* though a
rebel! when his comfort in So^lomon and his other children is laid aside* As
all the humors flow to the pained place, so do our thoughts as was aforesaid,
and so we overlook the matter of our comfort.

5. And it very much hinders the know^ledge of our Graces, that we search
upon (...) great disadvantages as hinder a true discovery. Among many others, I
will instance but in two or three. 1. We surprise our souls with sudden
questions, and look for a full and satisfactory answer, before we ca^^ well
recollect our selves, and call up our evidences; and we expect to know the sum
or product, before our consciences have had leisure deliberately to cast up
their ^ccounts. Yea when we have set to it, and ^y diligent search with the
best assistances, ^ave discovered our sincerity, and recorded the judgment, if
Conscience cannot present^y recall its proofs, and make it out upon every
surprise, we unjustly question all (...) past, and will never rest in any
judgment, but are still calling over all again, as ^f the cause had never been
tried. And ^hen the judgment passes according to ^ur present temper and
disposition, when many of the Circumstances are forgotten, and many of the
witnesses are out of the way, that last assisted us.

2. Perhaps we judge (as I said before) in the fit of a passion, of fear or
grief, which ^mperiously over-ruleth or disturbeth reason. And then no wonder
if in our haste we say that all men that would comfort us are ^yars. And if
with David, Psalm. 77.2, 3, 7, 8, 9. in the day of our trouble, our souls do
even refuse to be comforted, and if we remember God and are troubled more, and
if our spirit be overwhelmed in us: when he holds our eyes waking, and we are
so troubled that we cannot speak: and if we question whether the Lord will cast
off for ever, and will be favorable no more: whether (...) mercy be clean gone
for ever, and his promise fail for evermore? Whether he has forgotten to be
gracious, and has shut up (...) tender mercies in displeasure? till a cal^
deliver us from the mistake, and make (...) say, [ This is our infirmity] We
thin^ that God does cast off our souls, and hide^eth his face from us; when our
soul is fu^^ of troubles, and our life draws nigh (...) the grave; When we
are afflicted and rea^^^ to die from our youth up, and are distracted while we
suffer the terrors of the Lord: (...) he complains Psalm 88.3.14, 15, 16*
Passion judges according to its nature, an^ not according to truth.

3. Or perhaps we judge, when ou^ friends, our memory and other helps are (...)
of the way, and we are destitute of (...) assistance.

4. Or when our Bodies are weak or distempered with Melancholy, which
representet^ all this in black and terrible colors to the soul, and will hear
no language but [ forsaken, miserable, annd undone.] You may a^ well take the
judgment of a man ha^^ drunk, or half asleep, about the greate^^ matters of
your lives, as to take the judgment of Conscience in such a state o^
^isadvantage, about the condition of your ^ouls.

6. Another hinderance to us is, that we cannot take comfort from the former
sight of ^race that we have had, unless we have a con^inued present sight. And
so all our labor in ^rying, and all our experiences, and all Gods former
manifestations of himself to ^he soul are lost, as to our present comfort, when
over Grace is out of sight. Like fool^sh travailers that think they are out of
^he way, and are ready to turn back, when ever any hill does interpose, and
hinder them from seeing the place they go to. As if it were no matter of
comfort to us, to say, I did find the Evidences of Grace: I once recorded a
judgment of my sincerity: But the former is still questioned rather then the
later. When with David we should consider the days of old, the years of
ancient times, and call to remembrance our songs in the night, and commune with
our hearts in such a diligent search, and remembrance of the mercies formerly
received, Psalm. 77.5, 6, 7.

7. Lastly, the operations of man's soul are naturally so various, and from
corruption are so confused and so dark, that we are oft-times in a maze and at
a loss, when we are most desirous to judge aright: an^ scarce know where in so
great disorder (...) find any thing that we seek; and know^ not when we find
it: so that our hearts (...) almost as strange to themselves as to one
a^^^ther; and sometime more confident of oth^^ men's sincerity then our own,
where th^^ is no more matter for our confidence.

HAving thus showed you the Causes (...) our Ignorance of our Sanctification I
shall briefly tell you some Reasons th^^ should move you to seek to be
acquainte^ with it, where it is.

1. The knowledge of God is the most exce^^lent knowledge: and therefore the
best sor^ of creature knowledge is, that which has the most of God in it. And
undoubtedly the^^ is more of God in Holiness which is his Image then in common
things. Sins and (...) have nothing of God in them: They must be fathered on
the Devil and your selves. An^ therefore the knowledge of them is goo^ but by
Accident; because the knowledge even of evil, has a tendency to good. An^
therefore it is commanded and made ou^ duty, for the good which it tends to.
It is the Divine nature, and Image within you which has the most of God; and
therefore ^o know this, is the high and noble know^edge. To know Christ within
us, is our ^appiness on earth, in order to the know^edge of him in Glory face
to face, which is ^he happiness of heaven. To know God though darkly through a
glass, and but in ^art, (1 Cor. 13.12.) is far above all crea^ure knowledge.
The knowledge of him ^aiseth, quickneth, sanctifies, enlarges and advances
all our faculties. It is life ^ternal to know God in Christ, John 17.3.
Therefore where God appears most, there should our understandings be most
di^igently exercised in study and observa^ion.

2. It is a most delightful felicitating knowledge, to know that Christ is in
you. ^f it be delightful to the Rich to see their wealth, their houses, and
lands and goods and money: and if it be delightful to the Honorable to see
their attendance, and hear their own commendations and applause; how
delightful must it be to a true Believer to find Christ within him, and to
know his title to eternal life? If the knowledge of full barns, and much goods
laid up for many years, can make a sensual worlding say, Soul take thy ease,
eat, drink and be merry, Luke 12.19, 20. Me think^ the knowledge of our
interest in Christ an^ heaven, should make us say, [ Thou have (...) gladness
in my heart, more then in the ti^^ that their corn and wine increased, (that
(...) more then corn and wine could put in^^ theirs) Psalm. 4.7. [ Return unto
thy Rest, (...) soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully wi^^ thee, Psalm.
116.7.] If we say with Davi^ [Blessed are they that dwell in thy house they
will be still praising thee,] Psalm. 84.^ much more may we say, [ Blessed an^
they in whom Christ dwells, and the Hol^ Ghost has made his Temple:] they
should (...) still praising thee, [Blessed is the (...) whom thou choosest, and
causest to appro^^^ unto thee, that he may dwell in thy courts: (...) shall be
satisfied with the goodness of thy house even of thy holy Temple, Psalm. 65.4.
But this (...) upon supposition, that he be first Blessed by Christ's approach
to him, and dwelling in hi^*

If you ask, How it is that Christ dwelle^^ in us; I answer, 1. Objectively, as
he is ap^prehended by our Faith and Love: As the things or persons that we
think of, and Lov^ and delight in, are said to dwell in our (...) or hearts. 2.
By the Holy Ghost, who (...) a principle of new and heavenly Life, (...) given
by Christ the Head unto his members and as the Agent of Christ does illuminate,
sanctify and guide the soul. [ He that keeps his commandments, dwells in
him, and he in him: and hereby we know that he abides in us, by the spirit
which he has given us, 1 John 3.24. That of Ephesians. 3.17. may be taken in either,
or both senses comprehensively, That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith.]

3. Did you know that Christ is in you by his spirit, it might make every place
and condition comfortable to you! If you are alone, it may rejoice you to think
what company dwells continually with you in your hearts. If you are wearied
with evil company without, it may comfort you to think that you have better
within; when your have communion with the Saints, it is your joy to think that
you have nearer communion with the Lords of Saints. You may well say with
David, Psalm. 139.18. [ when I awake I am still with thee.] Psalm. 16.8. I have
set the Lord always before me: because he is at may right hand, I shall not be
moved.

4. Did you know Christ within you, it would much help you in believing what is
written of him in the Gospel. Though to the ungodly the mysteries of the
Kingdom of God do seem incredible: yet when you have experience of the power of
it on your souls, and find the Image of it on your hearts, and the same Christ
within you conforming you to what he commands in his word, this will work
such a sutableness to the Gospel in your hearts, as will make the work of faith
more easy. Says the Apostle, 1 John 4.14, 16. [ We have seen and do testify
that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the world (there is their
outward experience) And we have known and believed the Love that God has to
us: God is Love; and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him:
(There is their Faith confirmed by their inward evidence: N^ wonder if they
that have God dwelling (...) them by holy love, do believe the love (...) God
has to them.) This is the great advantage that the sanctified have in the work
(...) faith above those that much excel them (...) disputing, and are
furnished with more Arguments for the Christian verity; Christ has his witness
abiding in them. The fruits of the spirit bear witness to the incorruptible
(...) the word of God that lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23. The
impress on the (...) heard witness to the seal that caused i^ (...) it is not a
weak and uneffectual Argument for the Truth of the Gospel that Believer (...)
to fetch from within, when they plead the effects of it on their souls. Labor
to know the Truth of your sanctification, that you may be confirmed by it in
the Truth of the word that sanctifies you, Joh. 17.17. and may rejoice in him
that has chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the spirit and
belief of the truth, 2 These. 2.13.

5. If you can come to the knowledge of Christ within you, it will be much the
easier to you to trust upon him, and fly to him in all your particular
necessities, and to make use of his Mediatorship with holy confidence. When
others fly from Christ with trembling, and know not whether he will speak for
them, or help them, or have any regard to them, but look at him with strange
and doubtful thoughts, it will be otherwise with you that have assurance of his
continual Love and presence. Nearness breeds familiarity, and overcomes
strangness: Familiarity breeds confidence, and boldness: when you find Christ
so ^^er you, as to dwell within you, and so particular and abundant in his Love
to you, as to have given you his spirit, and all his Graces, i^ will breed a
sweet delightful boldness* and make you (...) to him as your help and refuge,
in all your necessities. When you find the great promise fulfilled to your
selves [ I will put my Law in their hearts, and in their minds will I write
them, and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more] you will [ have
boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus; by the new and living
way which he has consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, his
flesh; And having an high Priest over the house of God, you may draw near with
a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having your hearts sprinkled from an
evil conscience, (or the conscience of evil) as your bodies are washed (in
baptism) with pure water] Heb. 10.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. [In Christ we may
have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him] Ephesians. 3.12. This
intimate acquaintance with our great High Priest, that is passed into the
Heavens, and yet abides and reigns in our hearts, will encourage us to hold
fast our profession, and to come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.14, 16. When by
unfeigned Love, we [ know that we are of the truth, and may assure our hearts
before him, and our Heart condemns us not, then we have confidence toward
God; and whatever we ask we receive of him, because we keep his commandments,
and do those things that are pleasing in his sight, 1 John 3.18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

6. When once you know that you have Christ within you, you may cheerfully
proceed in the way of Life; when doubting Christians that know not whether they
are in the way or not, are still looking behind them, and spend their time in
perplexed fears, lest they are out of the way, and go on with heaviness and
trouble, as uncertain whether they may not lose their labor: and are still
questioning their groundwork, when the building should go on. It is an
unspeakable mercy, when a believing Soul is freed from these distracting
hindering doubts, and may bodily and cheerfully hold on his way, and be walking
or working, when other men are fearing and enquiring of the way; and may with
patience and comfort wait for the reward, the ^rown of life, when others are
still questioning whether they were ever regenerate, and whether their hopes
have any ground. We may be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work
of the Lord, when we know that our labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor.
15.58. We may then gird up the l^ins of the mind, and in sobriety hope unto the
end, for the grace that is to be brought us, at the Revelation of Jesus Christ.
1 Pet. 1.13.

7. When you are assured that you have Christ within you, it may preserve you
from those terrors of soul that affright the^ that have no such assurance. O he
th^^ knows what it is to think of the intolerable wrath of God, and says, I
fear I (...) the object of this wrath, and must bear th^^ intolerable lead
everlastingly,] may know^ what a mercy it is to be assured of our escape. He
that knows what it is to think of Hell, and say, [I know not but those endless
flames may be my portion,] will know what a mercy it is to be assured of
deliverance, and to be able to say, I know I am saved from the wrath to come, 1
These. 1.10. And that we are not of them th^^ draw back to perdition, but of
them that believe to ^he saving of the soul, Heb. 10.39. And that God has not
appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, who
dyed for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him:]
We may comfort our selves together and edify one another, when we have this
assurance, 1 These. 5.9, 10, 11.

They that have felt the burden of a wounded spirit and know what it is to feel
the terrors of the Lord, and to see Hell fire as it were before their eyes, and
to be kept waking by the dreadful apprehensions of their danger, and to be
pursued daily by an accusing conscience, setting their sins in order before
them, and bringing the threatenings of God to their remembrance, these persons
will understand that to be assured of a Christ within us, and consequently of a
Christ that is preparing a place in glory for us, is a mercy that the mind of
man is now unable to value according to the ten thousandth part of its worth.

8. Were you assured that Christ himself is in you, it would sweeten all the
mercies of your lives: It would assure you that they are all the pledges of his
love: And love in all, would be the Kernel and the Life of all: your friends,
your health, your wealth, your deliverances, would be steeped in the dearest
Love of Christ, and have a spiritual sweetnss in them, when to the worldling
they have but a carnal, unwholesome, luscious sweetness; and to the doubting
Christians they will be turned into troubles, while they are questioning the
Love and meaning of the giver, and whether they are sent for good to them, or
to aggravate their condemnation; and the Company of the Giver will advance your
estimation of the gift. Mean things with the company of our dearest friends are
sweeter then abundance in their absence. To have money in your purses, and
goods in your houses, and books in your studies, and friends in your near and
sweet society, are all advanced to the higher value, when you know that you
have also Christ in your hearts; and that all these are but the attendants of
your Lord, and the fruits that drop from the tree of life, and the tokens of
his Love, importing greater things to follow. Whereas in the crowd of all those
mercies the foul would be uncomfortable, or worse, if it mist the presence of
its dearest friend: and in the midst of all would live but as in a wilderness,
and go seeking after Christ with tears, as Mary at his Sepulcher, because they
had taken away her Lord (as she thought) and she knew not where they had laid
him, Joh. 20.13. All mercies would be bitter to us, if the presence of Christ
do not put into them that special sweetness which is above the estimate of
sense.

9. This assurance would do much to preserve you from the temptation of sensual
delights. While you had within you the matter of more excellent contentment,
and when you find that these inferior pleasures ^re enemies to those which are
your happi^ess and life, you would not be easily taken with the bait. The
poorest brutish pleasures ^re made much of by them that never were ^cquainted
with any better. But after the ^weetness of assurance of the Love of God, ^ow
little relish is there to be found in the pleasures that are so valued by
sensual unbe^ievers! Let them take them for me, says ^he believing soul; may I
but still have the comforts of the presence of my Lord, how ^ittle shall I miss
them? how easily can I ^pare them?] Silver will be cast by, if it ^e set in
competition, with Gold. The company of common acquaintance may be acceptable,
till better and greater come: and then they must give place. Men that are taken
up with the pleasing entertainment of Christ within them, can scarce afford any
more then a transient salutation or observance to those earthly things that are
the felicity of the carnal mind, and take up its desires, endeavors and
delight; when the soul is tempted to turn from Christ, to those deceiving
vanities that promise him more content and pleasure, the comfortable thoughts
of the love of (...) and his abode within us, and our (...) with him, do
sensibly scatter and (...) such temptations. The presence of (...) the great
Reconciler, does reconcile (...) our selves, and make us willing to be (...) at
home. He that is out of love with (...) company that he has at home, is (...)
drawn to go abroad: But who can (...) to be much abroad, that knows of (...)
guest as Christ at home? We shall say Peter, Joh. 6.68, 69. [ Lord, to whom
(...) we go? thou have the words of eternal (...) and we believe and are sure
thou ar^ (...) Christ the son of the living God.] An^ Matthew. 7.4. when he saw
him in a (...) his Glory [ Master it is good for us to (...) here.] And if the
riches of the world (...) offered to draw a soul from Christ, that (...) the
knowledge of his special love and (...) sense, the tempter would have no (...)
entertainment then Simon Magus had (...) Peter, Act. 8.20. Their money perish
(...) them that think Christ and his graces (...) no better then money.

10. How easy and sweet would all (...) service be to you, if you were assured
(...) Christ abides in you? What delightful (...) (...) might you have in
prayer, when you ^now that Christ himself speaks for you! not (...) if the
Father himself were unwilling to ^o us good, but that he will do it in the
(...) and for the sake and merits of his son: which is the meaning of Christ in
those ^ords which seem to deny his intercession, ^oh. 16.26. [ At that day ye
shall ask in ^^y name; and I say not unto you, that I will ^ay the Father for
you: for the Father himself loves you, because ye have loved (...), etc.] I
appeal to your own hearts, Christians, whether you would not be much ^ore
willing and ready to pray? and whether prayer would not be a swe^ter employment
to you, if you were sure of Christ's ^bode within you, and intercession for you,
and consequently that all your prayers are graciously accepted of the Lord! you
^ould not then desire the vain society of ^mpty persons* nor seek for
recreation in their insipid, frothy, insignificant discourse. The opening of
your heart to your hea^enly Father, and pleading the merits of ^^rson, in your
believing petitions for his ^aving benefits, would be a more contenting ^ind of
pleasure to you.

Now sweet would meditation be to you, ^f you could still think on Christ and
all the riches of his kingdom as your own? could you look up to Heaven, and say
wit^ grounded confidence, It is mine, and th^^ I must abide and reign for ever!
could yo^ think of the heavenly host as those that (...) be your own
companions, and of their (...) employment as that which must be your (...) for
ever, it would make the ascent of yo^^ minds to be more frequent, and
meditati^^ to be a more pleasant work: were you (...) assured of your special
interest in God, (...) that all his attributes are by his Love an^ Covenant
engaged for your happiness, expe^rience would make you say, [ In the mul^^^tude
of my thoughts within me, thy comfo^^ do delight my soul, Psalm. 44.19. [ I
(...) sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I (...) sing praise to my God while
I have my being* My Meditation of him shall be sweet (...) will be glad in the
Lord, Psalm. 104.33, 3^* Could you say with full assurance that (...) are the
children of the Promises, and (...) they are all your own, how sweet would
(...) reading and meditation on the holy script^^^ be to you! How dearly would
you (...) the word! What a treasure would y^^ judge it! your delight would be
then in (...) Law of the Lord; and you would medita^^^^ in it day and night,
Psalm. 1.2. To find (...) grounds of faith and hope, and riches of consolation
in every page, and assuredly to say, All this is mine, would make you better
understand why David did indite all the 119. Psalm in high commendations of the
word of God, and would make you join in his affectionate expressions, Psalm.
119.97, 98, 99. O how I love thy Law! it is my Meditation all the day: Thou
through thy commandments have made me wiser then mine enemies, for it is ever
with me.

Sermons also would be much sweeter to ^ou, when you could confidently take
^ome the consolatory part, and use our ministry as a help to your faith, and
hope, and ^oy; whereas your doubts and fears lest you are still unregenerate,
will turn all that you ^ear, or read, or meditate on, into food and fuel for
themselves to work upon; and you will gather up all that tends to your
disquietment, and say, It is your part; and cast away all that rendeth to your
consolation, and say, it belongs not to you: and the most comforting passages
of the word will be turned into your discomfort: and the promises will seem to
you as none, while you imagine that they are none of yours; And the loss of
your peace and comfort will not be the worst: But this will increase your
backwardness to duty* (...) when your delight in the worship of God (...) gone,
your inclination to it will abate, an^ it will seem a burden to you, and be as
(...) to the stomachs of the sick, that with the carefullest preparation and
much (...) can hardly be brought to get it down* (...) can bear but little and
that which is suited (...) their diseased appetites.

The same I may say of the Sacrament^ (...) the Lords supper. How sweet will i^
(...) to you, if you are assured that the (...) Christ that is there
represented as bro^^^ and bleeding for your sins, does dwell (...) in you by
his spirit! What welcome en^^^^tainment would you expect and find, if y^^ knew
that you brought the feast and (...) Master of the feast with you in your (...)
and had there entirely entertained (...) with whom you expect communion in
(...) sacrament! How boldly and comfort^^^ would your hungry souls then feed
(...) him! with what refreshing acts of (...) would you there take the sealed
(...) and pardon of your sins! whereas (...) you come in fear^ and doubting,
and (...) take the body and blood of Christ in (...) Representations, with yo^^
hand and mo^^^ while you know not whether you (...) (...) with the heart, and
whether you have ^^y special interest in him, O what a damp (...) casts on
the soul! how it stifleth its ^^pes and joys, and turns the Sacrament which
is appointed for their comfort, into ^^eir greater trouble! It has many a time
^^ieved me to observe that no ordinance ^^th cast many upright souls into
greater ^erplexities, and discouragements, and ^^stresses, then the Lords
Supper; because ^^ey come to it with double reverence, and (...) the doubtings
of their title, and questi^ning their preparedness, and by their fears of
eating and drinking unworthily, their ^^uls are utterly discomposed with
perplex^^g passions, and turned from the pleasant ^^^rcise of faith, and the
delighful enter^ourse that they should have with God; and ^^ey are distempered
and put out of relish (...) all the sweetness of the Gospel: And (...) they are
frightened from the Sacrament by such sad experiences, and dare (...) thither
no more, for fear of eating judgment to themselves. And should ^o^ Christians
labor to remove the cause of such miserable distracting fears, that so much
wrong both Christ and them, and (...) recover their well-grounded peace and
comfort!

11. Your Love to God, which is (...) Heart and Life of the new creature, (...)
so much depend upon your knowledge of (...) love to you, as should make you
much (...) desirous of such a knowledge. Love is (...) end of faith; and faith
the way to (...) So much of Love as is in every duty, (...) much holiness is in
it, and no more. I^ is the sum of the commandments. (...) the fulfilling of the
Law, Romans 13*^ Mat. 22.37. Mark. 12.33. Though God (...) us first, as purposing
our good, (...) we loved him, 1 John 4.9.10. And (...) therefore Love him,
because he first (...) us, v. 19. Yet does he Love us by comp^^^cency and
acceptance, because we love (...) Father and the son: Joh. 16.27. [ (...) the
Father himself loves you, because (...) loved me, and have believed that I
came (...) from God.] And what will more effect^^^ kindle in you the fervent
Love of Chr^^^ then to know that he loves you, and (...) in you? All this is
expressed by (...) himself, in Joh 14.20.21, 22, 23. [ At (...) day ye shall know
that I am in my Faith* and you in me, and I in you: He that (...) my
commandments and keeps them, he (...) that loves me; and he that loves me,
(...) be loved of my Father, and I will love (...) and will manifest my self
unto him -- If a man love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love
him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.] 1 Cor. 8.3. If
any man love God, the same is known of him.] with a knowledge of special Love
and approbation. This is no disparagement to faith, whose nature and use is to
work by Love, Gal. 5.6. What a man Loves, such he is. The Love is the man. Our
Love is judged by our Life, as the cause by the effect: but the Life is judged
by the Love, as the fruits by the tree, the effects by the cause: [Mores au^em
nostri non ex eo; quod quisque novit, sed ex eo quod diligit, dijudicari
solentin^^ faci^^t bonos vel malos mores, nisi boni vel mali amores.] says
Augustine; that is [ Our manners are not used to be judged of according to that
which every man knows, but according to that which he loves: It is only good
or evil love, that makes good or evil manners.] If Plato could say (as
Augustine cites him, lib. 8. de Civit. Dei) Hoc est Philosophari, scilicet
Deum amare: To be a Philosopher, is to Love God.] Much more should we say, Hoc
est Christianum agere, this is the doctrine and the work of a Christian, even
the Love of God. Indeed it is the work of the Redeemer, to recover the heart of
man to God, and to bring us to Love him by representing him to us as the most
amiable suitable object of our Love: And the perfection of Love, is Heaven it
self. [ O jugum sancti amoris, (inq. Bernard.) quam dulciter capis, gloriose
laqueas, suaviter premis, delectanter oneras, fortiter stringis, prudenter
erudis!] that is [ The yoke of holy Love, O how sweetly do thou surprise? how
gloriously do thou inthrall? how plesantly do thou press? how delightfully
do thou load? how strongly do thou bind? how prudently do thou instruct?]
[O faelix amor ex quo oritur strenuitas morum, puritas affectionum, subtilitas
intellectuum, desideriorum sanctitas, operum claritas, virtutum faecunditas,
meritorum dignitas, praemiorum sublimitas] [O happy Love, from which arises
the strength of manners, the purity of affections, the subtilty of intellects,
the sanctity of desires, the excellency of works, the fruitfulness of virtues,
the dignity of deserts the sublimity of the reward!] I appeal to your own
consciences Christians; would you not think it a foretaste of Heaven upon
earth, if you could but Love God as much as you desire? would any kind of life
that you can imagine, be so desirable and delightful to you! Would any thing be
more acceptable unto God! And on the contrary, a soul without the Love of God,
is worse then a Corpse without a soul. If any man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be anathama maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22.

And do I need to tell you what a powerful incentive it is to Love, to know
that you are beloved? It will make Christ much more dear to you, to know how
dear you are to him. What is said of affective Love in us, may partly be said
of attractive Love in Christ. Eccles. 8.7. Many waters cannot quench Love,
neither can the floods drown it: no riches can purchase what it can attract;
when you find that he has you as a seal upon his arm and heart, v. 6. and that
you are dear to him as the apple of his eye; what holy flames will this kindle
in your breast! If it be almost impossible with your equals upon earth not to
Love them that Love you (which Christ tells you that even Publicans will do,
Matthew. 5.46.) how much more should the Love of Christ constrain us abundantly
to Love him, when being infinitely above us, his Love descends, that ours may
ascend! His Love puts forth the hand from heaven, to fetch us up.

O Christians, you little know how Satan wrongeth you, by drawing you to deny,
or doubt of the special Love of God. How can you Love him that you apprehend to
be your enemy, and to intend your ruin? Doubtless not so easily as if you
know him to be your friend. In reason is there any likelier way to draw you to
hate God, then to draw you to believe that he hates you? Can your thoughts be
pleasant of him? or your speeches of him sweet? or can you attend him, or draw
near him with delight, while you think he hates you, and has decreed your
damnation? you may fear him, as he is a terrible avenger; and you may confess
his judgments to be just: but can you amicably embrace the consuming fire and
love to dwell with the everlasting burnings!

O therefore as ever you would have the Love of God to animate, and sanctify,
and delight your souls, study the greatness of his Love to you, and labor with
all possible speed and diligence, to find that Christ by his spirit is within
you. It is the whole work of sanctification that Satan would destroy or weaken
by your doubts: And it is the whole work of sanctification that by Love would
be promoted, if you knew your interest in the Love of Christ.

12. It is the knowledge of Christ, dwelling in you, and so of the special Love
of God, that must acquaint you with a life of holy Thankfulness and prase.
These highest and most acceptable duties, will be out of your reach if Satan
can hide from you that mercy which must be the chiefest matter of your
Thanksgiving. Will that soul be in tune for the high Praises of the Lord, that
thinks he means to use him as an enemy? Can you look for any cheerful
thanksgiving from him that looks to lie in hell? will he not rather cry with
David, Psalm. 6.5. [ In death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who
shall give thee thanks? Psalm. 30.9. What profit is there in my blood, when I go
down to the pit? shall the dust praise thee? shall it declare thy truth?] shall
the damned praise thee, or shall they give thee thanks that must be scorched
with the flames of thine indignation? Can you expect that Joy should be in
their hearts, or cheerfulness in their countenances, or praises in their
mouths, that think they are Reprobated to the fire of Hell? Undoubtedly Satan
is not ignorant, that this is the way to deprive God of the Service which is
most acceptable to him, and you of the pleasures of so sweet a life. And
therefore he that envyeth both, will do his worst to damp your spirits, and
breed uncomfortable doubts and fears, and wrongful suspicions in your minds.
Whereas the Knowledge of your interest in Christ, would be a continual
storehouse of thanksgiving and praise, and teach your hearts as well as your
tongues, to say with David, [Blessed is the man whose transgression is
forgiven, whose sin is covered; Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes
not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile. -- Be glad in the Lord,
and rejoice ye Righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart.]
Psalm. 32.1, 2, 11. Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me bless
his holy name: Bless the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits: Who
forgiveth all thine iniquities, Who heals all thy diseases: Who redeemeth thy
life from destruction, and crowns thee with loving kindness and tender
mercies, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3, 4.] O Lord, my God, I cried unto thee, and thou
have healed me: O Lord thou have brought up my soul from the grave; thou have
kept me alive that I should not go down to the pit; sing unto the Lord, O ye
saints of his, and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness: for his
anger endures but for a moment: in his favor is life, Psalm. 30.2, 3, 4, 5.
Thanksgiving would be the very pulse and breath of your assurance of Christ
dwelling in you. You would say with Paul, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in celestials in Christ: According as he has chosen us in him before
the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and blameless before him in
Love: having predestined us to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to
himself according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory
of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved; In whom we have
redemption through his blood, the remission of sins, according to the riches of
his grace, wherein he has abounded toward us, etc.] Thus faith and assurance,
as they have an unspeakable store to work upon, so it is natural to them to
expatiate in the praise of our Redeemer, and to delight in amplifications and
commemorations of the ways of grace. Just so does Peter begin his first Epistle
[ Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to
his abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you who are kept by the
power of Go^ through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the last
time, wherein ye greatly rejoice, etc.

No wonder if the Heirs of Heaven be inclined to the language and the work of
Heaven. I think there are few of you that would not rejoice, and by your
speech, and countenance express your joy, if you had assurance but of the
dignities and dominions of this world. And can he choose but express his Joy
and Thankfulness, that has assurance of the crown of life? What fragrant
thoughts should possess that mind that knows it self to be possessed by the
Spirit of the living God! How thankful will he be that knows he has Christ
and Heaven to be thankful for! What sweet delights should fill up the hours of
that man's life, that knows the son of God lives in him, and that he shall live
in Joy with Christ for ever! How gladly will he be exercised in the praises of
his Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier, that knows it must be his work for ever?
No wonder if this Joy be a stranger to their hearts, that are strangers to
Christ, or strangers to their interest in his love: No wonder if they have no
hearts for these celestial works, that have no part in the celestial
inheritance, or that know not that they have any part therein. How can they
joyfully give thanks for that which they know not that they have or ever shall
have, or have any probability to attain!

But to that man that is assured of Christ within him, Heaven and Earth and all
their store do offer themselves as the matter of his Thanks, and do furnish him
with provisions to feed his Praises. What a shame is it that an assured heir of
Heaven should be scant and barren in comfort to himself, or in Thanks and
Praise to Jesus Christ, when he has so full a heap of Love and mercy to fetch
his motives from, and has two worlds to furnish him with the preciousest
materials; and has no less then Infinite goodness even God himself, to be the
subject of his Praise! [O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: because
his mercy endures for ever: (what ever others do) Let Israel say, let the
house of Aaron say, let them that fear the Lord say that his mercy endures for
ever, Psalm. 118.1, 2, 3, 4. The knowledge of our Interest sits us for his
Praise. [Psal. 118.28. [ Thou art my God, and I will praise thee: thou art
(...) God, I will exalt thee.] Psalm. 116.16, 17 [ O Lord, truly I am thy
servant, I am the servant, and the son of thine handmaid thou have ^^^sed my
bonds; I will offer (...) thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and wi^^ call
upon the name of the Lord?] His Prais^ is for [ the Congregation of his Saint^
Psalm. 141.1, 2. Let Israel rejoice in him th^^ made him; let the children of
Zion be joy^ful in their King] Psalm. 148.13, 14* [ Let them praise the name of
the Lord* for his name alone is excellent: his glory i^ above the earth and
heaven. He also exalts the horn of his people; the Praise of all his Saints,
even of the children of Israel, (...) people near unto him.] Psalm. 132.16. I
will also cloth his priests with salvation, and his Saints shall shout aloud
for joy] Praise is a work so proper for the Saints, and Thanksgiving must be
fed with the knowledge of your mercies, that Satan well knows, what he shall
get by it, and what you will lose, if he can but hide your mercies from you.
The height of his malice is against the Lord, and the next is against you: and
how can he show it more then by drawing you to rob God of his Thanks and
Praise, when he has blessed and enriched you with the chiefest of his mercies!
Labor therefore Christians to know that you have that Grace that may be the
Matter and Cause of so sweet and acceptable an employment as the Praises of
your Lord.

13. Moreover, you should consider that without the knowledge of your interest
in Christ, you cannot live to the honor of your Redeemer, in such a measure as
the Gospel does require. The excellency of Gospel mercies will be veiled and
obscured by you, and will not be revealed and honored by your lives. Your low
and poor dejected spirits, will be a dishonor to the faith and hope of the
Saints, and to the Glorious inheritance of which you have so full a prospect in
the promises. If you take the son of a Prince in his infancy, and educate him
as the son of a plowman, he will not live to the honor of his birth, which he
is not acquainted with. The heirs of Heaven that know not themselves to be
such, may live like the heirs of Heaven as to uprightness and humility; but not
in the triumphant Joy, nor in the courageous boldness, which becomes a
Believer. What an injury and dishonor is to our Redeemer, that when he has
done and suffered so much to make us happy, we should walk as heavily as he had
done nothing for us at all! An^ when he has so fully secured us of
eve^^lasting happiness, and told us of it so e^^presly that our Joy may be
full, we shou^^ live as if the Gospel were not the Gospel, (...) such things
had never been promised or r^^vealed! When Heaven is the Object, a^^ the
promise of God is the groundwork (...) our faith, we should live above all
earth^^ things, as having the honors and pleasure of the world under our feet,
accountin^ all as loss and dung for the excellency of (...) knowledge of Jesus
Christ, Phil. 3.8. who^ we should love though we have not seen him in whom
though now we see him not, yet b^^lieving we should rejoice with joy
unspeaka^ble and full of glory; as those that (...) receive the end of their
faith, the salvation o^ our souls] 1 Pet. 1.8, 9. And how ca^ we do this, if we
are still questioning the Love of Christ, or our interes^ in it!

Believers should with undaunted resolution charge through the armies of
temptation, and conquer difficulties, and suffer for the name of Christ with
joy; accounting it a bessed thing to be persecuted (...) righteousness sake,
because that theirs i^ the kingdom of Heaven: Because of the greatness of the
Reward, they should rejoice and be exceeding glad, Matthew. 5.10, 12. And how can
they do this, that believe not that the Reward and Kingdom will be theirs!

The Joys of faith, and confidence on the promise and strength of Christ,
should overcome all inordinate fears of man, [For he has said, I will never
fail thee nor forsake thee. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper,
and I will not fear what man shall do unto me, Heb. 13.5.6. And how can we do
this, while we are questioning our part in the Christ and promise that we
should thus boldly trust upon!

14. Lastly consider, that the knowledge of your part in Christ, may make all
sufferings easy to you. You will be so much satisfied in God your portion, as
will abate the desires, and drown the Joys and sorrows of the world. You will
judge the sufferings of this present time unw^rthy to be compared to the Glory,
that shall be revealed in us. Romans 8.18. You will choose rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God* then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of
the world, as having respect to the recompense of re^ward, Heb. 11.25, 26. All
this must b^ done, and will be done by true believers that have an assurance of
their own since^rity; They must and will forsake all and take up the Cross and
follow Christ, in hop^ of a Reward in Heaven, as it is offered the^ in the
Gospel, when they know their specia^ interest in it. For these are Christ's
term^ which he imposes on all that will be hi^ Disciples, Luke 14.33. and
18.22, 24, 25. But you may certainly perceive that i^ will be much more easy
to part with all, and undergo and do all this, wen we have the great
encouragement of our assured inetrest, then when we have no more but the common
offer. To instance in some particulars.

1. Do you live where serious Godliness is derided, and you cannot obey the
word of God, and seek first the Kingdom of God, and its righteousness, without
being made the common scorn, and the daily jest and byword of the company?
Let it be so* If you know that you have Christ within you, and are secured of
the everlasting Joys, will you feel, will you regard such things as these ^
shall the jest of a distracted miserable fool, abate the joy of your ^ssured
happiness? Princes and noblemen ^ill not forsake their dominions or Lord-ships,
nor cast away the esteem and ^omfort of all they have, because the poor ^o
ordinarily reproach them as Proud, ^^merciful oppressors. They think they may
bear the words of the miserable, while ^hey have the the pleasure of prospe-
And shall not we give losers leave to ^alke? We will not be mocked out of the
comfort of our health or wealth, our habita^ions or our friends: and shall we
be mocked ^ut of the comfort of Christ and of the presence of the comforter
himself! If they that go naked deride you for having clothes; and they that are
out of doors in the cold and rain, deride you that are warm and dry withthin;
or they that are sick deride you for being well, this will but make you more
sensible of your felicity, and pity them that have added such folly to their
wants; so will it increase the sense of your felicity, to find that you are
possessed of so unspeakable a mercy, which others have not so far tasted of as
to know its worth. If you have the feast, you may bear the words of fa^ished
unhappy souls, that speak against it because they taste it not: If you are in
your Fathers arms, you may bear the scorns of such as stand without the door

2. If you have the contradictions a^^ opposition of the ignorant or malicious,
spe^^^ing evil of things they know not, and pe^^swading you from the ways of
righteo^^^ness, how easily may all this be born wh^^ you have Christ within you
to strengthene^^ encourage you! Had you but his examp^^ before you; who is the
author and finisher (...) your faith, who for the joy that was set before him
endured the Cross, despising (...) shame, and endured such contradiction of
sin^ners against himself; it should keep you from being weary and fainting in
your minds Heb. 12.2, 3. But when you have (...) presence, his spirit, and his
help, how much should it corroborate and confirm you!

3. How easily may you bear the slander of your own or the Gospels enemies, as
lon^ as you are sure of your interest in Christ* How easily may you suffer them
to call yo^ by their own names, pestilent fellows (...) movers of sedition
among the People, ringlead^ers of a Sect, prophaners of the Temple, as (...)
was called, Act. 24.5, 6. as long as you have Christ within you, that was
called Beelzebub for you sakes, Matthew. 10 25* Your Judge that must finally
decide the case* is your dearest friend, and dwells in you (...) It is he
that will justify you; who is he that condemns you? Romans 8.33, 34. His
approbation is your life and comfort. How inconsiderable is it as to your own
felicity, what mortal worms shall say or think of you? What if they call you
all that is naught, and stain your names* and obscure your innocence, and make
others believe the falsest accusations, that Satan can use their tongues to
utter of you? You have enough against all this within you: What if you go for
hypocrites, or factious, or what malignity can call you, until the day of
Judgment? As long as you have so good security of being then fully cleared of
all, and your righteousness vindicated by your Judge; how easily may you now
bear the slanders of men, that prove themselves wicked, by falsely affirming it
of you? You can endure to be called Poor, so you be not poor; and to be called
sick as long as you are well. And you may well endure to be called Proud, while
you are Humble; and factious, while you are the Lovers of Unity and Peace; or
Hypocrites, while you are sincere. How boldly may you say with the Prophet,
Isaiah 50.7, 8, 9. [ The Lord God will help me: therefore shall I not be
confounded: therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall
not be ashamed: He is near that justifies me; Who will contend with me? let us
stand together: Who is mine adversary? Let him come near to me: Behold the Lord
God will help me; who is he that shall condemn me? Lo, they shall all wax old
as a garment: the moth shall eat them up.]

Had you but Paul's assurance and experience of Christ dwelling in you, you
might imitate him in a holy contempt of all the slanders and revilings of the
world, 1 Cor. 4.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. [ For I think that God has set forth us the
Apostles last, as it were men appointed to death: For we are made a spectacle
to the world, and to Angels, and to men: We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye
are wise in Christ: We are weak, but ye are strong: Ye are honorable, but we
are despised: Even unto this present hour, we both hunger, and thirst, and are
naked, and are buffetted, and have no certain dwelling place; and labor
working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we
suffer it: being defamed, we entreat: We are made as the filth of the world,
and are the offscouring of all things unto this day.] Thus may we do and suffer
all things through Christ that strengthens us, Phil. 4.13. What matter is it
what men call us, if God call us his children, and friends, and Christ be not
ashamed to call us Brethren? With us ^t will be a very small thing to be judged
of man, while we know the Lord that must judge (...), is on our side, 1 Cor.
4.3, 4. It lies not ^n our hands to justify our selves: It is Christ that
has undertaken to answer for ^s; and made it the work of his office to
^ustifie us: and to him we may boldly and ^omfortably leave it: and let all the
accusers ^repare their charge, and deal with him, and do their worst.

4. How easily may you bear imprisonment, banishment, or other persecution, as
^ong as you are assured of the Love of Christ? Can you fear to dwell where
Christ ^wells with you? If he will go with you through fire and water, what
need you fear? those owning appropriating words, will make us venture upon the
greatest perils [ Fear not, for I have Redeemed thee; I have ^alled thee by thy
name, thou art mine: When ^hou passest through the waters, I will be with ^hee;
and through the rivers, they shall not ^verflow thee: When thou walk through
the ^ire, thou shall not be burnt -- For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy one of
Israel, thy Savior.] Who would not with Peter cast himself into the Sea, or
walk with confidence upon the waters, if Christ be there and call us to him?
Matthew. 14.28, 29. John 21.7.

The eleventh chapter to the Hebrews does recapitulate the victories of faith,
and show us what the Hope of unseen things can cause Believers patiently to
undergo. How cheerfully will he endure the foulest way, that is assured to come
safe to such a home? What will a man stick at that knows he is following Christ
to Heaven; and knows that he shall reign with him, when he has suffered with
him? 2 Timothy 2.12. Who will refuse blood letting, that is assured beforehand
that it shall procure his health? He is unworthy of Christ, and of salvation,
that thinks any thing in the world too good to lose for them, Matthew. 10.37.
What matter is it whether Death find us in honor or dishonor, in our own
Country or in another, at liberty or in prison, so we are sure it find us not
in a state of death. Who would not rather pass to Glory by as straight a way as
John Baptist, Stephen, or other Martyr^ did, then with their persecutors to
prosper in the way to misery? Who can for shame repine at the loss of temporal
commodities, that is secured of the eternal Joys? If assurance of the Love of
God, would not embolden you to patient suffering, and to lay down life and all
for Christ, what do you think should ever do it?

But when you are afraid lest death will turn you into Hell, What wonder if you
timerously draw back? When you know not whether ever you shall have any better,
no wonder if you are loath to part with the seeming happiness which you have.
Those doubts and fears enfeeble the soul, and spoil you of that valor that
becomes a soldier of Christ.

5. All personal crosses in your estates, your families, your friends, your
health, will be easily born, if you are once assured of your salvation. To a
man that is passing into Heaven, all these are almost inconsiderable things.
What is Lazarus the worse now for h^s sores or rags? Or what is the Rich man
the better for his sumptuonus attire and fare? Luke 16. Whether you be poor or
rich, sick or sound, whether you are used kindly or unkindly in the world, are
questions of so small importance, that you are not much concerned in the answer
of them: But whether you have Christ within you, or be reprobates; whether you
are the heirs of the promise, or are under the curse, are questions of
everlasting consequence.

6. Lastly, you may comfortably receive the sentence of death, when once you
are assured of the Life of Grace, and that you have escaped everlasting death.
Though nature will be still averse to a dissolution, yet faith will make you
cheerfully submit, desiring to depart and be with Christ, as the best condition
for you, Phil. 1.23. When you know that if the earthly house of this tabernacle
were dissolved, you have a building of God, an house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens; you will then groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed
upon with your house which is from heaven: not to be uncloathed, (for the union
of soul and body, is the constitution of the man, which nature cannot but
desire) but to be clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life:
This God does work you for, who gives you the earnest of the spirit; therefore
as men that know while you are at home in the body, you are absent from the
Lord, and that walk by faith, and not by sight, you would be always confident,
and willing rather to be absent from the body, and present with the Lord, 2
Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4 5, 6, 7* 8.

Though it be troublesome to remove your dwelling, yet you would not stick upon
the trouble, if you were sure to change a cottage for a Court: nor would you
refuse to cross the Seas, to change a prison for a Kingdom. The holy desires of
Believers, do prepare them for a safe death; but it is the assurance of their
future happiness, or the believing expectation of it, that must prepare them
for a death that is safe and comfortable. The Death of the Presumptuous may be
quiet, but not safe: The Death of doubting troubled Believers may be safe, but
not quiet: The Death of the ungodly, that have awakened undeceived consciences,
is neither safe nor quiet: But the Death of strong Belivers that have attained
assurance, is both. And he that finds Christ within him, may know that when
he dies, he shall be with Christ: His dwelling in us by faith, by Love, and by
his Spirit, is a pledge that we shall dwell with him. Christ within us, will
certainly carry us unto Christ above us. Let Socinians question the happiness
of such departed souls, or doubt whether they be in heaven before the
resurrection; I am sure that they are with Christ, as the forecited places
show, 2 Cor. 5.7, 8. and Phil. 1.23. and many other: We are following him, that
when he had conquered Death, and went before us, did send that message to his
doubting troubled Disciples, (which is to me so full of sweetness, that me
thinks I can scarce too often recite it) John 20.17. [ Go to my Brethren, and say
unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and to your
God.] O piercing, melting words, which methinks do write themselves upon my
heart, when ever I read them with attention and consideration! Know once that
you are his Brethren, and that his Father is your Father, and his God is your
God, and that he is ascended and glorified in your nature; and then how can you
be unwilling to be dismissed from the bondage of this flesh, and be with
Christ! For in his Fathers house are many mansions: and he is gone before to
prepare a place for us: and will come again and receive us unto himself, that
where he is, there we may be also, John 14.2, 3. And that this is his will for
all his servants, he has declared in that comfortable promise, (which also I
have found so full of sweetness, that I value it above all the riches of the
world) John 12.26. [ If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am,
there shall also my servant be: If any man serve me, him will my Father honour]
The Spirit of Christ within you, is the earnest of all this: Be assured of your
Faith, and Hope, and Love, and you may be assured to possess the Good believed
and Hoped for and Loved. The incorruptible seed, which lives and abides for
ever, of which you are new born (1 Pe^. 1.23.) does tend to the incorruptible
crown (1 Pet. 5.4.) even the Crown of righteousness which the righteous Judge
will give to all that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8. And so shall we ever be
with the Lord, as the Apostle comfortably speaks, 1 These. 4.17. and seasonably
annexeth the use of such a cordial, verse. 18. [ wherefore comfort one another
with these words.]

Whether we are to die by the decay of nature, or by the storm of any violent
disease, or by the hand of persecutros or any other instruments of Satan, the
difference is small: They are but several ways of landing at the shore of
happiness, which we were making toward, through all the duties and
difficulties of our lives. May we by any Death be sent to Christ, let them
domine^r a while that stay behind, and are conquerors and happy in their dream:
we shall neither miss nor desire their felicity. May I die assured of the Love
of God, how little regardable is it whether I be poor or rich till then? or in
what manner Death shall do its execution? and how little cause have blessed
souls, to envy them that are left on earth, in a quiet and prosperous passage
to damnation?

And what an ease and pleasure is this to a man's mind through all his life, to
be able with well-grounded comfort, to think of death? What cares can vex him
that has secured hi^ everlasting state? What losses should afflict him that is
sure he shall not lose his soul, and is sure to gain eternal life? What fears
should disquiet him that is sure to escape the wrath of God? What wants should
trouble him that knows he is an heir of Heaven? Why should the indignation or
threatenings of man, be any temptation to turn him out of the way of duty, or
dismay his mind, who knows that they can but kill the body, and dismiss the
soul into his blessed presence, whom it loves and labors and longs to see?
what should inordinately grieve that man that is certain of eternal Joy? What
else should he thirst for, that has in him the well of living waters springing
up to everlasting life? Joh. 4.14. And what should deprive that man of comfort,
that knows he has the Comforter within him, and shall be for ever comforted
with his masters joy? And what should break the Peace and Patience of him that
is assured of Everlasting Rest? If the assurance of a happy death cannot make
it welcome, and cannot make affliction easy, and fill our lives with the Joys
of Hope, I know not what can do it.

But alas for those poor souls that know not whither death will send them, or
at least have not good grounds of hope, what wonder if through the fear of
death they be all their life time subject unto bondage! Heb. 2.14. Methinks in
the midst of their wealth and pleasure, they should not be so stupid as to
forget the millions that are gone before them, that lately were as jovial and
secure as they; and how short their dreaming feast will be; Methinks all the
beauty of their fleshly Idols, should be blasted with those nipping frosts and
storms, that in their serious forethoughts, come in upon them, from the black
and dreadful regions of death! Methinks at any time it should damp their mirth,
and allay the ebullition of their phrenetick blood, to remember [ For all this
I must die] and it may be this night, that the fool must deliver up his soul;
and then whose shall those things be which he has provided! Luke 12.19, 20.
Then who shall be the Lord, and who the Knight or Gentleman? and who shall wear
the gay attire? and who shall domineer, and say, Our will shall be done, an^
thus we will have it? Then where is the pleasure of lust, and merry company,
an^ meat drink and sports? Methinks, Solo^mons memento, Eccles. 11.9. should
brin^ them to themselves [ Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart
cheer thee i^ the days of thy youth, and walk in the way^ of thy heart, and in
the sight of thine eyes (...) but know thou that for all these things, Go^ will
bring thee into judgement] And as the sound of these words [ I must shortly
die] methinks, should be always in your ears so in reason, the Question [
Whether must I then go] should be always a^ it were before your eyes, till your
soul^ have received a satisfactory answer to it* O what an amazing dreadful
thing it is* when an unsanctified unprepared soul must say [ I must depart from
earth, but I know not whither! I know not whether unto Heaven or Hell; Here I
am now, but where must I be for ever!] When men believe that their next
habitation must be everlasting, methinks, the Question [ Whether must I goe]
should be day and night upon their minds, till they can say upon good grounds,
[ I shall go to the blessed presence of the Lord:] O had you but the hearts of
men within you, methinks the sense of this one Question, [ Whither must I go
when I leave ^he flesh?] should so possess you, that it should give your souls
no rest, till you were ^ble to say, [ We shall be with Christ, because he
dwells in us here, and has sealed us and given us the earnest of his spirit:
or at least, till you have good hopes of this, and have done your best to make
it sure.

And thus I have told you of how great importance it is to believers, to attain
assurance of the love of God, and to know that Christ abides in them. And now
I think you will confess, I have proved the necessity of Self-knowledge, both
to the unregenerate, and the regenerate, though in several degrees: and having
opened the disease, and showed you the need of a remedy, I am next to direct
you in the application for the cure.

I Doubt not but there are many of the Hearers that by this time, are desirous
to be instructed, how this self knowledge may be attained: For whose
satsfaction, and for the reducing of all that has been spoken into practice, I
shall next acquaint you with the Hindrances of Self-knowledge (the removing of
them being not the least point in the cure,) and with the Positive Directions
to be practiced for the attainment of it: And because the Hindrances and Helps
are contrary, I shall open both together as we go on.

The Hindrances of self knowledge are some of them without us, and some within
us; and so must be the Helps.

I. The external Hindrances are these.

1. The failing of Ministers in their part of the work through unskilfulness or
unfaithfulness, is a great cause that so many are ignorant of themselves. They
are the Lights of the world: and if they are ec^lipsed, or put under a bushel;
if they are darkened by the snuff of their own corruptions; or if they feed not
their light by the oil of diligent studies and other endeavors; or if they
will not go ^long with men into the dark and unknown corners of the heart, what
wonder if men's hearts remain in darkness, when those that by office are
appointed to afford them Light, do fail them? It is not a general dull
discourse, or critical observations upon words, or the subtle decision of some
nice and curious questions of the schools, (though these may be useful to their
proper ends,) nor is it a neat and well composed speech about some other
distant matters, that is like to acquaint a sinner with himself. How many
sermons may we hear (that to others ends are not unprofitable) that are
levelled at some mark or other, that is very far from the Hearers hearts, and
therefore are never like to convince them, or prick them, or open and convert
them? And if our congregations were in such a case, as that they needed no
closer quickening work, such preaching might be born with and commended: But
when so many usually sit before us, that must shortly dye, and are unprepared,
and that are condemned by the Law of God, and must be pardoned or finally
condemned: that must be saved from their sins, that they may be saved from
everlasting misery, I think it is time for us to talk to them of such things as
most concern them; and that in such a matter as may most effectually convince
awake and change them. When we come to them on their sick-beds, we talk not
then to them of distant or impertinent things: o^ words, or forms, or parties,
or by-opinions, but of the state of their souls, an^ their appearing before the
Lord, and ho^ they may be ready, that death may b^ both safe and comfortable to
them (...) (though a superstitious miserable fellow that knows no better
things himself, may talk to the sick of beads, and relicts, and o^ being on
this side or that, for this ceremony or the other, and may think to conjure the
unholy spirit out of him, by some affected words of devotions uttered from a
graceless senseless heart, or to command him out by Papal authority, as if they
would charm his soul to heaven, by saying ove^ some lifeless forms, and using
the Gospel (...) a spell; Yet Ministers indeed that know themselves what Faith
and what Repentance is, and what it is to be regenerate and to be prepared to
die, do know that they have other work to do.) The Gospe^ offers men their
Choice, whether they will have Holiness or sin; and be ruled by Christ, or by
their fleshly lusts; and so whether they will have spiritual, or carnal,
eternal or transitory Joys. And our work is to persuade them to make that
choice which will be their Happiness if we can prevail, and which eternal Joy
depends upon: whether we come to them in sickness or in health, this is our
business with them. A man that is ready to be drowned, is not at leisure for a
song or dance; And a man that is ready to be damned, methinks should not find
himself at leisure to hear a man show his wit and reading only, if not his
folly and malice against a life of Holiness; Nor should you think that suitable
to such men's case, that does not evidently tend to save them. But, alas, how
often have we heard such sermons, as tend more to diversion than direction, to
fill their minds with other matters, and find men something else to think on,
lest they should study themselves, and know their misery! And whereas there may
be so much ingenuity in the sinner as to perceive that the discourse of idle
tongues, or the reading of a Romance is unsuitable to one in his condition; and
therefore will not by such toys as these, be called off from the consideration
of his ways; A preacher that seems to speak religiously, by a sapeless, dry,
impertinent discourse that's called a sermon, may more plausibly and easily
divert him: And has conscience will more quietly suffer him to be taken off the
necessary care of his salvation, by something that is like it, and pretends to
do the work as well, then by the grosser avocations, or the scorns of fools:
And he will more tamely be turned from Religion, by something that is called
Religion, and which he hopes may serve the turn, then by open wickedness, or
impious defiance of God and Reason. But how often do we hear applauded Sermons,
which force us in compassion to men's souls to think [ O what (...) all this to
the opening a sinners heart unto himself, and showing him his unregenerate
state? What Is this to the conviction of a self-deluding soul, that is passing
unto Hell with the confident expectations of Heaven* To the opening of men's
eyes, and turning them from darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan
unto God! what is this to show men their undone condition, and the absolute
necessity of Christ and of renewing grace! what is in this to lead men up from
earth to heaven, and to acquaint them with the unseen world, and to help them
to the life of faith and love, and to the mortifying and the pardon of their
sins? How little skill have many miserable preachers, in the searching of the
heart, and helping men to know themselves, whether Christ be in them, or
whether they be reprobates? and how little care and diligence is used by them
to call men to the trial, and help them in the examining and judging of
themselves, as if it were a work of no necessity! They have healed also the
hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying Peace, Peace, when there is
no Peace, says the Lord, Jer. 6.14. And Ezekiel. 13.10, 11, 12. Because, even
because they have seduced my people, saying Peace* and there was no peace, and
one built up a wall, and lo others dawbed (...) with untempered mortar, say to
them that dawb it with untempered mortar that it shall fall: there shall be an
overflowing shower, and ye O great hailstones, shall fall, and a stormy wind
shall rend it: Lo when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto you, Where
is the dawbing wherewith ye dawbed it?]

It is a plain and terrible passage, Prove. 24.24. He that says to the wicked,
Thou art Righteous, him shall the people curse; natives shall abhor him,] Such
injustice in a Judge or witnesses is odious, that determine but in order to
temporal rewards on punishments: ( Lev: 19.15. Prove. 18.5. and 28.21.) But in a
messenger that professes to speak to men in the name of God, and in the stead
of Jesus Christ, when the determination has respect to the consciences of men,
and to their endless joy or torment, how odious and horrid a crime must it be
esteemed to persuade the wicked that he is Righteous, or to speak that which
tends to persuade him of it though not in open plain expressions! what
perfidious dealing is this against the Holy God! what an abuse of our Redeemer,
that his pretended messengers shall make him seem to judge clean contrary to
his Holiness, and to his Law, and to the Judgment which indeed he passes and
will pass on all that live and die unsanctified! What vile deceit, and cruelty
against the souls of men, are such Preachers guilty of, that would make them
believe that all is well with them, or that their state is safe or tolerable,
till they must find it otherwise to their woe! when diseased souls have but a
short and limited time allowed them for their cure, that a man shall come to
them, as in the name of their Physician, and tell them that they are pretty
well, and need not make so much ado about the business, and thus keep them from
their only help till it be too late! what shame, what punishment can be too
great for such a wretch? when the neglect and making light of Christ and his
salvation, is the common road to Hell, Heb. 2.3. Matthew. 22.5. and most men
perish because they value not and use not the necessary means of their
recovery; for a man in the name of a minister of the Gospel, to cheat them into
such undervaluings and neglects, as are like to prove their condemnation: what
is this but to play the Minister of Satan, and to do his work, in the name and
garb of a minister of Christ? It is damnable treachery against Christ and
against the peoples souls to hide their misery when it is your office to reveal
it; and to let people deceive themselves in the matters of Salvation, and not
to labor diligently to undeceive them; and to see them live upon presumption
and ungrounded hopes, and not to labor with faithful plainess to acquaint them
with their need of better hopes. But some go further, and more openly act the
part of Satan, by reproaching the most faithful servants of the Lord, and
laboring to bring the people into a conceit that seriousness and carefulness
in the matters of God and our salvation, are but hypocrisy and unnecessary
strictness: And in their company and converse they put so much countenance on
the ungodly, and cast so much secret or open scorn upon those that would live
according to the Scriptures, as hardens multitudes in their impenitency. O
dreadful reckoning to these unfaithful shepherds, when they must answer for the
ruin of their miserable flocks! how great will their damnation be, which must
be aggravated by the damnation of so many others! When the question is, How
come so many souls to perish? the answer must be, Because they ^et light by
Christ and Holiness which should have saved them: But what made them set light
by Christ and Holiness? It was their deceitful confidence that they had so much
part in Christ and holiness, as would suffice to save them, though indeed they
were unsanctified strangers unto both. They were not practically acquainted
with their necessities. But how came they to continue thus ignorant of
themselves till it was too late? Because they had teachers that kept them
strange to the nature of true holiness, and did not labor publicly and
privately to convince them of their undone condition, and to drive them to
Christ that by him they might have life. Woe to such Teachers that ever they
were born, that must then be found under the guilt of such perfidiousness and
cruelty! Had they ever felt themselves, what is it to be pursued by the Law and
conscience, and with broken hearts to cast themselves on Christ as their only
hope and refuge, and what it is to be pardoned, and saved by him from the wrath
of God, and what it is to be sanctified and to be sensible of all his Love,
they would take another course with sinners, and talk of sin, and Christ, and
holiness at other rates, and not deceive their people with themselves.

Direct. 1. My first Direction therefore to you is in order to the knowledge of
your selves, that if it be possible, you will live under a faithful,
soul-searching, skilful Pastor, and that you will make use of his public and
personal help, to bring you and keep you in continual acquaintance with your
selves.

As there is a double use of Physicions; one General, to teach men the common
Principles of Physic, and read them Lectures of the nature of diseases, and
their causes and remedies; and the other particular, to apply these common
precepts to each individual person as they need; So is there a double use of
ministers of the Gospel, One to deliver publicly the common doctrines of
Christianity concerning man's sin and misery, and the remedy, etc. and the other
to help people in the personal application of all this to themselves. And they
that take up only with the former, deprive themselves of half the benefit of
the ministry.

1. In public how skilful and diligent should we be, in opening the hearts of
sinners to themselves! The Pulpit is but our candlestick, from which we should
diffuse the holy Light into all the Assembly: Not speaking the same things of
all that are before us, as if it were our work only to trouble men, or only to
comfort them: but as the same Light will show every man the things which he
beholds in their varieties and differences; (we see by the same sun a man to
be a man, and a beast to be a beast, and a bird to be a bird;) so the same word
of truth which we deliver, must be so discovering and discriminating, as to
manifest the ungodly to be ungodly, and the carnal to be carnal, the worldling
to be a worldling; the hypocrite to be an hypocrite, and the enemies of
holiness to be as they are; and the sincere to be sincere; and the renewed soul
to be indeed renewed. The same light must show the excellency of
sanctification, and the filthiness of sin: the glory of the Image of Christ,
and the deformity of that spiritual death which is its privation. It must show
the Righteous to be more excellent then his neighbor, Prove. 12, 26. and help
men to discern between the righteous and the wicked; between him that serves
God, and him that serves him not, Mal. 3.18. we must not be like the miserable
ungodly preachers, that cannot describe the state of grace with clearness and
feelingly, because they never knew it: or that dare not discover the
unsanctified lest they detect themselves, nor judge them accordidg to their
office, lest they condemn themselves; and that preach to the ungodly as if all
were well with them; and they dare not awaken the consciences of others, lest
they should awaken and affright their own: and therefore are ready to scorn at
all distinguishing preachers, and to take the discovery of regeneration to be
but the boasting of hypocrisy, as if he that would differ from the most, or
did pretend to the special privileges of the Saints, did but as the Pharise,
thank God that he is not like other men; or say, Stand by, I am more holy then
thou: And if these preachers could prove that all men shall be saved that will
but say that they are Christians, they might then have hope of being saved
themselves, without that serious piety which they so distaste. No wonder
therefore i^ they preach in the language of Corah* Numb. 1^.3. Ye take too much
upon you^ seeing all the Congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord
is among them* wherefore then lift you up your selves above the Congregation of
the Lord!] But the Lord says [ If thou take forth the precious from the vile,
thou shall be as my mouth: ^^t them return unto thee, but return not thou unto
them,] Jer. 15.19. If you love not differencing preaching, make no difference
from the true members of Christ by your hypocrisy or ungodly living; be such
as they, and we shall not difference you from them. Read but the first Psalm,
and the fifteenth Psalm, and the third of John, and the eighth to the Romans,
and the first Epistle of John, and then tell me whether the Scripture be not a
differencing word, condemning some, and justifying others, and showing the true
state of the difference betwixt them. What is there no difference between the
heirs of Heaven and Hell? Or is the difference no more then that one ^^th the
name of a Christian, and not the ^her? or that one had the hap to be born ^here
the Gospel was Received, and Chri^^^^nity was the Religion of the Country,
(...) the other the unhappiness to be born ^here it was not known? O no, when
(...) dreadful differencing day is come, men ^^all find that there was another
kind of ^^fference, between the way of Life and (...) death: When many shall
say, Lord, ^^rd, have we not prophesied in thy name, (...) in thy name have
cast out devils, and in (...) name done many wonderful works! (...) whom Christ
will profe^s, I nevor knew (...): Depart from me ye that work iniquity, ^atth.
7.22, 23. When many shall come ^^om the East and W^st, and shall sit down ^^th
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the ^ingdom of heaven; but the children (...) the
Kingdom shall be cast out into ^^ter darkness: there shall be weeping (...)
gnashing of teeth] Matthew. 8.11, 12. ^ha^ a difference will appear between those
^^at now converse together, and sit here in (...) same seats, between whom the
world ^at judges by the ^ut side, discerns but ^^tle or no difference? When
those things ^^all be executed that are written in Matthew. ^, and 2 These. 1. O
what a difference will then appear! when of those that we in the same Church,
the same house, (...) same shop, the same bed, One shall be tak^ and the other
left: and the felicity that (...) hid in the seed of Grace, shall shine (...)
to the astonishment of the world, in (...) fullness of eternal Glory!

I know Preachers are ordinarily (...) that thus difference between the Godly
(...) ungodly; the very names of difference (...) matter of scorn to guilty
souls, because the imply the matter of their terror. I ha^ often noted this with
admiration, in the su^^cess of Christ's own doctrine upon (...) Jews, Luke 4.18,
19, 22. when he had preached the Gospel, as that he had (...) testimony of the
multitude that wonder at the gracious words that proceeded out his mouth, yet
some were cavilling (...) believed not, and v. 25, 26, 27. he sai^ [ I tell you
of a truth, many widows were (...) Israel in the days of Elias, when the Hea^^
was shut up three years, etc. But (...) none of them, was Elias sent save unto
S^^repta a City of Sidon, to a woman that (...) a widow: And many lepers were
in Isra^^ in the time of EIizeus the prophet: (...) none of them was cleansed
saving Naam^^ the Syrian:] But how was this differenc^ (...) doctrine of Christ
entertained, by the (...)? It is said v. 28.29. All they in the ^^agogue when
they heard these things, were ^^lled with wrath, and rose up and thrust (...)
out of the City, and led him to the brow (...) the hill whereon their City was
built, that ^hey might might cast him down headlong] ^ead it and consider, what
moved these ^^en to so much rage against Christ himself or preaching this
doctrine, which restrain^d the fruit of the Gospel to a few; and ^^en you will
not wonder, if those preach^rs that imitate Christ in this, be used no ^etter
then their Master.

But let Ministers know that this is their ^uty, to show every man himself, his
deeds, and state as indeed they are: And let Christians choose and love such
Ministers. Choose not the Glass that makes you fair^st, but which is truest,
and represents you to your selves as God accounts you, whether he do it
with more eloquence or less; with smoother or with rougher language; hear him
if you may, that will best acquaint you with the truth of your condition, and
choose not those that speak not to the heart.

2. And when you have heard the best, the clearest, the most searching
Preacher, do not think that now you can do all the rest of work your selves:
and that you have further need of help: But make use their more particular
personal advic^ not needlessly, but in these follow^^^ cases.

1. In case that after your most dilige^^ self examination, you are yet at
uncertain^^ and doubt, whether you are truly sanctifi^^ or not. The settling of
your states for (...) eternity, and the well-grounding of yo^^ Hopes and
Comforts, is a matter of su^^ unspeakable moment, as that you shou^^ not remain
in careless, negligent unce^^tainty, while God has provided you (...) further
means that may be used for ass^^rance. Yea if you were not troubled wi^^
doubting, yet if you have opportunity (...) opening your Evidences to a
judicio^^ faithful Minister or friend, I think it may (...) worth your labor,
for the Confirmation (...) the peace and comforts which you ha^^ You cannot
make too sure of everlastin^ Happiness.

2. And not only in the first settling (...) your Peace, but also when any
notabl^ assault or dangerous temptation shall af^terward shake it, which you
cannon overcome without assistance, it is seaso^^able to betake your selves to
the Physi^ion.

3. And also in case of any dangerous ^a^se or declining that has brought you
^^to a state of darkness. The sick and ^^unded must have help: They are not
^ufficient for themselves.

4. Also in case of any particular corru^tion, or temptation, your particular
sinful ^nclinations may (caute^ously) be opened to a faithful Guide, that by
his prudent and lively counsel you may be strengthened.

If you say, To what end do Ministers preach to me, and why do I hear them
opening the natures of Grace and of Hypocrisy, if I cannot judge of my self by
the doctrine which they preach? I answer, 1. You may and must judge your selves
by the public common helps, as far as you are able: But a personal applying
help, added unto this, is a further advantage. And humility should teach you,
not to think better of your understandings then there is cause; nor to think
you are so wise as to need but one help, when God has provided you two: or
that you need but the lesser, when he has provided you a greater. And does not
your own experience convince you? Do you not find that after the best publi^^
preaching you are yet in doubt, and at loss about your spiritual state, and
ther^^fore that you have need of further help?

2. I further answer you: There is (...) great a diversity of particular
circumstance in the cases of particular persons, tha^ a great deal of help is
necessary to most, t^ pass a right judgment, when they do un^derstand both the
Law, and the fact. Wi^^ you think it enough that you have the statutes of the
Land, and the Law Books to judge of all your own cases by? Or will you not
think that you have also need o^ the Counsel of the wisest Lawyer (i^ your
weightiest cases) to help you to judge of your cause by the particular
application of the Law to it? So in Physic* who is so foolish, as to think
that by the help of the most learned Book, or approved Receipts he is able to
be his own Physicion, without any more particular advice? You must be long in
studying Law or Physic before you can understand them so well as those that
have made them the study and business of their lives. It is not having or
reading a Book only, or hearing a Lecture of them, that can make you as
understanding as the masters of the Profession; and also to have all passages
at hand that must be observed in the judging of your Cause. So is it in matters
of the soul. When you have heard much, and understand much, you cannot in
modesty think that all the sense of Scripture, about those points, is known as
exactly to you, as to your most judicious Teachers; and that you are as able at
once to see all the passages of the word, and of the fact, as may enable you to
pass so clear a judgment on it. Perhaps you will say, that you know your own
hearts and actions better then they do. I answer, You do so, or should do so,
as to the matter of fact: and it is you that they must know it from: And yet
when you have done, you may not be able to judge of your State by those acts
which you say you know: You must show the Lawyer all your evidences: He cannot
see them, till you show them him: and yet when he sees them, he can judge of
them whether they are good or bad, and of your title by them, better then you
can that have the keeping of them; because he better understands the Law: The
Physicion feels not your pain, nor knows it till you tell it him: And yet
when you have told it him, he knows better then you what it signifies, and
whether it tends, and whether be curable or not, and what must cure it.

But perhaps you will say, that when you have gone to Ministers, and opened
your case to them, they cannot resolve you, but you are still in doubt.

I answer, 1. Perhaps when they have resolved them, yet you would not be
resolved. Have they not told you the truth and you would not believe it? Or
directed you to Remedies which you would not use? They cannot when they have
told you the truth, compel you to believe it; nor when they have told you what
will do the cure, they cannot make you use it if you refuse.

2. And what if the nature of the disease be obstinate, and will not be cured
easily and at once, but with time and diligence and patience? Will you
therefore think the means are vain? Must you at once, or in a short time, be
resolved, and delivered from all your doubts, about your title to eternal life,
or else will you cast off all advice? should you do so by your bodies, you may
know what were like to be the issue: should your children learn thus of their
teachers, they were like to make unhappy Scholars. As you will not have done
with Christ, if he cure you not at once, nor give over praying if you have not
all your desires at once (if you love your selves) So you must not have done
with the Counsel of your Guides, if they satisfy not your doubts at once: As
you cease not hearing them in public, though you have still your doubtings; so
why should you cease advising with them personally upon that account? Use Gods
means, and be thankful, if by degrees they do the care, and prevail at last.

Object. But I find it is God only that can speak peace; and therefore it is
vain to hang on men.

I answer, God speaks by his word and spirit: His word is to be delivered,
expounded, and applied to you by his Ministers: If therefore you will have it
from God, you must not refuse his own appointed ordinary means. The spirit
comfort by the promise: As in Conversion God uses not to do it by the
spirit, without, but in, and by the Ministry of the word; so also in all our
directions, and satisfaction and comfort afterward. As he that will run from
the Ministry of the word, because it is God that must convert, does indeed run
from God, and is not like to be converted: so is it in point of assurance, and
consolation. The Teachers of the Church [are to be accounted of as the
Ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. by whom
the people have believed, 1 Cor. 3.5. not having dominion over their faith, but
being helpers of their joy, 2 Cor. 1.24. who are comforted in all their
tribulations, that they might be able to comfort them that are in any trouble,
by the comfort wherewith they themselves are comforted of God, v. 4. They are
to be faithful and wise stewards, whom the Lord makes Rulers over his household
to give them their portion of meat in due season, Luke 12.42. Thus Christ has
given authority to his servants, and appointed to every man his work, Mark.
13.34. and given Pastors and Teachers to his Church, for the perfecting of the
Saints for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ,
till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the son of
God to a perfect man, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. These therefore being Christ's
officers, and this their appointed work, we must receive so much of Gods
mercies by their hands, as belongs to their office to administer. [ If there
be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to show unto man
his uprightness; then God is gracious unto him, and says, Deliver him from
going down to the pit; I have found a ransom: Job. 33.23, 24.

So that you see it is Gods way to show to man his uprightness, and to speak
peace to souls by his messengers and interpreters that are fitted and
authorized thereto.

Object. But it is but few that are able thus to discuss the case of unsettled
doubting souls, and to give them clear and safe directions, that may save them
both from presumption and despair: In many places the Ministers are senseless
of these things, and unacquainted with the concernments and works of
conscience, and have nothing to say to us, unless to deride us as scrupulous
and precise, and bid us not trouble our heads about such matters, seeing God is
merciful, and Christ dyed for sinners: They will discourse with us long enough
about news, or worldly businesses, or opinions, or controversies; but when we
open to them the state of our souls, and desire their advice for the making our
calling and election sure, they have no sense or savor of such discourse: And
many ministers that are truly Conscientious, are yet so unskilful and so weak
that we have no encouragement to acquaint them with our state.

To this I answer: It cannot be denied but all this is too true; and it is
matter of lamentation, and must send us to God with the old petition which
Christ himself has put into our mouths, Math. 9.37, 38. [ The harvest truly is
plenteous, but the laborers are few: Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest
that he will send forth laborers into his harvest.]

But consider that this is no wonder, or unusual thing: For all this, there is
no nation under heaven that has more able faithful Ministers of Christ, then
are in these Nations. Alas how much of the Church is guided by mere ignorant
Readers! and how much by superstitious deceivers! Did you know the case of the
poor Christians in the Ethiopian, the Greek, and the Roman Churches, you would
bless God that it is so well with us: Even when the Church was in a narrower
room, yet God complained, Jer. 12.10. [ Many Pastors have destroyed my
vineyard: they have trodden my Portion under foot: they have made my pleasant
portion a desolate wilderness: They have made it desolate: and being desolate
it mourns unto me:] And Jer. 23.1, 2. [ Woe be to the Pastors that destroy and
scatter the sheep of my Pasture, says the Lord: therefore thus says the Lord
God of Israel against the Pastors that feed my people: Ye have scatted my flock
and driven them away, and have not visited them: behold I will visit on you the
evil of your doings, says the Lord.] And I will set up shepherds over them
that shall feed them, and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed] Then was
the Church fain to take up this lamentation, Jer. 10.19, 20.21. Woe is me, my
hurt! for my wound is grievous: But I said, Truly this is a grief, and I must
bear it: my tabernacle is spoiled, and all my cords are broken: my children are
gone forth of me, and they are not: there is none to stretch forth my tent any
more, and to set up my curtains: For the Pastors are become brutish, and have
not sought the Lord: therefore they shall not prosper, and all their flocks
shall be scattered.]

But the voice of healing mercy says [Only acknowledge thine iniquity, etc.
Turn O back sliding children, etc. and I will give you Pastors according to my
heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding,] Jer. 3.13, 14,
15.

You see in all other professions (that require not supernatural illumination)
there are but few that attain to excellency: It is but in few that Nature
lays the foundation in, or gives that capacity, to be excellent, which Grace
does elevate and improve.

Take therefore the advice of the ablest you can get: If most Physicions are
weak and ignorant, do not therefore cast off all, nor yet cast your selves upon
one that is like to kill you, because he is your neighbor. I will not persuade
you to go always to the Minister of your Parish, to open the case of your
souls, be he fit or unfit: but to the fittest that you can have access to: The
Papists themselves will give men leave to choose others for their Confessors.
Where there is most of the heavenly illumination, and holy skill in the matters
of the soul; where there is the soundest and exactest judgment, joined with
experience and tender compassion, and faithful plainess, and cautelous
secrecy, there open your hearts if you have opportunity, and take the help of
such faithful counselors to acquaint you with your selves.

Object. But such Ministers being few, and having more of greater work then
they can turn them to, are not to be spoken with (...) often as my necessity
requires help.

Answ. Use then the best that are at leisure; And it is not only Ministers that
you must use, but any other Christian friend, that has such abilities and
qualifications, as fit them to assist you; Whosoever has the Light, refuse not
to come to it; Gods gifts and graces may be helpful to you in a Parent, a
husband, a neighbor, and not only in a Minister.

Quest. But how far may a dark and doubting person take up and rest in the
judgment of a Minister or of others, about the state of his soul, when he is
not satisfied himself?

Answ. This Question is of very great use, and therefore the more carefully to
be resolved; I shall answer it therefore, 1. Negatively, and 2. Affirmatively.

1. No man's judgment of your state is to be taken as absolutely infallible or
divine: nor is man to be believed as God is with a divine belief: when they
tell you, that [ If you are regenerate, you are justified] then they do but
tell you what God has told you, and therefore this is to be taken as of
infallible certainty, not as it is their word, but as it is Gods: so also when
they tell you, that [ if you are unconverted you are not forgiven] But when
they tell you, that [ you are converted or unconverted, pardoned or
unpardoned,] this judgment is not to be taken as infallible or Divine.

2. For the bare matter of fact (whether you Repent or not; whether you had
rather be Holy or unholy, etc.) there is no Minister that can know your Heart
so well as you your selves may know it: except in case when Melancholy or
passion, or a weakness of understanding on one side, or a wilfulness of
presumption on the other side, does make men judge of their own condition quite
contrary to the evidence that appears in their lives to others.

3. It is not safe to rest on the judgment of one that is either an enemy or
stranger to the workings of a careful troubled soul; or of one that is drunk
with any heresy, or fond of any private opinion of his own, and lays out his
zeal to form people into his opinion, as if the life of Religion lay in that:
Nor yet of a weak unskilful man.

4. It is not safe for you to rest much in the judgment of one that knows you
not, and not acquainted (by himself, or by the ^port of others, or some good
evidence) of ^he bent and manner of your lives, but must ^^dge only by the
present expressions of your ^wn mouths.

5. It is not safe for you to rest on the ^^dgement of any one singular person,
when ^^e judgment of most of your judicious ^cquaintance is contrary to it. So
much ^or the Negative,

2. Affirmatively I answer, 1. By a ^^vine faith you are bound to believe all
^^e promises of Scripture that your Pastor ^or any other) shall acquaint you
with.

2. As a Disciple of Christ, you are ^ound to Learn the meaning of those
Pro^ises (and other passages of the Scripture) from your Teachers daily
authorized to ^^struct you: And with such a Humane ^^lief, as a scholar owes
to his Teacher (...) Arts or Sciences, you are bound to Be^lieve your Teachers
concerning the mean^ng of the promises, in cases wherein you (...) unable your
selves to understand the word by its proper light and evidence, as ^ell as
they; and in case you see no evidence of falsehood in their exposition, nor have
any special reason to distrust them. (...) that will believe nothing that his
Teach^^ tells him in order to his own understan^^ing, shall never understand
by Teaching* If you know as much as he already, yo^ need no Teacher: If you do
not, you mu^^ believe him, or else you can never learn (...) him. But this is
not to take him for om^niscient, or infallible in himself, but (...) credit him
as a man.

3. You are bound, when he judges (...) your particular case, upon your
opening t^ him the matter of fact, to allow him so much credit as is due to the
proportion of his un^derstanding. You tell him how you fe^^ your hearts
affected, and what the actions (...) your lives have been; when you have tol^
it him, he judges by Gods word, whethe^ this be a state of saving grace which
yo^ describe, or not; if upon much stronger parts or longer study, and more
experience, h^ know more of the meaning of the word and of the nature of grace,
and so be able to judge then you, modesty requires tha^ you do in that measure
submit your understanding unto his, and believe him according to the measure of
his skill, upon supposition that you deceive him not in your information. Even
as you will believe a^ ^awyer about your Title to your lands, ^hen you have
showed him your evidence; (...) a Physicion about your disease, when ^ou have
told him what you feel (as I said before.)

4. You are bound to add also all that credit that his Honesty and fidelity
requires, if ^e be a godly man, unwilling to deceive ^ou.

5. And you are bound to add so much ^elief as in the case is due to a stander
by that is out of the dust, and is not blinded by self-love, or partiality, or
passions, or any ^^lfish byas, as most men are to themselves.

6. If you are darkened by melancholy, ^r any other weakening distemper, that
makes you incapable of judging for your selves, you are bound to allow another
so much credit, as the advantage of his sounder understanding, and more
composed judgment does require. If every Child, or sick person will believe no
body that does not say as they, their self-conceitedness and their distrust of
others will be their wrong.

7. In the manner of reception, you are bound to do all this with such a
submission as belongs to an officer of Christ: Not that you are to believe
any falsehood, that he brings you, and fathereth upon Christ nor to put out
your own eyes, and see wit^ his: But to learn of him to understan^ your selves,
and receive what he bringet^ you according to his office: As a child (...)
bound to submit to any Tutor or Teache^ that the Parents shall set over him.
The same truth must be received as from a doubl^ obligation, when besides it
proper evidenc^ it is delivered by a messenger of Christ.

8. You may yet more boldly and confidently give credit to the judgment of
suc^ a Minister of Christ, when he not singular but speaks according to the
concurren^^ judgment of the generality of able experienced men Modesty will
forbid you to thin^ your selves wiser then all the able Minister^ about you.

9. You have the less reason to suspect hi^ judgment, when you may be sure
that he i^ not perverted by any self-interest, or self-respect, and bawketh not
the truth for fea^ of displeasing you, or bringing any discredi^ or suffering
on himself.

10. Lastly, when all these things concur you may with the greater confidence
res^ upon his Judgment. And though still he i^ but an imperfect man, and no
absolute certainty of your estate can be had from his bare judgment (though
from his doctrine and the Effects and Signs there may,) yet such a Judgment,
should weigh very much with you, to the raising of fear and care in the
ungodly, and for the quieting of a troubled soul.

Let us a little now apply this Direction to both parties. Beloved Hearers, if
any of you can look before you to eternity, and do not with awakened thoughts
conclude, that all probable means should be used in time, to make sure of your
final Justification at the dreadful day of God, that man wants either the faith
of a Christian, or the feeling of a considerate man. Are you all desirous to be
sure before hand, what sentence shall pass upon you then, or are you not? If
you are, come on, and let me make a motion that you cannot reasonably refuse:
The business is of unspeakable consequence: To be deceived, may be to be undone
for ever: Will you advise with those that God has appointed to give you advice
in so great a case? Well then! will you go and faithfully open your state
(supposing you have the need before expressed) to some able faithful Minister
of Christ? Not to an ignorant, or a carnal, unexperienced man; but unto once
that is skilled in spiritual affairs, and that will be faithful to you, and
deal with that serious gravity and reverence as beseems him that is helping to
prepare a sou^ for the bar of Christ: Will you (if you never did it) tell him,
whether ever you were convinced of your sin and misery; and whether ever you
saw the need of Christ? and whether you have loathed your selves for your
iniquities? and fle^ to Christ as your only refuge from the wrath of God? and
have turned away with resolution from your former ungodly careless life? and
have changed your company, your business, and your delights? Whether you make
it your chief business to please God, and to save your souls? and resolve to
take up with the hopes of Heaven as your only portion,, and not to hazard it,
for any wordly interest, or fleshly pleasure whatsoever? whether in your eyes a
vile person be contemned, but you love and honor them that fear the Lord? Tell
these and other such particulars of your state to your faithful Pastors; Answer
them to these, and such like questions, and then take their judgment (with the
cautions before expressed) of your spiritual state. Hear what they will tell
you of it. Might not this course convince thee of thy miserable state, that
never had any such evidences as these to show! and might it not awaken thee
in time, to bethink thee of a safer course! Go to any faithful Minister in the
world and tell him the plain truth, that yet thou art a secret fornicator or
drunkard, or pot companion, or flesh-pleaser in some sensual way; or if thou
sinnest not so grossly, that yet thou art a formal hypocrite, and have a secret
enmity to those that are most seriously Religious, and live the most heavenly
lives, and that thou art thy self a stranger to all the foresaid passages of
sanctification; and I dare assure thee that he will tell thee if thou art thus
indeed thou art in the gall of bitterness and the bond of iniquity, and must be
speedily renewed and sanctified and justified, or thou art undone for ever. I
tell thee, there is not a man that is worthy the name of a Minister in all the
world, but will pass this judgment on the condition of thy soul. And yet will thou bear it our with a senseless heart, a seared conscience, and a brazen
face, and still live as carelessly as if all were well with thee* what is thy
soul of no more worth? Is it so small a matter with thee what becomes of thee?
Or is the judgment of able faithful Ministers in the way of their own office,
of no more regard with thee? What not when all the foresaid requisites concur!
They show thee the plain word of God against thee; and that his Threatening
contains the vertual sentence of thy condemnation; They are by office the
Interpreters of the Law of God to you; It has been the study of their lives:
The matters in question are such as they have had experience of in themselves
and others: They have judged as hardly of themselves and of their own case, as
now they do of yours when theirs was the same as yours is now. Do they
pronounce you miserable as being strangers to the spirit of Christ? So they did
by themselves when they saw their sin: and therefore they are impartial: They
have had before them multitudes, (alas too many) in your case: And you will
regard the judgment of a Physicion that has had many hundreds in hand that
had the same disease as you. They are men that are not willing to deceive you.
They deny themselves in telling you of your danger: They know that smoother
words would please you better: And they have natures that desire men's love and
favor, rather then displeasure and ill will. They are more impartial then you
are, and have not your self-interest and passion to blind them: They are not
abused in their judgment by the temptations of evil company, or of worldly
fleshly things as you are; For these temptations more hinder us from judging
our selves then other men. They are the messengers of Christ appointed to give
to each their portion: and should not their judgment be regarded in the
business committed to their trust? And it is not one man or two, or a hundred
only, that are of this mind: Open thy case to all the judicious faithful
Ministers in the land, or in the world, and open it truly, and they will all
tell thee that if thou die without converting sanctifying grace, thou art lost
for ever; and that all the world cannot save thee from the everlasting wrath of
God. Try as many of them as you will, and see if all of them tell you not the
same thing. And is all this nothing to thee, presumptuous sinner, that in the
judgment of all the most able faithful Minsters of Christ, thy soul should be
in a state of death? Art thou wiser then all the best and wisest, in the
matters of their own profession? If all the Physicions in the country should
tell thee, that thou have a disease that will certainly be thy death, unless
thou take some ene effectual medicine in time, I think thou would not sl^ght
their judgment, and say, They are too censorious, that thou know thy
condition better then they! I think it would affright thee to seek after the
remedy. And why should not the judgment of the faithful Ministers, about the
state of thy soul, be so far regarded, as to awaken thee to a more careful
enquiry, and stir up a preventing and remedying fear? If the judgment of
Christ's officers be not regardable, then there is no matter of terror in
excommunication; nor no matter of comfort in Minist^rial Absolution.

O the madness of a hardened sinner! that when he shows by the fruits of an
ungodly life that he is a stranger to sanctification, and lives in the sins
which the Scripture threatens damnation to, and has no evidence of true
conversion to show, will yet be confident of pardon and salvation, let God and
all his Ministers say what they will against it^^ and will rather be offended
with h^s spiritual Physicions, for telling him of the danger of his state, and
rail at them as if they did him wrong, then he will see his danger and prevent
his misery! Let such a one hear the word of God, if he have ears to hear,
Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20, 21: [ Lest there should be among you a root that bears gall
wormwood, and it come to pass when he hears the words of this curse, that he
bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst: The Lord will not spare
him, but then the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that
man, and all the curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and
the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven, and the Lord shall separate
him to evil, etc.]

And on the other side, Is there any soul among you that in doubts, and
trouble, has opened his case to the faithful Ministers of Christ, and their
judgment is, that your state is safe? Is this the judgment, not only of the
weakest, but the wisest; not only of strangers, but of those that know you
best; not only of one, or two, but of all or most of the judicious Ministers,
that ever you opened you case to? even of the most honest and impartial, that
would not flatter you nor deceive you? Yea and perhaps, when desertions, or
Melancholy, or passion, or ignorance do make you unmeet to judge of your
selves: And does all this seem nothing to you? or a small matter? It is not
nothing: It is not small: I confess it is no ground of certainty: They are but
men: It is a humane testimony: But yet it is a testimony, that may weigh down
many of your own surmises, and take off much of your distressing fears; and may
give much ease to troubled souls, while they are seeking after surer knowledge:
It is a ground of comfort, not to be despised, or made light of: Till you can
come to see your evidences your selves, and to be acquainted with the
indwelling spirit as your witness, you may much quiet your minds, and take much
comfort, in this judgment and witness of the servants of the Lord, that have a
spirit of discerning* and have that grace which acquainteth them with the
nature of grace in others, and that have been long exercised in the discerning
of men's states: It is possible an Hypocrite (especially one that wilfully
gives them a false relation of himself) may deceive them: but it is Probable
that it is not one of many they are deceived in, when they know or have a good
description of the Person. If in a Law suit all the ablest Lawyers tell you
that your cause is good; it is possible they may be deceived, but it is not
likely; If in a Fever all the ablest Physicions tell you, the danger is past,
it is possible yet that they may be all deceived: But yet I think you would
take some comfort in such a testimony; so should you here: Though the Judgment
of Ministers be not infallible, it may be much better then your own, though
about your selves: and it may be set against the jealousies and fears of a
disquiet soul, and against abundance of the molesting suggestions of the
accuser.

I do not by all this draw you to lay too much on man; I advance them not too
high, and make them not Lords of your faith, but helpers of your Joy. I draw
you not to any deceitful course; nor into any way of danger to your souls. I
bid you not fully and finally rest in the judgment of man: I bid you not
neglect any means to come to fuller knowledge, and certainty of your own
sincerity: I bid you not forbear any means that tend to the getting of true
grace: If you have it and know it not, the same means (for the most part) may
increase it, which you use to get it: And if you have it not, when it is
thought you have it, the means may work it, that that are intended to increase
it. Do all that you can to Repent, Believe, and Love God, and Live to him,
whether you ever did these before, or not: But yet let the judgment of your
faithful Pastors, the officers and experienced servants of the Lord, keep of
despondency and despair that would disable you from the use of means, and would
weaken your hands, and make you sit down in unprofitable complaints, and give
up all as hopeless. Let their judgment quiet you in the way of duty; Lean on
them in the dark, till you come into the light. Yea be glad that you have so
much encouragement and hope, from those that are by Christ appointed to
subserve the spirit in the comforting as well as the sanctifying work, and to
show to man his uprightness, and to say to the Righteous, It shall be well with
him, Isa. 3.10. I tell you, all the wealth of the world, is not worth even this
much ground of comfort: Live upon this much, till by diligent attendance and
waiting on the spirit of grace and comfort, you can get higher.

2. THE second extrinsical Hinderance of self-knowledge, is, Prosperity and the
Flattery that usually attends it. The one disposes men to be deceived, and
the other puts the hood over their eyes, and tells them the falsehoods which
deceive them.

When men prosper in the world, their ^inds are lifted up with their estates;
and ^hey can hardly believe that they are in^eed so ill while they feel
themselves so ^ell; and that so much misery is joined with ^o much content and
pleasure. They cannot ^aste the bitterness of their sin, and Gods displeasure,
while the sweetness of worldly de^^ghts and honors is in their mouths. The
Rich ^an in Luke 16. its like would have given (...) man but an unwelcome
entertainment, that had come to tell him that within a few days or years he
should lie in hell, and not ^e able to get a drop of water to cool his ^ongue!
What need we doubt of that, when his five Brethren that he left on earth behind
him, would not be persuaded (to know their danger of those flames, and to use
the necessary means to escape them) though one had come to them from the dead!
Luke 16.31. You plead against their feeling, when you tell them of their
misery, when they feel prosperity: Their fleshly appetite and sense, which is
in them the reigning faculty, does tell them they are well and happy: and that
which must confute this, and tell them they are miserable, must be an inward
sense of the sin and diseases of their souls, and a foreseeing Faith that must
look before the^ unto eternity, and fetch its proofs from the word of God, and
fetch its motive from another world: And alas, they have no such inward sense,
nor no such Faith (...) can prevail against their their sensual feel^ing. And
therefore it is a matter of lamen^table difficulty to make a prospering sinne^
well acquainted with his misery. He (...) drunken with fleshly pleasures and
con^tentments: And when the drink is in a man's head, you can hardly make him
sensi^ble of his misery, though he be a beggar or a prisoner, or were to die
within a week* The Devil is therefore willing to reach hi^ servants as full a
cup of prosperity as h^ can, that their drunkenness may keep them from the true
use of their reason; For if they once come to themselves, they will come home
to God. When misery brought the Prodigal to himself, he resolves presently of
going to his Father, Luke 15. The bustle of his worldly business, and the
chattering vain discourse, that is in his ears, and the mirth and sport that
takes him up, will not allow him so much of reason as seriously to consider of
his souls condition. Alas, when poor men, that must labor all day for food,
and ^ayment, can find some time for serious converse with God and with their
Consciences; the Great ones of the world have ^o such leisure: How many are
going ^pace toward Hell, and say they cannot ^ave while to bethink themselves
what ^ay they are in, or whether it is that they are going! That which they
have all their time for, they have no time for, because they have no hearts for
it. Prosperity does so please their flesh, that they can give no heed to
conscience or to reason: It does so charm their minds, and enslave their wills
to sense and appetite, that they cannot abide to be so Melancholy is to prepare
for death and judgment, or to consider seriously how this will relish with
them at the end: nor scare to remember that they are men, that should rule
their senses, and be ruled by God, and that have another life to live.

And as Prosperity in it self is so great a Hinderance to the knowledge of your
selves, so Flatterers that are the flies of summer, are always ready to blow
upon the prosperous, and increase the danger. What miserable men are extolled
as wise and virtuous and Religious, if they be but Rich and Great! Their vices
are masked, or extenuated, and made but little human frailties: Though they
were swinish glut^tons or drunkards, or filthy fornicator^ or mere
flesh-pleasing sensual bruits, tha^ waste most of their lives in ease and
sports and eating and drinking and such delights yet with their flatterers all
these shall g^ for prudent, pious, worthy persons, if they can but seek when
they have done, to mock God and their consciences with some lip-service and
lifeless carcass of Religion* O happy men if God would judge of them as their
flatterers do; and would make a^ small a matter of their wickedness, and as
great a matter of their outside Hypocritical heartless worship! But they must
be greater then men or Angels, and higher then either earth or Heaven, before
God will flatter them. When they can make him afraid of their high looks or
threatenings, or when they can him put in Hope of rising by their preferment,
then they may look that he should comply with their parasites, and complement
with his enemies, and justify the ungodly; but not till then. O did they
consider, how little flattery does secure them, and how little the Judge of all
the world regards their worldly pomp and splendour, yea how greatly their
greatness does aggravate their sin and ^isery, they would frown their
flatterers out ^f doors, and call for plain and faithful deal^^s. Of all the
miseries of worldly greatness, ^^is is not the least, that usually such want
^^e necessary blessing of a glass that will ^^uly show them their faces; of a
friend at ^and that will deal plainly, and justly with their souls. Who tells
them plainly of the odiousness, and bitter fruits of sin? and of the wrath of
God and endless misery? How few such true and faithful friends have they? and
what wonder! when it is a carnal inducement that draws men to follow them: It
it is their wealth and honor, and their power to do men good or hurt in
outward things, that makes their friends: They are attended by these flies and
wasps, because they carry the honeypot which they love: And God says to his
followers, Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world: If any man
Love the world, the Love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. And it is
for Love of worldly things (even the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye,
and pride of life, etc. which are not of the Father, but of the world, 1 John
2.16.) it is for these that great men have their friends and followers for the
most part: And therefore it is plain that the worst sort of men are ordinaril^
their friends; For those are the wor^^ men, that have not the Love of the
Father in them, but are the friends of the world and therefore the enemies of
God, Jam^ 4.4. And the best, though fit to be their truest friends, are seldom
their followers as knowing that the attractive of the sensual world, is a
shadow unfit to deceiv^ those that are acquainted with its vanity^ and a snare
unfit to take those that have observed how Satan lays and baits the trap^ and
how they have sped that have been taken in it. A despised Christ that has the
words of eternal life, is much more followed by men that have the heavenly
relish. Such gracious souls whose appetites are not corrupted by the creature
and their sicknesses, have more mind to flock after a spiritual and powerful
messenger of Christ, that talks to them of his Kingdom and the Righteousness
thereof, which they first seek, then to gape after the preferment and vain
glory of prosperity. Christ that despised the offer of all the Kingdoms and
Glory of the world, ( Mat 4.8, 9.) does teach his followers to despise them.

Seeing then the ordinary attendants of (...) prosperous, are the worst of men,
that (...) themselves, and are purveying for the ^^sh, what wonder if they be
flatterers, that have neither skill nor will to speak ^^at unpleasing language
of reproof, that should make the prosperous know themselves! Oh how seldom (or
never) do they hear, that the poor can hear from every mouth! ^f a man of low
degree be wicked, or offend, its enemy dare tell him of it, and his friend dare
tell him of it, and his angry neighbor ^ companion will be sure to tell him of
it, and they dare tell him frequently till he amend, and tell him plainly, and
set it home: But if great ones be as bad, and ^^ed more help, as having more
temptation, yet alas they may sin, and sin again and perish, for any body that
will deal faithfully with their souls; except some faithful Minister of Christ,
whose plainess is taken but for a thing of course. And usually even Ministers
themselves, are some of them so unfaithful, and some so fearful, and some so
prudently cautelous, that such persons have no such help from them to know
themselves, as the poorer sort of people have. If we deal freely with them, and
set it home, it will be well taken; if it offend, yet offense may easily be
born as bringing no ill consequents to our Ministry: but if we deal so with
the great one^ of the world, what outcries would it raise* and by what names
should we and ou^ preaching be called! If it were not for fea^ lest some
malicious hearers would misunderstand me, and misapply my words, a^ spoken of
those that we are bound to honor, and as tending to diminish the reputation of
any of our superiors (which (...) detest) I should have showed you all this in
Scripture instances. When Haman could not bear the omission one man's obeisance,
what wonder if such cannot bear to be spoken to, as indeed they are! Not only
an Ahab hates one faithful plain Michaiah, because he prophesies not good of
him but evil, (1 King. 22.8.) but Asa that destroyed Idolatry, can imprison the
Prophet that reproves him for his sin, 2 Chronicles. 16.10. I will not tell you of
the words that were spoken to Amos by the Priest of Bethel, Amos 7.10, 11, 12,
13. or to the Prophet. 2 Chronicles. 25.15, 16. lest malice mis-interpret and
mis-report me; For it is none of my intent to fix on any particular persons,
but to tell you in general, the lamentable disadvantage that the great and
prosperous have as to the knowledge of themselves: how little plain dealing
they have, and how hardly most of them can bear it: though yet I doubt not but
it is born and loved by those that have true grace: and that if David sin, he
can endure to hear from Nathan [Thou art the man] and this shall befall thee;
and an Eli can bear the prophecy of Samuel and say. It is the Lord, let him do
what seems him good, 1 Samuel 2.27. and 3.17, 18. and an Hezekiah can say, Good
is the word of the Lord which thou have spoken, 2 King. 20.19. and Josiah can
bear the threatenings of Huldah. 2 Chronicles. 34. and 2 King. 22. And it is a double
honor in persons that have so great temptations, to love the plain discoveries
of their sin: But a Joash will slay even Zechariah the son of Jehoiadah that
set him up: and a Herod, that has so much religion as to [ fear John, as
knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and to observe (or save him) and
when he heard him to do many things and hear him gladly, had yet so much love
to his fleshly lust, and so little power to resist a flatterer, as that he
could sell both the head of John and his own soul, for so pitiful a price as
this, Mar. 6.20, 25, 27, 28. So true is that of Christ himself, Joh. 3.20, 21.
For every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the light
lest his deeds should be reproved (or discovered) But he that does truth,
comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought
in God.

And indeed there is none that more opposes Micaiah then Zedekiah; as being
concerned for the honor of his flattering prophecy, to bring plain dealing
into disgrace. It is he that smites him and says, which way went the spirit
of the Lord from me, to speak unto thee, 1 King. 22.24. As Plutarch compares
the flaterer to a painter, that having made a picture of Cocks which was very
bad, he bid his boys be sure to keep the living Cocks out of sight, lest their
appearance should show the faultiness of his picture: so says Plutarch does
the flatterer do what he can to keep away plain-dealing faithful friends, lest
his fraud and falsehood should be detected by them: But says Solomon, Prove.
28.23. He that rebukes a man, afterward shall find more favor then he that
flattereth with the tongue. And Prove. 27.6. Faithful are the wounds of a
friend: but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful. When prosperity is vanished,
the flatterer and the faithful dealer will be better known. Deceitful
prosperity, and deceitful men, will at once forsake you. None of them will
admire or applaud you when you are low, and the tide is gone, and has left you
in contempt: These kind of men will be as ready as any to reproach you; As
Shimei that honored David in his prosperity; but curses him and revileth him
as a Rebel against Saul, and casts stones at him, when he saw him flying in
distress. Plutarch likeneth flatterers to lice, that forsake the bodies of the
dead, because the blood is gone that did maintain them. Commonly men in misery
or at death, have better thoughts of faithful plainess, and worse of smoothing
man-pleasers, then before.

But whom can the prosperous blame so much as themselves, if they are undone by
the deceit of flatterers? It is their own choice: They love to have it so: They
will not endure faithful dealing. When they contract those diseases which will
not be cured without bitter medicines, they hate the Physicion that offers
them: Their appetites and sensual lust, and not their Believing-Reason, does
choose their work, their pleasures and their company, and prescribe what
language must be spoken to them. And he that resolves to cast away the remedy,
and will please his appetite and fancy, come on it what will, must take what
he gets by it, and bear the endless wrath of God, that could not bear the
necessary warnings and self-knowledge that should have prevented it; Did these
men hate sin and the messengers of Satan, they would not hate the Justice and
messengers of God. But while they damnably Love fleshly pleasures, they cannot
savingly Love the word that charge them to let go those pleasures; nor the
persons that cross them in the things they love. And thus poor worldlings are
ruined by their own desires: It seems so sweet to them to live in sin, that
they cannot endure to know the bitter fruits of misery, which it will at last
bring forth: They are conquered by their fleshly lusts; and therefore they hate
the messengers of that spirit, which would fight against them. Satan does
perfect his former victories in them, by dispelling or dispersing the
auxiliaries of Christ, that were sent for their rescue and relief. They live as
if they were purposely made great, that they may be able to drive away the
messengers of salvation, and to keep the voice of mercy far enough from their
ears: and to command that which the Gaderenes did entreat, that Christ would go
out of their coasts, Mark. 5.17. because they would not be troubled with him:
They so much love the way to Hell, that they cannot abide to be told whither it
leads them; and therefore they come thither before they are aware; and must
know themselves by the unquenchable fire, because they would not know
themselves by the discovering recovering Light. And thus by Prosperity and
flattery, Satan pursues and wins his game.

Dir. 2. IN opposition to this Hinderance, two things are to be done. 1. Desire
not so perilous a station as worldly Prosperity and greatness is. Love not and
seek not a condition so hazardous to your souls. Leave that to them that take
it for their Portion, as not believing what they must lose and suffer by it: or
what God has revealed of the life to come.

Or if you be in such Prosperity, not by your Desire, but by the will and
Providence of God, let your fear and watchfulness be doubled, as your dangers
are: Be not like those sensualists, Jud. 12. that feed themselves without fear.
Use not prosperity to the pleasing of the flesh, and the prospering of your
lusts: but deny your your selves in the midst of your abundance: and turn it
into an adversity to your sensual inclinations, by taming the body and bringing
it into subjection, and suspecting your selves, and walking humbly with God and
man.

And when Adversity is upon you, improve the opportunity for the knowledge of
your selves. Then take a just survey of your former course of life. Then try
your ways, when the drunkeness and deceits of prosperity are past, and the hand
of God has brought you into a sober and considerate state. O how many souls do
know that in one day, when adversity has made them wise and sensible, which
before they knew and would not know; they saw it, but did not understand and
feel it! Then on a sudden they are able to pass a righter judgment, upon their
yielding to temptations, and the value of the things that tempted them, and
upon their worldly designs, and fleshly wisdom, and their neglects of God and
Heaven and duty, then before they could do, though they had never so much
instruction, and though they could speak the same words of sin as now.
Affliction takes away the deceiving advantages of fleshly objects, and
unmasketh the glory and profit of the world, and awakeneth the rational
faculties to perform their office; and therefore is an excellent opportunity
for self-acquaintance. The prodigal came to himself when he was denied to fill
his belly with the food of swine, Luke 15.16, 17. Nature teaches men to
understand that it is the principal Lesson that Affliction reads to us, To
know our selves, and our ways, as they are related to God and to his judgment.

2. If you are in Prosperity, be the more suspicious of flatterers, and drive
them away with the greater detestation: Be more careful to keep them from you,
then to keep your bodies clean from vermin. And be the more solicitous to
procure such faithful Overseers and Physicions for your souls, as will do their
best to save you, though they displease you. O that you knew what an advantage
it is to have a faithful Pastor, and a faithful Friend, that seek not yours but
(...), and make no advantage to themselves by flattering you, but choose the
means that tend most to your salvation! And O that you knew the great
disadvantage of those that want such a Pastor and such a friend! You would then
be sure to give it as your strictest charge to both, to deal plainly with you,
and never to hide or extenuate your sin or danger. You would charge your
Teachers, [What ever you do, deal faithfully with my soul! If you see me in any
dangerous course, I beseech you tell me of it: If I should be hardened against
your warnings and reproofs, I beseech you deal not lightly with me, but labor
to awaken me, and set it home, and pull me out of the fire, and save me as with
fear; Jud. 23.] O suffer me not to be quiet in my sins. The like charge also
you would give to your friends that are about you, and converse with you;
choose such Pastors, and choose such friends as are fittest, thus to prove your
friends indeed: And charge them and entreat them, as they love your souls, and
as they will answer it before God, that they suffer you not to sin for fear of
displeasing you by plain reproofs: and resolve to submit and take it well. A
stander by has the great advantage of impartiality; and therefore may see that
in you which you observe not in your selves: an object too near the eye, or too
far off, is not well discerned: self-love does not hinder us so much in judging
of other men's cases as our own. Friendly and faithful dealing in the matters of
eternal consequence, is the principal use and benefit of friend-ship. This
differenceth the communion of Saints from Beelzebubs swarm of flies and
caterpillars. Thus two are better then one: For if they fall, the^ one will
lift up his fellow: But woe to him that is alone when he falls, for he has
not another to help him up, Eccles. 4.9, 10. Much more woe to him that has a
multitude to cast him and to keep him down.

Hind. 3. THE third extrinsecal Impediment to self-knowledge, is, Conversing
only with such as are as bad as our selves; and not with such whose lives
display the spiritual endowment, and excellencies which we want. Among the
Ethiopians, it seems no deformity to be Black: Seneca says, that no man is
to be upbraided with that which is vitium humani generis, the common fault of
all the world, or of the country where he lives: for this were but to upbraid
him that he is a man, or that he was born in such a time or place: Though
Christians that know better the common disease, do know that there must be
common humiliation and remedy; yet these indeed are the thoughts of most: They
know not that it is a matter of dishonor and lamentation, to be no better then
the most, and to lie in the common corruptions of the world, and to have no
better hearts then they had by Nature. To hear preachers talk of [ Holiness,
and a Divine Nature, and a new birth, and of being made new Creatures, and of
living in the Love of God, and in the joyful Hopes of endless Glory] does seem
to them but as the talk of a world in the sun, or the description of an Angel,
which humbles not them at all, for not being such, nor exciteth in them any
great desires to be such: As long as they see not the persons that are such,
they think these are but devout imaginations, or the pious dreams of melancholy
men; and that indeed there are no such persons in the world: or if there be,
that they are but as the Papists Saints, here and there one to be admired and
canonized, and not upon pain of damnation to be imitated. They judge of all the
world, or almost all, by those about them; And they think that God should be
unmerciful if he should condemn so great a number as they see are like
themselves; and should save none but those few transcendent souls, that they
are described, but hear unacquainted with.

It sometimes melts my heart, in pity of many Great ones of the world, to
think how hard a matter it is for them to know indeed what Holiness is; when
they seldom hear so much as one Heavenly prayer or Discourse, or any serious
talk of the matters of Sanctification, and communion with Christ! When
profaneness and inhumane wickedness dwell about them, and make such as are but
civil and temperate, and good-natured persons to seem Saints: When they see but
few that fear the Lord, and Love him unfeignedly, and live by faith: and those
few are perhaps of the more cold, and timorous, and temporizing Strain, that
show forth but little of the Heavenly nature, and the virtues of their holy
faith; that dare scarce open their mouths to speak against the wickedness which
they see or hear: that dare not discourse like the Saints of the most High, and
the heirs of Heaven, for fear of being made the scorn and byword of the rest,
or of falling under the frowns and dislike of their superiors; so that they
live among others almost like common men, save only that they run not with them
to their excess of riot; and think it enough that by such forbearance of gross
sin, they are in some measure evil spoken of: When they that should let their
light so shine before men, that they might see their good works, and glorify
their heavenly Father, (Matthew. 5.15.16.) do hide their Religion, and put their
Light as under a bushel, and not in a Candlestick, that it might give light to
all that are in the house; and so when Religion never appears in its proper
splendour and power, and heavenly tendencie, to those Great ones that have no
better company; what wonder if they never know themselves, nor truly understand
the nature, necessity or excellency of Religion? When they know it, for the
most part, but by heresay* yea and when they hear it more reproached then
applauded, it must be a miracle of mercy that must make such men to be
sincerely and heartily Religious. When they see so many about them worse then
themselves, and so sew better, and those few that are better do hide it and
live almost as if they were no better; and when the godly whom they see not,
are described to them by the Serpents seed, as if they were but a company of
whining melancholy brainsick hypocrites; who can expect that ever such men
should savingly know themselves or Christ, unless a wonder of mercy rescue
them, and bring them from this darkness and delusion into the light? O how often
have I wished in compassion to many of the Great ones of the world, that they
had but the company which we that are their inferiors have! that they did but
hear the humble, holy heavenly language, that we have heard? and hear the
faithful fervent prayers, that many poor Christians pour out before the Lord!
and saw but the humble, harmless, exemplary and heavenly lives, of many poor
Christians, that are represented to them as the filth and the offscouring of
the world, and perhaps no more regarded then Lazarus was at the Rich man's gate,
Luke 16. Did they but see and hear and know such holy and heavenly Believers,
and were as well acquainted with them as we are, how many of them would better
know themselves, and see what they want, and what they must be, and better
discern between the righteous and the wicked, between those that fear God, and
that fear him not! Mal. 3.18.

Dir. 3. IT will therefore be a great help to the Knowledge of your selves, if
you will converse with those that bear the Holy Image of their Creator, (Col.
3.10.) and whose lives will tell you what it is to live by faith, and what it
is to walk in the spirit, to mortify the flesh, and to live above all the
alluring vanities of the world. We can more sensibly perceive the nature of
holiness, when we see it in action before our eyes, than when we only read a
description of it. Who could have known what Life is, or what Reason is, by
bare reading or hearing their descriptions, if he knew them not in himself and
others, by another kind of demonstration! Many thousands can honor the name of
a Saint and the Scripture description of a Saint, that hate the life of
holiness, when it appears to them in practice, and cannot endure a Saint
indeed. It will most convincingly tell you what you want, when you see what
others have. To see how naturally they breath after heaven, will most
convincingly show you the dullness and earthliness of your minds: To see how
easily they can love an enemy, and forgive a wrong, will acquaint you most
sensibly with the ulcers of your passionate revenge^ul minds. Do but lay by
your prejudice and partiality, and see whether there be not in serious
Christians another spirit then in the world? and whether they live not upon the
things above, which your belief and love did never reach? Look upon believers,
and consider why they pray, and watch and study to please God, and then bethink
your selves whether you have not ^s much cause to do so as they: and so you may
perceive your negligence by their diligence, your senselesness by their
tenderness of heart and conscience; your fleshliness by their spirituality, and
the rest of your sins by the luster of their graces. Says Gregory [ Qui
plenissime intelligere appetit qualis sit, tales debet aspicere qualis non est;
^t in bonorum forma metiatur quantur ipse deformis est.] that is [ He that
would fully understand what he is, must look on such as are better then
himself: that in the comeliness of the good he may take the measure of his own
deformity.] As Isidore says [Minus homo seipsum ex seipso considerat] Men know
not themseves by themselves alone.

Hence therefore the servants of God may see how exactly they should live, and
of what consequence it is that they be eminently holy! when it is they that by
their heavenly excellency must convince the world of their sinfulness and
misery. O Christians, do you live such exemplary and convincing lives? Is there
indeed that excellency of Holiness appearing in you, which may show men, to the
glory of your Redeemer, how the heirs of heaven do differ from the world? Alas,
our common careless living does wrong to multitudes as well as to ourselves;
and is a cruelty to the souls whose salvation we are bound by our examples to
promote. What then do those men that by their vicious scandalous conversation,
do harden the ungodly, and cause them to think contemptuously, and to speak
scornfully of the holy way! O woe to them, if they repent not, by whom such
offense comes.

Especially Ministers should see that their lives be a continual Lecture; As
Hierome says [ Episcopi domus and conversatio quasi in speculo posita,
Magistra est publicae disciplina: quicquid f^cerit, id sibi omnes faciendum
putant.] That is, [ The house and conversation of a Bishop, is set as in a
glass (or to be beheld) as the teacher of public discipline: All think they
should do whatever he does.] And therefore Chrysostom concludes [ that a
Priest that is bad, does acquire by his priesthood, not dignity but disgrace:
For (says he) thou fittest in judgment on thy self: If thou live well and
preach well, thou instructest the people: If thou preach well and live ill,
thou condemnest thy self. For by living well and preaching well, thou
instructest the people how to live: But by preaching well and living ill, thou
instructest God as it were how to condemn thee.]

And hence it is also that the servants of God should have a care of their
fame, as well as of their conversation, because the reputation of religion
depends much on the reputation of the religious: and reputation does much to
the encouraging or discouraging of the ungodly that are strangers to the things
themselves. Says Augustine, [Conscientia necessaria est tibi, fama proximo
tuo: Qui famam ancupans negligit conscientiam, hypocrita est: Qui confi^ens
conscientiae negligit famam, crudelis est] that is, [ Conscience is necessary
for thy self: and thy good name is necessary for thy neighbor.] He that
hunteth after fame and neglects conscience, is an hypocrite: And he that so
trusts to a good conscience as to neglect his good name, is cruel (to others)
When we mind our fame for the good of others, and the service of God, and not
to please a proud vainglorios mind, and when we do it without immoderate care,
seeking it only by righteous means, and referring the issue to the will of God,
as being prepared for evil report as well as good, this is but to improve our
talent to our masters use.

II. I Come next to the Internal impediments to self acquaintance, especially
in the worser sort of men.

1. The first that I shall acquaint you with, is, that Natural deep rooted sin
of Pride, which strongly inclines men to think well of themselves, and to
desire that all others do so too. So that where Pride is not discovered and
subdued by grace, men will scarce endure to be closely questioned by Ministers
or other friends about their sin, and the condition of their souls: what,
question them whether they are ungodly, unsanctified, the servants of sin and
Satan; in a state of death, and condemnation? Their hearts will rise with
indignation against him that will put such questions to them. What! question
them whether they have any saving grace! whether they are regenerate, pardoned,
and have any grounded hopes of heaven! They love not the searching word of God;
they love not the distinguishing passages of Scripture, they love not a
faithful searching Minister, because they would dishonor and trouble them with
such doubts as these. A Proud man judges not of himself as he is, but as his
tumified distempered fancy represents him to himself to be. To think himself
something when he is nothing, and so to be wilfully his own deceiver, is his
disease, Gal. 6.3. And as Pride is one of the deep^st-rooted sins in man, and
of greatest strength, and hardliest extirpated and overcome; so true
self-acquaintance must be accordingly difficult, it being carried on but by
such degrees as we get ground and victory against our pride. As Melancholy men
that are wise in all other things, may be far from the right use of reason in
some one point, where the fantasy is crazed and the distemper lies; so a
Proud man, how wise soever in any other matters, as to the right knowledge of
himself, is like one that is cracked brained, and has not indeed the use of
reason; Pride was his first Tutor, and taught him what to believe of himself:
so that Christ who comes after with a humbling doctrine, cannot be believed,
nor scarce with any patience heard: O what a disease is to be cured, before a
Proud person will well know himself! What labor do we lose in all our sermons!
Yea how often does the medicine irritate the disease! So that a poor wretch that
is under the wrath of God, and knows not when he is gone out of the assembly,
whether the justice of heaven will not take vengeance on him before he come
hither again, yet cannot abide to hear of this, but with Ahab, hates the
Preacher that prophesies evil of him, be it never so true. It is pride that
leads up that army of corruptions, that here strive against the light of
truth, that is sent to convince and convert the guilty. And is a man like to be
saved by the word, while he hates it, and bends his thoughts and passions all
against it?

Dir. 1. HE therefore that will ever know himself, must first let in so much of
the light, as may take down his arrogance, and bring him as a little child to
the school of Christ. First know what thou art as Man; and then know what thou
art as a sinner, and sentenced by God; that so thou may come to know what
thou art as one that is under the hopes and duties of the Redeemed. When thy
proud heart rebelleth against conviction, remember with whom thou have to do.
Will God speak submissively to thee for fear of offending thee? will he cry
thee mercy for handling thee so roughly as to tell thee thou art yet the child
of wrath? Is he afraid to talk to thee of death or of damnation? Will he
recall his threatenings, and repent him of the severity of his laws, because
such worms are angry with them, or will not believe them? Perhaps thou may
make a false hearted, frightful, man-pleasing Minister, to change his strain of
plainer dealing, and become thy flatterer, or be silent: But will God be
silenced? will he stoop to thee, and bend or stretch his word to humor thee? O
no* he will one day tell thee what thou ar^ with another voice then this of a
mortal and despised man, and in another manner then preachers tell it thee. If
thou can frown the Preacher out of the pulpit, or out of his fidelity to God
and thee, yet can thou not frown God out of heaven. He will speak to thee
more terribly, then the terriblest preacher that ever thou heardst: And if thy
Pride shall rise up, and tell him that he does thee wrong, how quickly will thy
mouth be stopped, and thou be forced to confess thy guilt! Romans 3.5, 6, 19. O
stoop man to the humbling word of grace; or God will make thee stoop to the
words and strokes of wrath. Fear him that will make the proudest fear, before
he has done with them. Judged thou must be; by thy self, to self-abasing and
conversion, or by God to desolation and confusion: And can thou easier bear
Gods judgment then thy own! Stoop foolish self-deluding dust! Stoop sinful
wretch, and know thy misery! If thou stand it out a little longer, an
undiscerned blow will bring thee down; and thou shall not see the hand that
strikes thee, till thou art humbled to the grave and hell. O how absurd, yet
pitiful a sight is it, to see poor sinners brave it out against the humbling
message of the Lord! as if they could make good their cause againg him! and
scorn to know that they are going to Hell, till they are there! And then, will
Pride preserve them from the knowledge of it? It is shameful folly to be Proud
and obstinate, where a man knows beforehand that he must submit at last, and
is not able to stand it out.

2. THE second Intrinsecal Impediment to self-acquaintance is an unresonable
tenderness of our selves; when an inordinate Love of ease and quietness of mind
does prevail with us to hold fast all that thus quieteth us at the present,
without regard of due provision for the time to come; In this there is a
mixture of unreasonableness and self-love: It is indeed the very brutish
disposition. A beast will not willingly be dieted for his future health: Let
him have at present what he loves and you please him, though you feed him for
the slaughter! for he has not reason to foresee what follows: An ox must be
bound and cast and held down by force, if you will shoe him, though it be to
the keeping of his feet from hurt; or if you will pull out a thorn, or do any
thing for his good that hurts him at the present: you please not your horse
by letting him blood, though you save his life by it. Fleshly-minded men have
thus bruitified themselves, so that they judge of things by present feeling,
and have not Reason and Faith to look before them, and judge of things by what
they tend to; even by the good or hurt that will follow in the end. It is a
very terrible troublesome thing, for a man that is unregerate, unjustified, and
unreconciled to God, to know it; For a man that has any feeling left, to find
himself in a state of condemnation: This is to stir up all the terrors of his
soul, and cast him into perplexing fears and disquietments of mind; so that he
cannot eat, or drink, or sleep in quietness, but the troublesome thoughts of
sin and everlasting wrath torment him: And the inconsiderable man that judges
of things by present feeling, will not endure this; and therefore must needs
have the windows shut, and the light removed that shows him these perplexing
sights: As most men hate those that speak against them, be the matter never so
true; so they cannot endure those thoughts that do accuse them, nor to have a
reprover so near them, even in their own breasts: A Conscience within them, to
preach to them night and day; not one hour in a week, but wherever they go,
and whatever they are doing; to be so near, so constant, so precise, and so
s^vere and terrible a Preacher, as usually a newly enlightened and awakened
conscience is; this seems intolerable to them; And whatever come of it, this
Preacher must be silenced, as turbulent and vexatious, and one that would make
them Melancholy or mad. And this is the condemnation of these miserable souls,
that light is come into the world, and they loved darkness rather than light,
because their deeds were evil: For every one that does evil, hates the light,
neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved, Joh. 3.19, 20.
And thus while men are so tender of themselves, that they will do nothing that
troubles or hurts them at the present, they venture upon all the miseries
that they are forewarned of.

Dir. 2. BE not unreasonably tender of a little disturbance at the present, nor
unbelievingly careless of the misery to come. Cannot you endure to know your
sin and misery, and yet can you endure to bear it? will you go to Hell for fear
of knowing that you are in the way? Must you not know it with everlasting woe
and vengeance when you come thither, if by knowing your danger you prevent not
your coming thither? Is it easier to bear Gods wrath for ever, than to find at
present that you have offended him? Sirs, the question is whether you are under
the condemnation of the law, or not? Whether you are regenerate and justified,
or yet in your sin? If you are Justified, far be it from me to persuade you to
think that you are under condemnation: I leave that to Satan and the malicious
world, who are the condemners of those that Christ does Justify. But if you
are unregenerate and unjustified, what will you do at death and judgment? Can
you stand before God, or be saved upon any other terms? You cannot; if God be
to be believed, you cannot: and if you know the Scriptures, you know you
cannot! And if you cannot be saved in an unrenewed unjustified state, is it not
needful that you know it? Will you cry for help before you find your selves in
danger? or strive to get out of sin and misery, before you believe that you are
in it? If you think that you have no other sin than the pardoned infirmities of
the Godly, you will ^ever so value Jesus Christ, and pray and ^^rive for such
grace as is necessary to them ^^at have the unpardoned reigning sins of ^^e
ungodly. If it be necessary that you (...) saved, it is necessary that you
value and ^^ek salvation; and if so, it is necessary ^^at you know your need of
it, and what ^ou must be and do if you will obtain it! (...) is a childish or
brutish thing, below a man of reason, to stick at a little present trouble,
when Death cannot otherwise be prevented: If you can prove that ever any was
converted and saved by any other way then by coming to the knowledge of their
sin and misery, then you have some excuse for your presumption: But if
Scripture tell us of no other way, yea that there is no other way, and you know
of none that ever was saved by any other, I think it is time to fall to work,
and search and try your Hearts and lives, and not to stop at a straw when you
are running for your lives, and when damnation is as it were at your backs. You
should rather think with your selves, If we can so hardly bear the forethoughts
of Hell, how shall we be able everlastingly to bear the torments?

And consider, that Christ has made the discovery of your sin and misery to be
now comparatively an easy burden, in that he has made them pardonable and
curable: If you had not had a Savior to fly to, but must have looked on your
misery as a remediless case, it had then been terrible indeed; and it had been
no great mistake to have thought it the best way to take a little ease at
present, rather then to disquiet your selves in vain. But through the great
mercy of God, this is not your case; you need not despair of pardon and
salvation, if you will but hear while it is called Today. The task that you
are called to, is not to torment your selves as the damned do, with the thought
of unpardonable sin, and of a misery that has no help or hope; but it is only
to find out your disease, and come and open it to the Physicion, and submit to
his advice and use his means, and he will freely and infallibly work the cure.
It is but to find out the folly that you have been guilty of, and the danger
that you have brought your selves into, and come to Christ, and with hearty
sorrow, and resolution to give up your selves unto his grace, to cast away your
iniquities, and enter into his safe and comfortable service. And will you lie
in Hell, and say, We are suffering here, that we might escape the trouble of
foreseeing our danger of it, or of endeavoring in time to have prevented it!
We dyed for fear of knowing that we were sick! We suffered our house ^o burn to
ashes for fear of knowing, that it was on fire! O Sirs, be warned in time, and
own not, and practice not such ^egregious folly, in a business of everlasting
consequence. Believe it, if you sin, you must know that you have sinned: and if
you are in the power of Satan, it cannot long be hid. Did you but know the
difference between discovering it now while there is hope, and hereafter when
there is none, I should have no need to persuade you to be presently willing to
know the truth, whatever it should cost you.

Hind. 3. ANother great impediment of the Knowledge of ourselves, is, that self
love so blinds men that they can see no great evil in themselves or any thing
that is their own: It makes them believe that all things are as they would have
them be; Yea and better than they would have them: For he that would not indeed
be Holy, is willing by himself and others to be thought so: Did not the
lamentable experience of all the world confirm it, it were incredible that
self-love could so exceedingly blind men. If Charity think no evil of another,
and we are very hardly brought to believe any great harm by those we love; much
more will self-love cause men to see no evil by themselves, which possibly they
can shut their eyes against: it being more radicated and powerful than the love
of others. No arguments so cogent, no light so clear, no oratory so persuading,
as can make a self-lover think himself as bad as indeed he is, till God by
grace or terror shall convince him. When you are preaching the most searching
sermons to convince him, self-love confuteth or misapplyeth them; When the
marks of trial are most plainly opened, and most closely urged, self-love does
frustrate the preachers greatest skill and diligence: When nothing of sense can
be said to prove the piety of the impious, and the sincerity of the formal
hypocrite, yet self love is that wonderful Alchymist, that can make gold not
only of the basest metal, but of dross and dirt: Let the most undeniable
witness be brought to detect the fraud and misery of an unrenewed soul,
self-love is his most powerful defender; No cause so bad which it cannot
justify; and no person so miserable but it will pronounce him happy, till God
by Grace or wrath confute it. Self-love is the grand Deceiver of the world.

Dir. 3. SVbdue this inordinate self-love, and bring yoar minds to a just
impartiality in judging. Remember that self-love is only powerful at your
private bar: and it is not there that your cause must be finally decided: It
can do nothing at the bar of God; It cannot there justify, where it is
condemned it self: God will not so much as hear it, though you will hear none
that speak against it: self-love is but the vicegerent of the grand Usurper,
that shall be deposed and have no show of power, at Christ's appearing, when he
will judge his enemies.

And here it will be a helpful course, to see your own sin and misery in
others, and put the case as if it were theirs, and then see how you can discern
the evil of it. O how easy is it with the most, to see and aggravate the
faults of others? How safe were we if we were as impartial to ourselves!

And also it will be very useful to desire often the help of more impartial
judgments then your own: Fit enim nescio quomedo (inquit Cicero) ut magis in
aliis cernamus, quam in nobis met ipsis, siquid delinquitur. Others can quickly
spy our faults, as we can quickly find out theirs: Therefore as Poets and
Painters do expose their works before they finish them, to the common view,
that so what is blamed by many may be considered and amended; so should we in
order to the judging of our selves, observe both what our friends and enemies
say of us, and the more suspiciously try what others blame. But especially have
some near judicious friends that will prudently and faithfully assist you. A
true friend is an excellent looking-glass. Says Seneca, Deliberate well first
in the choosing of a friend, and then with him deliberate of all things.

And if you would have the benefits of friendship, discourage not plain
dealing. Magis amat objurgator sanans (inquit August.) quam adulator
dissimulans. I know a reprover should be wise, and love must be predominant if
he will expect success; for if he speak lacerato animo, as Augustine says, it
will seem but punientis impetus and not corigentis charitas.) But we must take
heed of judging that we are hated, because we are reproved: that is, that a
friend is not a friend, because he does the office of a friend. Of the two it
is fitter to say of a reproving enemy, He deals with me like a friend] then
of a reproving friend, He deals with me like an enemy:] For, as Augustine
says, Accusare vitia officium est bonum, quod cum mali faciunt, alienas parts
agunt] It is a good office to speak ill of vice, which when bad men do, they
play another part. It is a happy enmity that helps you to deliver you from
sin and hell: and a cruel friendship that will let you undo your soul for
ever, for fear of displeasing you by hindering it.

There are two sorts that deprive themselves of the saving benefit of necessary
reproof, and the most desirable fruits of friendship: The one is the Hypocrite
that so cunningly hides his greatest faults, that his friend and enemy never
tell him of them: He has the happiness of keeping his physicion unacquainted
with his disease, and consequently of keeping the disease. The other is the
Proud, that can better endure to be ungodly then to be told of it, and to live
in many sins, then to be freely admonished of one.

Consider therefore that it will prove self-hatred in the effect, which is now
called self-love: and that it would seem but a strange kind of love from
another, to suffer you to fall into a Cole-pit, for fear of telling you that
you are near it; or to suffer you to fall into the enemies hands, lest he
should affright you by telling you that they are near: If you love another no
better then thus, you have no reason to call your self his friend; And shall
this be your wisest Loving of your selves? If it be Love to damn your souls for
fear of knowing your danger of damnation, the Devil loves you: If i^ be
friendship to keep you out of Heaven for fear of disquieting you with the Light
that should have saved you, then you have no enemies in Hell. The Devil himself
can be content to grant you a temporal quietness and ease, in order to your
everlasting disquietness and woe. Let go your hopes of Heaven, and he can let
you be merry a while on earth: while the strong armed man keeps his house,
the things that he possesses are in peace. If it be no^ friendship but enmity
to trouble you with the sight of sin and danger, in order to your deliverance,
then you have none but enemies in Heaven: For God himself does take this
course, with the dearest of his chosen. No star does give such light as the Sun
does: No Minister does so much to make a sinner know himself, as God does. Love
yeur selves therefore in the way that God loves you: Be impartially willing
that God and man should help you to be thoroughly acquainted with your state;
Love not to be flattered by others or your selves. Vice is never the more
lovely because it is yours: And you know that pain is never the more easy or
desirable to you, because it is yours. Your own diseases, losses, injuries, and
miseries, seem the worst and most grievous to you: And why should not your own
sins also be most grievous? You love not poverty, or pain, because its your
own; O love not sin because it is your own.

Hind. 4. ANother impediment to self-acquaintance, is, that men observe not
their hearts in a time of trial, but take them always at the best, when no
great temptation puts them to it. A man that never had any opportunity to rise
in the world, perhaps does think he is not ambitious, and desires not much to
be higher then he is: because the coal was never blown: when a little affront
does ferment their Pride into disquietness and desires of revenge; or applause
does ferment it into tumor or self-exaltation, they observe not then the
distemper when it is up and most observable; because the nature of sin is to
please and blind, and cheat the mind into a consent: And when the sin seems
past, and they find themselves in a seeming humility and meekness, they judge
of themselves as then they find themselves, as thinking that distemper is past
and cured, and they are not to judge of themselves by what they were, but what
they are. And by that Rule every drunkard or whoremonger should judge
themselves temperate, and chaste, as soon as they forbear the act of sin: And
what if poverty, age or sickness hinder them from ever commiting either of them
again? For all this the person is a drunkard or fornicator still; because the
Act is not pardoned, nor the heart sanctified, and the habit or corrupt
inclination mortified. And thus passionate persons do judge of themselves by
their milder temper, when no temptation kindles the flame. But little does
many a one know himself, what corruption is latent in his heart, till trial
shall disclose it, and draw it into sight. Jam diu Diabolus (inq. August.)
sopitum ignem sine ullis flammis occultat, donec duas faculas jungens ambas
simul accendat, etc.] If these persons be not always sinning, they will not
take themselves for sinners: But he that has once sinned knowingly, in Gods
account continues in the sin, till his heart be changed by true repentance.

Yet, on the other side, I would not wrong any upright soul, by persuading them
to judge of themselves, as they are at the worst, in the hour of temptation;
for so they will be mistaken as certainly, though not as dangerously as the
other.

You will ask then, What is to be done in such a difficult case? If we must
neither judge of our selves as we are at the best out of temptation, not yet as
we are at the worst in the hour of temptation, when and how then shall we judge
of our selves?

I answer, It is one thing to know our particular sins, and their Degrees, and
another thing to know our state in general, whether we are justified and
sanctified or not. To discern what particular sin is in us, and how apt it is
to break forth into act, we must watch all the stirrings and appearings of it,
in the time of the temptation: But to discern whether it be unmortified and
have dominion, we must observe these Rules.

1. There is no man on earth that is perfectly free from sin: and therefore it
is no good consequence, that sin reigns unto death, because it is not
perfectly extinguished, or because it is sometime committed, unless in the
cases after expressed.

2. No sin that is truly Mortified and Repented of, shall condemn the sinner:
For pardon is promised to the truly penitent.

3. Whatever sin the Will, accordingly to its Habitual inclination, had rather
leave then keep, is truly Repented of and mortified. For the Will is the
principal seat of sin; and there is no mere sinfulness, then there is
Wilfulness, Romans 7.15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22.

4. There are some sins which cannot be frequently committed in consistency with
true grace, or sincere repentance: and some which may be frequently committed in
consistency with these. As where sins are known and great, or such as are
easily subject to the power of a sanctified will, so that he that will reject
them, may: As one such sin must have actual Repentance, if actually known; so
the frequent committing of such will not consist with Habitual Repentance.
Whereas those sins, that are so small as upright persons perhaps may not be
sufficiently excited to resistance; or such as upon the sincere use of means
are still unknown, or such as a truly sanctified Will may not subdue, are all
of them consistent with repentance and a justified state; And in this sense we
reject not that distinction betwixt Mortal and Venial sin; that is, between sin
inconsistent with a state of spiritual life, and sin consistent with it, and
consequently pardoned. He that had rather leave the former sort (the mortal
sins) will leave them; and he that truly repents of them, will forsake them:
But of the other (consistent with Life) we must say, that a may may possibly
retain them, that yet had rather leave them, and does truly repent of them.

5. A sin of carnal Interest (esteemed good in order to some thing which the
flesh desires; and so loved and deliberately kept) has more of the Will, and
is more inconsistent with Repentance, then a sin of mere passion or surprise,
which is not so valued upon the account of such an interest.

6. They that have grace enough to avoid Temptations to Mortal or Reigning sin,
and consequently that way to avoid the sin, shall not be condemned for it,
whatever a stronger temptation might have done.

7. Where bodily diseases necessitate to an act, or the omission of an act, the
Will is not to be charged with that which it cannot overcome, notwithstanding
an unfeigned willingness: As if a man in a frenzy or distraction should swear
or curse, or blasphem; or one in a Lethargy, or potent Melancholy cannot read
or pray, or meditate; etc.

8. As frequent Commssions of venial sins (or such as are consistent with true
grace) will not prove the soul unsanctified; so the once committing of a gross
sin by surprise, which is afterward truly repented of, will not prove the
absence of habitual repentance, or spiritual life, so as the frequent
committing of such sins will.

So that I conclude, in order to the detection of the sin itself, we must all
take notice of our selves as at the worst, and see what it is that Temptations
can do: but in order to the discovery of our state, and whether our sins are
pardoned or no, we must especially observe whether their eruptions are such as
will consist with true habitual Repentance, and to note what Temptations do
with us; to this end,

Dir. 4. OBserve then the workings and discoveries of the heart, and judge of
its abundance, or habits by your words and deeds. Note what you were when you
had opportunity to sin, when the full cup of pleasure was held out to you, when
preferment was before you, when injury or provoking words did blow the coal;
If then sin appeared, judge not that you are free, and that none of the roots
are latent in your hearts; Or if you are sure that such dispositions are hated,
repented of and mortified, yet you may hence observe what diseases of soul you
should chiefly strive against, to keep them under, and prevent a new surprise
or increase. It is usual for such licentiousness, such self-seeking, such ugly
pride and passion to break forth upon some special temptations, which for many
years together did never appear to the person that is guilty, or to any other,
that it should keep the best in fear and self-suspicion, and cause them to live
inconstant watchfulness, and to observe the bent and motions of their souls:
and to make use afterward of such discoveries as they have made to their cost
in time of trial.

And it much concerns all true Christians, to keep in remembrance the
exercise and discoveries of grace which formerly upon trial did undoubtedly
appear, and did convince them of the sincerity which afterward they are apt
again to question. Will you not believe that there is a sun in the firmament
unless it always shine upon you? Or that it is hot unless it be always Summer?
Will you not believe that a man can speak, unless he be always speaking? It is
weakness and injurious rashness in those Christians, that upon every damp that
seizes on their spirits, will venture to deny Gods former mercies, and say
that they had never special grace, because they feel it not at present: that
they never prayed in sincerity, because some distemper at present discomposeth
or overwhelmeth them: that their former zeal and life was counterfeit, because
they are grown more cold and dull; that their former comforts were all but
hypocritical delusions, because they are turned now to sorrows: As much as to
say, Because I am now sick, I was never well, nor so much as alive. O were it
not for the tender compassions of our Father, and the sure performance of our
Lord and Comforter, and that our peace is more in his hand than our own (though
more in our own than any others,) it could never be that a poor distempered
imperfect soul, should here have any constancy of peace; Considering the power
of self-love and partiality, on one side, and of grief and fear and other
passions on the other; and how little a thing does shake so moveable and weak a
thing, and muddy and trouble a mind so easily disturbed; and how hard it is
again to quiet and compose a mind so troubled, and bring a grieved soul to
reason, and make passion understand the truth, and to cause a weak afflicted
soul to judge clean contrary to what they feel: all this considered, no wonder
if the peace and comfort of many Christians be yet but little and interrupted
and uneven: and if there be much crying in a family that has so many little
ones, and much complaining where there are so many weak and poor: and many a
groan where there is so much pain. To show us the Sun at midnight; and
convince us of Love while we feel the rod; and to give us the comfortable sense
of grace, while we have the uncomfortable sense of the greatness of our sin; to
give us the joyful hopes of glory, in a troubled melancholy dejected State: all
this is a work that requires the special help of the Almighty, and exceeds
the strength of feeble worms. Let God give us never so full discoveries of his
tenderest Love and our own sincerity, as if a voice from Heaven had witnessed
it unto us, we are questioning all if once we seem to feel the contrary, and
are perplexed in the tumult of our thougths and passions, and bewildred and
lost in the errors of our own disturbed minds. Though we have walked with God,
we are questioning whether indeed we ever knew him, as soon as he seems to
hide his face. Though we have felt another life and spirit possess and actuate
us than heretofore, and found that we love the things and persons which once we
loved not, and that we were quite falln out with that which was our former
pleasure, and that our souls broke off from their old delights, and hopes and
ways, and resolvedly did engage themselves to God, and unfeignedly delivered up
themselves unto him; yet all is forgotten, or the convincing evidence of all
forgotten, if the lively influences of heaven be but once so far withdrawn, as
that our present state is clouded and afflicted, and our former vigor and
assurance is abated. And thus unthankfully we deny God the praise and
acknowledgement of his mercies, longer than we are tasting them, or they are
still before us; All that he has done for us is as nothing, and all the Love
which he has manifested to us is called hatred; and all the witnesses that
have put their hands to his Acts of Grace, are questioned; and his very seals
denied, and his earnest misinterpreted, as long as our darkened distempered
souls are in a condition unfit for the apprehension of Mercy; and usually when
a diseased or afflicted body does draw the mind into too great a participation
of the affliction. And thus as we are disposed our selves, so we judge of our
selves and of all our receivings, and al! Gods dealings with us: A soul in a
cheerful lively frame, thinks well of all that God does to him; and has
thoughts of Hope, and Peace, and Joy; as Health disposes the body to alacrity,
and can make a man merry, that has little else: Whereas a soul overwhelmed
with cares, and fears, and griefs, and muddyed with sinful excessive
thoughtfulness, and habituated in a diseased sickly frame, is afraid of every
thing, and turns matter of comfort into sorrow, and is in daily pain by its
own imaginations; like a man that has a sore, and is hurt with the thought
that some body touched it. When we feel our selves well, all goes well with us,
and we put a good interpretation upon all things: And when we are out of order,
we complain of every thing, and take pleasure in nothing, and no one can
content us, and all is taken in the worser part; As the Poet said, Laeta fere
laetus cecini, cano tristia tristis.

You shall have a merry song from a merry heart, and a sad ditty from a
troubled grieved mind.

And thus while the discoveries both of sin and grace, are at present
overlookt, or afterward forgotten, and almost all men judge of themselves by
present feeling, no wonder if few are well acquainted with themselves.

But as the Word and the works of God must be taken together, if they be
understood, and not a sentence, part or parcel taken separated from the rest
which must make up the sense: so also the workings of God upon your souls must
be taken altogether: and you must read them over from the first till now, and
set all together, and not forget the letters, the part that went before, or
else you will make no sense of that which follows. And I beseech all weak and
troubled Christians to remember also that they are but children and Scholars
in the school of Christ: and therefore when they cannot set the several parts
together, let them not overvalue their unexperienced understandings, but by the
help of their skilful faithful Teachers, do that which of themselves they
cannot do: Enquire what your former mercies signify: Open them to your guides,
and tell them how God has dealt with you from the beginning, and tell them how
it is with you now: and desire them to help you to perceive how one conduces
to the right understanding of the other. And be not of froward but of tractable
submissive minds; and thus your self-acquaintance may be maintained, at least
to safety, and to some degree of peace, if not to the Joys, which you desire,
which God reserveth for their proper season.

I Should have added more on this necessary subject; but that I have said so
much of it in other writings, especially in the Saints Rest, Part. 3. chap. 7.
and in my Treatise of Self-denial, and in the Right Method for Peace of
Conscience.

I must confess I have written on thi^ subject as I did of Self-denial, viz
with expectation that all men should confess the truth of what I say; and yet
so few be cured by it of their Self-ignorance, as that still we must stand by,
and see the world distracted by it the Church divided, the Love of Bre^thren
interrupted, and the work of Sa^tan carried on by error, violence, and pride;
and the hearts of men so strangely stupefied, as to go on incor^rigibly in all
this mischief, while the cause and cure are opened before them and all in vain,
while they confess the truth! so that they will leave us nothing to do, but
exercise our compassion by lamenting the deliration of phrenetick men, while we
are unable to save the Church, their brethren, or their own souls, from the
dilaceratious and calamitous effects of their furious self-ignorance* But
Christ that has sent us with the light which may be resisted, and abused, and
in part blown out, will speedily come with Light unresistible, and will teach
the proud, the scornful, the unmerciful, the self-conceited, the malicious, and
the violent, so effectually to know themselves, as that no more exhortations
shall be necessary for the reception of his convictions; nor will he or his
servants any more beseech men to consider and know their sin and misery, nor be
beholden to them to believe and confess it. See Jude v. 14.15. And is there no
Remedy for a stupefied inconsiderate soul? Is there no prevention of so
terrible a self-knowledge, as the Light of Judgment, and the fire of Hell will
else procure? Yes, the remedy is certain, easy, and at hand: even to know
themselves till they are driven to study, and seek and know the Father and his
Son Jesus Christ: Joh. 17.3. And yet is the Salvation of most as hopeless
almost as if there were no remedy, because no persuasion can prevail with them
to use it. Lord, what has thus locked up the minds and hearts of sinners
against thy truth and thee? what has made Reasonable man so unreasonable, and
a self-loving nature so mortally to hate it self? O thou that openest and no
man shuts, use the Key that opens Hearts; Come (...) with thy Wisdom and
thy Love, an^ all this blindness and obstinacy will be gone. At least commit
not the safety of thy flock to such as will not Know themselves: But gather thy
remnant, and bring them to their folds, and let them be fruitful and increase;
and set up shepherds over them, which shall feed them, and let them fear no
more, nor be dismayed, nor be lacking, Jer. 23.3, 4. Ordain a place for them,
plant them, and and let them dwell therein unmoved; and let not the children of
wickedness waste them any more, 1 Chronicles. 17.9. As a shepherd seeks out his
flock in the day that he is among (...) sheep that are scattered, so seek out
thy sheep and deliver them (...) of all places where they have been scattered
in the cloudy and dark day, Ezekiel. ^4.12, Save thy people and bless thine
inheritance: feed them also, and lift them up for ever, Psalm. 28.9.

FINIS.

