Gildas Salvianus;

THE REFORMED PASTOR. Showing the nature of the Pastoral work; Especially in
Private Instruction and Catechizing. With an open CONFESSION of our too open
SINS. Prepared for a day of Humiliation kept at Worcester, December. 4. 1655. by
the Ministers of that County, who subscribed the Agreement for Catechizing and
Personal Instruction, at their entrance upon that work.

By their unworthy fellow servants Richard Baxter. Teacher of the Church at
Kederminster.

Luke 12. 47 [(...)]

London, Printed by Robert White, for Nevil Simmons, Bookseller at
Kederminster, and are to be sold by William Roybould, at the Unicorn In Paul's.
Church Yard. 1656.

To my Reverend and Dearly beloved Brethren, the faithful Ministers of Christ,
in Britain and Ireland, Grace and Peace in Jesus Christ be increased.
Reverend Brethren,
THE subject of this Treatise so nearly concerns your selves and the Churches
committed to your care, that it persuades and emboldeneth me to this address,
notwithstanding the imperfections in the manner of handling it, and he
consciousness of my great unworthiness to be your Monitor.

Before I come to my principal errand, I shall give you hat account which I
suppose I owe you, of the Reasons of his following work, and of the freedom of
speech which to some may be displeasing.

When the Lord had awakened his Ministers in this County, and some neighboring
parts to a sense of their duty in the work of Catechizing, and private
Instruction of all in their Parishes that would not obstinately refuse their
help, and when they had subscribed an Agreement containing their Resolutions
for the future performance of it, they judged it unmeet to enter upon the work,
without a solemn humbling of their souls before the Lord, for their so long
neglect of so great and necessary a duty: And therefore they agreed to meet
together at Worcester, December. 4. 1655. and there to join in such Humiliation,
and in earnest Prayer to God for the pardon of our neglects, and for his
special Assistance in the work that we had undertaken, and for the success of
it with the People, whom we are engaged to instruct: At which time among
others, I was desired by them to Preach: In answer to their desires I prepared
the following Discourse; which though it proved longer then could be delivered
in one or two Sermons, yet I intended to have entered upon it at that time, and
to have delivered that which was most pertinent to the occasion, and to have
reserved the rest to another season. But before the meeting, by the increase of
my ordinary pain and weakness, I was disabled from going thither: To recompense
which unwilling omission, I easily yielded to the requests of diverse of the
Brethren, forthwith to publish the things which I had prepared, that they might
see that which they could not hear. If now it be objected, that I should not
have spoken so plainly or sharply against the sins of the Ministry, or that I
should not have published it to the view of the world, or at least that I
should have done it in another tongue, and not in the ears of the vulgar,
especially at such a time when Quakers and Papists are endeavoring to bring
the Ministry into contempt, and the people are too prone to harken to their
suggestions: I confess I thought the Objection very considerable; but that it
prevailed not to alter my resolutions, is to be ascribed to the following
Reasons. 1. It was a purposed solemn Humiliation that we were agreed on, and
that this was prepared and intended for. And how should we be humbled without a
plain Confession of our sin? 2. It was principally our own sins that the
Confession did concern; and who can be offended with us for confessing our own,
and taking the blame and shame to our selves, which our consciences told us we
ought to do. 3. I have excepted in our Confessions those that are not guilty:
and therefore hope that I have injured none. 4. Having necessarily prepared it
in the English tongue, I had no spare time to translate it. 5. Where the sin is
open in the sight of the world, it is in vain to attempt to hide it. 6. And
such attempts will but aggravate it, and increase our shame. 7. A free
Confession is a condition of a full Remission; and when the sin is public, the
Confession must be public. If the Ministers of England had sinned only in
Latin, I would have made shift to have admonished them in Latin, or else have
said nothing to them. But if they will sin in English, they must hear of it in
English. Unpardoned sin will never let us rest or prosper, though we be at
never so much care and cost to cover it: Our sin will surely find us out,
though we find not it. The work of Confession is purposely to make known our
sin, and freely to take the shame to our selves: And if he that confesses and
forsakes be the man that shall have mercy, no wonder then if he that covers
it, prosper not, Prove. 28. 13. If we be so tender of our selves, and so loath
to confess, God will be the less tender of us, and he will indite our
Confessions for us. He will either force our Consciences to confession, or his
Judgments shall proclaim our iniquities to the world. Know we not how many
malicious adversaries are day and night at work against us? Some openly revile
us, and some in secret are laying the designs, and contriving that which others
execute and are in expectation of a fuller stroke at us, which may subvert us
at once. What is it but our sins that is the strength of all these enemies? Is
not this evil from the ordering of the Lord? Till we are reconciled unto him we
are never safe: He will never want a rod to scourge us by. The tongues of
Quakers, and Papists, and many other sorts, are all at work to proclaim our
sins, because we will not confess them our selves: Because we will not speak
the truth, they will speak much more then the truth. Yet if we had man only to
plead our cause with, perhaps we might do much to make it good: but while God
accuses us, how shall we be justified? and who shall hide our sins, when he
will have them brought to light? And God is our Accuser, till we accuse our
selves: but if we would Judge our selves, he would not Judge us. 8. The fire is
already kindled which reveals our sin: Judgment is begun at the house of
God. Has the Ministry suffered nothing in England, Scotland, and Ireland? and
have there been no attempts for their overthrow? Has it not been put to the
Vote in an Assembly that some called A Parliament of England, whether the whole
frame of the stablished Ministry, and its legal maintenance should be taken
down? and were we not put to plead our Title to that maintenance, as if we had
been falling into the hands of Turks, that had thirsted for our subversion, as
resolved enemies to the Christian cause? And who knows not how many of these
men are yet alive? and how high the same spirit yet is, and busily contriving
the accomplishment of the same design? Shall we think that they have ceased
their enterprise, because they are working more subtly in the dark? What are
the swarms of Railers at the Ministry, sent abroad the Land for, but to delude,
exasperate and dis-affect the peeple, and turn the hearts of the children from
their Fathers, that they may be ready to promote the main design? And is it not
then our wisest course to see that God be our friend, and to do that which
tends most to engage him in our defense? I think it is no time now to stand
upon our credit, so far as to neglect our duty, and befriend our sins, and so
provoke the Lord against us. It rather beseems us to fall down at the feet of
our offended Lord, and to justify him in his Judgments, and freely and
penitently to confess our transgressions, and to resolve upon a speedy and
through reformation, before wrath break out upon us, which will leave us no
remedy. Its time to make up all breaches between us and Heaven, when we stand
in such necessity of the Divine Protection? For how can an impenitent
unreformed people expect to be sheltered by Holiness it self? It is a stubborn
child, that under the rod will refuse to confess his faults; When it is not the
least use of the rod to extort confession. We feel much: we fear more; and
all is for sin: and yet are we so hardly drawn to a Confession? 9. The world
already knows that we are sinners: As none can suppose us perfect, so our
particular sins are too apparent to the world: And is it not meet then that
they should see that we are Penitent sinners? It is sure a greater credit to us
to be Penitent sinners, then impenitent sinners: and one of the two we shall be
while we are on earth. Certainly as Repentance is necessary to the recovery of
our Peace with God, so is it also to the reparation of our credit with wise and
godly men: It is befriending and excusing our sin that is our shame indeed, and
leads toward everlasting shame; which the shame of Penitent confession would
prevent. 10. Our Penitent Confession and speedy Reformation are the means that
must silence the reproaching adversaries. He is impudently inhumane that will
reproach men with their sins, that bewail them and penitently charge them upon
themselves. Such men have a promise of pardon from God; and shall men take us
by the throat when God forgiveth us? Who dare condemn us, when God shall
justify us? Who shall lay that to our charge, which God has declared that he
will not charge us with? When sin is truly Repented of by Gospel indulgence, it
cease to be ours. What readyer way then can we imagine to free us from the
shame of it, then to shame our selves for it in Penitent Confessions, and to
break off from it by speedy reformation? 11. The Leaders of the Flock must be
exemplary to the rest; and therefore in this duty as well as in any other. It
is not our part only to teach them Repentance, but to go before them in the
exercise of it our selves: As far as we excel them in Knowledge and other
Gifts, so far should we also excel them in this and other Graces. 12. Too many
that have set their hand to this sacred work do so obstinately proceed in
Self-seeking, Negligence, Pride, Division, and other sins, that it is become
our necessary duty to admonish them. If we could see that such would reform
without reproof, we could gladly forbear the publishing of their faults. But
when reproofs themselves do prove so uneffectual, that they are more offended
at the reproof then at the sin, and had rather that we should cease reproving,
then themselves should cease sinning, I think it is time to sharpen the remedy.
For what else should we do? To give up our Brethren as uncureable were cruelty,
as long as there are further means to be used. We must not hate them, but
plainly rebuke them, and not suffer sin upon them, Lev. 19. 17. And to bear
with the vices of the Ministers, is to promote the ruin of the Church. For
what speedyer way is there for the depraving and undoing of the people, then
the pravity of their Guides? And how can we more effectually further a
Reformation, (which we are so much obliged to do) then by endeavoring the
Reforming of the Leaders of the Church? Surely Brethren, if it be our duty to
endeavor to cast out those Ministers that are Negligent, Scandalous and Unfit
for the work, and if we think this so necessary to the reformation of the
Church (as no doubt it is) it must needs be our Duty to endeavor to heal the
sins of others; and to use a much gentler remedy to them that are guilty of a
less degree of sin: If other men's sin deserves an ejection, sure ours deserve
and require plain reproof. For my part I have done as I would be done by: and
it is for God and the safety of the Church, and in tender Love to the Brethren
whom I do adventure to reprehend; Not (as others) to make them contemptible and
odious, but to heal the evils that would make them so: That so no enemy may
find this matter of reproach among us. But especially because our faithful
endeavors are of so great necessity to the welfare of the Church and the
saving of men's souls, that it will not consist with a love to either (in a
predominant sort) to be negligent our selves, or silently to connive at, and
comply with the negligent. If thousands of you were in a leaking ship, and
those that should pump out the water and stop the leaks, should be sporting or
asleep, yea or but favor themselves in their labors, to the hazarding of you
all, would you not awake them to their work, and call out on them to labor as
for your lives? and if you used some sharpness and importunity with the
sloathful, would you think that man were well in his wits that would take it
ill of you, and accuse you of pride, self-conceitedness, or unmannerlyness, to
presume to talk so sawcily to your fellow workmen? or should tell you that you
wrong them by diminishing their reputation? Would you not say, The work must be
done, or we are all dead men: is the ship ready to sink, and do you talk of
Reputation? or had you rather hazard your self and us, then hear of your
sloathfulness? This is our case, Brethren! The work of God must needs be done!
souls must not perish while you mind your worldly business, or observe the tide
and times, and take your ease, or quarrel with your Brethren! nor must we be
silent while men are hastened by you to perdition, and the Church to greater
danger and confusion, for fear of seeming too uncivil and unmannerly with you,
or displeasing your impatient souls! Would you be but as impatient with your
sins as with reproofs, you should hear no more from us, but we should be all
agreed! But neither God nor good men will let you alone in such sins. Yet if
you had betaken your selves to another calling, and would sin to your selves
only, and would perish alone, we should not have so much necessity of molesting
you, as now we have: But if you will enter into the office, which is for the
necessary preservation of us all, so that by letting you alone in your sin, we
must give up the Church to apparent loss and hazard; blame us not if we talk to
you more freely then you would have us do. If your own body be sick, and you
will despise the remedy, or if your own house be on fire, and you will be
singing or quarrelling in the streets, I can possibly bear it, and let you
alone (which yet in charity I should not easily do.) But if you will undertake
to be the Physician of an Hospital, or to all the Town that is infected with
the plague, or will undertake to quench all the fires that shall be kindled in
the Town, there is no bearing with your remisness, how much soever it may
displease you: Take it how you will, you must be told of it: and if that will
not serve, you must be yet closelyer told of it: and if that will not serve, if
you be rejected as well as reprehended, you must thank your selves. I speak all
this to none but the guilty: And thus I have given you those Reasons which
forced me even in plain English to publish so much of the sins of the Ministry
as in the following Treatise I have done. And I suppose the more penitent and
humble any are, and the more desirous of the truest Reformation of the Church,
the more easily and fully will they approve such free confessions and
reprehensions.

THE second sort of objections against this free Confession of sin, I expect to
hear from the several parties whose sins are here confessed. Most of them can
be willing that others be blamed, so they might be justified themselves. I can
truly say, that what I have here spoken has been as impartially as I could,
and not as a party, nor as siding with any, but as owning the common Christian
cause, and as somewhat sensible of the apparent wrongs that have been offered
to common truth and godliness, and the hindrances of men's salvation, and of
the happiness of the Church. But I find it impossible to avoid the offending of
guilty men. For there is no way of avoiding it, but by our silence, or their
patience: And silent we cannot be, because of Gods commands: and Patient they
cannot be, because of their guilt and partiality, and the interest that their
sin has got in their affections: I still except those humble men, that are
willing to know the worst of themselves, and love the light, that their deeds
may be made manifest, and long to know their sins that they may for sake them,
and their duty that they may perform it.

Some its like will be offended with me, that I blame them so much for the
neglect of that Discipline, which they have disputed for so long. But what
remedy? If Discipline were not of God, or if it were unnecessary to the Church,
or if it were enough to dispute for duty, while we deliberately refuse to
perform it, then would I have given these Brethren no offense.

Some its like will be offended that I mention with disallowance the
Separatists or Anabaptists, as I understand some are offended much that I so
mentioned them in an Epistle before the Quakers Catechism, as if they opened
the door to the Apostasy of these times; and they say that by this it appears
that while I pretend so much Zeal for the Unity of the Church, I intend and
endeavor the contrary. To which I answer: 1. Is it indeed a sign that a man
loves not the Unity of the Saints, because he loves not their disunion and
division? Who can escape the censure of such men, but he that can unite the
Saints by dividing them? 2. I never intended in urging the Peace and Unity of
the Saints, to approve of any thing which I judged to be a sin, nor to tie my
own tongue or other men's from seasonable contradicting it. Is there no way to
peace but by participating of men's sin? The thing I desire is this: 1. That we
might all consider how far we may hold Communion together, even in the same
Congregations, notwithstanding our different opinions; and to agree not to
withdraw where it may possibly be avoided. 2. But where it cannot, that yet we
may consult how far we may hold Communion in distinct Congregations: and to
avoid that, no further then is of mere necessity. And 3. and principally, to
consult and agree upon certain Rules, for the management of our differences in
such a manner, as may be least to the disadvantage of the common Christian
truths which are acknowledged by us all. Thus far would I seek peace with
Arminians, Antinomians, Anabaptists, or any that hold the foundation. Yea and
in the two last, I would not refuse to consult on accommodation with moderate
Papists themselves, if their Principles were not against such consultations and
accommodations: and I should judge it a course which God will better approve
of, then to proceed by carnal contrivances to undermine their adversaries, or
by cruel murders to root them out, which are their ordinary courses. I remember
that Godly, Orthodox, Peaceable man, Bishop Usher, (lately deceased) tells us in
his Sermon at Wansted, for the Unity of the Church, that he made a motion to
the Papist, Priests in Ireland; that, because it was ignorance of the common
principles that was like to be the undoing of the common people, more then the
holding of the points which we differ in, therefore both parties should agree
to teach them some Catechism containing those common principles of Religion
which are acknowledged by us all: But jealousies and carnal counsels would not
permit them to harken to this motion.

3. And as concerning that Epistle before my papers to the Quakers, I further
answer; that by Separatists there I plainly mean Church-dividers: even all that
make unnecessary Divisions in or from the Churches of Christ; whom the Apostle
so earnestly beseeches us to mark and avoid, Romans 16. 17. and which he calls
them carnal for, and so earnestly contendeth against, 1 Cor. 1. and 2. and 3.
and in many other places in his Epistles. And if this be a tolerable sin, then
the Unity of the Church is not a necessary thing; and then the Apostles would
never have condemned this sin as they have done. Do we all so sensibly smart by
the effects of these sins, and is the Church of Christ among us brought into
such a torn and endangered condition by them, so that we are in no small danger
of falling all into the hands of the common adversaries? Is so hopeful and
chargeable a Reformation so far frustrated by these men; and yet must we not
open our mouths to tell them of it? May we not tell them of it, when we are
bleeding by their hands? Is it tolerable in them to cut and wound, and let out
our blood, and is it unpeaceableness in us to tell them that we suffer by them,
and to beseech them to repent and to have compassion on the Church of Christ?
Must we be patient to be ruined by them, and have they not the patience to hear
of it? What remedy? Let them be silent that dare; for I profess I dare not. I
must tell them that this height of Pride has been in their Ancestors a
Concomitant of Schism. A poor Drunkard or Swearer will more patiently hear of
his sin, then many that we hope are godly will of theirs, when once they are
tainted with this sin. But godliness was never made to be the credit of men's
sins: Nor is sin to be let alone, or well thought of, when it can but get into
a godly man. Shall we hate them most, whom we are bound to love best? and shall
we show it by forbearing our plain rebuke, and suffering their sin upon them?
It must not be: How ever they take it in their sick distemper, it must not be.
No man that erreth does think that he erreth: These men are confident
themselves that they are in the right. But the sober prudent servants of
Christ, that have escaped their disease, do see their error; and England
feels it, and that at the very heart: What, must we die by their hand, and
our very heart blood be let out, and the Gospel delivered up to the
adversaries, before they will believe that they have done us wrong, or before
they will endure to hear us tell them of it? If the ages to come do not say
more against the ways of these mistaken men, then I have done in that Epistle:
and if either Mercy or Judgment do not bring them one day to think or speak
more sharply of themselves; then I must confess my self quite out in my
prognostics.

Another sort that will be offended with me, are some of the Divines of the
Prelatical way: whom I had no mind to offend, nor to dishonor: But if
necessary duty will do it; What remedy? If they cannot bear with just
admonition, I must bear with their impatience. But I must tell them, that I
spoke not by hearsay, but from sight and feeling. Its more tolerable in an
Englishman to speak such things, that has seen the sad work that was made in
England, the silencing of most godly, able men, the persecution even of the
peaceable, the discountenance of godliness, and the insulting scorn of the
prophanest in the Land, then for a forrainer that has known of this but by
hearsay. When we remember what a sort of Ministers the Land abounded with,
while the ablest and most diligent men were cast out, (of which matters we
cannot be ignorant, if there were no records remaining of their attested
accusations) we must needs take leave to tell the world that the souls of men
and the welfare of the Church were not so contemptible in our eyes, as that we
should have no sense of these things, or should manifest no dislike of them,
nor once invite the guilty to repent. And if you think my language harsh, I
will transcribe some words of a far wiser man, and leave it to your
consideration how far they concern the present case, or justify my free and
plain expressions.

Gildas de excid. Britan. edit. Polid. Virgil. sub fine. [Quid plura? I ertur
vobis in medium Matthaei in confusionem vestram, exemplum, sanctorum quoque
Apostolorum electione, vel judicio Christi, non propria voluntate sortiti, ad
quod caeci effecti non videtis, quia long a meritis ejus distatis, dum in
morem and affectum Judae traditoris sponte corruitis. Apparet ergo eum qui vos
sacerdotes sciens ex cord, dicit non esse eximium Christianum. Sane quod
sentio, proferam. Posset quidem lenior fieri increpatio, sed quid prodest
vulnus manu tantum palpare, unguentove ungere, quod tumore jam vel faetore sibi
horrescens cauterio, and publico ignis medicamine eget? Si tamen ullo modo
sanari possit, aegro nequaquam medelam quaerente and ob hoc medico longius
recedente. O inimici Dei, and non Sacerdotes o licitatores malorum, and non
pontifices; traditores, and non sanctorum Apostolorum successores;
impugnatores, and non Christi Ministri. Auscultastis quidem secundae lectionis
Apostoli Pauli verborum sonum, sed nullo modo monita virtutemque servastis, and
simulachrorum more, quae non vident, neque audiunt, eodem die alteriastitistis,
licet ille tune and quotidie vobis intonaret. Fratres, fidelis sermo est, and
omni acceptione dignus. Ille dixit, fidelem, and dignum, vos ut infidelem and
indignum sprevistis. Si quis Episcopatum cupit, bonum opus cupit. Vos
Episcopatum magnopere avaritiae gratia, non spiritalis profectus obtentu,
cupitis, and bonum opus illi condignum nequaquam habetis. Oportet ergo
hujusmodi irreprehensibilem esse: In hoc namque sermon lachrymis magis, quam
verbis opus est, ac si dixisset Apostolus eum esse omnibus irreprehensibiliorem
debere. Unius uxoris virum. Quid ita apud nos, quoque contemnitur, quasi non
audiretur vel idem dicere. Et virum uxoris sobrium, prudentem? Quis etiam ex
vobis hoc aliquando in esse sibi saltem optavit. Hospitalem? Id forte casu
evenerit, popularis aurae potius, quam praecepti gratia factum. Non prodest,
Domino salvatore ita dicente. Amen dico vobis, receperunt mercedem suam.
Ornatum, non vinolentum, non percussorem, sed modestum, non litigiosum, non
cupidum? O feralis immutatio, o horrenda praeceptorum coelestium conculcatio;
nonne infatigabiliter ad-haee expugnanda, vel potius obruenda actuum
verborumque arma corripitis, pro quibus conservandis, atque firmandis, si
necesse fuisset, and poena ultro subeunda, and vita ponenda erat? sed videamus
and sequentia. Domum suam (inquit) been regentem, filios habentem, subditos in
omni castitate. Ergo imperfecta est patrum castitas, si non item and filiorum
accumuletur? Sed quid erit, ubi nec pater, nec filius, mali genitoris exemplo
privatus, conspicitur castus? Si quis autem domui suae praeesse nescit, quomodo
Ecclesiae Dei diligentiam adhibebit? Haec sunt verba quae indubitatis
affectibus approbantur. Diaconos sim liter pudicos, non bilingues, non vino
multo deditos, non turpelucrum sectantes, habentes ministerium fidei, in
conscientia pura. Hi autem probentur primum, and sic ministrent nullum crimen
habentes. His nimirum horrescens diu immorari, unum veridice possum dicere.
Quin haec omnia in contrarios actus mutantur, ita ut clerici quod non absque
dolor cordis fateor, impudici, bilingues, ebrii, turpis lucri cupidi, habentes
fidem, and ut verius dicam, infidelitatem, in conscientia impura, non probati
in bono, sed in malo praesciti ministrantes, and innumera crimina habentes,
sacro ministerio adsciscantur. Audistis etiam illo die, quo multo dignius,
multoque rectius erat, ut ad carcerem vel catastam poenalem quam ad sacerdotium
traheremini domino scitante, quem se esse putarunt discipuli, Petrum
respondisse. Tu es Christus filius Dei, eique dominum pro tali confessione,
dixisse. Beatus es Simon Barjona, quia caro and sanguis non revelavit tibi, sed
pater meus, qui in coelis est. Ergo Petrus a Deo Patre doctus recte Christum
consitetur. Vos autem moniti a patre vestro Diabolo inique, salvatorem malis
actibus denegatis. Vero sacerdoti dicitur: tu es Petrus, and super hanc petram,
aedificabo ecclesiam meam. Vos quidem assimilamini viro stulto, qui aedificavit
domum suam, super arenam. Notandum vero est, quod insipientibus in aedificanda
domo, arenarum pendulae mobilitati Dominus non cooperatur, secundum illud.
Fecerunt sibi reges; and non per me. Itidemque quod sequitur eadem sonat
dicendo. Et portae Inferi non praevalebunt, ejusque peccata intelliguntur. De
vestra quidem exitiabili factura pronunciantur. Venerunt flumina, flaverunt
venti, and impegerunt in domum illam, and cecidit, and fuit ruina ejus magna.
Petro ejusque successoribus dicit Dominus, and tibi dabo claves regni coelorum.
Vobis vero; Non novi vos, discedite a me, operarii iniquitatis, ut separati
sinistrae partis hoedi eatis in ignem aeternum. Itemque omni sancto sacerdoti
promittitur. Et quaecunque solveris super terram, erunt soluta and in coelis;
and quaecunque ligaveris super terram, erunt ligata and in coelis. Sed quomodo
vos aliquid solvetis, ut sit solutum, and in coelis, a coelo ob scelera
adempti, and immanium peccatorum funibus compediti? Ut Solomon quoque ait,
funiculis peccatorum suorum unusquisque constringitur. Qua ratione aliquid in
terra ligabitis, quod supra mundum etiam ligetur, propter vosmetpsos, qui ita
ligati iniquitatibus, in hoc mundo tenemini, ut in coelis nequaquam ascendatis,
sed in infausta tartari ergastula non conversi in hac vita ad dominum,
decedatis. Nec sibi quisquam sacerdotum de corporis mundi solum conscientia
supplaudat, cum eorum quibus praeest, si propter ejus imperitiam, seu desidiam,
seu adulationem, perierint, in die judicii de ejusdem manibus veluti
interfectoris animae exquirantur Quia nec dulcior mors, quam quae infertur ab
unoquoque homineque malo, alioquin non dixisset Apostolus velut paternum
legatum suis successoribus derelinquens. Mundus ego sum ab omnium sanguine, non
enim subterfugi, quo minus annuntiarem vobis omne ministerium Dei. Multum
namque usu ac frequentia peccatorum inebriati, and incessanter irruentibus
vobis scelerum cumulatorum, acsi undis quassati, unam veluti post naufragium,
in qua ad vivorum terram evadatis, poenitentiae tabulam toto animae nisu
exquirite, ut avertatur furor Domini a vobis, misericorditer dicentis, nolo
mortem peccatoris, sed ut convertatur and vivat. Ipse omnipotens Deus totius
consolationis and misericordiae paucissimos bonos pastores conservet ab omni
malo, and municipes faciat civitatis Jerusalem coelestis, hoc est sanctorum
omnium congregationis, Pater and Pilius and spiritus sanctus, cui sit honor and
gloria in secula seculorum. Amen.

If the English translation of this book (for translated it is long ago) do
fall into the hands of the vulgar, they will see what language the British
Clergy received from one that was neither a censorious railer, nor
schismatically self-opinionated.

Perhaps some will say, that the matter is not much amended, when in former
times we were almost all of a mind, and now we have so many Religions, that we
know not well whether we have any at all. Answ. 1. Every different opinion is
not another Religion. 2. This is the common Popish argument against
Reformation, as if it were better that men believed nothing fide divina, then
enquire after truth, for fear of misbelief: And as if they would have all
ungodly, that they might be all of a mind. I am sure that the most of the
people in England where ever I came, did make Religion, and the reading of
Scripture, or speaking of the way to heaven, the matter of their bitter scorn
and reproach. And would you have us all of that mind again, for fear of
differences! A charitable wish! 3. If others run into the other extreme, will
that be any excuse to you? Christ's Church has always suffered between profane
Unbelievers, and Heretical dividers, as he suffered himself on the Cross
between two thieves. And will the sin of one excuse the other? 4. And yet I
must say, (lest I be impiously blind and ungrateful) that through the great
mercy of God, the matter is so far amended, that many hundred drunken,
swearing, ignorant, negligent, scandalous Ministers are cast out; and we have
many humble, godly, painful teachers in a County for a few that we had before.
This is so visibly true, that when the godly are feasted, who formerly were
almost famished, and beaten for going abroad to beg their bread, you can hardly
by all your arguments or Rhetoric persuade them that the times are no better
with them then they were; though men of another Nation may possibly believe you
in such reports. I bless God for the change that I see in this Country; and
among the people, even in my own charge; which is such as will not permit me to
believe, that the case is as bad with them as formerly it has been. I say with
Minutius Foelix, p. 401. (mihi) Quid ingrati sumus? quid nobis invidemus? Si
veritas divinitatis nostri temporis aetate maturuit. Fruamur nostro bono; Et
recti sententiam temperemus: cohibeatur superstitio: impietas expietur: religio
servetur. It is the sinful unhappiness of some men's minds, that they can hardly
think well of the best words or ways of those whom they disaffect: And they
usually disaffect those that cross them in their corrupt proceedings, and
plainly tell them of their faults: And they are ready to judge of the reprovers
spirit by their own, and to think that all such sharp reproofs proceed from
some disaffection to their persons, or partial opposition to the opinions which
they hold: And therefore they will seldom regard the reproofs of any, but those
of their own party; who will seldom deal plainly with them, because they are of
their party. But plain dealers are always approved in the end: And the time is
at hand when you shall confess, that those were your truest friends. He that
will deal plainly against your sins, in uprightness and honesty, will deal as
plainly for you against the sins of any that would injure you: For he speaks
not against sin, because it is yours, but because it is sin. It is an
observable passage that is reported by many, and Printed by one, how the late
King Charles, (who by the Bishops instigation had kept Mr. Prin so long in
prison, and twice cropped his ears, for writing against their Masks and Plays,
and the high and hard proceedings of the Prelates) when he read his notable
voluminous speech for an acceptance of the Kings Concessions, and an agreement
with him thereupon, did, not long before his death deliver the Book to a friend
that stood by him, saying, Take this Book: I give it thee as a Legacy: and
believe it, this Gentleman is the Cato of the Age. The time will come when
plain dealing will have a better Construction, then it has while prejudice
does turn the heart against it.

I shall stand no longer on the Apologetical part: I think the foregoing
Objections being answered, there is no great need of more of this. The Title of
the Book it self is Apologetical (which if I tell you not, I may well expect
that some of my old ingenuous Interpreter; should put another sense upon it) I
pretend not to the Sapience of Gildas, nor to the Sanctity of Salvian (as to
the degree:) but by their names I offer you an excuse for plain dealing. If it
was used in a much greater measure, by men so wise and holy as these, why
should it in a lower measure be dis-allowed in another? At least from hence I
have this encouragement, that the plain dealing of Gildas and Salvian being so
much approved by us now they are dead, how much soever they might be despised
or hated while they were living, by them whom they did reprove, at the worst I
may expect some such success in times to come.

But my principal business is yet behind. I must now take the boldness,
Brethren, to become your Monitor concerning some of the necessary duties, of
which I have spoken in the ensuing discourse: If any of you should charge me
with arrogance or immodesty, for this attempt, as if hereby I accused you of
negligence, or judged my self sufficient to admonish you; I crave your candid
interpretation of my boldness, assuring you that I obey not the counsel of my
flesh herein, but displease my self as much as some of you; and had rather have
the ease and peace of silence, if it would stand with duty and the Churches
good. But it is the mere necessity of the souls of men, and my desire of their
salvation, and the prosperity of the Church, which forces me to this Arrogance
and Immodesty, if so it must be called. For who that has a tongue can be
silent, when it is for the honor of God, the welfare of his Church, and the
everlasting happiness of so many persons?

1. And the first and main matter which I have to propound to you, is, Whether
it be not the unquestionable duty of the generality of Ministers in these three
Nations, to set themselves presently to the work of Catechizing, and Personal
Instructing all that are to be taught by them, who will be persuaded to submit
thereunto? I need not here stand to prove it, having sufficiently done it in
the following discourse. Can you think that holy wisdom will gainsay it? Will
zeal for God, will delight in his service, or love to the souls of men gainsay
it? 1. That people must be taught the Principles of Religion, and matters of
greatest necessity to salvation, is past doubt among us. 2. And that they must
be taught it in the most edifying advantageous way, I hope we are agreed? 3.
And that personal Conference, and Examination, and Instruction, has many
excellent advantages for their good, is beyond dispute, and afterward
manifested. 4. As also that personal Instruction is commended to us by
Scripture, and the practices of the servants of Christ, and approved by the
godly of all ages, so far as I can find without contradiction. 5. It is past
doubt that we should perform this great duty to all the people, or as many as
we can: For our love and care of their souls must extend to all. If there be a
1000. or 500. ignorant people in your Parish, it is a poor discharge of your
duty now and then occasionally to speak to some few of them, and let the rest
alone in their ignorance, if you are able to afford them help. 6. And it is as
certain that so great a work as this is, should take up a considerable part of
our time. 7. And as certain is it, that all duties should be done in order, as
far as may be, and therefore should have their appointed times. And if we are
agreed to practice according to these commonly acknowledged truths, we need not
differ upon any doubtful circumstances.

Obj. We teach them in public; and how then are we bound to teach them man by
man besides?

Answ. You pray for them in Public: Must you not also pray for them in
private? Paul taught every man, and exhorted every man, and that both publicly
and from house to house, night and day with tears. The necessity and benefits
afterward mentioned prove it to be your duty. But what need we add more, when
experience speaks so loud? I am daily forced to admire, how lamentably ignorant
many of our people are, that have seemed diligent hearers of me this ten or
twelve years, while I spoke as plainly as I was able to speak! Some know not
that each person in the Trinity is God; Nor that Christ is God and man; Nor
that he took his humane nature into heaven; Nor many the like necessary
principles of our faith. Yea some that come constantly to private meetings are
found grossly ignorant: Whereas in one hours familiar instruction of them in
private, they seem to understand more, and better entertain it, then they did
in all their lives before.

Obj. But what obligation lies on us to tie our selves to certain days for
the performance of this work?

Answ. This is like the Libertines plea against family prayer. They ask, where
are we bound to pray morning and evening? Does not the nature and end of the
duty plainly tell you that an appointed time conduces to the orderly
successful performance of it? How can people tell when to come if the time be
not made known? You will have a fixed day for a Lecture, because people cannot
else tell when to come without a particular notice for each day: And it is as
necessary here, because this must be a constant duty, as well as that.

Obj. But we have many other businesses that sometimes may interrupt the course.

Answ. Weightyer business may put by our preaching, even on the Lords day; but
we must not therefore neglect our constant observance ordinarily of that day:
And so it is here. If you have so much greater business, that you cannot
ordinarily have time to do the Ministerial work, you should not undertake the
office: For Ministers are men separated to the Gospel of Christ, and must give
themselves wholly to these things.

Obj. All the Parish are not the Church, nor do I take the Pastoral charge of
them, and therefore I am not satisfied that I am bound to take this pains with
them.

Answ. I will pass by the question, Whether all the Parish be to be taken for
your Church: because in some places it is so, and in others not. But let the
negative be supposed: Yet 1. The common maintenance which most receive, is for
Teaching the whole Parish, though you be not obliged to take them all for a
Church. 2. What need we look for a stronger obligation, then the common bond
that lies on all Christians, to further the work of men's salvation, and the
good of the Church, and the honor of God, to the utmost of their power:
together with the common bond that is on all Ministers, to further these ends
by Ministerial teaching to the utmost of their power? Is it a work so good, and
apparently conducing to so great benefits to the souls of men, and yet can you
perceive no obligation to the doing of it?

Obj. But why may not occasional Conference and Instructions serve the turn?

Answ. I partly know what occasional conferences are compared to this duty,
having tried both. Will it satisfy you to deal with one person of 20. or 40.
or an hundred, and to pass by all the rest? Occasional conferences fall out
seldom, and but with few; and (which is worst of all) are seldom managed so
thoroughly, as these must be. When I speak to a man that comes to me purposely
on that business, he will better give me leave to examine him, and deal closely
with him, then when it falls in on the by: And most occasional conferences fall
out before others, where plain dealing will not be taken so well. But so much
is said afterward to these and several other Objections, that I shall add no
more.

I do now in the behalf of Christ, and for the sake of his Church, and the
immortal souls of men, beseech all the faithful Ministers of Christ, that they
will presently and effectually fall upon this work. Combine for an unanimous
performance of it, that it may more easily procure the submission of your
people. But if there should be found any so blind or vile as to oppose it, or
dissent, God forbid that other Ministers should because of that forbear their
duties. I am far from presuming to prescribe you Rules or Forms, or so much as
to motion to you to tread in our steps, in any circumstances where a difference
is tolerable, or to use the same Catechism or Exhortation as we do: Only fall
presently and closely to the work. If there should be any of so proud or
malicious a mind, as to withdraw from so great a duty, because they would not
seem to be our followers, or drawn to it by us, when as they would have
approved it, if it had risen from themselves; I advise such, as they love their
everlasting peace, to make out to Christ for a cure of such cankered minds; and
let them know that this duty has its rise neither from them nor us, but from
the Lord; and is generally approved by his Church: And for my part, let them,
and spare not, tread me in the dirt, and let me be as vile in their eyes as
they please, so they will but harken to God and reason, and fall upon the work,
that our hopes of a more common salvation of men, and of a true Reformation of
the Church may be revived. I must confess I find by some experience that this
is the work that must Reform indeed; that must expel our common prevailing
ignorance; that must bow the stubborn hearts of men; that must answer their
vain objections; and take off their prejudice; that must reconcile their hearts
to faithful Ministers; and help on the success of our public preaching; and
must make true godliness a commoner thing, through the Grace of God, which
works by means. I find that we never took the rightest course to demolish the
Kingdom of Darkness till now. I do admire at my self, how I was kept off from
so clear and excellent a duty so long. But I doubt not but other men's case is
as mine was. I was long convinced of it, but my apprehensions of the
difficulties were too great, and my apprehensions of the duty too small, and so
I was hindered long from the performance. I thought that the people would but
have scorned it, and none but a few that had least need would have submitted to
it: and the thing seemed strange: and I stayed till the people were better
prepared; and I thought my strength would never go through with it, having so
great burdens on me before: and thus I was long detained in delays, which I
beseech the Lord of mercy to forgive. Whereas upon trial, I find the
difficulties almost nothing (save only through my extraordinary bodily
weakness) to that which I imagined; and I find the benefits and comforts of the
work to be such, as that I profess I would not wish that I had forborne it, for
all the Riches in the world (as for my self.) We spend Monday and Tuesday from
morning to almost night in the work; (besides a Chappelrie catechized by
another assistant) taking about 15. or 16. families in a week (that we may go
through the Parish (which has above 800. families) in a year:) and I cannot
say yet that one family has refused to come to me, nor but few persons excused
and shifted it off. And I find more outward signs of success with most that
come, then of all my public preaching to them. If you say, It is not so in
most places: I answer, 1. I wish that be not much long of our selves. 2. If
some refuse your help, that will not excuse you for not affording it to them
that would accept it. If you ask me, what course I take for order and
expedition; I have after told you: In a word; at the delivery of the
Catechisms, I take a Catalogue of all the persons of understanding in the
Parish: and the Clark goes a week before to every family to tell them when to
come, and at what hour (one family at 8. a Clock, the next at 9. and the next
at ten, etc.) And I am forced by the number to deal with a whole family at
once; but admit not any of another to be present (ordinarily.)

Brethren, do I now invite you to this work, without God, without the consent
of all antiquity, without the consent of the Reformed Divines or without the
conviction of your own consciences? See what our late Assembly speak
occasionally, in the Directory, about the visitation of the sick, It is the
duty of the Minister not only to teach the people committed to his charge in
public, but Privately and Particularly to admonish, exhort, reprove and
comfort them upon all seasonable occasions, so far as his time, strength, and
personal safety will permit. He is to admonish them in time of health to
prepare for death: And for that purpose, they are often to confer with their
Minister about the estate of their souls, etc. Read this over again and
consider it. Harken to God if you would have peace with God: Harken to
conscience if you would have peace of conscience. I am resolved to deal plainly
with you, if I displease you: It is an unlikely thing that there should be a
heart that is sincerely devoted to God in the breast of that man, that after
advertisements and exhortations, will not resolve on so clear and great a duty
as this is. As it is with our people in hearing the word, so it is with us in
teaching: An upright heart is an effectual perswader of them to attend on God
in the use of his Ordinances; and an upright heart will as effectually persuade
a Minister to his duty: As a good stomach needs no arguments to draw it to a
feast, nor will easily by any arguments be taken off: And as a child will love
and obey his parents, though he could not answer a Sophister that would
persuade him to hate them: so I cannot conceive that he that has one spark of
saving Grace, and so has that love to God, and delight to do his will, which
is in all the sanctified, should possibly be drawn to contradict or refuse such
a work as this: except under the power of such a temptation as Peter was when
he denied Christ, or when he dissuaded him from suffering, and heard an half
excommunication, Get thee behind me Satan: thou art an offense unto me: for
thou favourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men, Mat.
16. 22, 23. You have put your hand to the plough of God: You are doubly
sanctified or devoted to him, as Christians, and as Pastors; and dare you after
this draw back and refuse his work? You see the work of Reformation at a stand;
and you are engaged by many obligations to promote it: and dare you now neglect
that means by which it must be done? Will you show your faces in a Christian
Congregation, as Ministers of the Gospel, and there pray for a Reformation, and
pray for the Conversion and Salvation of your hearers, and the prosperity of
the Church: and when you have done, refuse to use the means by which it must be
done? I know carnal wit will never want words and shows of reason to gainsay
that truth and duty which it abhors: It is easier now to cavil against duty
then perform it: but stay the end, before you pass your final judgment. Can
you possibly make your selves believe that you shall have a comfortable review
of these neglects, or make a comfortable account of them unto God? I dare
prognosticate from the knowledge of the nature of Grace, that all the Godly
Ministers in England will make conscience of this duty, and address themselves
to it (except those that by some extraordinary accident are disabled, or those
that are under such temptations as aforesaid:) I do not hopelesly persuade you
to it, but take it for granted that it will be done: And if any lazy, or
jealous, or malicious hypocrites, do cavil against it, or hold off, the rest
will not do so: but they will take the opportunity, and not resist the warnings
of the Lord. And God will uncase the hypocrites ere long, and make them know to
their sorrow, what it was to play fast and loose with God. Woe to them, when
they must be accountable for the blood of souls! The Reasons which satisfied
them here against duty, will then be manifested to be the effects of their
folly, and to have proceeded radically from their corrupted wills, and carnal
interest. And (unless they be desperately blinded and scared to the death)
their consciences will not own those Reasons at a dying hour which now they
seem to own. Then they shall feel to their sorrow, that there is not that
comfort to be had for a departing soul in the reviews of such neglected duty,
as there is to them that have wholly devoted themselves to the service of the
Lord. I am sure my arguments for this duty will appear strongest at the last,
whatever they do now. And again I say, I hope the time is even at hand when it
shall be as great a shame to a Minister to neglect the private Instructing and
oversight of the Flock, as it has been to be a seldom Preacher; for which men
are now justly sequestered and ejected: And if God have not so great a quarrel
with us as tends to a removal of the Gospel, or at least to the blasting of
its prosperity and success in the desired reformation, I am confident that this
will shortly be. And if these lazy worldly hypocrites were but quickened to
their duty by a Sequestring Committee, you should see them stir more zealously
then all arguments fetched from God and Scripture, from the Reward or
Punishment, or from the Necessity and Benefits of the work can persuade them to
do. For even now these wretched men, while they pretend themselves the servants
of Christ, and are asking, What Authority we have for his work? and if we could
but show them a command from the Lord Protector or Council, it would answer all
their scruples, and put the business beyond dispute, as if they had a design to
confirm the accusation of the Papists, that their Ministry only is Divine, and
ours depends on the will of men. Well! for those godly zealous Ministers of
Christ, that labor in sincerity, and denying their worldly interest and ease,
do wholly devote themselves to God, I am confident there needs not much
persuasion. There is somewhat within that will presently carry them to the
work: And for the rest, let them censure this warning as subtly as they can,
they shall not hinder it from rising up against them in judgment, unless it be
by true Repentance and Reformation.

And let me speak one word of this to you that are my dear fellow laborers in
this County, who have engaged your selves to be faithful in this work. It is
your henour to lead in sacred Resolutions and Agreements: but if you should any
of you be unfaithful in the performance, it will be your double dishonor.
Review your subscribed Agreement, and see that you perform it with diligence
and constancy. You have begun a happy work: such as will do more to the welfare
of the Church then many that the world does make a greater stir about. God
forbid now, that imprudence or negligence should frustrate all. For the
generality of you, I do not much fear it, having so much experience of your
fidelity in the other parts of your office. And if there should be any found
among you, that will shuffle over the work, and deal unfaithfully in this and
other parts of your office, I take it for no just cause of reproach to us that
we accept of your subscription, when you offer to join with us. For Catechizing
is a work not proper only to a Minister; and we cannot forbid any to engage
themselves to their unquestionable duty: But in our Association for Discipline
we must be somewhat more scrupulous, with whom we join. I earnestly beseech you
all in the name of God, and for the sake of your peoples souls, that you will
not slightly slubber over this work; but do it vigorously and with all your
might, and make it your great and serious business: Much judgment is required
for the managing of it. Study therefore how to do it beforehand, as you study
for your Sermons. I remember how earnest I was with some of the last
Parliament, to have had them settle Catechists in our Assemblies; But truly I
am not sorry that it took not effect (unless for a few of the larger
Congregations.) For I perceive that all the life of the work under God, does
lie in the prudent effectual management; in searching men's hearts, and setting
home the saving truths: and the ablest Minister is weak enough for this, and
few of inferior place or parts would be found competent: for I fear nothing
more, then that many Ministers that preach well, will be found too unmeet for
this work; especially to manage it with old, ignorant, dead-hearted sinners:
And indeed if the Ministers be not reverenced by the people, they will rather
slight them and contest with them, then humbly learn and submit: how much more
would they do so by inferior men? Seeing then the work is cast upon us, and it
is we that must do it or else it must be undone, let us be up and doing with
all our might, and the Lord will be with us. I can tell you one thing for your
encouragement; It is a work that the enemies of the Church and Ministry do
exceedingly vex at, and hate and fear more then any thing that yet we have
undertaken. I perceive the signs of the Papists indignation against it. And me
thinks it has the most not able character of a work extraordinarily and
unquestionably good: For they storm at it, and yet have nothing to say against
it. They cannot blame it, and yet they hate and fear it, and would fain
undermine it, if they knew how. You know how many false rumors have been
spread abroad this Country to deter the people from it: as that the Lord
Protector and Council were against it: That the subscribers were to be ejected:
That the Agreement was to be publicly burnt, etc. And when we have searched
after the authors, we can drive it no higher then the Quakers, the Papists
Emissaries; from whom we may easily know their minds. And yet when a Papist
speaks openly as a Papist, some of them have said, that it is a good work, but
that it wants authority, and is done by those that are not called to it:
Forsooth, because we have not the Authority of their Pope or Prelates: And some
that should be more sober have used the same language: as if they would rather
have thousands and millions of souls neglected, then have them so much as
Catechized and Instructed, without Commission from a Prelate. Yea and some that
differ from us about Infant Baptism, I understand, repine at it; and say that
we will hereby insinuate our selves into the people, and hinder them from the
receiving of the truth. A sad case that any that seem to have the fear of God,
should have so true a Character of a partial, dividing, and siding mind, as to
grudge at the propagation of Christianity it self, and the common truths which
we are all agreed in, for fear least it should hinder the propagation of their
opinions. The common cause of Christianity, must give place to the cause of
these lower controverted points: and they grudge us our very labor and
suffering for the common work, though there be nothing in it which medleth with
them, or which they are able with any show of reason to gainsay. I beseech you
Brethren let all this, and the many motives that I have after given you,
persuade you to the greater diligence herein! When you are speaking to your
people; do it with the greatest prudence and seriousness, and be as earnest
with them as for life or death; and follow it as close as you do your public
exhortations in the Pulpit. I profess again, it is to me the most comfortable
work, except public preaching (for there I speak to more, though yet with less
advantage to each one) that ever I yet did set my hand to: And I doubt not but
you will find it so to you, if you faithfully perform it.

2. MY second request to the Reverend Ministers in these Nations is, that at
last they would without any more delay, unanimously set themselves to the
practice of those parts of Christian Discipline, which are unquestionably
necessary, and part of their work. It is a sad case that good men under so much
liberty, should settle themselves so long in the constant neglect of so great a
duty. The common cry is, [Our people be not ready for it: they will not bear
it.] But is not the meaning, that you will not bear the trouble and hatred
which it will occasion? If indeed you proclaim our Churches incapable of the
Order and Government of Christ, What do you but give up the cause to them that
withdraw from them? and encourage men to look out for better societties where
that Discipline may be had? For though preaching and Sacraments may be omitted
in some cases, till a fitter season, and accordingly so may Discipline be; yet
it is a hard case to settle in a constant neglect, for so many years together
as we have done, unless there were a flat impossibility of the work: And if it
were so, because of our incapable materials, it would plainly call us to alter
our constitution, that the matter may be capable. I have spoke plainly
afterward to you of this, which I hope you will bear, and conscionably consider
of. I now only beseech you that would make a comfortable account to the chief
Shepherd, and would not be found unfaithful in the house of God, that you do
not wilfully or negligently delay it, as if it were a needless thing; nor
shrink not from duty because of trouble to the flesh that does attend it: For
as that is too sad a sign of hypoorisie; so the costlyest duties are usually the
most comfortable; and be sure that Christ will bear the cost. I could here
produce a heap of testimonies, of Fathers and Reformed Divines, that charge
this duty with great importunity. I shall only now give you the words of two of
the most godly, laborious, judicious Divines that most ever the Church of
Christ had since the days of the Apostles.

Calvin. Institut. li. 4. cap. 12. sect. 1, 2. Sed quia nonnulli in odium
Disciplinae ab ipso quoque nomine abhorrent, hi sic habeant: Si nulla societas,
imo nulla domus quae vel modicam familiam habeat, contineri in recto statu sine
disciplina potest: Eam esse multo magis necessariam in Ecclesia, cujus slatum
quam ordinatissimum esse decet. Proinde quemadmodum salvifica Christi doctrina
anima est Ecclesiae, ita illic disciplina pro nervis est, qua fit ut membra
corporis suo quaeque loco inter se cohaereant. Quamobrem quicunque vel sublatam
disciplinam cupiunt, vel ejus impediunt restitutionem, sive hoc faciant data
opera, sive per incogitantiam, Ecclesiae certe extremam dissipationem quaerunt.
Quid enim futurum est, si unicuique liceat quod libuerit? Atqui id fieret nisi
ad doctrinae praedicationem accederent privatae monitiones, correctiones, and
alia ejusmodi adminicula quae doctrinam sustinent and otiosam esse non sinunt.
Disciplina igitur veluti fraenum est, quo retineantur and domentur qui adversus
Christi doctrinam ferociunt: vel tanquam stimulus quo excitentur parum
voluntarii: interdum etiam velut paterna ferula qua clementer and pro spiritus
Christi mansuetudine castigentur, qui gravius lapsi sunt. Quum ergo jam
imminere cernamus initia quae dam horrendae in Ecclesia vastitatis, ex eo quod
nulla est cura, nec ratio continendi populi, ipsa necessitas clamat remedio
opus esse. Porro hoc unicum remedium est quod and Christus praecipit, and
semper usitatum inter pios fuit. 2. Primum disciplinae fundamentum est, ut
privatae monitiones locum habeant: hoc est, siquis officium sponte non faciat
aut insolenter se gerat aut minus honest vivat, aut aliquid admiserit
reprehensione dignum, ut patiatur se moneri, atque ut quisque fratrem suum dum
res postulabit monere studeat. Praesertim vero in hoc advigilent Pastores ac
presbyteri quorum parts sunt non modo concionari ad populum sed per singulas
domos monere and exhortari, sicubi universali doctrina non satis profecerint,
quemadmodum docet Paulus, quum refert se docuisse privatim and per domos; and
se mundum a sanguine omnium attestatur, quia non cessaverit cum lachrymis nocte
and die monere unumquemque. See the rest. And sect. 4. he adds of the
necessity: Sine hoc disciplinae vinculo qui diu stare posse Ecclesias
confidunt, opinione fallantur: Nisi forte carere impune possimus eo adminiculo,
quod Dominus fore nobis necessarium providit. Et sec. 5. Atque hic quoque
habenda est coenae Dominicae ratio ne promisma exhibitione profanetur.
Verissimum est enim eum cui commissa est dispensatio si sciens ac volens
indignum admiserit quem repellere jure poterat, proinde reum esse sacrilegii
acsi corpus Domini canibus prostitueret.

Hier. Zanchius de Ecclesia Vol. 3. f. 123, 124. (Disciplina) est actio qua
Ecclesia, secundum facultatem sibi a Christo traditam fideles suos non solum
public, sed etiam privatim, tam in vero Dei cultu quam in bonis moribus idque
tum doctrina, tum correctionibus, tum Ecclesiasticis poenis and censuris, tum
etiam si opus sit excommunicationibus instituit and institutos retinet. Fol.
124. Primo habet privatam doctrinam. Habet enim Ecclesia potestatem, si publica
doctrina in publico templo non sufficiat, privatas fidelium domos ingrediendi,
atque ibi eos privatim docendi, ac in vera doctrina ac religione Christiana
instituendi: and fideles pati debent ut Pastor suas aedes ingrediatur, and eos
privatim instituat. Hujus exemplum est, in Act. 20. etc. Idem fecerunt reliqui
Apostoli. 2. Habet privatas admonitiones, correctiones, objurgationes, etc.
This is for private teaching: Now for the Sacrament, hear what he says, ibid.
fol. 79. Obj. Manebimus in Ecclesia, audiemus verbum, etc. sed qui possumus in
coena Communionem vobiscum habere, cum ad eam admittantur multi impuri, ebrii,
avari, etc. Resp. 1. Quantum ad hos peccatores, eos intelligi posse bifariam:
vel qui ante fuerunt ebrii, etc. Sed postea resipuerunt. Hos dicimus secundum
verbum domini non esse excludendos a Mensa domini, quandoquidem vera
poenitentia and fide praediti sunt: vel eos qui etiamnum ebrietati student,
aliisque vitiis, and talis sine poenitentia and fide accedunt: Hos dicimus
simpliciter non esse admittendos. Quod autem admittuntur plerumque hoc
contingere potest bifariam: vel ex ignorantia Ministrorum, eo quod non
agnoverint tales esse, quales sunt: Et hanc certe ignor antiam non probamus,
quoniam debet Minister agnoscere, qualesnam sint illi quibus coenam Domini
administrat: quod si ignorant, non potest non accusari supinae and
reprehendendae negligentiae, etc. Aut cum sint omnibus noti qualesnam sint, non
student tamen eos arcere prae timore, vel aliquo alio humano respectu. Hoc
damnamus in Ministro vitium timiditatis. Debet enim Minister Christi esse
cordatissimus and heroicus. Sed hic non est spectandum quid unus aut alter
vilis Minister agat (mark the Title) sed quae sit Ecclesiae institutio, quaeque
communis in omnibus Ecclesiis consuetudo: In omnibus autem Ecclesiis nostris
antequam coena Ministretur, omnibus hujusmodi interdicitur, etc. Et certo
magnum est prob^um, quod inter filios Dei locum habeant and porci and canes:
Multo vero magis, si illis prostituuntur sacro-sancta coenae Dominicae symbola,
etc. Quare Ecclesiae Christi non debent hu jusmodi scelerators in sinu suo
far, nec ad sacram coenam dignos simul and indignos promiscue admittere: id
quod plerumque fit in Ecclesiis nostris: (How many then were the viles
Ministri!)

But the principal is behind of the necessity of Discipline: And I desire both
Magistrates and Ministers, into whose hands these lines shall fall, to read and
consider it.

Ibid. fol. 134, 135. Videant igitur principes and Magistratus qui hanc
disciplinam in Ecclesiam restitutam nolunt, quid agant. Haec instituta est a
Christo, ut perpetuo in Ecclesia tanquam singularis thesaurus conservetur: Ergo
qui eam exulare volunt, sciant se velle, Christum, exulare. Haec pars est
Evangelii Jesu Christi. Ergo qui hanc restitutam nolunt, sciant se nolle
Evangelium Christi, ficut debet, restitutum. Quomodo igitur gloriamur
restitutum esse Evangelium in Ecclesiis nostris, si hanc eamque non postremam
partem Evangelii restitutam-nolumus? Hac vitia corriguntur: virtutes
promoventur: ergo qui hanc disciplinam restitutam nolunt, quomodo audent dicere
se vitia odisse, virtutum vero amantes esse, pietatis promotores, impietatis
osores. Hac conservatur and regitur Ecclesia, singulaeque Ecclesiae membra suo
quaeque loco cohaerent: Ergo quomodo qui hanc expulsam volunt dicunt se velle
Christi Ecclesiam, been rectam si quando sine hac been regi non potest. Si
nulla domus nullum opidum, nulla urbs, nulla respublica, nullum regnum, imo ne
exiguus quidem ludus literarius, sine disciplina regi potest, quomodo poterit
Ecclesia? I would Magistrates would read the rest, which is purposely to them.

Et fol. 135. At timetur seditio and tumultus. Resp. Ergo neque Evangelium est
praedicandum, etc. Quid: Annon vident Principes and Magstratus nostri quantum
malum in Ecclesia oriatur, and intus and foris ex neglectu contemptuve hujus
disciplinae? Foris nulla res est quae magis Papistas and alios, arceat, vel
saltem retrudet amplectendo evangelio, atque haec disciplinae Ecclesiasticae
destitutio, quae est in Ecclesiis nostris. Intus, nihil quod magis alat vitia,
haeresis, etc. Annon vident Ecclesias suas principes plenas sectis
haereticorum, and impurorum hominum? Ad has confluit omne genus hominum
fanaticorum, impurorum, etc. tanquam ad asylum. Quare? quia ibi nulla
disciplina.

Sciant ergo principes and quicunque illi sint qui Disciplinam Ecclesiasticam
in Ecclesiis restitutam nolunt, sed ei adversantur eamque proscribunt, se
Christo adversari: qui ministros impediunt ne came exerceant, se Christum and
Deum impedire, ne sua fungantur potestate. Quid enim agunt Ministri cum
excommunicant? Pronunciant sententiam Domini. Ait enim Christus: Quicquid liga
veritis in terris, etc. Quid igitur agunt qui impediunt Ecclesiam ne sententiam
Domini pronunciet? Peccant contra Christum, and rei sunt laesae Divinae
Majestatis. Annon reus esset laesae Majestatis Caesareae, siquis ejus judicem
ne sententiam Caesaris pronunciet impediat? Videant igitur quid agant. Hactenus
Christus rexit Ecclesiam suam hac Disciplina; and ipsi Principes, imo and
Ministri aliquot, nolunt eam sic regi? Viderint ipsi. Pronuncio, Proclamo,
Protestor, eos peccare, qui cum possint and debeant eam restituere, non
restituunt.

I hope both Magistrates and Ministers that are guilty, will give me leave to
say the like with Zanchy, if not to call them Traitors against the Majesty of
God, that hinder Discipline, and adversaries to Christ, yet at least to
Pronounce, Proclaim, Protest, that they sin against God, who set it not up when
they may and ought. But what if the Magistrate will not help us? Nay, What if
he were against it? So he was for about 300. years, when Discipline was
exercised in the primitive Church. To this Zanchy adds, ib. Ministri Ecclesiae
quantum per consensum and pacem Ecclesiae licet hanc Disciplinam exercere
debetis. Hanc enim potestatem vobis dedit Dominus, neque quispiam auferre eam
potest: nec contenti esse debetis ut doceatis quid agendum, quid fugiendum sit,
utut quisque pro sua libidine vivat nihil curantes, sed urgenda disciplina.
vid. August. de fide and operib. c. 4. Obj. At impedimur per Magistratum. Resp.
Tunc illi significate quam male agat, etc. Read the rest of the solid advice
that Calvin and Zanchy in the forecited places, do give both to Ministers and
people where Discipline is wanting.

The great Objection that seems to hinder some from this work, is because we
are not agreed yet, who it is that must do it? Whether only a Prelate? or
whether a Presbytery? or a single Pastor? or the People? Answ. Let so much be
exercised as is out of doubt. 1. Its granted that a single Pastor may expound
and apply the word of God: He may rebuke a notorious sinner by name. He may
make known to the Church that God has commanded them, with such a one no not
to eat? and require them to obey this command, etc. I shall say no more of this
now, then to cite the words of two learned, godly, moderate Divines, impartial
in this cause. The one is Mr. Lyford a maintainer of Episcopacy, in his Legacy
of Admission to the Lords Supper: who page 55. says, [Q. In which of the
Ministers is this power placed?] Answ. Every Minister has the power of all
Christ's Ordinances to dispense the same in that Congregation or Flock, over
which the Holy Ghost has made him Overseer; yet with this difference: he may
preach the word, baptize, and administer the holy Supper alone of himself
without the assistance or consent of the People: But not excommunicate alone
(he means not without the people, though of that more must be said:) because
excommunication does presuppose an offense to the Congregation, a conviction
and proof of that offense, and witnesses of the parties obstinacy: and
therefore hereunto is required the action of more then one, etc.
Excommunication comprizeth several acts: Admonition, private, public: the last
act is, the casting out of a wicked obstinate person from the society of the
faithful. 1. By the authority of Christ. 2. Dispensed and executed by the
Ministers of the Gospel. 3. With the assistance and consent of the
Congregation, etc. 2. If you ask by whose office and Ministry this sentence is
denounced? I answer, by the Ministers of the Gospel: we bind and loose
doctrinally, in our preaching peace to the godly and curses to the wicked: But
in excommunication we denounce the wrath of God against this or that particular
person (Thou art the man! thou have no part with us:) and that not only
declaratively, but judicially: It is like the sentence of a Judge on the bench,
etc. 3. If you ask, Whether this be done by the Minister alone? I answ. No; it
must be done by the assistance and consent of the Congregation, 1 Cor. 5. 4.
Excommunication must not be done in a corner, by the Chancellor and his
Register, etc. But whosoever does by his offenses lose his right to the holy
things of God, he must lose it in the face of the Congregation, and that after
proofs and allegations, as is abovesaid: the people hear and see the offense,
complain of it, and are grieved at his society with them, and judge him worthy
to be cast out. This concurrence and consent being supposed, every Minister is
Episcopus Gregis, a Bishop in his own Parish (N. B.) Act. 20. 28. To all the
Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you (...), Overseers. And Heb. 13.
17. Remember them which have the Rule over you, who have spoken to you the word
of God. Where note, that they who preach the word of God, must Rule and Govern
the Church; and every Preacher is a Ruler, unto whom the people must submit. v.
17. Besides every Minister is vested with this authority at his Ordination,
Whose sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven: whose sins thou do retain,
etc. 2. Every Minister is vested with this authority by the Laws of this Land:
The words of the Rubric for the administration of the Lords Supper which do
enable us thereto are these [If any of those which intend to be partakers of
the holy Communion, be an open notorious evil liver, so that the Congregation
by him is offended, or have done wrong to his neighbors by word or deed, the
curate having knowledge thereof, shall call him, and advertise him in any wise
not to presume to the Lords Table, until he have openly declared himself to
have truly repented and amended his former naughty life, that the Congregation
may thereby be satisfied, which before were offended; and that he have
recompensed the parties whom he has done wrong to, or at least declare himself
to be in full purpose so to do as soon as he conveniently may: Besides this our
Authority in this particular is, confirmed by an Ordinance of the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, etc.! So far Mr. Lyfords words.

The other is Mr. Tho. Ball of Northampton in his late Book for the Ministry,
where Part 3. Cap. 4. he brings many Arguments to prove it the Ministers duty
to exercise Discipline as well as to preach: and the seventh Argument is this,
[What was given by the Bishops unto such Ministers as they ordained and laid
their hands upon, should not be grudged or denied to them by any body: for they
were never accounted lavish or over liberal unto them, especially in point of
Jurisdiction: that was always a very tender point, and had a guard and centry
always on it: for conceiving themselves the sole possessors of it, they were
not willing to admit of partners: Whatever they indulged in other points, as
Pharaoh to Joseph [Only in the throne I will be greater then thou] Yet Bishops
granted to all that they ordained Presbyters, the use and exercise of
Discipline as well as Doctrine, as appears in the Book of ordering Bishops,
Priests and Deacons, whereof the Interrogatories propounded to the party to be
ordained is, [Will you then give your faithful diligence always so to Minister
the Doctrine and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ as the Lord has
commanded, and as this Realm has received the same according to the
Commandments of God, so that you may teach the people committed to your care
and charge with all diligence to keep and observe the same:] Which a Reverend
and Learned Brother, not observing would confine all jurisdiction to Diocesan
Bishops, etc. Argu. 8. What is granted and allowed to Ministers by the Laws and
Customs of this Nation cannot reasonably be denied: for the Laws of England
have never favored usurpation in the Clergy, etc. But the Laws and customs of
this Nation allows to the Ministers of England the use and exercise of
Discipline as well as Doctrine: for such of them as have Parsonages or
Rectories, are in all process and proceedings called Rectors, etc.

2. And as to the point of the Peoples interest, the moderate seem to differ
but in words. Some say the People are to Govern by Vote: I confess if this were
understood as it is spoken, according to the proper sense of the words, and
practiced accordingly, it were contrary to the express commands of Scripture,
which Command the Elders to Rule well, and the people to obey them as their
Rulers, in the Lord: And it seems to me to be destructive to the Being of a
Political Church, whose constitutive parts are the Ruling and the Ruled parts:
as every School consists of Master and Scholars, and every commonwealth of
the Pars imperans, and pars subdita: And therefore those that rigidly stick to
this, do cast out themselves from all particular Political Churches Communion
of Christ's institution. (Which because I have formerly said, or somewhat to
that purpose, a late nameless Writer makes me cruel to his party, while I seem
for them, and so self-contradicting: as if it were cruelty to tell a Brother of
his sin, and not to leave it on him: Or as if I understood not my self, because
he understands me not!) But I perceive the moderate mean not any such things as
these words in their proper sense import. They only would have the Church Ruled
as a free people (as from unjust impositions) and in a due subordination to
Christ. And we are all agreed that the Pastors have the Judicium Directionis,
the Teaching, Directing Power, by Office: and that the People have Judicium
Discretionis; and must try his Directions, and not obey them when they lead to
sin; and therefore we cannot expect that the people should execute any of our
Directions except their Judgment lead them to execute them. (Though if their
Judgment be wrong, God requires them to rectify it) And as for the Judicial
Decisive power (about which there is so great contending) in the strictest
sense it is the Prerogative of Christ, and belongs to neither of them: For
only Christ is proper Lawgiver, and Judge of the Church, whose Law and
Judgment is Absolute, of it self Determinative, and not subjected to our trial
of its equity or obligation. So that we must as much conclude that there is no
final Judge of Controversies in a Particular Church, as we do against the
Papists, that there is none in the Church in general. And therefore the
Churches Judicial Decisive Power is but improperly such, reducible to the
former, which seeing we are agreed in, we are as far in sense agreed in this. A
Pastor is Judge as a Physician in an Hospital, or as Plato or Zeno was in his
School, or any Tutour in a College of voluntary Students. For any more, it
belongs to Christ, and to the Magistrate. Why then do we stand quarreling
about the names? One says, The people have a Power of Liberty, and the
Ministers only the Power of Authority. And what is this more then we yield them;
viz. That the guiding Authority being only in the Guides, and the people
commanded to obey them in a due subordination to Christ, there is a Liberty
belonging to all the Saints; from any other kind of Ministerial Rule, that is,
from a sic volo, sic jubeo, a Rule without Divine authority: and therefore the
people must first try and judge, whether the Direction be according to God, and
so obey: And this in Church censures as well as other cases. So that, 1. As the
people ought not to dissent, or disobey their Guides, unless they lead them to
sin (and therefore must see a danger of sin before they suspend obedience.) So
2. the Guides cannot bring the people to execute their Censures or Directions,
but by procuring their consent. And therefore though he must do his duty, and
may pass his Directive censure though they dissent, and Ministerially require
them in the name of the Lord, e. g. to avoid a notorious obstinate offender,
and so to obey the command of God; that is, though we may charge them in the
name of the Lord to consent, and obey, and do their duty, yet if their
Judgments remain unconvinced in a case which is to them obscure, we have no
more to do, but satisfy our selves that we have done our duty. So that when we
have quarrelled never so long, what is it but the Peoples consent that the
moderate men on one side do require? and consent the other side requires also:
Call it what else you will, whether a Government, or an Authority, or a
Liberty; Consent is the thing which both require! And are we not then in the
matter agreed? Peruse for this Mr. Lyfords words before cited. See also what
the leading men for Presbyterian Government do not only acknowledge but
maintain as effectually as others: as Dav. Blondellus de Jure plebis in Regim.
Eccles. Calvin Institut. l. 4. c. 12. sect. 4. Ne quis tale judicium spernat,
aut parvi aestimet se Fidelium suffragiis damnatum, testatus est Dominus, etc.
Ita Zanchius ubi sup. and many more. Indeed this Consent of the people is not
sine qua non to the Pastors performance of his own part; viz. Charging the
Church in Christ's name to avoid the Communion of such a notorious obstinate
offender, and suspending his own acts toward him: and so charging them to
receive the innocent or penitent.] (For if the people consent not to avoid
such, and so would exclude all Discipline, yet the Pastor must charge it on
them, and do his part.) But it is sine qua non to their actual rejecting and
avoiding that offender. In a word, we must Teach them their duty and require it
and they and we must obey and do it: and neither they nor we may oblige any to
sin.

Obj. But we are not agreed about the matter of the Church that must be
Governed.

Answ. Peruse the qualifications required in Churchmembers in the writings of
the moderate on both sides, and see what difference you can find! Are not both
agreed, that Professors of true faith and holiness, cohabiting and consenting,
are a true Church? and when they contradict that Profession by wicked actions,
(Doctrine or life) they are to be dealt with by Discipline. Though I confess in
our practice we very much differ; most that I know running into one of the
extremes, of looseness or rigor.

3. MY third and last Request is, that all the faithful Ministers of Christ
would without any more delay Unite and Associate for the furtherance of each
other in the work of the Lord, and the maintaining of Unity and Concord in his
Churches. And that they would not neglect their Brotherly meetings to those
ends, nor yet spend them unprofitably, but improve them to their edification,
and the effectual carrying on the work. Read that excellent Letter of Edmond
Grindal Archbishop of Canterbury to Q. Elizabeth, for Ministerial meetings and
exercises (such Bishops would have prevented our contentions and wars:) You may
see it in Fullers new History of the Church of England.

And let none draw back that accord in the substantials of faith and godliness:
Yea if some should think themselves necessitated (I will not say to Schism,
least I offend them; but) to separate in public worship from the rest, me
thinks, if they be indeed Christians, they should be willing to hold so much
Communion with them as they can, and to consult how to manage their differences
to the least disadvantage to the common truths and Christian cause which they
all profess to own and prefer.

And here I may not silently pass by an uncharitable slander which some
Brethren of the Prelatical Judgment have divulged of me far and near: viz.
That while I persuade men to Accommodation, it was long of me that the late
Proclamation or Ordinance was procured for silencing all Sequestered Ministers;
viz. by the late Worcestershire Petition, which they say was the occasion of it
(and they falsely report that I altered it after the subscription.) To which I
say. 1. It was the Petition of many Justices, and the grand Jury, and thousands
of the County, as well as me. 2. There is not a word in it, nor ever was,
against any godly man, but only that the notoriously insufficient and
scandalous should not be permitted to meddle with the mysteries of Christ
(specially the Sacraments;) which we desired should have impartially extended
to all parties alike. And so much of this as was granted, we cannot but be
thankful for, whoever grudge at it; and wish it had been fully granted. 3. I
desire nothing more, then that all able, godly, faithful Ministers of what side
soever in our late State differences, may not only have liberty, but
encouragement: For the Church has not any such to spare, were they ten times
more. In a word; I would have those of what party soever to have Liberty to
preach the Gospel, whose errors or miscarriages are not so great, as that
probably they will do as much hurt as good.

Brethren, I crave your pardon for the infirmities of this address: and
earnestly longing for the success of your Labors, I shall daily beg of God,
that he would persuade you to those duties which I have here requested you to
perform, and would preserve and prosper you therein, against all the Serpentine
subtilty and rage that is now engaged to oppose and hinder you.

April 15. 1656. Your unworthy fellow servants, Rich. Baxter.

TO The Lay-Reader.
THE reason why I have called this volumn, the first Part of the book, is
because I intend, if God enable me, and give me time, a Second Part, containing
the duty of the people in relation to their Pastors, and therein to show; 1.
The Right and Necessity of a Ministry. 2. The way to know which is the true
Church and Ministry, and how we justify our own calling to this office, and
how false Prophets and Teachers must be discerned. 3. How far the people must
assist the Pastors in the work of the Cospel, and the Pastors put them on, and
make use of them to that end. And 4. How far the people must submit to their
Pastors, and what other Duty they must perform in that Relation. But because my
time and strength is so uncertain, that I know not whether I may live to
publish my yet-imperfect preparations on this subject, I dare not let this
first Part come into your hands, without a word of caution and advice, lest you
should misunderstand or misapply it.

1. The caution that I must give you, is in two parts.

1. Entertain not any unworthy thoughts of your Pastors, because we here
confess our own sins, and aggravate them in order to our humiliation and
reformation. You know it is men and not Angels that are put by God in the
office of Church-guides! And you know that we are imperfect men: Let Papists
and Quakers pretend to a sinless perfection; we dare not do it; but confess
that we are sinners. And we should heartily rejoice to find the signs of
imperfect sincerity, in them that so confidently pretend to sinless perfection;
yea if in some of them we could find but common honesty, and a freedom from
some of the crying abominations of the ungodly, such as cruel bloodiness,
lying, slandering, railing, etc. If it would make a man perfect to say he is
perfect, and if it would deliver a man from sin, to say, I have no sin, I
confess this were an easy way to perfection.

There is one Richard Farnworth called a Quaker, that has lately published a
Pamphlet against our Agreement for Catechizing; and the substance of it is
this: because we confess that by neglecting that work of the Lord, we have
sinned, and do beg pardon of our miscarriages, and say that by Nature we are
children of wrath, and prone to do evil, etc. therefore he will prove us
deceivers and no Ministers of Christ, as from our own Confession. As if they
that are Dead by Nature, may not be made alive by Grace! And as if Are is not
as proper a term as Were, when we speak of the state of all mankind in their
natural condition, wherein the most do still abide! And as if the confessing
our sin would prove us to be ungodly! O shameless men! God says, He that
confesses and forsakes his sin shall have mercy. And the Quaker makes it a
matter of his reproach. John says, If we confess, he is faithful and just to
forgive: And the Quaker makes it a sign that we are not forgiven. God will not
forgive us, if we refuse to confess: And the Quaker makes us unpardoned,
because we do it. What would this wretch have said to David, Ezra, Nehemiah,
Daniel, etc. if he had lived in their days, who made such full confessions of
their sins! God hit them not in the teeth with them; but the Quakers will!
Christ did forgive even Peter's denial of him! but it seems the Quaker would
have condemned him for the penitent lamenting of it: Is Paul damned for
confessing himself the chief of sinners (of whom I am chief, (1 Timothy 1. 15.)
and that formerly he was a persecutor, blasphemer, etc. Or because he says,
Ephesians. 3. 8. Unto me, who am less then the least of Saints. Or for crying out, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! What
I would that I do not, and what I hate that do I. I find a Law, that when I
would do good, evil is present with me, etc. Romans 7. 24. 15. 21. Or is Isaiah a
wicked man, and no Prophet of God, for saying, Woe is me, I am undone, because I
am a man of unclean lips, etc. Isa. 6. 5. Or Jacob, for saying, Genesis 32. 10. I
am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, etc. Or Job for abhorring
himself in dust and ashes, Job 42. 6. It irketh me to spend words upon such
Impudent revilers! But in this much you have a sufficient Reply to his book.

But for our parts we believe that he that says he has no sin, deceives
himself, and the truth is not in him, I John 1. 8. and that in many things we
offend all, I am. 3. 2. and we profess to know but in part, and to have our
treasure in earthen vessels, and to be insufficient for these things. And
therefore see that you love and imitate the holiness of your Pastors, but take
not occasion of dis-esteeming or reproaching them for their infirmities.

2. I take it to be my duty as a watchman for your souls, to give you notice of
a train that is laid for your perdition. The Papists who have found that they
could not well play their game here with open face, have masked themselves, and
taken the vizards of several sects; and by the advantage of the license of the
times, are busily at work abroad this Land, to bring you back to Rome. What
names or garb soever they bear, you may strongly conjecture which be they by
these marks following. 1. Their main design is to unsettle you, and to make you
believe that you have been all this while misled, and to bring you to a loss in
a matter of Religion, that when they have made you dislike or suspect that
which you had (or seemed to have) you may be the more respective of theirs. 2.
To which end their next means is to bring you to suspect first, and then to
contemn and reject your Teachers. For says Rushworth, one of their Writers,
Not one of ten among the people indeed do ground their faith on the Scripture,
but on the credit of their teachers, etc. therefore they think, if they can but
bring you to suspect your teachers, and so to reject them, they may deal with
the sheep without the Shepherds, and dispute with the Scholars without their
Teachers, and quickly make you say what their list. To this end their design is
partly to cry them down as false teachers (but how are they baffled when it
comes to the proof?) and partly to persuade you that they have no calling to
the work; and urge them to prove their calling (which how easily can we do?)
and partly to work upon your covetous humor, by crying down tithes, and all
established maintenance for the Ministry. And withal they are busy yet in
contriving how to procure the Governors of the Nation, to withdraw their
public countenance and maintenance, and sacrilegiously to deprive the Church
of the remnant that is devoted to it for God, and to leave the Ministry on
equal terms with themselves or all other sects (which in Spain, Italy, France,
etc. they will be loath to do.) And time will show you, whether God will suffer
them to prevail with the Governors of this sinful land to betray the Gospel
into their hands, or not? but we have reason to hope for better things. 3.
Their next design, is to diminish the Authority, and sufficiency of Scripture:
and because they dare not yet speak out, to tell us what they set up in its
stead, some of them will tell you of New Prophets, and Revelations, and some of
them will tell you, that in that they are yet at a loss themselves: that is,
they are of no Religion; and then they are no Christians. I shall now proceed
no further in the discovery: but only warn you, as you love your souls, keep
close to Scripture and a faithful Ministry! and despise not your Shepherds if
you would escape the wolves. If any question our calling, send them to our
writings where we have fully proved them; or send them to us, who are ready to
justify them against any Papist or Heretic upon earth. And let me tell you,
that for all the sins of the Ministry which we have here confessed, the known
world has not a more able, faithful, godly Ministry then Britain has at this
day. If at the Synod of Dort the Clerus Anglicanus was called stupor mundi,
before all those Ignorant and Scandalous ones were cast out; what may we now
call it? Brethren, let me deal freely with you! The ungrateful contempt of a
faithful Ministry, is the shame of the faces of thousands in this Land! and if
through-Repentance prevent it not, they shall better know in hell, whether such
Ministers were their friends or foes, and what they would have done for them,
if their counsel had been heard. When the Messengers of God were mocked, and
his words despised, and his Prophets abused, the wrath of the Lord arose on the
Israelites themselves: and there was no remedy, 2 Chro. 36. 16. Shall Ministers
study, and preach, and pray for you, and shall they be despised? When they have
the God of Heaven and their own consciences to witness, that they desire not
yours but you, and are willing to spend and be spent for your sakes, and that
all the wealth in the world would not be regarded by them in comparison of your
salvation, and that all their labors and sufferings is for your sakes; if yet
they shall be requited with your contempt, or scorn, or dicourageing
unteachableness, see who will prove the losers in the end: When God himself
shall Justify and Condemn them, with a Well done good and faithful servant;
let those that reproached, despised, and condemned them, defend their faces
from shame, and their consciences from the accusations of their horrid
ingratitude, as well as they can! Read the Scripture and see, whether they that
obeyed Gods Messengers, or they that despised and disobeyed them sped best? And
if any of the Seducers will tell you, that we are not the Ministers of Christ,
leave them not, till they tell you, which is his true Church and Ministry, and
where they are? and by that time they have well answered you, you may know more
of their minds.

3. My last advice to you is this. See that you Obey your faithful Teachers,
and improve their help for your salvation while you have it; and take heed that
you refuse not to learn when they would teach you. And in particular, see that
you refuse not to submit to them in this duty of Private Instruction, which is
mentioned in this Treatise. Go to them when they desire you, and be thankful
for their help. Yea and at other times when you need their advice, go to them
of your own accord, and ask it. Their office is to be your guides in the way to
life: If you seek not their Direction, it seems you either despise salvation it
self, or else you are so Proud as to think your selves sufficient to be your
own Directors. Shall God in mercy send you Leaders to Teach you and Conduct you
in the way to Glory, and will you stoutly send them back, or refuse their
assistance, and say, We have no need of their Direction? Is it for their own
case or gain that they trouble you, or is it for your own everlasting gain?
Remember that Christ has said to his Messengers, He that despises you,
despises me! If your obstinate refusal of their Instruction, do put them to
bear witness against you in Judgment, and to say, Lord, I would have taught
these ignorant sinners, and admonished these worldly impenitent wretches; but
they would not so much as come to me, nor speak with me! look you to it, and
answer it as you can: For my part I would not be then in your case for all the
world. But I shall say no more to you on this point, but only desire you to
read and consider the exhortation, which is published in our Agreement it self,
which speaks to you more fully: And if you read this book, remember that the
Duty which you find to belong to the Ministers, does show also what belongs to
your selves. For it cannot be our duty to Teach, Catechize, Advise, etc. if it
be not yours to Hear, and Learn, and seek Advice. If you have any temptation to
question our office, read the London Ministers Ius Divinum Minister. Evang. and
Mr. Tho. Balls book for the Ministry: If you doubt of the duty of learning the
Principles, and being Catechized, read the London Ministers late Exhortation to
Catechizing, and Mr. Zach. Croftons book for Catechizing (now newly published.)

April 16. 1656. Rich. Baxter.

Dr. H. Hammond of the Power of the Keys, cap. 4. sect. 104. page 113. NAY
thirdly, there will be little matter of doubt or controversy, but that
private, frequent, spiritual conference betwixt Fellow Christians, but
especially (and in matters of high concernment and difficulty) between the
Presbyter and those of his charge, even in the time of health; and peculiarly,
that part of it, which is spent in the discussion of every man's special sins
and infirmities and inclinations may prove very useful and advantageous (in
order to spiritual directions, reproof and comfort) to the making the man of
God perfect. And to tell truth, if the Pride and self conceit of some, the
wretchlesness of others, the bashfulness of a third sort, the nauseating, and
instant satiety of any good in a fourth, the follies of men, and artifices of
Satan had not put this practice quite out of fashion among us, there is no
doubt but more good might be done by Ministers this way, then is now done by
any other means separated from the use of this particularly, then by that of
Public Preaching (which yet need not be neglected the more when this is used)
which has now the fate to be cried up, and almost solely depended on, it being
the likelyer way, as Quintilian says, (comparing Public and private teaching
of youth) to fill narrow mouthed bottles (and such are the most of us) by
taking them single in the hand, and pouring in water into each, then by setting
them altogether, and throwing never so many bottles of water on them.

Mr. William Gurnal in his excellent Book called, The Christian in complete
Armor, page 2, 5. THE ignorant soul feels no such smart: If the Minister stay
till he sends for him to instruct him, he may sooner hear the bell go for him
than any Messenger come for him: You must seek them out, and not expect that
they will come to you. These are a sort of people that are afraid more of their
Remedy, than their disease, and study more to hide their ignorance, then how to
have it cured; which should make us pity them the more, because they can pity
themselves so little. I confess it is no small unhappiness to some of us, who
have to do with a multitude, that we have neither time nor strength to make our
addresses to every particular person in our Congregations, and attend on them
as their needs require; and yet cannot well satisfy our consciences otherwise.
But let us look to it, that though we cannot do to the height of what we would,
we be not found wanting in what we may. Let not the difficulty of our Province
make us like some, who when they see they have more work upon their hands, than
they can well dispatch, grow sick of it, and sit down out of a lazy
despondency, and do just nothing. -- O if once our hearts were but filled with
Zeal for God and compassion to our peoples souls, we would up and be doing,
though we could but lay a brick a day; and God would be with us. May be, you
who find a people rude and sottishly ignorant, like stones in the quarry and
trees unfell'd, shall not bring the work to such perfection in your days as
you desire! Yet as David did for Solomon, thou may by thy pains in teaching
and instructing them, prepare materials for another, who shall rear the Temple.
--

Read the rest.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
Sect. 1. THE brief explication of the Text. Sect. 2. What sort of Elders they
were, that Paul spoke to. Sect. 3. The Doctrine and Method. Sect. 4. The terms
opened. Sect. 5, 6, 7, and 8. Wherein we must take heed to ourselves. Sect. 9.
to 16. The moving Reasons to Take heed to ourselves.
CHAP. II.
Sect. 1. WHat it is to Take heed to all the Flock? Its employed that every
Flock have their own Pastor; and that regularly the Flock be no greater then
the Pastors may over-see, taking heed to all. Sect. 2. The ends of this
Oversight. Sect. 3. Of the subject of this work. Sect. 4. Of the Object of it.
1. The unconverted. 2. The converted. 1. The young and weaker. 2. Those that
labor under some special distempers. 3. Decliners. 4. That are fallen under
some great Temptation. 5. The disconsolate. 6. The strong. Sect. 5. Of the
action it self. 1. Public Preaching. 2. Sacraments. 3. Public prayer, and
praise, and benediction. 4. Oversight of the members distinctly. 1. Knowing
them. 2. Instructing the ignorant. 3. Advising them that seek advice. 4.
Looking to particular Families. How. 5. Resisting seduction. 6. Encourageing
the obedient. 7. Visiting the sick. 8. Comforting. 9. Private admonishing
offenders. 10. More public Discipline. 1. Public admonition. How. 2. Public
exhortation to open discovery of Repentance. 3. Public praying for the
offender. 4. To assist the penitent, confirming, absolving, etc. 5. Rejecting
the obstinately impenitent from our Communion. 6. Reception of the penitent.
The manner and necessity of these acts. Making Laws for the Church is not our
work.
CHAP. III.
OF the manner and concomitants of our work. It must be done. 1. Purely for
God, and not for self. 2. Laboriously and diligently. 3. Prudently and orderly.
4. Insisting most on the Greatest and most Necessary things. 5. With Plainness
and Evidence. 6. In a sense of our insufficiency and dependence on Christ. 7.
In Humility and Condescension. 8. A mixture of severity and mildness. 9. With
Affectionate seriousness. 10. Reverently and spiritually. 11. In tender love to
our people. 12. Patiently. And we must be studious of Union and Communion among
our selves, and of the Unity and peace of the Church.
CHAP. IV.
Sect. 1. THE first Use for our humiliation: Confessing the sins of the
Ministry; especially of this Nation; heretofore. Sect. 2. A confession of our
present sins. Specially; 1. Pride. Sect. 3. 2. An undervaluing the Unity and
Peace of the Catholic Church. Sect. 4. 3. Want of serious, industrious,
unreserved laying out our selves in the work of God. Discovered 1. By negligent
studies. Sect. 5. 2. By dull drowsic preaching. Sect. 6. 3. By not helping them
that want abroad. Sect. 7. 4. By neglect of acknowledged Duties. E. G. Church
Discipline. The pretenses confuted, that would justify it. Sect. 8. 5. By the
Power of worldly carnal interests. Manifested, 1. By temporizing. 2. Worldly
business. 3. Barrenness in works of Charity. Sect. 9. Applied for Humiliation.
CHAP. V.
Sect. 1. USE of Exhortation. Motives in the text. 1. From our office and
Relation to all the Flock, with some subservient considerations. Sect. 2. 2.
From the efficient cause: the Holy Ghost. Sect. 3. 3. From the Dignity of the
Object. Sect. 4. 4. From the price paid for the Church. Sect. 5. A more
particular exhortation. 1. To see that the saving work of grace be wrought on
our own hearts. A word to Tutours and Schoolmasters. Sect. 6. 2. Keep Grace in
vigor and activity, and preach to your own hearts first; for your work sake.
Sect. 7. 3. Stir up your selves to the work, and do it with all your might.
Sect. 8. 4. Keep up earnest desires and expectations of success. Sect. 9. 5. Be
zealous of good works. Spare no cost. Sect. 10. 6. Maintain Union and
Communion. The way thereto. Sect. 11. 7. Practice so much of Discipline, as is
certainly your duty. Sect. 12. 8. Faithfully discharge this duty of personal
Catechizing and Instruction of all the Flock.
CHAP. VI.
Sect. 1. REasons for this Duty. 1. From the Benefits. The great Hopes we have
of a blessed success of this work if faithfully managed; Showed in 20.
particulars. Sect. 2. 2. From the Difficulty of this work. Sect. 3. 3. From the
Necessity of it: which is manifold. Sect. 4. Use: What great cause of
Humiliation we have for neglecting this so long. Sect. 5. An Exhortation to the
faithful performance of this work. Twenty aggravations of our sin, and
witnesses which will condemn the wilful refusers of so great duties, as this
Private Instruction, and Discipline are. Sect. 6. The Objections of lazy
unfaithful Ministers, against Personal Instruction and Catechizing, answered.
CHAP. VII.
Sect. 1. DIrections to the less experienced, for the right managing of this
work. 1. For bringing our People to submit to it. Sect. 2. 2. To do it so as is
likest to succeed. 1. For the Conversion of the ungodly, and awaking of the
secure. In twelve Directions.
CHAP. VIII.
DIrections how to deal with self-conceited Opinionists, and to prevent or cure
Error and Schism in our People. And how to deal with those of whose condition
we are between hope and fear.
Readers, you will right me, and ease your selves, if you will mend these
mis-Printings with your pen, before you read the book.
Page 46. li. 14. for conscience read conference 3 p. 90. l. 9. r. mo^iendo; p.
105. l. 4. blot out that; p. 106. l. 29. blot out us; p. 113. l. 23. r. art; p.
115. l. 19. after token r. it; p. 135. l. 25. r. speaking for; p. 142. l.
penult. r. desertion; p. 144. l. 26. r. histrionical; p. 145. l. 13. r. useful;
p. 146. l. 18. r. better; p. 150. l. 16. r. contrive; p. 168. l. antipen. r.
sit; p. 180. l. antipen. r. that; p. 186. l. 3. r. Ho^tonus; p. 188. l. 25. and
p. 189. l. 8. r. sit still; p. 209. l. 16. for shines r. thriveth; p. 211. l.
8. after and r. then; p. 213. l. 17. blot out for: p. 217. l. 17. after call r.
them: p. 222. l. 18. r. the: p. 286. l. 11. r. going to Church: p. 289. l. 9,
10. r. continued: and l. 20. r. see, p. 290. l. 15. r. compose: and l. 17. r.
will never; and l. 24. r. serve; and l. 28. r. confessions; p. 248. l. 14. r.
promissionibus; p. 309. l. 11. for Is it not r. It is not; p. 314. l. 20. for
recover recover; p. 339. l. 24. for for r. to; p. 341. l. 9. for the r. that;
p. 343. l. 22. r. prosecution; p. 351. l. 22. for more r. mere; p. 356. l. 11.
r. (...); p. 377. l. 25 r. use it; and l. 27. r. and that sect; p. 378. l. 29.
r. is in p. 383. l. 23. for by such r. than by taking such; p. 389. l. ult. for
One r. Me; p. 390. l. 27. for profession r. proper place; p. 394. l. 10. r. so
far as; p. 398. l. 21. for sensual Lazarus r. sensual Lazyness; and l. 27. r.
acknowledged; p. 403. l. 29. r. from him; p. 401. l. 10. for I say r. They say;
p. 409. l. 10. r. against all; p. 418. l. 12. for prosess r. possess; and l.
14. r. If any have; p. 422. l. 2. r. to live long; p. 430. l. 5. for elocution
r. election, and l. 29. for of r. that; p. 431. l. 20. for of that; r. of
Christ; p. 438. l. 15. for them r. him; p. 442. l. 22. r. to the heart; p. 444.
l. 14. r. beset; p. 445. l. 7. for we r. so. p. 459. l. 19. for till then r.
tell them. p. 463. l. penult. for they r. that. and l. ult. for these r. the
Church. p. 467. l. 2. for loathed r. toothed. p. 469. for obtusions r.
obtrusions.

Gildas Salvianus; THE REFORMED PASTOR.
ACTS 20. 28. Take heed therefore to your selves, and to all the Flock, over
the which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased with his own blood.
CHAP. I.
SECT. I.
Reverend and Dearly Beloved Brethren,
THough some think that Paul's Exhortation to these Elders, does prove him their
Ruler, we hope, who are this day to speak to you from the Lord, that we may
freely do the like, without any jealousies of such a Conclusion. Though we
teach our people as Officers set over them in the Lord, yet may we teach one
another, as Brethren in Office as well as in Faith. If the people of our charge
must teach and admonish, and exhort each other daily, Col. 3. ^6. Heb. 3. 13.
no doubt Teachers may do it to one another without any supereminency of power
or degree. We have the same sins to kill, and the same graces to be quickened
and corroborated, as our people have: we have greater works then they to do,
and greater difficulties to overcome, and no less necessity is laid upon us;
and therefore we have need to be warned and wakened, if not to be instructed,
as well as they: So that I confess I think such meetings should be more
frequent, if we had nothing else to do together but this: And as plainly and
closely should we deal with one another, as the most serious among us do with
their Flocks; lest if only they have the sharp admonitions and reproofs, they
only should be sound and lively in the Faith. That this was Paul's judgment, I
need no other proof, then this rowsing heart-melting exhortation to the
Ephesian Elders: A short Sermon; but not soon learnt. Had the Bishops and
Teachers of the Church but thoroughly learned this short exhortation, though
with the neglect of many a Volumn which has taken up their time, and helped
them to greater applause in the world, how happy had it been for the Church and
them!

Our present straits of time will allow me to touch upon no part of it but my
Text; which, supposing Paul the speaker, and the Ephesine Elders his hearers,
contains, 1. A two-sold duty. 2. A fourfold motive to enforce it.

The first duty is to Take heed to themselves. The second is, to take heed to
all the Flock. And the main work for the Flock which is thus heedfully to be
done, is expressed, even to feed them, or play the Shepherds for them.

The motives closely laid together are these. 1. From their engagement and
Relation: They are the Overseers of the Flock; It is their office. 2. From the
efficient cause; even the authority and excellency of him that called them to
it: which was the Holy Ghost. 3. From the dignity of the object, which is the
matter of their charge; It is the Church of God: the most excellent and
honorable society in the world. 4. From the tender regard that Christ has to
this Church, and the price it cost him: He purchased it with his own blood.
This Motive is partly subordinate to the former. The terms of the Text have no
such difficulty as to allow me the spending of much of our little time for
their explication. (...), here: is, maxima cura and diligentia animum adhibere;
(...), as Iansenius and others note, a little Flock. It signifies not here the
whole Church of Christ, which elsewhere is called (...), in reference to Christ
the great Shepherd; but it signifies that particular Church which these Elders
had a special charge of. Whether that was one or many, we shall enquire anon.
What is mean by (...). Bishops or Overseers here, is thus far agreed on, that
they were Officers appointed to Teach and Guide those Churches in the way to
salvation; and that it is the same persons that are called Elders of the Church
of Ephesus before, and Bishops here. Of whom more anon. The verb (...), seems
here to import both the Qualification, Ordination, and particular designation
of these Elders or Bishops to their charge: for we must not limit and exclude
without necessity. The Holy Ghost did by all these three ways make them
Overseers of their Flocks. 1. By qualifying them with such gifts as made them
fit for it. 2. By directing the minds of those that Ordained them to the
ministry. 3. By disposing both their own minds, and the Ordainers, and the
peoples for the affixing them to that particular Church rather then another.
Dicit eos constitutos a spiritu sancto, says Grotius, quia constituti erant ab
Apostolis plenis spiritu sancto, quanquam approbante plebe: But no doubt, in
those times the Holy Ghost did give special directions as by internal oracle,
for the disposal of particular teachers, as we read in the case of Saul and
Barnabas, and for the provision for particular Congregations.

(...), is by some translated barely to feed, as ours here; by others only to
Rule; but indeed as Gerhard, Iansenius, and others note, it is not to be
restrained to either, but contains in it all the Pastoral work. In one word
it is Pastorem agere, to do the work of a Pastor to the Flock. Whether it be
the Ephesine Congregation before called (...), that is here called (...), or
whether it be the Universal Church which they may be said to feed and Rule, by
doing their part toward it in their station (as a Justice of Peace may be said
to rule the Land) is not a matter of much moment to be stood upon: but the
former seems most likely to be the sense; (...), is both acquisivit and
asseruit and in suam vindicavit. Its said to be done by the blood of God, by a
Communication of the names of the distinct natures: And it affords us an
argument against the Arrians, seeing Christ is here expressly called God.

SECT. II.
BUT it is necessary before we proceed to Instruction and Application, that we
be resolved more clearly who those Elders or Bishops be that Paul does here
exhort. I am desirous to do all that lawfully I may to avoid controversy,
especially in this place, and on such occasions; But here it is unavoidable,
because all our following application will much depend upon the explication:
and if you shall once suppose that none of this Exhortation was spoken to men
in your office and capacity; no wonder if you pass it over and let it alone and
take all that I shall hence gather for your practice, as impertinent. This Text
was wont to be thought most apt to awaken the Ministers of the Gospel to their
duty: but of late the negligent are gratified with the News, (for news it is)
that only Bishops in a s^pereminent sense, whom we usually call Prelates are
spoken to in this Text; and not only so, but that no other Text of Scripture
does speak to any other Church Presbyters (certainly) but them; yea, that no
other were in being in Scripture times. Here are two Questions before us to be
resolved. 1. Whether the Elders here mentioned were the Elders of one Church of
Ephesus, or of all that part of Asia, that is, of every Church one. This is but
in order to the second, which is, whether these Elders were only Prelates, or
such Bishops as among us have carried that name.

The reasons that may be brought to prove these to be the Prelates of the
several Cities of Asia, and that the (...), is those many Cities, are these
following. 1. The affirmation of Irenaeus. To which we say; 1. There might be
many Elders of Ephesus present, though some from the nearest Cities were there
also: which is all that Irenaeus affirms. 2. We oppose to the saying of
Irenaeus the ordinary exposition of the ancients: The most singular is of least
authority, caeteris paribus.

2. It may be said that Paul calls them to remember how he had been among them
three years, not ceasing to warn every one, etc. But he was not three years at
Ephesus only, but in Asia, etc. Answ. He may be said to be where his chief
place of abode is. He that resideth ordinarily at Ephesus, though he thence
make frequent excursions to the neighbor parts, may well be said to abide so
long at Ephesus. And the Ephesian Elders might well be acquainted with his
industry round about them, though here is no certainty that he mentions any
more then what he did with them. For what he did in Ephesus, he did in Asia, as
that which is done in London is done in England. Obj. 3. But it is meant of all
Asia; for he says, among whom I have gone, etc. Answ. 1. As though Paul might
not go preaching the Gospel in Ephesus? 2. If he went further, the Ephesine
Elders might accompany him. Ob. Ephesus was the Metropolis, and therefore all
Asia might be thence denominated. Answ. 1. It must be proved that it was so
denominated. All France is not called Paris, nor all England London. 2. It is
not whole Countries, but a Church that Paul speaks of; and it is yet unproved
that the Church of one City had then any such dependence on the Church of
another City, as lesser Cities had upon the Metropolis.

Our Reasons that make us think that either all or many of these Elders or
Bishops were over the particular Church of Ephesus, are these. 1. It is
expressly said in the Text, that they were Elders of the Church, referring to
Ephesus next before mentioned. He sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the
Church. And it cannot be proved in all the New Testament that the Bishops of
other Churches and Cities, are called Bishops of a greater City, because it is
the Metropolis. 2. Here is mention but of one Church and one Flock in the
singular number, and not of many: when yet it is acknowledged that he speaks
not of the Universal Church (for then that language were not strange) but of a
particular Church. And it is the use of the Apostles to speak still in the
plural number when they mention the particular Churches of many Cities, and not
to call them all one Church or Flock. 3. And it may seem else that the Elder of
each one of these Cities has a charge of all the rest. For they are required
to take heed of all the Flock: which though it may possibly be by taking every
one his part, yet if one should fail, the rest seem to have his charge upon
them, which is more then they can do. 4. Paul was now in so great have in his
journey to Jerusalem, that Luke measures it out by the days. And it is not
like that Paul could in such have call the Elders from the several Cities of
Asia. If he had passed through the British Seas in such haste, and lodged at
Plymouth, and had thence called to him the Elders of Paris, he must have staid
many days or weeks, before he could have gathered also the Bishops of Rhemes,
Arles, Orleance, and the rest of France. 5. The numbers of Prophets and gifted
men in those times, and the state of other particular Churches, does give us
sufficient reason to conjecture that Ephesus was not so scant of help, as to
have but one Presbyter. Grotius thought that Timothy with his Com-Presbyters
made this appearance; but others have given very probable reasons that Timothy
was none of them. 6. The Judgment of Expositors ancient and modern running so
commonly the other way, commands some respect from us.

But 1. I confess the matter seems but conjectural on both sides, and neither
part to have a certainty: but if probability may carry it, there seems to be
many of the Elders of Ephesus, though possibly some of the neighboring Cities
might be with them. 2. But let this go how it will, it makes not much to the
main matter in hand. What if Ephesus and each other City or Church had then but
one Presbyter? will it follow that he was a Prelate? No; but the contrary: It
will prove that there was then none such at all, if there were no subject
Presbyters. For there is no King without subjects; nor master without servants.
1. The stream of ancient and modern Expositors do take this Text to speak of
Presbyters in the common sense. And we must be cautelous before we be singular
in the expounding of so many texts as speak the same way. 2. If men be put now
in the end of the world to find out a new foundation for Prelacy, supposing
that it has been amiss defended till now, and all these Texts (except by one
or two) amiss expounded, it will occasion the shaking of the frame it self. 3.
But the best is, we begin to be pretty well agreed, at least about the whole
Government that. de facto was in being in Scripture-times. For 1. It is now at
last confessed, that the word Presbyter is not certainly taken any where in the
New Testament, for one that is subject to a Bishop, having not power of
Ordination or Jurisdiction; and that no such Presbyters were in being in
Scripture-times. And by what authority they are since erected let them prove
that are concerned in it. 2. We are agreed now that they were the same persons
who in Scripture are called Bishops and Presbyters. 3. And that these persons
had the power of Ordination and Jurisdiction 4. And that these persons were not
the Bishops of many particular Churches, but one only: They ruled not many
Assemblies Ordinarily meeting for Church Communion: for there could no such
meetings be kept up without a Bishop or Presbyter to administer the Ordinances
of Christ in each. And if there were in a Diocese but one Bishop, and no other
Presbyters in Scripture times, then it must needs be that a Diocese contained
but one ordinary Church Assembly, and that de facto no Biship in
Scripture-times had under him any Presbyters nor more such Assemblies then one.
That is, they Ruled the particular Churches just as our Parish Pastors do. So
that we are satisfied that we go that way that the Apostles established and was
used de facto in Scripture-times: And if any will prove the lawfulness of
latter mutations, or will prove that the Apostles gave power to these
particular Pastors to degenerate into another sort of officers hereafter,
according to the Cogency of their Evidence, we shall believe it. In the mean
time, desiring to be guided by the word of God, and to go upon sure ground, and
take only so much as is certain, we hold where we are, and are glad that we are
so far agreed. Yet not presuming to censure all superior Episcopacy, nor
refusing to obey any man that commands us to do our duty, but resolving to do
our own work in faithfulness and peace.

For my own part, I have ever thought it easier to be Governed then to Govern;
and I am ready (as the British told Austin) to be obedient to any man in and
for the Lord: Nor can I think that any Government can be burdensome, which
Christ appoints; but all beneficial to us; as making our burden lighter and
not heavyer, and helping and not hindering us in the way to heaven. Were
Christ's work but thoroughly done, I should be the backwardest in contending, who
should have the doing of it. Let us agree but on this one thing which is plain
here in my Text, That the Churches or Flocks should be no greater then the
Pastors can personally over-see, so that they may Take heed to all the Flock;
and then let but able faithful men be the Overseers, that will make the word
of God the Rule, and lay out themselves for the saving of men's souls, and I am
resolved never to contend with such about the business of superiority; but
cheerfully to obey them in all things lawful, if they require my obedience. If
the difference were not more about the matters commanded, and the work it self
to be done, then, Who should command it: me thinks humble men should be easily
agreed. Would they but lay by all needless humane impositions and obtrusions,
and be contented with the sufficient word of God, and not make new work to
necessitate, new Canons and Authorities to impose it, but be content with the
Gospel simplicity, and let us take that for a sufficient way to heaven, that
Peter and Paul went thither in, I think I should not disobey such a Bishop,
though I were not satisfied of his differing Order or Degree. Yea, if he were
addicted to some encroaching usurpation of more power then is meet, would he
but forbear the Ecce duo gladii, and come to us only with the sword of the
spirit, which will admit of fair debates, and works only upon the conscience, I
know no reason much to fear such power, though it were undue. But enough of
this.

SECT. III.
THE Observations which the Text affords us are so many, that I may not now
stay so much as to name them: but shall only lay down that one which contains
the main scope of the Text, and take in the rest as subordinate motives in the
handling of that, in the method which the Apostle does here deliver them to us.

Doct. THE Pastors or Overseers of the Churches of Christ, must take great
heed both to themselves, and to all their Flocks in all the parts of their
Pastoral work.

The method which we shall follow in handling this point, shall be this. 1. I
shall briefly open to you the terms of the subject: What is meant by Pastors
and Churches. 2. I shall show you what it is to Take heed to our selves, and
wherein it must be done. 3. I shall give some brief Reasons of that part of the
point. 4. I shall show you, What it is to Take heed to all the Flock in our
Pastoral work, and wherein it must be done. 5. I shall make some Application of
all.

SECT. IV.
1. What the words, Pastor, Bishop and Church do signify, I will not wast
time to tell you, they being so well known. As for the things signified. 1. By
a Pastor or Bishop here is meant, An Officer appointed by Christ for the
ordinary Teaching and Guiding a particular Church and all its members, in order
to their salvation and the pleasing of God.

Christ appoints the Office it self by his Laws. The person he calls to it
by his qualifying Gifts, Providential disposals, secret impulses, and
ordinarily by the Ordination of his present Officers, and the Acceptance of the
Church.

Teaching and Guidance contain the main parts at least of the work to which
they are designed. The particulars we shall further stand upon anon.

A particular Church is the object of their work; by which they are
distinguished from Apostolical unfixed itinerant Ministers.

They are the stated Ordinary Teachers of such a Church, by which they are
differenced, both from private men, who do occasionally teach; and from the
foresaid Itinerant Ministers, that do but in transitu, or seldom teach a
particular Church. The subject is the matters of Salvation and Obedience to
God, and the end is salvation it self, and the pleasing of God therein; by
which work and ends the office is distinguished from all other offices, as
Magistrates, Schoolmasters, etc. though they also have the same remote or
ultimate ends.

By the Flock and Church is meant that particular society of Christians of
which these Bishops or Elders have the charge, associated for personal
Communion in Gods public worship, and for other mutual assistance in the way
to Salvation. Exact Definitions we may not now stand on; we have more fully
made some attempts that way heretofore.

SECT. V.
II. LET us next consider, What it is to take heed to our selves, and wherein
it must be done. And here I may well for brevity sake adjoyn the Application to
the Explication, it being about the matter of our Practice, that I may be put
to go over as little as may be of the same things again. Take therefore I
beseech you all this Explication, as so much Advice and Exhortation to the
duty, and let your hearts attend it as well as your understandings.

1. Take heed to your selves, lest you should be void of that saving Grace of
God which you offer to others, and be strangers to the effectual workings of
that Gospel which you preach; and lest while you proclaim the necessity of a
Savior to the world, your own hearts should neglect him, and you should miss
of an interest in him and his saving benefits? Take heed to your selves, lest
you perish, while you call upon others to take heed of perishing! and lest you
famish your selves while you prepare their food. Though there be a promise of
shining as the stars to those that turn many to righteousness, Dan. 12. 3. that
is but on supposition that they be first turned to it themselves: Such promises
are meant, caeteris paribus, and suppositis supponendis. Their own sincerity in
the faith is the condition of their glory simply considered, though their great
ministerial labors may be a condition of the promise of their greater glory;
Many a man has warned others that they come not to that place of Torment,
which yet they hasted to themselves: Many a Preacher is now in hell, that has
an hundred times called upon his hearers to use the utmost care and diligence
to escape it. Can any reasonable man imagine that God should save men for
offering salvation to others, while they refused it themselves: and for telling
others those truths which they themselves neglected and abused? Many a Tailor
goes in rags, that makes costly clothes for others: And many a Cook scarce
licks his fingers, when he has dress't for others the most costly dishes.
Believe it Brethren, God never saved any man for being a Preacher, nor because
he was an able Preacher: but because he was a justified, sanctified man, and
consequently faithful in his masters work. Take heed therefore to your selves
first, that you be that which you persuade your hearers to be, and believe that
which you persuade them daily to believe: and have heartily entertained that
Christ and Spirit which you offer unto others. He that bid you love your
neighbors as your selves, did imply that you should love your selves and not
hate and destroy your selves and them.

SECT. VI.
2. TAke heed to your selves, lest you live in those actual sins which you
preach against in others, and lest you be guilty of that which daily you
condemn. Will you make it your work to magnify God, and when you have done,
dishonor him as much as others? Will you proclaim Christ's Governing Power, and
yet contemn it, and rebel your selves? Will you preach his laws, and wilfully
break them? If sin be evil, why do you live in it? If it be not, why do you
dissuade men from it? If it be dangerous, how dare you venture on it? If it be
not, why do you tell men so? If Gods threatenings be true, why do you not fear
them? If they be false, why do you trouble men needlessly with them, and put
them into such frights without a cause? Do you know the Judgment of God, that
they that commit such things are worthy of death, and yet will you do them?
Romans 1. 32. Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that
say a man should not commit adultery, or be drunk, or covetous, art thou
such thy self? Thou that make thy boast of the Law, through breaking the Law
dishonourest thou God? Romans 2. 21, 21, 23. What, shall the same tongue speak
evil, that speaks against evil? shall it censure, and slander, and secretly
backbite, that cries down these and the like in others? Take heed to your
selves, lest you should cry down sin, and not overcome it, lest while you seek
to bring it down in others, you bow to it, and become its slaves your selves.
For of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage, 2 Pet. 2.
19. To whom you yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom
ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness. Romans 6.
16. It is easier to chide at sin, then to overcome it.

SECT. VII.
3. TAke heed also to your selves, that you be not unfit for the great
employments that you have undertaken. He must not be himself a babe in
knowledge, that will teach men all those mysterious things that are to be known
in order to salvation. O What qualifications are necessary for that man that
has such a charge upon him as we have! How many difficulties in Divinity to be
opened? Yea, about the very fundamentals that must needs be known! How many
obscure Texts of Scripture to be expounded? How many duties to be done, wherein
our selves and others may miscarry, if in the matter, and end, and manner, and
circumstances, they be not well informed? How many sins to be avoided, which
without understanding and foresight cannot be done? What a number of slye and
subtle temptations must we open to our peoples eyes, that they may escape
them? How many weighty and yet intricate cases of conscience have we almost
daily to resolve? Can so much work, and such work as this be done by raw
unqualified men? O what strong holds have we to batter, and how many of them?
What subtle, and diligent, and obstinate resistance must we expect at every
heart we deal with? Prejudice has blockt up our way: we can scarce procure a
patient hearing. They think ill of what we say while we are speaking it. We
cannot make a breach in their groundless hopes and carnal peace, but they have
twenty shifts and seeming reasons to make it up again; and twenty enemies, that
are seeming friends, are ready to help them. We dispute not with them upon
equal terms: But we have children to reason with that cannot understand us: we
have distracted men (in spirituals) to reason with, that will bawl us down with
raging nonsense: We have wilful unreasonable people to deal with, that when
they are silenced, they are never the more convinced: and when they can give
you no reason, they will give you their resolution: like the man that Salvian
had to deal with (lib. 4. de Gubernat. p. 133.) that being resolved to devour
a poor man's means, and being entreated by Salvian to forbear, told him, He
could not grant his request, for he had made a Vow to take it, so that the
Preacher audita religiosissimi sceleris ratione was fain to depart. We dispute
the case against men's wills and sensual passions as much as against their
understandings; and these have neither reason nor ears: Their best Arguments
are, I will not believe you, nor all the Preachers in the world in such things.
I will not change my mind, or life: I will not leave my sins; I will never be
so precise, come on it what will. We have not one, but multitudes of raging
passions, and contradicting enemies to dispute against at once, whenever we go
about the conversion of a sinner; as if a man were to dispute in a Fair or
tumult, or in the midst of a crowd of violent scolds: what equal dealing, and
what success were here to be expected? why such is our work, and yet a work
that must be done.

O Dear Brethren what men should we be in skill, resolution and unwearied
diligence, that have all this to do? Did Paul cry out, who is sufficient for
these things? 2 Cor. 2. 16. and shall we be proud or careless, and lazy, as if
we were sufficient: As Peter says to every Christian in Consideration of our
great approaching change, 2 Pet. 3. 11. What manner of persons ought we to be
in all holy Conversation and Godliness? so may I say to every minister, seeing
all these things do lie upon our hands, What manner of persons ought we to be
in all holy Endeavors and Resolutions for our work! This is not a burden for
the shoulders of a child. What skill does every part of our work require? and
of how much moment is every part? To preach a Sermon I think is not the hardest
part; and yet what skill is necessary to make plain the truth, to convince the
hearers; to let in unresistible light into their consciences, and to keep it
there, and drive all home! to scrue the truth into their minds, and work Christ
into their affections; to meet with every objection that gainsaies; and clearly
to resolve it; to drive sinners to a stand, and make them see that there is no
hope, but they must unavoidably be converted or condemned: and to do all this
so for language and manner as beseems our work, and yet as is most suitable to
the capacities of the hearers, this and a great deal more that should be done
in every Sermon, should sure be done with a great deal of holy skill. So great
a God whose message we deliver, should be honored by our delivery of it! It is
a lamentable case, that in a message from the God of heaven, of everlasting
consequence to the souls of men we should behave our selves so weakly, so
unhandsomly, so imprudently, or so slightly, that the whole business should
miscarry in our hands, and God be dishonored, and his work disgraced, and
sinners rather hardened then converted, and all this much through our weakness
or neglect! How many a time have carnal hearers gone jearing home at the
palpable and dishonorable failings of the Preacher! How many sleep under us,
because our hearts and tongues are slepy: and we bring not with us so much
skill and zeal as to awake them!

Moreover what skill is necessary to defend the truth against gainsayers, and
to deal with disputing Cavillers according to their several modes and case! And
if we fail through weakness, how will they insult? but that is the smallest
matter: but who knows how many weak ones may be perverted by the success, to
their own undoing and the trouble of the Church?

What skill is there necessary to deal in private with one poor ignorant soul
for their conversion (of which more in the end?)

O Brethren, do you not shrink and tremble under the sense of all this work!
Will a common measure of holy skill and ability of prudence and other
qualifications, serve for such a task as this! I know necessity may cause the
Church to tolerate the weak: But woe to us if we tolerate and indulge our own
weakness. Does not reason and conscience tell you, that if you dare venture on
so high a work as this, you should spare no pains to be fitted to perform it?
It is not now and then an idle snatch or taste of studies that will serve to
make a sound Divine. I know that laziness has lately learned to pretend the
lowness of all our studies, and how wholly and only the Spirit must qualify
and assist us to the work: and so, as Salvian says in another case (lib. 4. p.
134.) Authorem quodammodo sui sceleris deum faciu^t: As if God commanded us the
use of means, and then would warrant us to neglect them! As if it were h^s way
to cause us to thrive in a course of idlene^s; and to bring us to knowledge by
dreams when we are asleep, or to take us up into heaven, and show us his
counsels, while we think of no such matter, but are routing in the earth. O
that men should dare so sinfully by their laziness to quench the Spirit, and
then pretend the Spirit for the doing of it. Quis unquam (says he before
mentioned) creder^t usque in loanc contumeliam Dei, progressuraam esse humanae
cupiditatis (ignaviae) oudaciam! ut id ipsum in quo Christo injuriam facium,
dicant se ob Christi homen esse facturos! O inestimabile facinus and
prodigiosum! God has required of us, that we be not sloathful in business, but
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12. 11. Such we must provoke our
hearers to be, and such we must be our selves. O therefore Brethren lose no
time: study, and pray, and confer, and practice: for by these four ways your
abilities must be increased. Take heed to your selves lest you are weak through
your own negligence; and least you mar the work of God by your weakness. As
the man is, so is his strength, Judge. 8. 21.

SECT. VIII.
4. MOreover take heed to your selves, lest your example contradict your
Doctrine, and lest you lay such stumbling blocks before the blind, as may be
the occasion of their ruin. Lest you unsay that with your lives, which you say
with your tongues; and be the greatest hinderers of the success of your own
labors. It much hinders our work when other men are all the week long
contradicting to poor people in private, that which we have been speaking to
them from the word of God in public because we cannot be at hand to manifest
their folly: But it will much more hinder, if we contradict our selves, and if
your actions give your tongue the lie, and if you build up an hour or two with
your mouths, and all the week after pull down with your hands! This is the way
to make men think that the word of God is but an idle tale: and to make
preaching seem no better then prating. He that means as he speaks, will sure do
as he speaks. One proud surly Lordly word, one needless contention, one
covetous action may cut the throat of many a Sermon, and blast the fruit of all
that you have been doing. Tell me Brethren, in the fear of God: Do you regard
the success of your labors, or do you not? Do you long to see it upon the
souls of your hearers? If you do not, What do you preach for! What do you study
for! and what do you call your selves the Ministers of Christ for? But if you
do, then sure you cannot find in your heart to mar your work for a thing of
naught! What, do you regard the success of your labors, and yet will not part
with a little to the poor, not put up an injury or a soul word, nor stoop to
the meanest, nor forbear your passionate or ^ordly carriage, no not for the
winning of souls, and attaining the end of all your labors! You much regard
the success indeed, that will fell it at so cheap a rate, or will not do so
small a matter to attain it!

It is a palpable error in those Ministers that make such a disproportion
between their preaching and their living, that they will study hard to preach
exactly, and study little or not at all to live exactly: All the week long is
little enough to study how to speak two hours: and yet one hour seems too much
to study how to live all the week. They are loath to misplace a word in their
Sermons or to be guilty of any notable infirmity (and I blame them not, for the
matter is Holy and of weight;) but they make nothing of misplacing affections,
words and actions in the course of their lives. O how curiously have I heard
some men preach! and how carelessly have I seen them live! They have been so
accurate as to the wordy part in their own preparations, that seldom preaching
seemed a virtue to them, that their language might be the more polite, and all
the Rhetorical jingling writers they could meet with, were pressed to serve them
for the adorning of their style, (and gawds were often their chiefest ornaments.)
They were so nice in hearing others, that no man pleased them that spoke as he
thought, or that drowned not affections, or dulled not, or distempered not the
heart by the predominant strains of a fantastic wit. And yet when it came to
matter of practice, and they were once out of Church, how incurious were the
men, and how little did they regard what they said or did, so it were not so
palpably gross as to dishonor them! They that preached precisely, would not
live precisely! What difference between their pulpit speeches and their
familiar discourse? They that are most impatient of Barbarisms, Solecisms, and
Paralogisms in a Sermon, can easily tolerate them in their conversations.

Certainly Brethren, we have very great cause to take heed what we do, as well
as what we say: If we will be the servants of Christ indeed, we must not be
tongue-servants only, but must serve him with our deeds, and be doers of the
work, that in our deed we may be blessed, Iam. 1. 25. As our people must be
Doers of the word, and not hearers only; so we must be Doers and not speakers
only, least we be deceivers of our selves, Iam. 1. 22. A practical Doctrine
must be practically preached. We must study as hard how to live well, as how to
preach well. We must think and think again how to compose our lives as may most
tend to men's salvation, as well as our Sermons. When you are studying what to
say to them, I know these are your thoughts (or else they are naught and to no
purpose) How should I get within them? and what should I say that is likely
most effectually to convince them, and convert them, and tend to their
salvation? And should you not as diligently bethink your selves, How shall I
live, and what shall I say and do, and how shall I dispose of all that I have,
as may most probably tend to the saving of men's souls? Brethren, if saving
souls be your end, you will certainly intend it as well out of the pulpit as in
it! If it be your end, you will live for it, and contribute all your endeavors
to attain it: And if you do so, you will as well ask concerning the money in
your purse, as the words of your mouth, Which way should I lay it out for the
greatest good, especially to men's souls? O that this were your daily study, how
to use your wealth, your friends, and all you have for God, as well as your
tongues? and then we should see that fruit of your labors that is never else
like to be seen. If you intend the end of the Ministry in the pulpit only,
then it seems you take your selves for Ministers no longer then you are there.
And then I think you are unworthy to be esteemed such at all.

SECT. IX.
III. HAving showed you in four particulars, How it is that we must Take heed
to our selves, and what is comprised in this command; I am next to give you the
Reasons of it, which I entreat you to take as so many Motives to awaken you to
your duty, and thus Apply them as we go.

Reas. 1. You have a Heaven to win or lose your selves, and souls that must be
happy or miserable for ever: and therefore it concerns you to begin at home,
and to take heed to your selves as well as unto others. Preaching well may
succeed to the salvation of others, without the holiness of your own hearts or
lives; It is possible at least, though less usual: but it is impossible it
should serve to save your selves: [Many shall say at that day, Lord, have we
not prophesied in thy name? Mat. 7. 22. Who shall be answered with an I never
knew you, depart from me ye that work iniquity. v. 23. O Sirs, how many men
have preached Christ, and perished for want of a saving interest in him! How
many that are now in hell, have told their people of the torments of hell, and
warned them to avoid it! How many have preached of the wrath of God against
sinners, that are now feeling it! O what sadder case can there be in the world,
then for a man that made it his very trade and calling to proclaim salvation,
and to help others to attain it, yet after all to be himself shut out! Alas
that ever we should have so many books in our libraries that tell us the way to
heaven, that we should spend so many years in reading those books, and studying
the Doctrine of eternal life, and after all this to miss of it! That ever we
should study and preach so many Sermons of salvation, and yet fall short of it!
so many Sermons of damnation, and yet fall into it! And all because we preached
so many Sermons of Christ while we neglected him: of the Spirit while we
resisted it; of faith, while we did not heartily believe; of Repentance and
conversion, while we continued in the state of flesh and sin; and of a Heavenly
life, while we remained carnal and earthly our selves. If we will be Divines
only in Tongue and Title, and have not the Divine Image upon our souls, nor
give up our selves to the Divine honor and will, no wonder if we be separated
from the Divine presence, and denied the fruition of God for ever. Believe it
Sirs, God is no respecter of persons: He saves not men for their coats or
callings; A holy calling will not save ^n unholy man. If you stand at the door
of the Kingdom of Grace, to light others in, and will not go in your selves;
when you are burnt to the snuff ^ou will go out with a stink, and shall knock
in vain ^t the gates of glory, that would not enter at the ^oor of Grace. You
shall then find that your lamps should have had the oil of grace as well as of
ministerial Gifts; of Holiness as well as of Doctrine, if you would have had a
part in the glory which you preached. Do I need to tell you that Preachers of
the Gospel must be judged by the Gospel; and stand at the same bar, and be
sentenced on the same ^erms, and dealt with as severely as any other men? Can
you think to be saved then by your Clergy? and to come off by a legit ut
Clericus, when there ^ wanting the credidit and vixit ut Christianus? Alas, it
will not be: You know it will not. Take ^eed therefore to your selves for your
own sakes, seeing you have souls to save or lose as well as others.

SECT. X.
2. TAke heed to your selves; For you have a depraved nature, and sinful
inclinations as well as others. If innocent Adam had need of heed, and lost
himself and us for want of it, how much more need have such as we? sin dwells
in us, when we have preached never so much against it. And one degree prepares
the heart to another, and one sin inclines the mind to more; If one theif be
in the house, he will let in the rest; because they have the same disposition
and design. A spark is the beginning of a flame: and a small disease may bring
a greater. A man that knows himself to be purblind, should take heed to his
feet. Alas, even in our hearts as well as in our hearers, there is an aversness
to God, a strangeness to him, unreasonable and almost unruly passions. In us
there is at the best the remnants of pride, unbelief self seeking, hypocrisy,
and all the most hareful deadly sins. And does it not then concern us to take
heed? Is so much of the fire of hell yet unextinguished, that at first was
kindled in us? Are there so many Traitors in our very hearts, and is it not
time for us to take heed? You will scarce let your little children go
themselves while they are weak, without calling upon them to take heed of
falling. And alas how weak are those of us that seem strongest? How apt to
stumble at a very straw? How small a matter will cast us down, by ticing us to
folly, or kindling our passions and inordinate desires, by perverting our
Judgments, or abating our resolutions, and cooling our zeal, and dulling our
diligence? Ministers are not only sons of Adam, but sinners against the Grace
of Christ as well as others, and so have increased their radical sin. Those
treacherous hearts will one time or other deceive you, if you take not heed.
Those sins that seem now to lie dead will revive: Your pride, and worldliness,
and many a noysom vice will spring up, that you thought had been weeded out by
the roots. It is most necessary therefore, that men of such infirmities should
take heed to themselves, and be careful in the dieting and usage of their souls.

SECT. XI.
3. AND the rather also Take heed to your selves; because such great works as
ours do put men on greater use and trial of their graces, and have greater
temptations, then many other men's. Weaker gifts and graces may carry a man out
in a more even and laudable course of life, that is not put to so great trials.
Smaller strength may serve for lighter works and burdens. But if you will
venture on the great undertakings of the Ministry, if you will lead on the
Troops of Christ against the face of Satan and his followers; if you will
engage your selves against principalities and powers, and spiritual
wickednesses in high places; if you undertake to rescue captivated sinners, and
to fetch men out of the Devils paws: do not think that a heedless, careless
Minister is fit for so great a work as this. You must look to come off with
greater shame, and deeper wounds of conscience, then if you had lived a common
life, if you will think to go through such things as these with a careless
soul. It is not only the work that calls for heed, but the workman also, that
he may be fit for business of such weight; we have seen by experience, that
many men that lived as private Christians, in good reputation for parts and
piety, when they have taken upon them either military employment, or
Magistracy, where the work was above their parts, and temptations did overmatch
their strength, they have proved scandalous disgraced men. And we have seen
some private Christians of good note, that having thought too highly of their
parts, and thrust themselves into the Ministerial office, they have been empty
men, and almost burdens to the Church, and worse then some that we have
endeavored to cast out. They might have done God more service in the station
of the higher rank of private men, then they do among the lowest of the
Ministry. If you will venture into the midst of the enemies, and bear the
burden and heat of the day, Take heed to your selves.

SECT. XII.
4. AND the rather also, Take heed to your selves; because the Tempter will
make his first or sharpest onset upon you. If you will be the leaders against
him, he will spare you no further then God restrains him. He bears you the
greatest malice, that are engaged to do him the greatest mischief. As he hates
Christ more then any of us, because he is the General of the field, and the
Captain of our salvation, and does more then all the world besides against the
Kingdom of darkness; so does he hate the Leaders under him, more then the
common soldiers on the like account (in their proportion) He knows what a rout
he may make among the rest, if the leaders fall before their eyes. He has long
tried that way of fighting, neither against great or small comparatively, but
these: and of smiting the Shepherds, that he may scatter the Flock: And so
great has been his success this way, that he will follow it on as far as he is
able. Take heed therefore Brethren, for the enemy has a special eye upon you.
You shall have his most subtle insinuations, and incessant solicitations, and
violent assaults. As wise and learned as you are, Take heed to your selves lest
he over-wit you. The Devil is a greater Scholar then you, and a nimbler
disputant: he can transform himself into an Angel of light to deceive: He will
get within you, and trip up your heels before you are aware: He will play the
juglar with you undiscerned, and cheat you of your faith or innocence, and you
shall not know that you have lost it; nay he will make you believe it is
multiplied or increased, when it is lost. You shall see neither hook nor line,
much less the subtle Angler himself, whole he is offering you his bait. And
his baits shall be so fitted to your temper and disposition, that he will be
sure to find advantages within you, and make your own principles and
inclinations to betray you, and when ever he ruineth you, he will make you the
instruments of your own ruin. O what a conquest will he think he has got, if
he can make a Minister lazy and unfaithful; if he can tempt a Minister into
covetousness or scandal! He will glory against the Church and say, These are
your holy Preachers: you see what their preciseness is, and whither it will
bring them. He will glory against Jesus Christ himself, and say, These are thy
Champions! I can make thy chiefest servants to abuse thee; I can make the
Stewards of thy house unfaithful. If he did so insult against God upon a false
surmise and tell him he could make Job to curse him to his face (Job 1. 11.)
What would he do if he should indeed prevail against us? And at last he will
insult as much over you, that ever he could draw you to be false to your great
trust, and to blemish your holy profession, and to do him so much service that
was your enemy. O do not so far gratify Satan, do not make him so much sport:
suffer him not to use you as the Philistines did Sampson, first to deprive you
of your strength, and then to put out your eyes, and so to make you the matter
of his triumph and derision.

SECT. XIII.
5. TAke heed to your selves also, because there are many eyes upon you, and
therefore there will be many observers of your falls. You cannot miscarry but
the world will ring of it. The Ecclipses of the Sun by day time are seldom
without witnesses. If you take your selves for the Lights of the Churches, you
may well expect that men's eyes should be upon you. If other men may sin without
observation, so cannot you. And you should thankfully consider, how great a
mercy this is, That you have so many eyes to watch over you, and so many ready
to tell you of your faults, and so have greater helps then others, at least for
the restraining of your sin. Though they may do it with a malicious mind, yet
you have the advantage by it: God forbid that we should prove so impudent, as
to do evil in the public view of all, and to sin wilfully while the world is
gazing on us! He that is drunk, is drunk in the night; and he that sleeps,
does sleep in the night, 1 These. 5. 7. What fornicator so impudent as to sin
in the open streets while all look on? Why consider that you are still in the
open light; Even the Light of your own Doctrine will disclose your evil doings.
While you are as Lights set upon a hill, look not to lie hid, Mat. 5. 14. Take
heed therefore to your selves, and do your works as those that remember that
the world looks on them, and that with the quick-sighted eye of malice, ready
to make the worst of all, and to find the smallest fault where it is, and
aggravate it where they find it, and divulge it and make it advantageous to
their designs; and to make faults where they cannot find them. How cautelously
then should we walk before so many ill-minded observers!

SECT. XIV.
6. TAke heed also to your selves; for your sins have more heinous aggravations
then other men's: Its noted among King. Alphonsus sayings, that a great man
cannot commit a small sin; we may much more say, that a learned man, or a
Teacher of others cannot commit a small sin: or at least, that the sin is
great, as committed by him, which is smaller in another.

I. You are liker then others to sin against knowledge, because you have more
then they. At least you sin against more light or means of knowledge. What, do
you not know that Covetousness and Pride are sins? do you not know what it is
to be unfaithful to your trust, and by negligence or selfseeking to betray men's
souls? You know your masters will, and if you do it not, shall be beaten with
many stripes. There must needs therefore be the more wilfulness, by how much
there is the more knowledge. If you sin, it is because you will sin.

2. Your sins have more hypocrisy in them then other men's, by how much the
more you have spoke against them. O what a heinous thing is it in us, to study
how to disgrace sin to the utmost, and make it as odious to our people as we
can, and when we have done, to live in it, and secretly cherish that which we
openly disgrace? What vile hypocrisy is it, to make it our daily work to cry
it down, and yet to keep it? to call it publicly all to naught, and privately
to make it our bedfellow and companion? To bind heavy burdens for others, and
not to touch them our selves with a finger? What can you say to this in
judgment? Did you think as ill of sin as you spoke? or did you not? If you did
not, why would you dissemblingly speak it? If you did, why would you keep it
and commit it? O bear not that badge of a miserable Pharisee, They say but do
not, Mat. 23. 3. Many a minister of the Gospel will be confounded, and not be
able to look up, by reason of this heavy charge of hypocrisy.

3. Moreover, your sins have more perfidiousness in them then other men's. You
have more engaged your selves against them. Besides all your common engagements
as Christians, you have many more as Ministers. How often have you proclaimed the
evil and danger of it, and called sinners from it? how often have you declared
the terrors of the Lord? all these did imply that you renounced it your selves.
Every Sermon that you preached against it, every private Exhortation, every
Confession of it in the Congregation, did lay an engagement upon you to forsake
it. Every child that you have baptized, and entered into the Covenant with
Christ: and every administration of the Supper of the Lord, wherein you called
men to renew their Covenant, did import your own renouncing of the flesh and
the world, and your engagement unto Christ. How often and how openly have you
born witness of the odiousness, and damnable nature of sin? and yet will you
entertain it against all these professions and testimonies of your own? O what
treachery is it to make such a stir in the Pulpit against it, and after all to
entertain it in the heart, and give it the room that is due to God, and even
prefer it before the glory of the Saints?

Many more such aggravations of your sins might be mentioned: but as we haste
over these, so we must pass them by through our present haste.

SECT. XV.
7. TAke heed to your selves; for the honor of your Lord and Master, and of
his holy Truth and ways, does lie more on you then on other men. As you may do
him more service, so also more dis-service then others. The nearer men stand to
God the greater dishonor has he by their miscarriages: and the more will they
be imputed by foolish men, to God himself. The heavy Judgment was threatened
and executed on Eli and on his house, because they kicked at his sacrifice and
offering: 1 Samuel 2. 29. For therefore was the sin of the young men great before
the Lord, for men abhorred the offering of the Lord; verse. 17. It was that
great aggravation, of causing the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme; which
provoked God to deal sharplyer with David then else he would have done, 2 Samuel
12. 11, 12, 13, 14. If you are indeed Christians, the glory of God is dearer to
you then your lives. Take heed therefore what you do against it, as you would
take heed what you do against your lives. Would it not wound you to the heart
to hear the name and truth of God reproached for your sakes! To see men point
to you, and say, There goes a covetous Priest, a secret Tipler, a scandalous
man; these are they that Preach for strictness, when themselves can live as
loose as others; they condemn us by their Sermons, and condemn themselves by
their lives: For all their talk they are as bad as we. O Brethren, could your
hearts endure to hear men cast the dung of your iniquities in the face of the
Holy God, and in the face of the Gospel, and of all that desire to fear the
Lord? would it not break your hearts to think on it, that all the poor godly
Christians about you should suffer reproach for your mis-doings? why, if one of
you that is a Leader of the Flock should but once be ensnared in a scandalous
crime, there is scarce a man or woman that seeks diligently after their
salvation, within the hearing of it but besides the grief of their hearts for
your sin they are likely to have it cast in their teeth by the ungodly about
them, though they never so much detest it and lament it. The ungodly husband
will tell the wife, and the ungodly parents will tell their children, and
neighbors and fellow servants will be telling one another of it, and saying,
These are your godly Preachers? you may see what comes of all your stir; are
you any better then others? you are even all alike. Such words as these must
all the godly in the Country perhaps hear for your sakes. It must be that
offense come; but woe to that man by whom it comes, Mat. 18. 7. O Take heed
brethren in the name of God of every word that you speak, every step you tread,
for you bear the Ark of the Lord, you are entrusted with his honor; and dare
you let it fall, and cast it in the dirt? If you that know his will, and
approve the things that are more excellent, being instructed out of the Law,
and being confident that you your selves are Guides of the blind, and lights to
them that are in darkness, instructers of the foolish, teachers of babes, etc.
If you I say, should live contrary to your Doctrine, and by breaking the Law
dishonor God, the name of God would be blasphemed among the ignorant and
ungodly through you, Romans 2. 14, 20, 21, 23, 24. And you are not unacquainted
with that standing Decree of Heaven, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Them that honor me, I will
honor: and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. Never did man
dishonor God, but it proved the greatest dishonor to himself. God will find
out ways enough to wipe off all that can be cast upon him: but you will not so
easily remove the shame and sorrow from your selves.

SECT. XVI.
8. TAke heed to your selves; for the souls of your hearers, and the success of
all your labors do very much depend upon it. God uses to fit men for great
works, before he will make them his instruments in accomplishing them. He uses
to exercise men in those works that they are most suited to. If the work of the
Lord be not soundly done upon your own hearts, how can you expect that he
should bless your labors for the effecting it in others? He may do it if he
please, but you have much cause to doubt whether he will. I shall here show you
some particular Reasons under this last, which may satisfy you, that He that
would be a means of saving others, must take heed to himself, and that God does
more seldom prosper the labors of unsanctified men.

Reas. 1. Can it be expected that God should bless that man's labors (I still
mean comparatively, as to other Ministers) who works not for God, but for
himself? why this is the case of every unsanctified man. None but the upright
do make God their chief end, and do all or any thing heartily for his honor:
They make the Ministry but a trade to live by: They choose it rather then
another calling, because their parents did destinate them to it, and because it
is a pleasant thing to know, and it is a life wherein they have more
opportunity to furnish their intellects with all kind of science; and because
it is not so toylsom to the body, to those that have a will to favor their
flesh; and because it is accompanied with some reverence and respect from men,
and because they think it a fine thing to be Leaders and Teachers, and have
others depend on them, and receive the Law at their mouth, and because it
asfordeth them a competent maintenance. For such ends as these are they
ministers, and for these do they preach; and were it not for these, and such as
these, they would soon give over. And can it be expected that God should much
bless the labors of such men as these? It is not him they preach for, but
themselves, and their own reputation or gain: It is not him but themselves that
they seek and serve, and therefore no wonder if he leave them to themselves for
the success, and if their labors have no greater a blessing then themselves
can give them, and the word reach no further then their own strength is able to
make it reach.

2. Can you think that he is likely to be as successsul as others, that deals
not heartily and faithfully in his work, and never soundly believes what he
says, and never is truly serious when he seems to be most ligent? And can
you think that any unsanctified man can be hearty and serious in the
ministerial work? It cannot be. A kind of seriousness indeed he may have, such
as proceeds from a common faith or opinion that the word is true, and is
actuated by a natural servour, or by selfish ends: But the seriousness and
fidelity of a sound believer that ultimately intends God and men's salvation,
this he has not. O Sirs, all your preaching and persuading of others will be
but dreaming and trifling hypocrisy, till the work be thoroughly done upon your
selves. How can you set your selves day and night to a work that your carnal
hearts are averse from? How can you call out with serious servour upon poor
sinners to repent and come in to God, that never Repented or came in your
selves? How can you heartily follow poor sinners with importunate
solicitations, to take heed of sin, and to set themselves to a holy life, that
never felt your selves the evil of sin, or the worth of holiness? I tell you,
these things are never well known till they are felt, nor well felt till they
are possessed: And he that seeleth them not himself, is not so like to speak
feelingly to others, nor to help others to the feeling of them. How can you
follow sinners with compassion in your hearts, and tears in your eyes, and
beseech them in the name of the Lord to stop their course and return and live,
that never had so much compas^ion on your own souls as to do this much for your
selves? What, can you love other men better then your selves? and have pity on
them that have none upon your selves? Sirs, do you think they will be hearty
and diligent to save men from hell, that be not heartily persuaded that there
is a hell? Or to bring men to heaven, that do not soundly believe that there is
such a thing? As Calvin says on my Text; Neque enim aliorum salutem sedulo
unquam curabit qui suam negligit. He that has not so strong a belief of the
word of God, and the life to come, as will take off his own heart from the
vanities of this world, and set him upon a resolved diligence for salvation, I
cannot expect that he should be faithful in seeking the salvation of other men.
Sure he that dare damn himself, dare let others alone in the way to damnation;
and he that will sell his master with Judas for silver, will not stick to make
merchandise of the flock; and he that will let go his hopes of heaven rather
then he will leave his worldly and fleshly delights, I think will hardly leave
these for the saving of others. In reason we may conceive, that he will have no
pity on others, that is wilfully cruel to himself; and that he is not to be
trusted with other men's souls, that is unfaithful to his own, and will sell it
to the Devil for the short pleasures of sin. I confess that man shall never
have my consent to have the care and charge of others, and to over-see them in
order to their salvation, that takes not heed to himself, but is careless of
his own (except it were in case of absolute Necessity, that no better could be
had.)

3. Do you think that it is a likely thing, that he will fight against Satan
with all his might, that is a servant to Satan himself? And will he do any
great harm to the Kingdom of the Devil, that is himself a member and subject of
that Kingdom? And will he be true to Christ that is in Covenant with his enemy,
and Christ has not his heart? why this is the case of every unsanctified man,
of what cloth soever his coat be made. They are the servants of Satan, and the
subjects of his Kingdom; It is he that rules in their hearts: And are they
like to be true to Christ that are ruled by the Devil? What Prince will chose
the friends and voluntary servants of his enemy to lead his Armies in war
against him? This is it that has made so many Preachers of the Gospel to be
enemies to the work of the Gospel which they Preach: No wonder if such be
secretly girding at the Holy obedience of the faithful; and while they take on
them to preach for a holy life, if they cast reproaches on them that use it! O
how many such Traitors have been in the Church of Christ in all ages, that have
done more against him under his colors, then they could have done in the open
field! That have spoken well of Christ and Scripture, and godliness in the
general, and yet slily and closely do what they can to bring it into disgrace,
and make men believe that those that set themselves to seek God with all their
hearts, are but a company of hypocrites, or self-conceited fantastical fellows:
And what they cannot for shame speak that way in the Pulpit, they will do it in
secret amongst their companions. How many such Wolves have been set over the
sheep, because they had sheeps clothing; pretending to be Christians and as
good as others. If there were a Traitor among the twelve in Christ's family, no
marvel if there be many now. It cannot be expected that a slave of Satan, whose
God is his belly, and who minds earthly things, should be any better then an
enemy to the Cross of Christ. What though they live civilly, and preach
plausibly, and have the outside of an easy cheap Religiousness? They may be
as fast in the Devils snares by worldliness, pride, a secret distaste of a
diligent godliness, or by an unsound heart that is not rooted in the faith, nor
unreservedly devoted to God in Christ, as any others are by drunkenness,
uncleanness and such disgraceful sins. Publicans and Harlots do sooner come to
heaven then Pharisees, because they are sooner convinced of their sin and
misery.

And though many of these men may seem excellent Preachers, and cry down sin as
loud as others, yet is it all but an affected fervency, and too commonly but a
mere uneffectual bawling. For he that cherishes it in his own heart, does
never fall upon it in good sadness in others. I know that a wicked man may be
more willing of another reformation then his own, and may thence have a kind
of real earnestness in dissuading them from it; because he can preach against
sin at easier rates then he can forsake it, and another man's reformation may
stand with his own enjoyments of his lusts. And therefore many a wicked
Minister or Parent may be earnest with their people or family to amend, because
they lose not their own sinful profits or pleasures by another reformation,
nor does it call them to that self denial as their own does. But yet for all
this, there is none of that zeal, resolution and diligence, as is in all that
are true to Christ. They set not against sin as the enemy of Christ, and as
that which endangereth their peoples souls. A traiterous Commander, that
shoots nothing against the enemy but powder, may cause his Guns to make as
great a sound or report, as some that are laden with bullets: but he does no
hurt to the enemy by it. So one of these men may speak as loud, and mouth it
with an affected fervency: but he seldom does any great execution against sin
and Satan. No man can fight well, but where he hates, or is very angry: Much
less against them whom he loves, and loves above all. Every unrenewed man is
so far from hating sin to purpose, that it is his dearest treasure; though not
as sin, yet the matter of it is, as it affords delight to his sensual
desires. So that you may see, that an unsanctified man is very unfit to be a
Leader in Christ's Army, who loves the enemy; and to draw others to renounce
the world and the flesh, who cleaves to them himself as his chiefest Good.

4 And it is not a very likely thing that the people will regard much the
Doctrine of such men, when they see that they do not live as they preach. They
will think that he does not mean as he speaks, if he do not as he speaks. They
will hardly believe a man that seems not to believe himself. If a man bid you
run for your lives, because a Bear, or an enemy is at your backs, and yet do
not mend his pace himself in the same way, you will be tempted to think that he
is but in jest, and there is really no such danger as he pretends. When
preachers tell people of a necessity of Holiness, and that without it no man
shall see the Lord, and yet remain unholy themselves, the people will think
that they do but talk to pass away the hour, and because they must say somewhat
for their money, and that all these be but words of course. Long enough may you
lift up your voices against sin, before men will believe, that there is any
such harm or danger in it as you talk of, as long as they see the same man that
reproacheth it, to put it in his bosom, and make it his delight. You rather
tempt them to think that there is some special good in it, and that you
dispraise it as gluttons do a dish which they love, that they may have it all
to themselves. As long as men have eyes as well as ears, they will think they
see your meaning as well as hear it; and they are apter to believe their sight
then their hearing, as being the more perfect sense. All that a Preacher does
is a kind of preaching; And when you live a covetous or a careless life, you
preach these sins to your people by your practice. When you drink, or game, or
prate away your time in vain discourse, they take it as if you told them,
Neighbors, this is that life that you should all live: you may venture on this
course without any danger. If you are ungodly, and teach not your families the
fear of God, nor contradict not the sins of the company you come into, nor turn
the stream of their vain talking, nor deal with them plainly about the matters
of their salvation, they will take it as if you preached to them that such
things are needless, and they may boldly do so as well as you. Yea, and you do
worse then all this, for you teach them to think ill of others that are better.
How many a faithful Minister and private man is hated and reproached for the
sake of such as you? What say the people to them? You are so precise, and tell
us so much of sin, and danger, and duty, and make such a stir about these
matters; When such or such a Minister that is as great a Scholar as you, and as
good a Preacher as you, will be merry and jest with us, and let us alone, and
never trouble themselves or us with such discourse. These busy fellows can
never be quiet, but make more ado then needs; and love to fright men with talk
of damnation, when (ober, learned, peaceable Divines can be quiet, and live
with us like other men. This is the very thoughts and talk of people, which
your negligence does occasion. They will give you leave to preach against their
sins as much as you will, and talk as much for godliness in the pulpit, so you
will but let them alone afterward, and be friendly and merry with them when
you have done, and talk as they do, and live as they, and be indifferent with
them in your conscience and your conversation. For they take the Pulpit to be
but as a stage; a place where Preachers must show themselves and play their
parts; where you have liberty to say what you list for an hour: and what you
say they much regard not, if you show them not by saying it personally to their
faces, that you were in good earnest, and indeed did mean them. Is that man
likely therefore to do much good, or fit to be a Minister of Christ, that will
speak for him an hour, and by his life will preach against him all the week
besides; yea and give his public words the lie?

And if any of the people be wiser then to follow the examples of such men yet
the loathsomness of their lives will make their Doctrine the less effectual.
Though you know the meat to be good and wholesome yet it may make a weak stomach
rise against it, if the Cook or the servant that carries it have pocky, or
leprous, or dingy-hands. Take heed therefore to your selves, if ever you mean
to do good to others.

5. Lastly, consider, Whether the success of your labors depend not on the
grace and blessing of the Lord; And where has he made any promise of his
assistance and blessing to ungodly men? If he do promise his Church blessing
even by such, yet does he not promise them any blessing. To his faithful
servants he has promised that he will be with them, that he will put his
Spirit upon them, and his word into their mouths, and that Satan shall fall
before them as lightening from heaven. But where is there any such promise to
the ungodly, that are not the children of the promise? Nay, do not you rather
by your abuse of God, provoke him to forsake and blast your endeavors? at
least, as to your selves, though he may bless them to his chosen. For I do not
all this while deny but that God may often do good to his Church by wicked men,
but not so ordinarily nor eminently as by his own.

And what I have said of the wicked themselves, does hold in part of the godly
while they are scandalous and backsliding, proportionably according to the
measure of their sin. So much for the Reasons.

CHAP. II.
SECT. I.
IV. HAving showed you, What it is to Take heed to our selves, and Why it must
be done? I am next to show you, What it is to Take heed to all the Flock, and
wherein it does consist and must be exercised. It was first necessary to take
into Consideration, What we must be, and what we must do for our own souls,
before we come to that which must be done for others: Ne quis aliorum vulnera
medendo ad salutem, ipse per negligentiam suae salutis intumescat; ne proximos
juvando, se deser^t; ne alios erigens, cadat, says Gregor. M. de cur. past. l.
4. Yea left all his labors come to naught, because his heart and life is
naught that does perform them. Nonnulli enim sunt qui solerti cura spiritualia
praecepta prescrutantur, sed quae intelligendo penetrant, vivendo conculcant:
repent decent quae non opere, sed meditatione didicerunt: and quod verbis
praedicant, moribus impugnant; unde fit ut cum pastor per abrupta graditur, ad
praecipitium grex sequatur. Idem ib. li. 1. cap. 2. When we have led them to
the living waters, if we muddy it by our filthy lives, we may lose our labor,
and yet they be never the better. Aquam pedibus perturbare, est sancta
meditationis studia male vivendo corrumpere, inquit Idem. ibid.

Before we speak of the work it self, we must begin with somewhat that is
employed and presupposed.

And 1. It is here employed, that Every Flock should have their own Pastor (one
or more) and every Pastor his own Flock. As every Troop or Company in a
Regiment of soldiers must have their own Captain and other officers, and every
soldier know his own Commanders and Colors: so is it the will of God, that
every Church have their own Pastors, and that all Christ's Disciples do know
their Teachers that are over them in the Lord, 1 These. 5. 12, 13. The Universal
Church of Christ must consist of particular Churches guided by their own
Overseers; and every Christian must be a member of one of these Churches;
except those that upon Embassages, travels, or other like cases of necessity,
are deprived of this advantage, Acts 14. 23. They ordained them Elders in every
Church; so Tit. 1. 5. and in many places this is clear. Though a Minister be an
Officer in the Universal Church, yet is he in a special manner the Overseer of
that particular Church which is committed to his charge: As he that is a
Physician in the Commonwealth may yet be the Medicus vel Archiater cujusdam
Civitatis, and be obliged to take care of that City, and not so of any other:
so that though he may and ought occasionally to do any good he can else where
that may consist with his fidelity to his special charge, (when an unlicenced
person may not) yet is he first obliged to that City, and must allow no help to
others that must occasion a neglect of them, except in great extraordinary
cases, where the public good requires it. So is it betwixt a Pastor and his
special Flock. When we are Ordained Ministers without a special charge, we are
licenced and commanded to do our best for all, as we shall have a call for the
particular exercise: but when we have undertaken a particular charge, we have
restrained the exercise of our gifts and guidance so specially to that, that we
may allow others no more then they can spare, of our time and help, except
where the public good requires it, which must be first regarded. From this
Relation of Pastor and Flock, arise all the duties which mutually we owe. As we
must be true to our trust, so must our people be faithful to us, and obey the
just Directions that we give them from the word of God.

2. When we are commanded to Take heed to all the Flock; it is plainly employed,
that the Flocks must be no greater regularly and ordinarily then we are capable
of Over-seeing or taking heed of. That particular Churches should be no
greater, or Ministers no fewer, then may consist with a Taking heed to all. For
God will not lay upon us natural impossibilities: He will not bind men on so
strict account as we are bound, to leap up to the Moon, to touch the Stars, to
number the sands of the Sea. If it be the Pastoral work to Over-see and Take
heed to all the Flock, then sure there must be such a proportion of Pastors
assigned to each Flock, or such a number of souls in the care of each Pastor,
as he is able to take such heed to as is here required. Will God require of one
Bishop to take the charge of a whole County, or of so many Parishes or
thousands of souls, as he is not able to know or to over-see? Yea and to take
the sole Government of them, while the particular Teachers of them are free
from that undertaking? Will God require the blood of so many Parishes at one
man's hands, if he do not that which ten or twenty, or an hundred, or three
hundred men can no more do then I can move a Mountain? Then woe to poor
Prelates? This were to impose on them a natural or unavoidable necessity of
being damned. Is it not therefore a most doleful case that learned sober men
should plead for this as a desirable privilege? or draw such a burden wilfully
on themselves? and that they tremble not rather at the thoughts of so great an
undertaking? O happy had it been for the Church, and happy for the Bishops
themselves, if this measure that is intimated by the Apstole here had been
still observed: and the Diocese had been no greater then the Elders or Bishops
could Over-see and Rule, so that they might have Taken heed to all the Flock?
Or that Pastors had been multiplied as Churches multiplied, and the number of
Overseers proportioned so far to the number of souls, that they might not have
let the work be undone, while they assumed the empty titles, and undertook
impossibilities! And that they had rather prayed the Lord of the harvest to
send forth more Laborers, even so many as had been proportioned to the work;
and not to have undertaken all themselves. I should scarce commend the prudence
or humility of that Labourer (let his parts in all other respects be never so
great) that would not only undertake to gather in all the harvest in this
County himself, and that upon pain of death yea of damnation, but would also
earnestly contend for this prerogative.

Obj. But there are others to Teach, though one only have had the Rule.

Answ Blessed be God it was so: and no thanks to some of them. But is not
Government of great concernment to the good of souls, as well as Preaching? If
not, then what matter is it for Church-Governors? If it be, then they that
nullify it by undertaking impossibilities, do go about to ru^ne the Church,
and themselves. If only preaching be necessary, let us have none but mere
Preachers: what needs there then such a stir about Government? But if
Discipline (in its place) be necessary too, what is it but enmity to men's
salvation to exclude it? and it is unavoidably excluded, when it is made to be
his work that is naturally incapable of performing it. He that w^ll command an
Army alone, may as well say, It shall be destroyed for want of command: And the
Schoolmaster that will Over-see or Govern all the Schools in the County alone,
may as well say plainly, they shall be all ungoverned: And the Physician that
will undertake the Guidance of all the sick people in a whole Nation, or
County, when he is not able to visit or direct the hundredth man of them, may as
well say, Let them perish.

Ob. But though they cannot Rule them by themselves, they may do it by others.

Answ. The nature of the Pastoral work is such, as must be done by the Pastor
himself. He may not delegate a man that is no Pastor to Baptize or administer
the Lords Supper, or to be the Teacher of the Church: No more may he commit the
Government of it to another. Otherwise by so doing he makes that man the
Bishop, if he make him the immediate Ruler and Guide of the Church: And if a
Bishop may make each Presbyter a Bishop, so he do but derive the power from
him, then let it no more be held unlawful for them to Govern, or to be Bishops.
And if a Prelate may do it, it is like Christ or his Apostles might and have
done it; for as we are to preach in Christ's name, and no in any man's; so its
likely that we must Rule in his name. But of this somewhat more anon.

Yet still it must be acknowledged that in case of necessity, where there are
not more to be had, one man may under take the charge of more souls then he is
able well to over-see particularly. But then he must only undertake to do what
he can for them, and not to do all that a Pastor ordinarily ought to do. And
this is the case of some of us that (...) greater Parishes then we are able to
take (...) ^eed to, as their state requires; I must prote^^ or my own part, I
am so far from their boldness in (...) venture on the sole Government of a
County, that I would not for all England have undertaken to have been one of
the two that should do all the Padoral work that God enjoyneth to that one
Parish where I live, had I not this to satisfy my conscience, that through the
Churches necessities more cannot be had; and therefore I must rather do what I
can, than leave all undone because I cannot do all. But cases of unavoidable
necessity, are not to be the standing condition of the Church; or at least it
is not desirable that it should so be. O happy Church of Christ, were the
Laborers but Able and Faithful, and proportioned in number to the number of
souls; So that the Pastors were so many, or the particular Flocks or Churches
so small, that we might be able to Take heed to All the Flocks.

SECT. II.
HAving told you these two things that are here employed. I come next to the
duty it self that is expressed. And this Taking heed to All the Flock in general
is, A very great care of the whole and every part, with great watchfulness and
diligence in the use of all those holy actions and Ordinances which God has
required us to use for their salvation.

More particularly, this work is to be considered:

1. In respect to the subject matter of it.

2. In respect to the object.

3. In respect to the work it self, or the Actions which we must do.

And 4. In respect to the End which we must intend. Or it is not amiss if I
begin first with this last, as being first in our intention, though last as to
the attainment.

1. The ultimate end of our Pastoral oversight, is that which is the ultimate
end of our whole lives; Even the Pleasing and Glorifying of God, to which is
connext the Glory of the humane nature also of Christ, and the Glorification of
his Church, and of our selves in particular: And the nearer ends of our office,
are, the sanctification, and holy obedience of the people of our charge, their
unity, order, beauty, strength, preservation and increase; and the right
worshipping of God, especially in the solemn Assemblies.

By which it is manifest, that before a man is capable of being a true Pastor
of a Church according to the mind of Christ, he must have so high an estimation
of these things, that they may be indeed his ends.

1. That man therefore that is not himself takenup with the predominant love of
God, and is not himself devoted to him, and does not devote to him all that he
has and can do; that man that is not addicted to the pleasing of God, and
makes him not the Center of all his actions, and lives not to him as his God
and Happiness: That is, that man that is not a sincere Christian himself, is
utterly unfit to be a Pastor of a Church.

And if we be not in a case of desperate necessity, the Church should not admit
such, so far as they can discover them. Though to inferior common works (as to
teach the Languages, and some Philosophy, to translate Scriptures, etc.) they
may be admitted. A man that is not heartily devoted to God, and addicted to his
service and honor, will never set heartily about the Pastoral work: nor indeed
can he possibly (while he remains such) do one part of that work, no nor of
any other, nor speak one word in Christian sincerity. For no man can be sincere
in the means, that is not so in his intentions of the end. A man must heartily
Love God above all, before he can heartily serve him before all.

2. No man is fit to be a Minister of Christ that is not of a public spirit as
to the Church, and delights not in its beauty, and longs not for its
felicity: As the good of the Commonwealth must be the end of the Magistrate
(his nearer end) so must the felicity of the Church be the end of the Pastors
of it. So that we must rejoice in its welfare, and be willing to spend and be
spent for its sake.

3. No man is fit to be a Pastor of a Church that does not set his heart on the
life to come, and regard the matters of everlasting life, above all the matters
of this present life: and that is not sensible in some measure how much the
inestimable riches of glory are to be preferred to the trifles of this world.
For he will never set his heart on the work of men's salvation, that does not
heartily believe and value that salvation.

4. He that delights not in holiness, hates not iniquity, loves not the
Unity and Purity of the Church, and abhors not discord and divisions, and
takes not pleasure in the Communion of Saints, and the public worship of God
with his people, is not fit to be a Pastor of a Church. For none of all these
can have the true ends of a Pastor, and therefore cannot do the works. For of
what necessity the end is to the Means, and in Relations, is easily known.

SECT. III.
II. THE subject matter of the Ministerial work, is in general, spiritual
things, or matters that concern the Pleasing of God, and the Salvation of our
people. It is not about temporal and transitory things. It is a vile usurpation
of the Pope and his Prelates to assume the management of the temporal sword,
and immerse themselves in the businesses of the world; to exercise the violent
coertion of the Magistrate, when they should use only the spiritual weapons of
Christ. Our business is not to dispose of Commonwealths, nor to touch men's
purses or persons by our penalties: but it consists only in these two things.

1. In revealing to men that Happiness, or chief Good, which must be their
ultimate end.

2. In acquainting them with the right means for the attainment of this end,
and helping them to use them, and hindering them from the contrary.

1. It is the first and great work of the Ministers of Christ to acquaint men
with that God that made them, and is their Happiness: to open to them the
treasures of his Goodness, and tell them of the Glory that is in his presence,
which all his chosen people shall enjoy: That so by showing men the Certainty
and the Excellency of the promised felicity, and the perfect blessedness in the
life to come, compared with the vanities of this present life, we may turn the
stream of their cogitations and affections; and bring them to a due contempt of
this world, and set them on seeking the durable treasure. And this is the work
that we should lie at with them night and day: could we once get them right in
regard of the end, and set their hearts unfeignedly on God, and heaven, the
chiefest part of the work were done: for all the rest would undoubtedly follow.

And here we must diligently disgrace their seeming sensual felicity, and
convince them of the baseness of those pleasures which they prefer before the
delights of God.

2. Having showed them the right end, our next work is to acquaint them with
the right means of attaining it. Where the wrong way must be disgraced, the
evil of all sin must be manifested, and the danger that it has brought us
into, and the hurt it has already done us, must be discovered. Then have we
the great mystery of Redemption to disclose; the Person, Natures, Incarnation,
Perfection, Life, Miracles, Sufferings, Death, Burial, Resurrection, Ascension,
Glorification, Dominion, Intercession of the blessed Son of God. As also the
tenor of his promises, the conditions imposed on us, the duties which he has
Commanded us, and the Everlasting Torments which he has threatened to the final
Impenitent neglecters of his grace. O what a treasury of his blessings and
Graces, and the privileges of his Saints have we to unfold! What a blessed
life of Holiness and Communion therein have we to recommend to the sons of men:
And yet how many temptations, difficulties and dangers to disclose, and assist
them against! How many precious spiritual duties have we to set them upon, and
excite them to, and direct them in! How many objections of flesh and blood, and
cavils of vain men, have we to confute! How much of their own corruptions and
sinful inclinations to discover and root out! We have the depth of Gods
bottomless Love and Mercy, the depth of the mysteries of his Designs and Works,
of Creation, Redemption, Providence, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification,
Glorification; the depth of Satan's temptations, and the depth of their own
hearts, to disclose. In a word, we must teach them, as much as we can of the
whole Word and Works of God. O what two volumns are there for a Minister to
Preach upon! how great, how excellent, how wonderful and mysterious! All
Christians are Disciples or Scholars of Christ, the Church is his School; we
are his Ushers, the Bible is his Grammar: This is it that we must be daily
teaching them. The Papists would teach them without book, lest they should
learn heresies from the Word of truth; least they learn falsehood from the Book
of God, they must learn only the books or words of their Priests. But Our
business is not to teach them without Book, but to help them to undrstand this
Book of God. So much for the subject matter of our work.

SECT. IV.
III. THE Object of our Pastoral care is, All the Flock: That is, the Church
and every member of it. It is considered by us, 1. In the whole body or
society. 2. In the parts or individual members.

1. Our first care must be about the whole. And therefore the first duties to
be done are public duties, which are done to the whole. As our people are
bound to prefer public duties before private, so are we much more. But this is
so commonly confessed, that I shall say no more of it.

2. But that which is less understood or considered, is, That All the Flock
even each individual member of our charge must be taken heed of and watched
over by us in our Ministry. To which end, it is presupposed necessary, that
(unless where absolute necessity forbids it, through the scarcity of
Pastors, and greatness of the Flock) We should know every person that belongs
to our charge. For how can we take heed to them, if we do not know them? Or how
can we take that heed that belongs to the special charge that we have
undertaken, if we know not who be of our charge, and who not (though we know
the persons?) Our obligation is not to all neighbor Churches, or to all
straglers, as great as it is to those whom we are set over. How can we tell
whom to exclude, till we know who are included? Or how can we refel the
accusations of the offended, that tell us of the ungodly or defiled members of
our Churches, when we know not who be members, and who not? Doubtless the
bounds of our Parishes will not tell us, as long as Papists and some worse do
there inhabit. Nor will bare hearing us certainly discover it, as long as those
are used to hear that are members of other Churches, or of none at all. Nor is
mere participation of the Lords Supper a sure note, while strangers may be
admitted, and many a member accidentally be kept off. Though much probability
may be gathered by these, or some of these, yet a fuller knowledge of our
charge is necessary where it may be had, and that must be the fittest
expression of Consent, because it is Consent that is necessary to the Relation.

All the Flock being thus known, must afterward be Heeded. One would think all
reasonable men should be satisfied of this, and it should need no further
proof. Does not a careful Shepherd look after every individual Sheep? And a
good Schoolmaster look to every individual Scholar, both for instruction and
correction? And a good Physician look after every particular Patient? And good
Commanders look after every individual soldier? Why then should not the
Teachers, the Pastors, the Physicians, the Guides of the Churches of Christ,
take heed to every individual member of their charge? Christ himself the great
and good Shepherd, and master of the Church, that has the whole to look after,
does yet take care of every individual. In the 15. of Luke he tells us that
he is as the Shepherd that leaves the ninety and nine sheep in the Wilderness
to seek after one that was lost: or as the woman that lights a Candle, and
sweepeth the house, and searches diligently to find the one groat that was
lost; and having found it, does rejoice, and call her friends and neighbors to
rejoice. And Christ tells us, that even in heaven there is Joy over one
sinner that repents. The Prophets are often sent to single men. Ezekiel is made
a watch man over individuals: and must say to the wicked, Thou shall surely
dye, Ezekiel. 3. 18, 19. and 18 And Paul taught them publicly and from house to
house, which was meant of his teaching particular families; for even the
public teaching was then in houses; and publicly and from house to house,
signify not the same thing. The same Paul warned every man, and taught every
man, in all wisdom, that he might present every man perfect in Christ Jesus,
Col. 1. 18. Christ expounded his public parables, to the twelve a part, Mark
4. 34. Every man must seek the Law at the mouth of the Priest, M^l. 2 7. We
must give an account of our watching for the souls of all that are bound to
obey us, Heb. 13. 7. Many more passages in Scripture assure us that it is our
duty to Take heed to every individual person in our Flock. And many passages in
the ancient Councils do plainly tell us, it was the practice of those times,
till Churches began to be crowded, and to swell so big that they could not be
guided as Churches should be (when they should rather have been multiplied, as
the Converts did increase.) But I will pass over all these, and mention only
one passage in Ignatius or whoever it was I matter not much seeing it is but to
prove what was then the custom of the Church) ad Polycarp. (...). i. e. Let
Assemblies be often gathered; seek after (or enquire of) all by name: despise
not servant-men or maids. You see it was then taken for a duty to look after
every member of the flock by name, though it were the meanest servant-man or
maid. The Reasons of the necessity of this I shall pass over now, because some
of them will fall in when we come to the duty of Catechizing and personal
instruction in the end.

Obj. But the Congregation that I am set over is so great that it is not
possible for me to know them all, much less to take heed of all individuals.

Answ. 1. Is it necessity or not that has cast you upon such a charge? If it
be not, you excuse one sin with another: How durst you undertake that which you
knew your self unable to perform, when you were not forced to it? It seems then
you had some other ends in your undertaking, and never intended to make it
good, and be faithful to your trust. But if you think that you were
necessitated to it, I must ask you, 1. Might not you possibly have procured
assistance for so great a charge? Have you done all that you could with your
friends and neighbors to get maintenance for another to help you? 2. Have you
not so much maintenance yourself as might serve your self and another? What
though it will not serve to maintain you in fullness? Is it not more reason that
you should pinch your flesh and family, then undertake a work that you cannot
do, and neglect the souls of so many men? I know it will seem hard to some that
I say; But to me it seems an unquestionable thing: That if you have but an
hundred pounds a year, it is your duty to live upon part of it, and allow the
rest to a competent assistant, rather then the Flock that you are over should
be neglected. If you say, That this is hard measure; your wife and children
cannot so live. I answer, 1. Do not many families in your Parish live on less?
2. Have not many able Ministers in the Prelates days been glad of less, with
liberty to preach the Gospel? There are some yet living (as I have heard) that
have offered the Bishops to enter into bond to preach for nothing, so they
might but have had liberty to preach. 3. If still you say, that you cannot live
so nearly as poor people do, I further ask; Can your Parishoners better endure
damnation, then you can endure want and poverty? What, do you call your selves
Ministers of the Gospel, and yet are the souls of men so base in your eyes that
you had rather they did eternally perish, then your selves and family should
live in a low and poor condition? Nay, should you not rather beg your bread,
then put such a thing as men's salvation upon a hazard, or disadvantage? Yea or
hazard the damnation but of one soul? O Sirs, it is a miserable thing when men
study and talk of Heaven and Hell, and the fewness of the saved, and the
difficulty of salvation, and be not all this while in good sadness! If you
were, you could never sure stick at such matters as these, and let your people
go to damnation, that you might live at higher rates in the world? Remember
this, the next time you are preaching to them, that they cannot be saved
without knowledge: and hearken whether conscience do not conclude, Its likely
they might be brought to knowledge, if they had but diligent instruction and
exhortation privately man by man; and then were there another minister to
assist me, this might be done: and then if I would live nearly and deny my
flesh, I might have an assistant: and then it must conclude, Dare I let my
people live in that Ignorance which I my self have told them is damning; rather
then put my self and family to a little want?

And I must further say, that indeed this poverty is not so sad and dangerous a
business as it is pretended to be. So you have but food and raiment, must you
not therewith be content? and what would you have more then that which may
enable you for the work of God? And it is not purple and fine linen, and
faring deliciously every day, that you must expect as that which must content
you. A man's life consists not in the abundance of the things that he
possesses. So your clothing be warm, and your food be wholesome, you may as
well be supported by it to do God service, as if you had the fullest
satisfaction to your flesh: A patcht coat may be warm, and bread and drink is
wholesome food. He that wants not these, has but a cold excuse to make for
hazarding men's souls, that he may live on a fuller diet in the world.

Obj. If this Doctrine be received, then it will discourage men from meddling
with great places; and so all Cities, Market Towns, and other great Parishes
will be left desolate.

Answ. It will discourage none but the carnal and self-seeking, and not those
that thirst after the winning of souls, and are wholly devoted to the service
of God, and have taken up the Cross and follow Christ in self-denial. And for
others, they are so far from being good Ministers, that they are not his
Disciples or true Christians. Christ would not forbear to tell the world of the
absolute necessity of self-denial and resigning up all, and bearing the Cross,
and mortifying the flesh, for fear of discouraging men from his service; but
contrarily tells them that he will have no other servants but such, and those
that will not come on these terms, may go their ways, and take their course,
and see who will lose by it, and whether he do more want their service, or they
want his protction and favor.

Obj. But I am not bound to go to a charge which I cannot perform, and to take
a greater place, when I am fit but for a less.

Answ. 1. If you would undertake it but for want of maintenance, then it is not
unfitness, but poverty that is your discouragement: and that is no sufficient
discouragement.

2. We are all bound to dispose of our selves to the greatest advantage of the
Church, and to take that course in which we may do God the greatest service;
and we know that he has more work for us in greater Congregations then in
lesser, and that the neglect of them would be the greatest injury and danger to
his Church and interest: and therefore we must not refuse, but choose the
greatest work, though it be accompanied with the greatest difficulties and
suffering. It must be done, and why not by you as well as others?

Obj. But no man must undertake more then he can do.

Answ. I will add the rest of my enquiries, which will answer this objection.
3. Would the maintenance of the place serve two others, that have less
necessity, or smaller families then you? If it will, try to get two such as may
accept it in your stead. 4. If this cannot be done, nor addition be procured,
and there be really so little that you cannot have assistance, then these two
things must be done. 1. You must take the charge with limitation, with a
profession of your insufficiency for the whole work, and your undertaking only
so much as you can do; and this you do for the necessity of the place that
cannot otherwise be better supplied. 2. You must not leave off the work of
personal Oversight, nor refuse to deal particularly with any, because you
cannot do it with all: But take this course with as many as you are able: and
withal put on godly neighbors, and specially parents and masters of families
to do the more. And thus doing what we can, will be accepted.

And in the mean time let us importune the Rulers of the Commonwealth, for
such a proportion of maintenance to great Congregations, that they may have so
many Ministers to watch over them, as may personally as well as publiklely
instruct and exhort them. It may please God at last to put this into the hearts
of Governors, and to give them a love to the prosperity of his Church, and a
conscience of their duty for the promoting of men's salvation.

Some more of these Objections we shall answer anon, under the Uses. So much
for the distribution of the work of the Ministry, drawn from the Object
materially Considered.

We are next to consider of it in reference to the several qualities of the
object. And because we shall here speak somewhat of the Acts with the Object,
there will be the less afterward to be said of them by themselves.

1. The first part of our Ministerial work lies in bringing unsound Professors
of the faith to sincerity, that they who before were Christians in name and
show, may be so indeed. Though it belong not to us as their Pastors, to co^^^rt
professed Infidels to the faith, because they cannot be members of the Church
while they are professed Infidels; yet does it belong to us as their Pastors,
to convert these seeming Christians to sincerity, because such seeming
Christians may be visible members of our Churches. And though we be not
absolutely certain that this or that man in particular is unsound, and
unsanctified, yet as long as we have a certainty that many such are usually in
the Church, and have too great probability that it is so with several
individuals whom we can name, we have therefore ground enough to deal with them
for their conversion. And if we be certain by their notorious Impiety that they
are no Christians, and so to be ejected from the Communion of Christians; yea
if they were professed Infidels, yet may we deal with them for their
conversion, though not as Their Pastors, yet as Ministers of the Gospel. So
that upon these terms we may well conclude that, The work of conversion is the
great thing that we must first drive at, and labor with all our might to
effect.

Alas, the misery of the unconverted is so great that it calls lowdest to us
for our compassion. If truly converted sinner do fall, it will be but into sin
which will sure be pardoned, and he is not in that hazard of damnation by it as
others be. Not (as some unjustly accuse us to say) That God hates not their
sins as well as others, or that he will bring them to heaven, let them live
never so wickedly: but the spirit that is within them will not let them live
wickedly, nor to sin as the ungodly do; but they hate sin habitually, when
through temptation they commit it actually; and as they have a General
Repentance for all, so have they a particular Repentance for all that is known;
and they usually know all that's gross and much more, and they have no iniquity
that has dominion over them. But with the unconverted it is far otherwise.
They are in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, and have yet no part
nor fellowship in the pardon of their sins, or the hopes of glory; We have
therefore a work of greater necessity to do for them, even to open their eyes,
and turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God;
that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among the sanctified
by faith in Christ, Acts 26. 18. To soften and open their hearts to the
entertainment of the truth, if God peradventure will give them Repentance to
the acknowledging of it, that they may escape out of the snare of the Devil,
who are taken Captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 25 That so they may be
converted, and their sins may be forgiven them, Mark 4. ^^. He that sees one
man sick of a mortal disease, and another only pained with the toothache, will
be moved more to compassionate the former, then the latter, and will sure make
more haste to help him, though he were a stranger, and the other were a Son. It
is so sad a case to see men in a state of damnation, wherein if they should dye
they are remedilesly lost* that me thinks we should not be able to let them
alone, either in public or private, whatever other work we have to do. I
confess, I am forced frequently to neglect that which should tend to the
further increase of knowledge in the godly, and may be called stronger meat,
because of the lamentable necessity of the unconverted. Who is able to talk of
Controversies or nice unnecessary points, yea or truths of a lower degree of
necessity, how excellent soever, while he sees a company of ignorant, carnal,
miserable sinners before his face, that must be changed or damned? Me thinks I
even see them entering upon their final woe! Me thinks I even hear them crying
out for help, and speedyest help. Their misery speaks the louder, because they
have not hearts to seek or ask for help themselves. Many a time have I known,
that I had some hearers of higher fancies, that looked for rarities, and were
addicted to despise the Ministry, if he told them not somewhat more then
ordinary; and yet I could not find in my heart to turn from the observation of
the necessities of the impenitent, for the humouring of these, nor to leave
speaking to the apparently miserable for their salvation, to speak to such
novelists, for the clawing of their ears; no nor so much as otherwise should be
done, to the weak for their confirmation, and increase in grace. Me thinks as
Paul's Spirit was stirred within him, when he saw the Athenians so addicted to
Idolatry, Acts 17. 16. so it should cast us into one of his paroxisms, to see
so many men in great probability of being everlastingly undone; and if by
faith we did indeed look upon them as within a step of hell, it should more
effectually untye our tongues, then they tell us that Croesus danger did his
sons. He that will let a sinner go to hell for want of speaking to him, does
set less by souls then the Redeemer of souls did, and less by his neighbor
then rational Charity will allow him to do by his greatest enemy. O therefore
Brethren, whomsoever you neglect, neglect not the most miserable! Whatever you
pass over, forget not poor souls that are under the condemnation and curse of
the Law, and may look every hour for the infernal execution, if a speedy change
do not prevent it. O call after the impenitent, and ply this great work of
converting souls whatever else you leave undone.

2. The next part of the Ministerial work, is for the building up of those that
are already truly converted. And according to the various states of these, the
work is various. in general, as the persons are either such as are young and
weak, or such as are in danger of growing worse, or such as are already
declining, so our work is all reducible to these three, Confirmation and
Progress, Preservation and Restoration.

1. We have many of our flock that are young and weak; though of long standing,
yet of small proficiency or strength, Heb. 5. 11, 12. And indeed it is the most
common condition of the godly: Most of them ^^ick in weak and low degrees of
grace: And it is no easy matter to get them higher. To bring them to higher
and stricter opinions, is very easy; that is, to bring them from the truth
into error, on the right hand as well as on the left: but to increase their
knowledge and gifts is not easy; but to increase their graces is the hardest
of all. It is a very troublesome thing to be weak: It keeps under dangers, it
abateth consolation, and delight in God, and takes off the sweetness of his
ways, and makes us go to work with too much backwardness, and come off with
little peace or profit: It makes us less serviceable to God and man, to bring
less honor to our Master and profession, and do less good to all about us. We
find small benefit by the means we use: we too easily play with the Serpents
baits, and are ensnared by his wiles. A Seducer will easily make us shake, and
evil may be made appear to us as Good, truth as falsehood, sin as a duty; and so
on the contrary; we are less able to resist and stand in an encounter; we
sooner fall; we hardlier rise; and are apter to prove a scandal and reproach to
our profession; We less know our selves, and are more apt to be mistaken in our
own estate not observing corruptions when they have got advantage: we are
dshonourable to the Gospel by our very weakness, and little useful to any about
us; and in a word, though we live to less profit to our selves or others, yet
are we unwilling and too unready to dye.

And seeing the case of weakliness is comparatively so sad, how diligent should
we be to cherish and increase their grace? The strength of Christians is the
honor of the Church. When men are inflamed with the Love of God, and live by a
lively working says, and set light by the profits and honors of the world,
and love one another with a pure heart fervently, and can bear and heartily
forgive a wrong, and suffer joyfully for the cause of Christ, and study to do
good, and walk in offensively and harmlesly in the world, as ready to be
servants of all men for their good, becoming all things to all men to win them,
and yet abstaining from the appearances of evil, and seasoning all their
actions with a sweet mixture of Prudence, Humility, Zeal and Heavenly
spirituality; O what an honor are such to their professions? What ornaments to
the Church? and how excellently serviceable to God and man! Men would sooner
believe that the Gospel is indeed a word of truth and power, if they could see
more such effects of it upon the hearts and lives of men. The world is better
able to read the nature of Religion in a man's life then in the Bible. They that
obey not the word, may be won by the conversations of such as these, 1 Pet. 3.
1. It is therefore a necessary part of our work, to labor more in the
polishing and perfecting of the Saints, that they may be strong in the Lord,
and fitted for their masters use.

2. Another sort of Converts that need our special help, are those that labor
under some particular distemper, that keeps under their graces, and makes them
temptations and troubles to others, and a burden to themselves. For alas too
many such there are. Some that are specially addicted to Pride, and some to
worldliness, and some to this or that sensual desire, and many to frowardness,
and disturbing passions. It is our duty to set in for the assistance of all
these, and partly by disswasions and clear discoveries of the odiousness of the
sin, and partly by suitable directions about the way of remedy, to help them to
a fuller conquest of their corruptions. We are leaders of Christ's Army against
the powers of darkness, and must resist all the works of darkness wherever we
find them, though it be in the children of light. We must be no more tender of
the sins of the godly then the ungodly, nor any more befriend them or favor
them. By how much more we love the persons above others, by so much the more
must we express it in the opposition of their sins. And yet we must look to
meet with some tender persons here, especially when iniquity has got any head,
and made a party; and many have fallen in love with it; They will be as pettish
and impatient of a reproof as some worser men, and interest piety it self into
their faults, and say that a Minister that preaches against them, does preach
against the godly; A most heinous crime! to make God and godliness accessory to
their sins; When all the world besides has not the thousandth part of that
enmity and opposition against them. But the Ministers of Christ must do their
duties, for all men's peevishness; and must not so far hate their Brother, as to
forbear the plain rebuking of him, or suffer sin to lie upon his soul, Levit.
19. 17. Though it must be done with much prudence, yet done it must be.

3. Another sort that our work is about, is Declining Christians, that are
either fallen into some scandalous sin, or else abate their zeal and diligence,
and show us that they have lost their former Love! As the case of back-sliders
is very sad, so our diligence must be great for their recovery. Its sad to them
to lose so much of their Life, and peace, and serviceableness to God: and to
become so serviceable to Satan and his cause. It is sad to us to see that al
our labor is come to this, and that when we have taken so much pains with men,
and bad so much hopes of them, all should be so far frustrate. It is saddest of
all to think that God should be so abused by those that he has so loved, and
done so much for, and that the enemy should get such advantage upon his graces,
and that Christ should be so wounded in the house of a friend, and the name of
God evil spoken of among the wicked through such; and all that fear God should
be reproached for their sakes. Besides that partial backsliding has a natural
tendency to total Apostacy, and would effect it, if special grace prevent it
not.

The sadder the case of such Christians is, the more lies upon us for their
effectual recovery, to restore those that are but overtaken with a fault by the
Spirit of meekness, Gal. 6. 12. and yet to see that the sore be thoroughly
searched and healed, and the joint be well set again, what pain soever it cost;
and especially to look to the honor of the Gospel, and to see that they rise
by such free and full confessions and significations of true Repentance, that
some reparation be thereby made to the Church, and their holy profession, for
the wound of dishonor that they had given it by their sin. Much skill is
required to the restoring of such a soul.

4. Another part of the Ministerial work is about those that are fallen under
some great Temptation. Much of our assistance is needful to our people in such
a case. And therefore every Minister should be a man that has much insight
into the Tempters wiles. We should know the great variety of them, and the
cunning craft of all Satan's instruments that lie in wait to deceive, and the
methods and devices of the grand deceiver! some of our people lie under
Temptations to Error and Heresy, especially the young unsettled, and most
self-conceited: and those that are most conversant or familiar with Seducers.
Young, raw ungrounded Christians, are commonly of their mind that have most
interest in their esteem, and most opportunity of familiar talk to draw them
into their way. And as they are tinder, so deceivers want not the sparks of
zeal, to set them on a flame. A zeal for error and opinions of our own, is
natural, and easily kindled and kept alive: but it is far otherwise with the
spiritual zeal for God. O what a deal of holy Prudence and Industry is
necessary in a Pastor to preserve the flock from being tainted with heresies,
and falling into noxious conceits and practices, and especially to keep them in
Unity and Concord, and hinder the rising or increase of Divisions. If there be
not a notable conjunction of all accomplishments, and a skilful improvement of
parts and interests, it will hardly be done, especially in such times as ours,
when the sign is in the head, and the disease is Epidemical. If we do not
publicly maintain the credit of our Ministry, and second it by unblamable
exemplary lives, and privately meet with Seducers, and shame them; if we be not
able to manifest their folly, and follow not close our staggering people before
they fall, how quickly may we give great advantage to the enemy, and let in
such an inundation of sin and calamity, that will not easily be again cast out!

Others lie under a temptation to worldliness! and others to gluttony or
drunkenness; and others to just; some to one sin, and some to another. A
faithful Pastor therefore should have his eye upon them all, and labor to be
acquainted with their natural temperament, and also with their occasions and
affairs in the world, and the company that they live or converse with, that so
he may know where their temptations lie: and then speedily, prudently and
diligently to help them.

5. Another part of our work is to comfort the disconsolate, and to settle the
Peace of our peoples souls, and that on sure and lasting grounds. To which end,
the quality of the Complainants, and the course of their lives had need to be
known; for all people must not have the like Consolations that have the like
complaints. But of this I have spoken already elsewhere, and there is so much
said by many, especially Mr. Bolton in his Instructions for right Comforting,
that I shall say no more.

6. The rest of our Ministerial work is upon those that are yet strong: For
they also have need of our assistance: Partly to prevent their temptations and
declinings, and preserve the grace they have; partly to help them for a further
progress and increase; and partly to direct them in the improving of their
strength for the service of Christ, and the assistance of their brethren. As
also to encourage them, especially the aged, the tempted, and afflicted to hold
on, and to persevere that they may attain the Crown. All these are the objects
of the Ministerial work, and in respect to all these we must Take heed to all
the Flock. Abundance more distributions of our work, with directions how to
perform it to rich and poor, young and old, etc. You may find in Gregor. M. de
cura pastorali, worth the reading. You may have the Book by it self of Mr. Ier.
Stephens Edition.

SECT. V.
IV. HAving done with our work in respect of its Objects; I am next to speak of
the Acts themselves. But of this I shall be very brief. 1. Because they are
intimated before. 2. And because they are so fully handled by many. 3. And
because I find I have already run into more tediousness then I intended.

1. One part of our work, and that the most excellent, because it tends to
work on many, is the public preaching of the word. A work that requires
greater skill, and especially greater life and zeal, then any of us bring to
it. It is no small matter to stand up in the face of a Congregation, and
deliver a Message of salvation or damnation, as from the living God, in the
name of our Redeemer. It is no easy matter to speak so plain, that the
ignorant may understand us, and so seriously, that the deadest hearts may feel
us; and so convincingly, that the contradicting Cavilers may be silenced. I
know it is a great dispute whether preaching be proper to the Ministers or not?
The decision seems not very difficult. Preaching to a Congregation as their
ordinary Teacher, is proper to a Minister in office; And Preaching to the
unbelieving world (Jews, Mahometans or Pagans) as one that has given up
himself to that work, and is separated and set apart to it, is proper to a
Minister in office: But Preaching to a Church or to Infidels, occasionally, as
an act of Charity, extraordinarily, or upon special call to that act, may be
common to others. The Governor of a Church, when he cannot preach himself, may
in a case of necessity appoint a private man pro tempore, to do it that is able
(as Mr. Thorndike has showed.) But no private man may obtrude without his
consent, who by office is the Guide and Pastor of that Church. And a master of
a family may preach to his own family, and a Schoolmaster to his Scholars,
and any man to those whom he is obliged to teach; so be it he go not beyond his
ability, and do it in a due subordination to Church-teaching, and not in a way
of opposition and division. A man that is not of the trade, may do some one act
of a tradesman in a Corporation for his own use, or his family, or friend; but
he may not addict or separate himself to it, or set it up, and make it his
profession, nor live upon it, unless he had been Apprentice and were free. For
though one man of ten thousand may do it of himself as well as he that has
served an Apprentiship, yet it is not to be presumed that it is ordinarily so:
And the standing Rule must not bend to rarities and extraordinaries, lest it
undo all: For that which is extraordinary and rare in such cases, the Law does
look upon as a non ens.

But the best way to silence such usurping Teachers, is for those to whom it
belongs, to do it themselves so diligently, that the people may not have need
to go a begging; and to do it so judiciously, and affectingly, that a plain
difference may appear between them and usurpers, and that other men's works may
be shamed by theirs; and also by the adding of holy lives, and unwearied
diligence to high abilities, to keep up the reputation of their sacred office,
that neither Seducers, nor tempted ones may fetch matter of Temptation from our
blemishes, or neglects. But I shall say no more of this duty.

2. Another part of our Pastoral work is to administer the holy mysteries, or
Seals of Gods Covenant, Baptism and the Lords Supper. This also is claimed by
private usurpers: but I Will not stand to discuss their claim. A great fault it
is among our selves, that some are so careless in the manner, and others do
reform that with a total neglect, and others do lay such a stress on
circumstances, and make them a matter of so much contention, even in that
ordinance where Union and Communion is so professed.

3. Another part of our work is to Guide our people, and be as their mouth in
the public prayers of the Church, and the public praises of God: as also to
bless them in the name of the Lord. This sacerdotal part of the work is not the
least, nor to be so much thrust into a corner as by too many of us it is. A
great part of Gods service in the Church Assemblies, was wont in all ages of
the Church till of late, to consist in Public Praises and Eucharistical acts
in holy Communion: and the Lords Day was still kept as a day of Thanksgiving,
in the Hymns and Common rejoycings of the faithful, in special Commemoration of
the work of Redemption, and the happy condition of the Gospel Church. I am as
apprehensive of the necessity of Preaching as some others: but yet me thinks,
the solemn Praises of God should take up much more of the Lords day then in
most places they do. And me thinks, they that are for the magnifying of Gospel
Prviledges, and for a life of love and heavenly joys, should be of my mind in
this; and their worship should be Evangelical as well as their Doctrine
pretends to be.

4 Another part of the Ministerial work, is, to have a special care and
oversight of each member of the Flock. The parts whereof are these that follow.

1. We must labor to be acquainted with the state of all our people as fully
as we can; Both to know the persons, and their inclinations, and conversations,
to know what are the sins that they are most in danger of, and what duties they
neglect for the matter or manner, and what temptations they are most liable to.
For if we know not the temperament or disease, we are like to prove but
unsuccessful Physicians.

2. We must use all the means we can to instruct the ignorant in the matters of
their salvation; by our own most plain familiar words; by giving or lending, or
otherwise helping them to books that are fit for them: by persuading them to
learn Catechisms; and those that cannot read, to get help of their neighbors;
and to persuade their neighbors, to afford them help, who have best
opportunities thereto.

3. We must be ready to give advice to those that come to us with cases of
conscience, especially the great case which the Jews put to Peter, and the
Jailer to Paul and Silas, Acts 16. What must we do to be saved? A Minister is
not only for Public Preaching, but to be a known Counselor for their souls,
as the Lawyer is for their estates, and the Physician for their bodies: so that
each man that is in doubts and straits, should bring his case to him and desire
Resolution. Not that a Minister should be troubled with every small matter,
which judicious neighbors can give them advice in as well as he, no more then
a Lawyer or Physician should be troubled for every trifle or familiar case,
where others can tell them as much as they: but as when their estate or life is
in danger they will go to these, so when their souls are in danger they should
go to Ministers: As Nicodemus came to Christ and as was usual with the people
to go to the Priest, whose lips must preserve knowledge, and at whose mouth
they must ask the Law, because he is the Messenger of the Lord of hosts. And
because the people are grown unacquainted with the office of the Ministry, and
their own necessity and duty herein, it belongs to us to acquaint them
herewith, and to press them publicly to come to us for advice in such cases of
great concernment to their souls. We must not only be willing of the trouble,
but draw it upon our selves by inviting them hereto. What abundance of good
might we do, could we but bring our people to this? And doubtless much might be
done in it, if we did our duties. How few have I ever heard that heartily pressed
their people to their duty in this? A sad case; that peoples souls should be so
injured and hazarded, by the total neglect of so great a duty, and Ministers
scarce ever tell them of it, and awaken them to it! were they but duly sensible
of the need and weight of this, you should have them more frequently knocking
at your doors, and open their cases to you, and making their sad complaints,
and begging your advice. I beseech you put them more on this for the future,
and perform it carefully when they seek your help. To this end its very
necessary that we be acquainted with Practical Cases, and specially that we be
acquainted with the nature of true Grace, and able to assist them in trying
their states, and resolve the main question that concerns their everlasting
life or death. One word of seasonable prudent advice given by a Minister to
persons in necessity, has done that good that many Sermons would not have done.

4. We must also have a special eye upon families, to see that they be well
ordered, and the duties of each relation performed. The life of Religion, and
the welfare and glory of Church and State, depends much on family Government
and duty. If we suffer the neglect of this, we undo all. What are we like to do
our selves to the Reforming of a Congregation, if all the work be cast on us
alone, and Masters of families will let fall that necessary duty of their own,
by which they are bound to help us! If any good be begun by the Ministry in
any soul in a family, a careless, prayerless, worldly family is like to stiffle
it, or very much hinder it. Whereas if you could but get the Rulers of families
to do their part, and take up the work where you left it, and help it on, what
abundance of good might be done by it? (as I have elsewhere showed more at
large) I beseech you therefore do all that you can to promote this business, as
ever you desire the true Reformation and welfare of your Parishes. To which end
let these things following be performed.

1. Get certain information how each family is ordered, and how God is
worshippped in them: that you may know how to proceed in your carefulness for
their further good.

2. Go now and then among them, when they are like to be most at leisure, and
ask the master of the family, Whether he pray with them, or read the Scripture,
or what he does? And labor to convince the neglecters of their sin. And if you
can have opportunity, pray with them, before you go, and give them an example,
What you would have them do, and how. And get a promise of them that they will
be more conscionable therein for the future.

3. If you find any unable to pray in tolerable expressions, through ignorance
and disuse, persuade them to study their own wants, and get their hearts
affected with them, and so go often to those neighbors who use to pray, that
they may learn: and in the mean time persuade them to use a form of prayer
rather then none. Only tell them that it is their sin and shame that they have
lived so negligently, as to be now so unacquainted with their own necessities,
as not to know how to speak to God in prayer; when every beggar can find words
to ask an alms; and therefore tell them that this form i^ but for necessity, as
a crutch to a Cripple, while they cannot do as well without it; but they must
not resolve to take up there, but to learn to do better as soon as they can,
seeing prayer should come from the feeling of the heart, and be varied both
according to our necessities and observations. Yet is it necessary to most
unaccustomed ill-bred people, that have not been brought up where prayer has
been used, that they begin at first with the use of a form, because they will
else be able to do nothing at all, and in sense of their disability will wholly
neglect the duty, though they desire to perform it. For many disused persons
can mutter out some honest requests in secret, that be not able before others
to speak tolerable sense. And I will not be one of them that had rather the
duty were wholly neglected, or else profaned and made contemptible, then
encourage them to the use of a sorm, either recited by memory, or read.

4. See that they have some profitable moving book (besides the Bible) in each
family: If they have not, persuade them to buy some of small price, and great
use; such as Mr. Whateleys New Birth, and Dod on the Commandments; or some
smaller moving Sermons; If they be not able to buy them, give them some if you
can: if you cannot, get some Gentlemen or other rich persons that are willing
to good works, to do it. And engage them to read on it at nights when they have
leisure, and especially on the Lords day.

5. By all means persuade them to procure all their children to learn to read
English.

6 Direct them how to spend the Lords day: how to dispatch their worldly
businesses so as to prevent encombrances and distractions; and when they have
been at the Assembly, how to spend the time in their families: The life of
Religion lies much on this, because poor people have no other free
considerable time: and therefore if they lose this they lose all, and will
remain ignorant and brutish. Specially persuade them to these two things. 1. If
they cannot repeat the Sermon, or otherwise spend the time profitably at home,
that they take their family with them, and go to some godly neighbor that
spends i^ better, that by joining with them, they may have the better help. 2.
That the Master of the family will every Lords day at night cause all his
family to repeat the Catechism to him, and give him some account of what they
have learned in public that day.

7. If there be any in the family that are known to be unruly, give the Ruler a
special charge concerning them, and make them understand what a sin it is to
connive at them and tolerate them.

Neglect not therefore this necessary part of your work: Get masters of
families to their duties, and they will spare you a great deal of labor with
the rest, or further much the success of your labors. If a Captain can get his
Lieutenant, Cornet, and other inferior officers to do their duties, he may
rule the Soldiers with less trouble, then if all should lie upon his own hands
alone. You are like to see no general Reformation, till you procure family
Reformation. Some little obscure Religion there may be in here and there one;
but while it sticks in single persons, and is not promoted by these societies,
it does not prosper, nor promise much for future increase.

5. Another part of the work of our private Oversight consists in a vigilant
opposing of Seducers, and seeking to prevent the Infection of our Flock, and
speedy reclaiming those that begin to itch after strange Teachers, and turn
into crooked paths. When we hear of any one that lies under the influence of
their temptations, or that is already deceived by them, we must speedily with
all our skill and diligence make out for their relief. The means I shall show
in the Directions in the end.

6. Another part of this oversight lies in the due encouragement of those that
are humble, upright, obedient Christians, and profit by our teaching, and are
an honor to their Profession: We must in the eyes of all the Flock, put some
difference between them and the rest by our Praises, and more special
samiliarity, and other testimonies of our approbation and rejoicing over them;
that so we may both encourage them, and incite others to imitate them. Gods
graces are amiable and honorable in all; even in the poorest of the Flock, as
well as in the Pastors: and the smallest degrees must be cherrished and
encouraged, but the highest more openly honored and propounded to imitation.
They that have slighted or vilified the most gracious, because they were of the
Laity, while they claimed to themselves the honor of their Clergy, though
adorned with little or none of that grace, as they showed themselves to be
Proud and Carnal, so did they take the next way to debase themselves by
self-exaltation, and to bring the office it self into contempt. For if there be
no honor due to the Real sanctity of a Christian, much less to the relative
sanctity of a Pastor: and he that vilifieth the Person, cannot well plead for
the honoring of Robes and empty Titles: Nor can he expect that his people
should give him the honor of a Pastor, if he will not give them the love and
honor that is due to Christians and members of Christ. As the Orator said to
Domitius, Cur ego te habeam ut principem, cum tu me non habeas ut Senatorem. It
was an unchristian course therefore, which our late Prelates and their Agents
took, who discountenanced none so much as the most godly, whom they should have
rejoiced in, and encouraged; and made them not only the common scorn, but also
the objects of their persecuting rage, as if they had fed their Flock for the
Butcher, and called them out for suffering as they came to any maturity. This
vilifying and persecuting the most diligent of the Flock, was neither the note
of Christian Shepherds, nor the way to be so esteemed. As Hierom says, Quid de
Episcopis, qui verberibus timeri volunt, canones dicant, been fraternitas
vestra novit. Pastores enim facti sumus, non percussores. Egregius praedicator
dixit, Argue, obsecra, increpa, in omni patientia and doctrina: Nova vero atque
inaudita est illa praedicatio, qu^ verberibus exi^ it sidem. Much more might he
have said, quae verberibus castigat pie^atem.

7. Another part of our Oversight lies in visiting the sick, and helping them
to prepare either for a fruitful life, or a happy death: Though this be the
business of all our life and theirs, yet does it at such a season require
extraordinary care both of them and us. When time is almost gone, and they must
be now or never reconciled to God and possessed of his grace: O how does it
concern them to redeem those hours, and lay hold upon eternal life! And when we
see that we are like to have but a few days or hours time more to speak to
them in order to their endless state, What man that is not an Infidel, or a
block, would not be with them, and do all that he can for their salvation in
that short space!

Will it not waken us to compassion to look upon a languishing man, and to
think that within a few days his soul will be in heaven or hell? Surely it
will much try the faith and seriousness of Ministers or others, to be about
dying men! and they will have much opportunity to discern whether they are
themselves in good sadness about the matters of the life to come. So great is
the change that is made by death, that it should awaken us to the greatest
sensibility, to see a man so near it, and should provoke us in the deepest
pangs of compassion, to do the office of inferior Angels for the soul before
it is departed from the flesh, that it may be ready for the convoy of superior
Angels, to transmit it to the prepared glory when it is removed from sin and
misery. When a man is almost at his journeys end, and the next step puts him
into heaven or hell, its time for us to help him if we can, while there is
hope. As Bernard says, The death of the righteous is bona propter requiem,
melior propter novitatem, optima propter securitatem: sed mors peccatorum est
mala in mundi amissione, pejor in carnis separatione, pessima in vermis
ignisque duplici contritione. Could they have any hope that it would be their
ultima linea rerum, and that they have no more to suffer when that dismal day
is past, they might have such abatements of their terror as to die as brutes,
who fear no sorrow after death. But its so far otherwise, that death it self is
the smallest matter that they need to care for: Sed moneudo quo ire Cogantur,
ut August. Its not the prima mors quae animam pellit violenter e corpore, that's
the most terrible, sed secunda quae animam nolentem tenet in corpore, in quit
Idem.

And as their present necessity should move us to take that opportunity for
their good, so should the advantage that sickness and the foresight of death
affords. There are few of the stoutest hearts but will hear us on their
deathbed, that scorned us before. They will then let fall their fury, and be
as tame as Lambs, that were before as intractable as wasps or mad men. A man
may speak to them then, that could not before. I find not one of ten of the
most obstinate scornful wretches in the Parish, but when they come to dye, will
humble themselves, confess their fault, and seem penitent, and promise if they
should recover, to do so no more. If the very Meditations of death be so
effectual in the time of health that it is says August, quasi Clavis carnit
omnes motus superbiae ligno crucis affigens (l. 2. de Doct. Christ.) much more
when it comes in as it were at the window, and looks men in the face. Cyprian
says to those in health, Qui se quotidie recordatur moriturum esse, contemnit
praesentia, and ad futura festinat: much more qui sentit se statim moriturum.
Nil it a revocat a peccato, says Austin, quam frequens mortis meditatio. O how
resolvedly will the worst of them seem to cast away their sins, and promise a
reformation, and cry out of their folly, and of the vanity of this world, when
they see that death is in good sadness with them, and away they must without
delay! Perhaps you will say, that these forced changes are not cordial, and
therefore we have no great hope of doing them any saving good. I confess that
it is very common to be frighted into uneffectual purposes, but not so common
to be at such a season converted to fixed resolutions. And as Austin says, Non
potest male mori, qui been vixerit; and vix been moritur qui male vixit. Yet
vix and nunquam be not all one: It should make both them and us the more
diligent in the time of health, because it is vix; but yet we should bestir us
at the last, in the use of the last remedies, because it is not nunquam.

And it will not be unuseful to our selves to read such Lectures of our own
mortality: It is better to go into the house of mourning, then into the house
of feasting: for it tends to make the heart better, when we see the end of
all the living, and what it is that the world will do for those that sell their
salvation for it. When we see that it will be our own case, and there is no
escape;

(Scilicet omne Sacrum mors importuna prophanat, Omnibus obscuras injicit illa
manus.) it will make us talk to our selves in Bernards language, Quare O miser
non omni hora ad mortem te disponis? Cogita te jam mortuum, quem scis
necessitate moriturum: distingue qualiter oculi vertentur in capite, venae
rumpentur in corpore, and cor scindetur dolor. When we see that (as he says)
death spares none: inopiae non miseretur, non reveretur divitias; non
sapientiae, non moribus, non aetati denique parcit; nisi quod senibus mors est
in januis, juvenibus vero in insidiis; it will excite us the better to consider
the use of faith and holiness; that it is not to put by death, but to put by
hell; not that we may not dye as certainly as others, but that we may dye
better, and be certainly happy after death.

Because I intend no such thing as a Directory for the whole Ministerial work,
I will not stand to tell you particularly what must be done for men in that
last extremity; but only choose out these three or four things to remember you
of, passing by all the rest.

1. Stay not till strength and understanding be gone, and the time so short
that you scarce know what to do; but go to them as soon as you hear that they
are sick (whether they send for you or not.)

2. When the time is so short, that there is no opportunity to endeavor the
change of their hearts in that distinct way, as is usual with others, nor to
press truths upon them in such order, and stay the working of it by degrees; we
must therefore be sure to ply the main, and dwell upon those truths which must
do the great work: Showing them the certainty and glory of the life to come,
and the way by which it was purchased for us, and the great sin and folly of
their neglecting it in time of health; but yet the possibility that remains
of obtaining it, if they but yet close with it heartily as their happiness, and
with the Lord Jesus as the way thereto, and abhorring themselves for their
former evil, can now unfeignedly resign up themselves to him to be justified,
sanctified, ruled and saved by him. Three things must be chiefly insisted on.

1. The End: The Certainty and Greatness of the Glory of the Saints in the
presence of God: that so their hearts may be set upon it.

2. The sufficiency and necessity of the Redemption by Jesus Christ; and the
fullness of the Spirit, which we may and must be made partakers of: This is the
principal way to the end; and the nearer end it self.

3. The Necessity and Nature of faith, repentance and resolutions for New
Obedience according as there shall be opportunity. This is the subservient way,
or the means that on our part must be performed.

3. Labor, upon Conviction and Deliberation, to engage them by solemn promise
to Christ, and new obedience according to their opportunity: specially if you
see any likelihood of their recovery.

4. If they do recover, be sure to mind them of their promises. Go to them
purposely to set it home, and reduce them into performance. And when ever after
you see them remiss, go to them then, and mind them what they formerly said.
And because it is of such use to them that recover (and has been a means of
the conversion of many a soul) it is very necessary that you go to them whose
sickness is not mortal, as well as to them that are nearer death: that so we
may have some advantage to move them to repentance, and engage them to newness
of life; and may afterward have this to plead against their sins: As a Bishop
of Colen is said by Aeneas Sylvius to have answered the Emperor Sigismund,
when he asked him, What was the way to be saved; that he must be what he
purposed or promised to be, when he was last troubled with the stone and the
gout; So may we hereafter answer these.

8. Another part of our Ministerial Oversight consists in the right
comforting the consciences of the troubled, and settling our people in a well
grounded peace. But this I have spoken of elsewhere, and others have done it
more at large.

9. Another part of this Oversight, is, in Reproving and admonishing those that
live offensively or impenitently, and receiving the information of those that
have admonished them more privately in vain. Before we bring such matters to
the Congregation, or to a Representative Church, it is ordinarily most fit for
the Minister to try himself what he can do more privately to bow the sinner to
repentance, especally if it be not a public crime. A great deal of skill is
here required, and difference must be made according, to the various tempers of
offenders; but with the most it will be necessary to fall on with the greatest
plainness and power, to shake their careless hearts, and make them see what it
is to dally with sin; to let them know the evil of it, and its sad effects, and
the unkindness, unreasonableness, unprofitableness, and other aggravations; and
what it is that they do against God and themselves. For the manner, the
following directions may be hither applied.

10. The next part of our Oversight consists in the use of Church Discipline:
and this consists after the foresaid private Reproofs. 1. In more public
Reproof. 2. And persuading the person to meet expressions of Repentance. 3. And
Praying for them. 4. In restoring the Penitent. 5. And excluding and avoiding
the impenitent.

1. And for Reproof, these things must be observed. 1. That the Accusations of
none (no not the best in the Church) be taken without proof, nor rashly
entertained, nor that a Minister should make himself a party, before he have a
sufficient evidence of the case. It is better let many vicious persons go
unpunished, or uncensured when we want full evidence, then to censure one
unjustly; which we may easily do if we will go upon too bold presumptions: and
then it will bring upon the Pastors the scandal of partiality, and unrighteous
and injurious dealing, and make all their reproofs and censures become
contemptible.

2. Let there be therefore a less public meeting of chosen persons (the
Officers and some Delegates of the Church on their behalf) to have the hearing
of all such cases before they be made more public: that once a month at a set
place, they may come together, to receive what charge shall be brought against
any member of the Church, that it may be considered whether it be just and the
offender may be dealt with then first: And if the fault be either less public,
or less heinous, so that a less public profession of Repentance may satisfy,
then if the party shall there profess Repentance, it may suffice.

3. But if it be not so, or if the party remain impenitent, he must be reproved
before all, and there again invited to Repentance. This duty is never the less,
because our Brethren have made so little conscience of the Practice of it; It
is not only Christ's command to tell the Church, but Paul's to rebuke such before
all, and the Church has constantly practiced it, till selfishness and
formality caused them to be remiss in this and other duties together, and the
Reformers have as much stood up for it as the rest; and as deeply are we
engaged by Vows, Covenants, Prayers and other means, for the execution of it,
(of which more in the Application) Austin says, Quae peecantur coram omnibus,
coram omnibus corripiendae sunt, ut omnes timeant: Qui secreto peccant in te,
secreto corripe; nam si solus nosti, and eum vis coram aliis arguere, non es
corrector sed proditor. Greg. Mag. in Registro says, Manifesta peccata non
sunt occulta correctione purganda: sed palam sunt arguendi qui palam nocent; ut
dum aperta objurgatione sanantur, hi qui eos imitando deliquerant, corrigantur.
Dum enim unus corripitur, plurimi emendantur; and melius est ut pro multorum
salute unus condemnetur, quam ut per unius licentiam multi periclitentur.
Isidore says, Qui admonitus secret de peccato corrigi negligit, public
arguendus est, ut vulnus quod occulte sanari nescit, manifest debeat emendari.
If any shall say, that we shall thus be guilty of defaming men by publishing
their crimes; I answer in the words of Bernard sup. Cantic. Cum carpuntur
vitia, and inde scandalum oritur, ipse sibi scandali causa est, qui fecit quod
argui debet; non ille qui arguit. Non ergo timeas contra charitatem esse, si
unius scandalum multorum recompensaveris pace. Melius est enim ut pereat unus
quam unitas. There is no room for a doubt, whether this be our duty, nor any to
doubt whether we are unfaithful as to the performance of it. I doubt many of us
that would be ashamed to omit preaching or praying half so much, have little
considered what we do in living in the willful neglect of this duty, and the
rest of Discipline so long as we have done. We little think how we have drawn
the guilt of swearing, and drunkenness, and fornication, and other crimes upon
our own heads, for want of using Gods means for the cure of them. As Gregor. M.
says in Reg. Qui non corrigit rosecanda, committit: and facientis culpam
habet, qui quod potest corrigere, negligit emendare, says the Comedian. Si
quid me s^is fecisse inscite aut improbe, si id non accusas, tuipse objurgandus
es. Plaut.

If any say, There is little likelihood that public personal reprehension
should do good on them, because they will be but enraged by the shame; I answer.

1. Philo a Jew could say, (de Sacrif. Abel and Cain) We must endeavor as far
as we are able to save those from their sins that shall certainly perish;
imitating good Physicians, who when they cannot save a sick man, do yet
willingly try all means for cure, least they seem to want success through their
own neglects.

2. I further answer, It ill beseems the silly creature to implead the
Ordinances of God as useless, or to reproach his service instead of doing it,
and set their wits against their Maker. God can make use of his own Ordinances,
or else he would never have appointed them

3. The usefulness of this Discipline is apparent, to the shaming of sin, and
humbling of the sinner; and manifesting the holiness of Christ, and his
Doctrine, and Church before all the world.

4. What would you have done with such sinners? give them up as hopeless? that
were too cruel. Would you use other means why it is supposed that all other
have been used without success; for this is the last remedy.

5. The Church of Christ has found reason enough to use this course, even in
times of persecution, when our carnal reason would have told them, that they
should then above all have forborne it, for fear of driving away all their
converts.

6. The principal use of this public Discipline, is not for the offender
himself, but for the Church. It tends exceedingly to deter others from the
like crimes, and so to keep pure the Congregations and their worship. Seneca
could say, Vitia transmitit ad posteros, qui praesentibus culpis ignoscit. And
elsewhere. Bonis nocet, qui malis parcit. If you say, that It will but restrain
them as hypocrites, and not convert them. I answer, 1. As I said, it may
preserve others. 2. Who knows how God may bless his Ordinance, even to them? 3.
The restraint of sin, is a benefit not to be contemned. Audebo peccanti mala
sun ostendere: vitia ejus si non excidero, inhibebo. Non desinent; sed
intermittent: fortasse autem desinent, si intermittendi consuetudinem fecerint,
said the Moralist. Sen. Epist. 40. The scorns that I have heard from many
against the Scottish Ministers, for bringing offenders to the stool of
Repentance, (as if it were mere formality and hypocrisy, to take such a thing
as satisfactory, when true Repentance is absent) has discovered more of the
accusers error then of theirs. For no doubt, it is true Repentance that they
exhort men to; and it is true Repentance which offenders do profess: and
whether they truly profess it, who can tell but God? It is not nothing that sin
is brought to so much disgrace, and the Church does so far acquit themselves of
it. (But of this next.)

2. Next, To the duty of Public Reproof, must be joined an exhortation of the
person to Repentance, and to the Public Profession of it for the satisfaction
of the Church. For as the Church is bound to avoid Communion with impenitent
scandalous sinners, so when they have had the Evidence of their sin, they must
see some Evidence of their Repentance; for we cannot know them to be penitent
without Evidence. And what Evidence is the Church capable of, but their
Profession of Repentance first, and their actual reformation afterward? both
which must be expected.

3. To these may most fitly be adjoined the public prayers of the Church, and
that both for the Reproved before they are Rejected, and for the Rejected (some
of them at least) that they may repent and be restored: but we are now upon the
former. Though this is not expressly affixed to Discipline, yet we have
sufficient discovery of Gods will concerning it in the general precepts: We are
commanded to pray always, and in all things, and for all men, and in all places,
and all things are said to be sanctified by it. It is plain therefore that so
great a business as this should not be done without it! And who can have any
just reason to be offended with us, if we pray to God for the changing of their
hearts, and the pardon of their sins. It is therefore in my Judgment a very
laudable course of those Churches that use for the three next days together to
desire the Congregation to join in earnest prayer to God for the opening of the
sinners eyes, and softning of his heart, and saving him from impenitency and
eternal death! And though we have no express direction in Scripture just how
long we shall stay to try whether the sinner be so impenitent as to be
necessarily excluded, yet we must follow the general directions, with such
diversity as the case and quality of the person and former proceeding shall
require, it being left to the discretion of the Church, who are in general to
stay so long till the person manifest himself obstinate in his sin: not but
that a temporal exclusion (called suspension) may often be inflicted in the mean
time; but before we proceeded to an exclusion a statu, it is very meet
(ordinarily) that three days prayer for him, and patience toward him should
antecede.

And indeed I see no reason but this course should be much more frequent then
it is; and that not only upon those that are members of our special charge, and
do consent to Discipline, but even to those that deny our Pastoral oversight
and Discipline, and yet are our ordinary hearers. For so far as men have
Christian Communion or familiarity with us, so far are they capable of being
excluded from Communion. Though the members of our special charge have fuller
and more special Communion, and so are more capable of a fuller and more
special exclusion; yet all those that dwell among us, and are our ordinary
hearers, have some Communion. For as they converse with us, so they hear the
word, not as heathens, but as Christians, and members of the universal Church
into which they are baptized. And they join with us in public prayers and
praises in the celebration of the Lords day. From this therefore they are
capable of being excluded, or from part of this, at least. Morally, if not
Locally! For the precept of avoiding, and withdrawing from and not eating with
such, is not restrained to the members of a Governed Church, but extended to
all Christians that are capable of Communion.

When these ungodly persons are sick, we have daily bills from them to request
the prayers of the Congregation: And if we must pray for them against sickness
and temporal death; I know no reason but we should much more earnestly pray for
them against sin and eternal death. That we have not their consent, is no
disswasive: For that is their disease, and the very venom and malignity of it;
and we do not take it to be sober arguing to say, I may not pray for such a man
against his sickness, because he is sick: Or, if he were not sick, I would pray
against his sickness. No more is it to say, If he were not impenitent so as to
refuse our prayers, I would pray that he might be saved from his impenitency. I
confess I do not take my self to have so strict a charge over this sort of men,
that renounce my oversight, as I do over the rest that own it; and that's the
reason why I have called no more of them to public Repentance, because it
requires most commonly more time to examine the matter of fact, or to deal
with the person first more privately, that his impenitenc* may be discerned,
then I can possibly spare from the duties which I owe to my special charge, to
whom I am more indebted; and therefore may ordinarily expend no more on the
rest (who are to me but as strangers, or men of another Parish, and of no
governed particular Church) then I can spare when I have done my main duty to
my own Flock. But yet though I cannot use any such discipline on all that sort,
nor am so much obliged to do it, yet some of them that are most notoriously and
openly wicked, where less proof and shorter debates are requisite, I intend to
deal thus with hereafter, having found some success in that kind already. But
specially to all those whom we take for Members of that particular Church which
we are Pastors of; there is no question but this is our duty. And therefore
where the whole Parish are members, Discipline must be exercised on the whole.

I confess much prudence is to be exercised in such proceedings, least we do
more hurt then good; but it must be such Christian prudence as orders duties,
and suteth them to their ends, and not such carnal prudence as shall enervate
or exclude them. It may be fit therefore for younger Ministers to consult with
others, for the more cautelous proceeding in such works. And in the performance
of it, we should deal humbly, even when we deal most sharply, and make it
appear that it is not from any contending, or Lordly disposition, nor an act of
revenge for any injury but a necessary duty which we cannot conscionably avoid:
And therefore it will be meet that we disclaim all such animosities, and show
the people the commands of God obliging us to what we do.

E. G. Neighbors and Brethren, sin is so hateful an evil in the eyes of the
most holy God, how light soever impenitent sinners make of it, that he has
provided the everlasting torments of Hell for the punishment of it; and no
lesser means can prevent that punishment then the Sacrifice of the blood of the
Son of God, applied to those that truly Repent of it and forsake it; and
therefore God that calls all men to Repentance, has commanded us to exhort
one another daily, while it is called to day, least any be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 13. and that we do not hate our Brother in our
heart, but in any wise rebuke our neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him, Lev.
19. 17. and that if our brother offend us, we should tell him his fault between
him and us; and if he hear not, take two or three; and if he hear not them,
tell the Church; and if he hear not the Church, he must be to us as a heathen
or a Publican, Mat. 18. 17. and those that sin, we must rebuke before all, that
others may fear, 1 Timothy 5. 20. and rebuke with all authority, Tit. 1. 15. Yea
were it an Apostle of Christ that should openly sin, he must be openly
reproved, as Paul did Peter, (Gal. 2. 11, 14.) and if they repent not, we must
avoid them, and with such not so much as eat, 2 These. 3. 6, 12, 14. 1 Cor. 5.
11, 13. According to these commands of the Lord, having heard of the scandalous
practice of N. N. of this Church (or Parish) and having received sufficient
proof that he has committed the odious sin of -- We have seriously dealt with
him to bring him to repentance; but, to the grief of our hearts, do perceive no
satisfactory success of our endeavors; but he seems still to remain
impenitent (or, still lives in the same sin, though he verbally profess
repentance.) We do therefore judge it our necessary duty, to proceed to the use
of that further remedy which Christ has commanded us to try; and hence we
desire him in the Name of the Lord without any further delay to lay by his
obstinacy against the Lord, and to submit to his rebuke, and will, and to lay
to heart the greatness of his sin, the wrong he has done to Christ and to
himself, and the scandal and grief that he has caused to others; and how
unable he is to contend with the Almighty, and prevail against the Holy God,
who to the impenitent is a consuming fire! or to save himself from his burning
indignation! And I do earnestly beseech him for the sake of his own soul, that
he will but soberly consider, What it is that he can gain by his sin or
impenitency, and whether it will pay for the loss of everlasting life? and how
he thinks to stand before God in Judgment, or to appear before the Lord Jesus
one of these days, when death shall snatch his soul from his body, if he be
found in this impenitent state; when the Lord Jesus himself in whose blood they
pretend to trust, has told such with his own mouth, that except they repent
they shall all perish, Luke 13. 3, 5. And I do beseech him for the sake of his
own soul, and require him as a Messenger of Jesus Christ, as he will answer the
contrary at the Bar of God, that he lay by the stoutness and impenitency of his
heart, and unfeignedly confess and lament his sin before God and this
Congregation! And this desire I here publish, not out of any ill will to his
person, as the Lord knows, but in love to his soul, and in obedience to
Christ that has made it my duty; desiring that if it be possible, that he may
be saved from his sin, and from the power of Satan, and from the everlasting
burning wrath of God, and may be reconciled to God, and to his Church, and
therefore that he may be humbled by true contrition, before he be humbled by
remediless condemnation.

Thus or to this purpose I conceive our public admonition should proceed: And
in some cases where the sinner takes his sin to be small, the aggravation of
it will be necessary, and specially the citing of some texts of Scripture that
do aggravate and threaten it.

And in case he either will not be present, that such admonition may be given
him, or will not be brought to a discovery of Repentance (and to desire the
prayers of the Congregation for him) it will be meet that with such a preface
as this before expressed, we desire the prayers of the Congregation for him our
selves; That the people would consider what a fearful condition the impenitent
are in, and have pity on a poor soul that is so blinded and hardened by sin
and Satan that he cannot pity himself; and think what it is for a man to
appear before the living God in such a case, and therefore that they would join
in earnest prayer to God, that he would open his eyes, and soften and humble
his stubborn heart, before he be in hell beyond remedy: And accordingly let us
be very earnest in prayer for them, that the Congregation may be provoked
affectionately to join with us; and who knows but God may hear such prayers,
and the sinners heart may more relent, then our own exhortation could procure
it to do. However, the people will perceive that we make not light of sin, and
preach not to them in mere custom or formality. If Ministers would be
conscionable in thus carrying on the work of God entirely and self-denyingly,
they might make something of it, and expect a fuller blessing: But when we will
shrink from all that is dangerous or ungrateful, and shift off all that is
costly or troublesome, they cannot expect that any great matter should be done
by such a carnal partial use of means: and though some may be here and there
called home to God, yet we cannot look that the Gospel should prevail, and run,
and be glorified, where it is so lamely and defectively carried on.

4. When a sinner is thus Admonished and Prayed for, if it please the Lord to
open his eyes and give him remorse, before we proceed to any further censure,
it is our next duty to proceed to his full recovery, where these things must be
observed.

1. That we do not either discourage him by too much severity, nor yet by too
much facility and levity make nothing of Discipline, nor help him to any saving
cure, but merely slubber and palliate it over. If therefore he have sinned
scandalously but once, if his Repentance seem deep and serious, we may in some
cases Restore him at that time; that is, If the wound that he has given us to
the credit of the Church be not so deep as to require more ado for
satisfaction, or the sin so heinous as may cause us to delay. But if it be so,
or if he have lived long in the sin, it is most meet that he do wait in
Penitence a convenient time before he be Restored.

2. And when the time comes (whether at the first confession, or after) it is
meet that we urge him to be serious in his humiliation, and set it home upon
his conscience till he seem to be truly sensible of his sin; For it is not a
vain formality, but the Recovery and saving of a soul that we expect.

3. We must see that he beg the Communion of the Church, and their prayers to
God for his Pardon and Salvation.

4. And that he Promise to fly from such sins for the time to come, and watch
more narrowly, and walk more warily.

5. And then we have these things more to do.

1. To assure him of the riches of Gods love, and the sufficiency of Christ's
blood to pardon his sins, and that if his Repentance be sincere, the Lord does
pardon him, of which we are authorized as his Messengers to assure him.

2. To charge him to persevere and perform his promises, and avoid temptations,
and continue to beg mercy and strengthening grace.

3. To charge the Church that they imitate Christ in forgiving, and retain (or
if he were cast out, receive) the Penitent person in their Communion, and that
they never reproach him with his sins, or cast them in his teeth, but forgive
and forget them as Christ does.

4. And then to give God thanks for his recovery so far, and to pray for his
confirmation, and future preservation.

5. The next part of Discipline, is the Rejecting and Removing from the
Churches Communion, those that after sufficient tryaldo remain impenitent.
Where note.

1. That if a man have sinned but once (so scandalously) or twice, it is but a
Profession of Repentance that we can expect for our satisfaction; but if he be
accustomed to sin, or have often broke such Promises, then it is an actual
reformation that we must expect. And therefore he that will refuse either of
these, to Reform, or to Profess and manifest Repentance, is to be taken by us
as living in the sin: For a heinous sin, but once committed, is morally
continued in till it be Repented of; and a bare forbearing of the act is not
sufficient.

2. Yet have we no warrant to rip up matters that are worn out of the public
memory, and so to make that public again that is ceased to be public: at
least in ordinary cases.

3. Exclusion from Church Communion, commonly called Excommunication, is of
diverse sorts or degrees, more then two or three, which are not to be
confounded; of which, I will not so far digress as here to treat.

4. That which is most commonly to be practiced among us, is, Only to remove an
impenitent sinner from our Communion, till it shall please the Lord to give him
Repentance.

5. In this Exclusion or Removal, the Minister or Governors of that Church are
Authoritatively to charge the people in the name of the Lord to avoid Communion
with him: and to pronounce him one, whose Communion the Church is bound to
avoid: and the Peoples duty is Obedientially to avoid him, in case the Pastors
charge contradict not the word of God. So that he has the Guiding or Governing
Power; and they have, 1. A discerning power, whether his charge be just. 2. And
an executive power; For its they that must execute the sentence in part, by
avoiding the Rejected, as he himself must execute it by denying him those
Ordinances and Privileges not due to him, whereof he is the Administrator.

6. It is very convenient to pray for the Repentance and restoration, even of
the Excommunicate.

7. And if God shall give them Repentance, they are gladly to be received into
the Communion of the Church again: Of the manner of all these I shall say no
more, they being things that have so much said of them already. And for the
manner of other particular duties, of which I have said little or nothing, you
have much already, as in other writings, so in the Directory of the late
Assembly.

Would we were but so far faithful in the Practice of this Discipline, as we
are satisfied both of the matter and manner: and did not dispraise and reproach
it by our negligence, while we write and plead for it with the highest
commendations. It is worthy our consideration, Who is like to have the heavyer
charge about this matter at the Bar of God? Whether those deluded ones that
have reproached and hindered discipline by their tongues, because they knew not
its nature and necessity; or we that have so vilified it by our constant
omission, while with our tongues we have magnified it? If hypocrisy be no sin,
or if the knowledge of our Masters will be no aggravation of the evil of
disobedience, then we are in a better case then they. I will not advise the
zealous maintainers, and obstinate neglecters and rejecters of Discipline, to
unsay all that they have said, till they are ready to do as they say, nor to
recant their defenses of Discipline, till they mean to practice it, nor to burn
all the Books that they have written for it, and all the Records of their cost
and hazzards for it, least they rise up in Judgment against them to their
confusion; not that they recant their condemnation of the Prelates in this,
till they mean a little further to outgo them: But I would persuade them
without any more delay, to conform their Practices to these Testimonies which
they have given, lest the more they are proved to have commended Discipline,
the more they are proved to have condemned themselves for neglecting it.

I have often marvailed that the same men who have been much offended at the
Books that have been written for Free Admission to the Lords Supper, or for
mixed Communion in that one part, have been no more offended at as Free
permission in a Church state, and as Free admission to other parts of
Communion; and that they have made so small a matter at as much mixture in all
the rest: I should think that it is a greater profanation to permit an
obstinate scandalous sinner, to be a stated member of that particular Church,
without any private (first) and then public Admonition, Prayer for him, or
censure of him; then for a single Pastor to admit him to the Lords Supper, if
he had no power to censure him, as these suppose. I should think that the
faithful Practice of Discipline in the other parts, would soon put an end to
the Controversy about Free Admission to the Lords Supper, and heal the hurt
that such Discourses have done to the rebellions of our people. For those
Discourses have more modesty then to plead for a Free Admission of the Censured
or Rejected ones; but its only of those that have yet their standing in that
Church, and are not censured. And if when they forfeit their title to
Church Communion, we would deal with them in Christ's appointed way, till we had
either reclaimed them to Repentance, or censured them to be Avoided, it would
be past controversy then that they were not to be admitted to that one act of
Communion in the Supper, who are justly excluded from the whole. But as long as
we leave them uncensured members, and tell a single Pastor that he has no
power to censure them, we tempt him to think that he has no power then to deny
them that Communion with the body, which is the common privilege of uncensured
members.

And as we thus our selves oppose Discipline by Parts, or cherish
Church-corruption by parts, one party being for the Free admission of them,
while Members, to the Sacraments, and the other as Freely Permitting them in
Church State, and other parts of Communion, while they exclude them from the
Sacrament; so some have learned to tie these ends together, and by holding
both, to set open the doors of Church and Chancel, and pluck up the hedge, and
lay the Vineyard common to the Wilderness. It has somewhat amazed me to hear
some that I took for Reverend godly Divines, to reproach as a Sect, the
Sacramentarians and Disciplinarians! and when I desired to know whom they
meant, they tell me, they mean them that will not give the Sacrament to all the
Parish, and them that will make distinction by their Discipline. I had thought
the Tempter had obtained a great victory if he had but got one godly Pastor of
a Church to neglect Discipline, as well as if he had got him to neglect
Preaching: Much more if he had got him to approve of that neglect; but it seems
he has got some to scorn at the performers of the duty which they neglect. As
the impure were wont to reproach the diligent by the name of Puritans: so do
these reproach the faithful Pastors by the name of Disciplinarians. And I could
wish they would remember what the ancient Reproaches were both Symptomatically
and Effectively, and accordingly Judge impartially of themselves, and fear a
participation of the Judgment that befell them. Sure I am, if it were well
understood, how much of the Pastoral authority and work, consists in Church
Guidance, it would be also discerned, that to be against Discipline is tantum
non to be against the Ministry: and to be against the Ministry, is tantum non
to be absolutely against the Church; and to be against the Church is near to
being absolutely against Christ. Blame not the harshness of the inference, till
you can avoid it, and free your selves from the charge of it before the Lord.
Prelates would have some Discipline; and other parties would have some. Yea
Papists themselves would have some, and plead only against others about the
form and manner of it. But these are so much worse then all, that they would
have none. Was not Christ himself the leader of these Disciplinarians who
instituted Discipline, and made his Ministers the Rulers or Guides of his
Church, and put the Keys of the Kingdom into their hand, and commanded the
very particular acts of Discipline, and requires the people to submit to them,
and obey them in the Lord? What would these men have said, if they had seen the
Practice of the ancient Church for many hundred years after Christ, who
exercised a Discipline so much more rigorous, then any among us do, and that
even in the heat of heathen persecutions? as if they read but the ancient
Canons, and Cyprians Epistles, they may soon see, though they look no further.
And it was not then (no nor after under Christian Magistrates) taken to be a
useless thing; nor would it appear such now, if it were showed in its strength
and beauty by a vigorous Practice: For its a thing that is not effectually
manifested to the ear, but to the eye: and you will never, make men know well
what it is by mere talking of it; till they see it they will be strangers to
it: As it is in the military act, or in Navigation, or in the Government of
Commonwealths, which are so little known till learned by experience. And that
will tell us that, as Cyprian says, Disciplina est custos spei, retinaculum
fidei, dux itineris salutaris, fomes ac nutrimentum bonae indolis, magistra
virtutis; facit in Christo manner semper, ac jugiter Deo vivere, ad promissa
coelestia and divina praemia pervenire: Hanc and sectari salubre est, and
aversari ac negliger^ lethale: as he begins his Book de Discipl. and hab. virg.
page (mihi) 265. When the Martyrs and Confessors would (upon others
persuasions) have had some offenders restored before they had made Confession,
and manifested openly Repentance for their sin, and been absolved by the
Pastor; Cyprian resists it, and tells them that they that stand so firmly to
the faith, should stand as firmly to Christ's Law and Discipline: Sollicitudo
lori nostri and timor Domini compellit, fortissimi ae beatissims Martyrs,
admonere vos literis nostris, ut a quibus tam devote and fortiter servatur
fides Domino, ab iisdem lex quoque and Disciplina Domini reservetur, etc.
Epist. 11. page 32. Upon which Goulartius puts this note, Locus de Nacessitate
Disciplinae in Domo Dei, quam qui tollunt, and manifest impios ac sceleratos
ad mensam Christi, sine Censura Ecclesiastica, and acta Paenitentia, pro
delictorum ratione recipient, ii videant quam de gregibus sibi commissis
Pastori summo rationem reddituri sint; vel quid commune habeant in Ecclesiarum
suarum regimine cum beato illo Cypriani and aliorum vere Episcoporum
Christianorum seculo. And Cyprian, Epist, 67. p. 199. mentioning Gods
threatenings to negligent Pastors, adds, Cum ergo pastoribus talibus per quos.
Dominicae oves negligantur and pereant, sic Dominus comminetur, quid nos aliud
facere oportet, quam colligendis and revocandis Christi ovibus exhibere
diligentiam plenam, and curandis lapsorum vulneribus paternae pietatis adhibere
medicinam? In Epist. 61. 28, 38, 41, 49, 53, 55. and many other places of
Cyprian; you may see that they were then no contemners of Discipline: Vide
etiam, eundem de Orat. Domini^. page 313. in Pet. 4.

Says Augustine, Ibi superbia, ubi negligitur Disciplina: Nam Disciplina est
Magistra Religionis and verae pietatis, quae nec ideo increpat ut laedat, nec
ideo castigat ut noceat, etc. says Bernard, Ep. 113. O quam compositum reddit
omnem corporis statum, nec non and mentis habitum Disciplina! Cervicem
submittit, ponit supercilia, componit vultum, ligat oculos, moderatur linguam,
fraenat gulam, sedat iram, format incessum.

I know that when the Church began to be tainted with vain inventions, the word
Discipline began to have another signification (for their own various Rules of
life and austere impositions, touch not, taste not, handle not) but its the
ancient and truly Christian Discipline that I am contending for. So much of the
Acts of Pastoral Oversight.

From what has been said, we may see that the Pastoral office is another kind
of thing then those men have taken it to be, who think that it consists in
preaching and administering Sacraments only; much more then they have taken
for, that think it consists in making of new Laws or Canons to bind the
Church: As if God had not made us Laws sufficient; and as if he had committed
the proper Legislative power over his Church to Ministers or Bishops? whose
office is but to expound, and apply and execute in their places the Laws of
Christ.

Obj. But will you deny to Bishops the power of making Canons? What are all
those Articles that you have here agreed on among your selves about Catechizing
and Discipline, but such things?

Answ. 1. I know Pastors may teach, and expound Scripture, and deliver that in
writing to the people, and apply the Scripture Generals to their own and the
peoples particular cases, if you will call this making Canons. 2. And they may
and ought to Agree among themselves for an unanimous performance of their
duties, when they have discovered it; that so they may excite one another, and
be more strong and successful in their work. 3. And they must determine of the
Circumstances of worship in special, which God has only determined in General,
(as what time, and place they shall meet in, what Chapter read, what Text
preached on, what shape the Table, Cups, etc. shall be; where the Pulpit, when
each person shall come to be catechized or instructed, and whither, etc.) But
these are actions that are fitter to be ordered by them that are in the place,
then by distant Canon-makers: And to Agree for unity in a necessary duty (as we
have done) is not to make Laws, or arrogate Authority over our Brethren. Of
this I refer you to Luther de Conciliis, at large: and to Grotius de Imper.
sum. pot. That Canons are not properly Laws.

CHAP. III.
SECT. I.
HAving spoken of the matter of our work, we are next to speak a little of the
manner; not of each part distinctly, least we be too tedious, but of the whole
in general: But specially refering to the principal part.

1. The Ministerial work must be managed Purely for God and the salvation of
the people, and not for any private ends of our own. This is our sincerity in
it. A wrong end makes all the work bad, as from us, how good soever in it self.
Its not a serving God, but our selves, if we do it not for God, but for our
selves. They that set upon this as a common work, to make a trade of it for
their worldly livelihood, will find that they have chosen a bad trade, though a
good employment. Self-denial is of Absolute necessity in every Christian, but
of a double necessity in a Minister, as he has a double Sanctification or
Dedication to God. And without self-denial he cannot do God an hours faithful
service. Hard studies, much knowledge, and excellent preaching, is but a more
glorious hypocritical sinning, if the ends be not right. The saying of Bernard,
Sermon. in Cant. 26. is commonly known. Sunt qui scire volunt co sine tantum ut
sciant, and turpis curiositas est: and sunt qui scire volunt, ut scientiam suam
vendant; and turpis quaest us est: sunt qui scire volunt ut sciantur ipsi: and
turpis vanitas est: Sed sunt quoque qui scire volunt ut adificent; and Charitas
est; and sunt qui scire volunt ut aedificentur; and prudentia est.

2. This work must be managed Laboriously and Diligently: as being of such
unspeakable consequence to others and our selves. We are seeking to uphold the
world, to save it from the curse of God, to perfect the Creation, to attain the
ends of Christ's Redemption, to save our selves and others from Damnation, to
overcome the Devil, and demolish his Kingdom, and to set up the Kingdom of
Christ, and attain and help others to the Kingdom of Glory. And are these works
to be done with a careless mind, or a lazy hand? O see then that this work be
done with all your might. Study hard, for the well is deep, and our brains are
shallow; and (as Cassiod.) Decorum hic est terminum non habere: hic honesta
probatur ambitio; Omne fi quidem scientificum quanto profundius quaeritur,
tanto gloriosius invenitur. But especially be laborious in Practice and
exercise of your knowledge. Let Paul's words ring in your ears continually,
Necessity is laid upon me, and woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel. Still
think with your selves, what lies upon your hands. If I do not bestir me,
Satan may prevail, and the people everlastingly perish, and their blood be
required at my hand. And by avoiding Labor and Suffering, I shall draw on me a
thousand times more then I avoid: for as Bernard says, Qui in labor hominum
non sunt, in labor profecto Daemonum erunt, Whereas by present Diligence you
prepare for future blessedness. For, as Gregor. in Mor. says, Quot labores
veritati nunc exhibes, tot etiam remunerationis pignora intra spei tuae
cubiculum clausum tenes. No man was ever a loser by God.

3. This work must be carried on Prudent'y, Orderly and by Degrees; Milk must
go before strong meat: The foundation must be first laid before we build upon
it. Children must not be dealt with as men at age. Men must be brought into a
state of Grace, before we can expect from them the works of Grace. The work of
Conversion and Repentance from dead works, and faith in Christ must be first,
and frequently, and thoroughly taught. The Stewards of Gods household must give
to each their portion in due season. We must not go beyond the capacities of
our people ordinarily, nor teach them the perfection, that have not learned the
principles. As August. says, li. 12. de Civit. Si pro viribus suis alatur
infans, fiet ut crescendo plus capiat: si modum suae capacitatis excedat,
desicit antequam crescat. And as Gregor. Nysen. says, Orat, de Pauper. amand.
As we teach not insants the deep precepts of science, but first letters, and
then syllables, etc. So also the Guides of the Church do first propound to
their hearers certain documents, which are as the elements, and so by degrees
do open to them the more perfect and mysterious matters. Therefore did the
Church take so much pains with their Catechumeni, before they baptized them,
and would not lay unpolished stones into the building; as Chrysostom. says, Hom.
40. Imperfect. operis (or who ever else it be) p. (mihi) 318. Aedificatores
sunt Sacerdotes, qui -- domum Dei compon unt sicut enim adificatores, nodosos
lapides and habentes torturas, ferro dolant, postea vero ponunt eos in
aedificio, alioqui non dolati lapides lapidibus non cohaerent: Sic and
Ecclesiae doctores vitia hominum quasi nodos acutis increpationibus primum
circumcidere debent, and sic in Ecclesiae aedificatione collocare: alioquin
vitiis manentibus Christiani Christianis concordare non possunt.

4. Through the whole course of our Ministry, we must insist most upon the
Greatest, most Certain and Necessary things, and be more seldom and sparing
upon the rest. If we can but teach Christ to our people, we teach them all. Get
them well to heaven, and they will have knowledge enough. The great and
commonly acknowledged Truths are they that men must live upon, and which are
the great instruments of raising the heart to God, and destroying men's sins.
And therefore we must still have our peoples necessities in our eyes. It will
take us off gawdes, and needless Ornaments, and unprofitable Controversies, to
remember that One thing is Necessary. Other things are desirable to be known,
but these must be known, or else our people are undone for ever. I confess I
think Necessity should be a great disposer of a Ministers course of study and
labors. If we were sufficient for every thing, we might fall upon every thing,
and take in order the whole Encuclopaedia: But life is short: and we are dull:
and eternal things are necessary: and the souls that depend on our teaching are
precious: I confess Necessity has been the Conductor of my studies and life:
It chooses what book I shall read, and tells when and how long? it chooses my
Text, and makes my Sermon for matter and manner, so far as I can keep out my
own corruption. Though I know the constant expectation of death has been a
great cause of this, yet I know no reason why the most healthful man should not
make sure of the Necessaries first, considering the uncertainty and shortness
of all men's lives. Xenophon thought, there was no better Teacher then
Necessity, which teaches all things most diligently. Curtius says, Efficacior
est omni art Necessitas. Who can in study, preaching, or life, aliud agere be
doing other matters, if he do but know, that This must be done? Who can trifle
or delay, that feels the spurs of hasty Necessity: As the soldier says, Non
diu disputandum, sed celeriter and fortiter dimicandum ubi urget Necessitas. So
much more must we as our business is more important. And doubtless this is the
best way to redeem time, and see that we lose not an hour, when we spend it
only on Necessary things: And I think it is the way to be most profitable to
others, though not always to be most pleasing and applauded; because through
men's frailty, its true that Seneca complains of, that Nova potius miramur quam
magna.

Hence it is, that a Preacher must be often upon the same things, because the
matters of Necessity are few; We must not either feign Necessaries, or fall
much upon unnecessaries, to satisfy them that look after Novelties: Though we
must cloth the same necessaries with a grateful variety in the manner of our
delivery. The great volumns and tedious controversies that so much trouble us
and waste our time, are usually made up more of Opinion then necessary
verities. For, as Marsil. Ficinus says, Necessitas brevibus clauditur
terminis; opinto nullis. And as Greg. Nazianz. and Seneca often say,
Necessaries are common and obvious it is superfluities that we waste our time
for, and labor for, and complain that we attain them not. Ministers therefore
must be observant of the case of their Flocks, that they may know what is most
necessary for them, both for matter and for manner. And usually matter is first
to be regarded, as being of more concernment then the manner. If you are to
chose what Authors to read your selves, will you not rather take those that
tell you what you know not, and speak the needful truth most evidently though
it were with barbarous, or unhandsom language, then those that will most
learnedly, and elegantly, and in grateful language tell you that which is false
or vain, and magno conatu nihil dicere? I purpose to follow Austins counsel,
(li. de catech.) praeponendo verbis sententiam, ut animus praeponitur corpori:
ex quo fit ut ita mallem Veriores quam Discretiores invenire sermones, sicut
mallem prudentiores quam formosiores habere amicos. And surely as I do in my
studies for my own edification, I should do in my teaching for other men's. It
is commonly empty ignorant men that want the matter and substance of true
learning, that are over curious and sollicitous about words and ornaments, when
the ancient, experienced, most learned men, abound in substantial verities,
usually delivered in the plainest dress. As Aristotle makes it the reason why
women are more addicted to pride in apparel then men, because being conscious
of little inward worth and ornament, they seek to make it up with borrowed
ornaments without; So is it with empty worthless Preachers, who affect to be
esteemed that which they are not, and have no other way to procure that esteem.

5. All our teaching must be as Plain and Evident as we can make it. For this
does most suite to a Teachers ends. He that would be understood, must speak to
the capacity of his hearers, and make it his business to make himself
understood. Truth loves the Light, and is most beautiful when most naked. Its a
sign of an envious enemy to hide the truth; and a sign of an Hypocrite to do
this under pretense of revealing it: and therefore painted obscure Sermons
(like the painted glass in the windows that keeps out the light) are too often
the marks of painted Hypocrites. If you would not Teach men, what do you in
the Pulpit? If you would, why do you not speak so as to be understood? I know
the height of the matter may make a man not understood when he has studied to
make it as plain as he can; but that a man should purposely cloud the matter in
strange words, and hide his mind from the people, whom he pretends to
instruct, is the way to make fools admire his profound learning, and wise men
his folly, pride and hypocrisy. And usually its a suspicious sign of some
deceitful project and false Doctrine that needs such a cloak, and must walk
thus masked in the open day light. Thus did the followers of Basilides, and
Valentinus, and others among the old Heretics; and thus do the Behmenists and
other Paracelsians now; who when they have spoken that few may understand them,
lest they expose their errors to the open view, they pretend a necessity of
it, because of men's prejudice, and the unpreparedness of common understandings
for the truth. But truth overcomes prejudice by mere light of Evidence, and
there is no better way to make a good cause prevail, then to make it as plain,
and commonly and thoroughly known as we can; and it is this Light that will
dispose an unprepared mind. And, at best, its a sign that he has not well
digested the matter himself, that is not able to deliver it plainly to another.
I mean, as plain as the nature of the matter will bear, in regard of capacities
prepared for it by prerequisite truths. For I know that some men cannot at
present under stand some truths, if you speak them as plainly as words can
express them: as the easiest Rules in Grammar most plainly taught, will be no
whit understood by a child that is but learning his Alphabet.

6. Our whole work must be carried on in a sense of our insufficiency, and in a
Pious, Believing dependence upon Christ. We must go to him for Light, and Life,
and strength, who sends us on the work; And when we feel our own faith weak,
and our hearts grown dull, and unsuitable to so great a work as we have to do,
we must have recourse to the Lord that sends us, and say, Lord, will thou
send me with such an unbelieving heart to persuade others to believe? must I
daily and earnestly plead with sinners about everlasting life and death, and
have no more belief and feeling of these weighty things my self? O send me not
naked and unprovided to the work; but as thou command me to do it, furnish
me with a spirit suitable thereto. As Austin says, (de Doctr. Christ. l. 4.)

A Preacher must labor to be heard understandingly, willingly and obediently,
and hoc se posse magis pretate or ationum, quam oratoris facultate non dubitet:
ut or ando pro se ac pro aliis, quos est allocuturus, sit prius orator quam
doctor; and in ipsahora accedens, priusquam exeat, proferat linguam ad Deum,
levet animam sitientem, etc. Prayer must carry on our work as well as
preaching; He preaches not heartily to his people, that will not pray for
them; If we prevail not with God to give them faith and Repentance, we are
unlike to prevail with them to Believe and Repent. Paul gives us frequently
his example, of praying night and day for his hearers; When our own hearts are
so far out of order, and theirs so far out of order, if we prevail not with God
to mend and help them, we are like to make but unsuccessful work.

7. Our work must be managed with great humility; we must carry our selves
meekly and condescendingly to all; and so teach others, as to be as ready to
learn of any that can teach us, and so both Teach and learn at once; Not
proudly venting our own conceits, and disdaining all that any way contradict
them, as if we had attained to the top of knowledge, and we were destinated for
the chair, and other men to set at our feet: Not like them that Gregory M.
mentions in Moral. l. 24. par. 5. c. 12. In quorum verbis proditur, quod cum
docent, quasi in quodam sibi videntur summitatis culmine residere, ^osque quos
docent, ut long infrase positos, velut in imo recipient, quibus non
consulendo loqui, sed vix dominando dignantur. Pride is a vice that ill beseems
them that must lead men in such an humble way to heaven. And let them take
heed, lest when they have brought others thither, the gate should prove too
strait for themselves. For (as Hugo says) Superbia in coelo nata est, sed
velut immemor qua via inde c^cidit, istuc postearedire non potuit. God that
thrust out a proud Angel, will not entertain there a proud Preacher, while
such. Me thinks we should remember at least the title of a Minister, which
though the Popish Priests disdain, yet so do not we. It is indeed this Pride at
the root that feeds all the rest of our sins: Hence is the envy, the
contention, and unpeaceableness of Ministers, and hence the stops in all
reformation; all would lead, and few will follow or concur; yea hence are the
Schisms and Apostasies, as hence have been former persecutions, and arrogant
usurpations and impositions: As Gregor. M. says, in Mor. Latet plernmque
superbia, and castitas innotescit, atque ideo tentata diu castitas, circa finem
vitae perditur; quia cooperta superbia usque ad finem, in correctaretinetur.
And the same may be said of other vices, which often revive when they seemed
dead, because Pride was unmortified, which virtually contains them all. Hence
also is the non-proficiency of too many Ministers, because they are too proud
to learn; unless it be as Hieroms adversaries, public detrahentes, legentes in
angulis; and scarcely will they stoop to that. But I may say of Ministers as
Augustine to Hierom, even of the Aged of them, Etsi senes magis decet docere
quam discere; magis tamen decet discere quam ignorare; Humility would teach
them another lesson; Ut Hugo, Abomnibus libenter disce quod tu nescis: quia
humilitas commune tibi facere potest, quod natura cuique proprium fecit,
sapientior omnibus eris, si ab omnibus discere volueris: Qui ab omnibus
accipiunt, omnibus ditiores sunt.

8. There must be a prudent mixture of severity and mildness both in our
preaching and discipline; each must be predominant according to the quality of
the person, or matter that we have in hand. If there be no severity, there will
be contempt of our reproofs. If all severity, we shall be taken as usurpers of
Dominion, rather then perswaders of the minds of men to the Truth. As Gregor.
M. says, Moral. l. 20. Miscenda est lenitas cum severitate, and faciendum ex
utraque quoddam temperamentum, ut nec multa asperitate exulcerentur subditi,
nec nimia benignitate solvantur.

9. We must be sincerely Affectionate, serious and zealous in all our public
and private Exhortations. The weight of our matter condemns coldness, and
sleepy dullness. We should see that we be well awakned our selves, and our
spirits in such a plight as may make us fit to awaken others. As Gregor. says,
Mor. l. 30. c. 5. We should be like the Cock that Cum edere cantus parat, prius
alas solerter excutit, and se ipsum feriens vigilantiorem reddit: Ita
praedicatores cum verbum praedicationis movent, prius se in sanctis actionibus
exercent, ne in se ipsis torpentes opere, alios excitent voce, sed ante se per
sublimia facta excutiunt, and tunc ad been agendum alios sollicitos reddunt.
Prius sua punire fletibus curant, and tunc quae aliorum sunt punienda,
denuntiant. If our words be not sharpened, and pierce not as nails, they will
hardly be felt by stony hearts. To speak coldly and slightly of heavenly
things, is near as bad as to say nothing of them.

10. All our work must be managed Reverently; as beseems them that believe
the presence of God, and use not holy things as if they were common. The more
of God appears in our duties, the more authority will they have with men: And
Reverence is that affection of the soul, which proceeds from deep
apprehensions of God, and signifies a mind that is much conversant with him.
To manifest unreverence in the things of God, is so far to manifest hypocrisy;
and that the heart agrees not with the tongue. I know not what it does by
others; but the most Reverent Preacher, that speaks as if he saw the face of
God, does more affect my heart, though with common words, then an unreverent
man with the most exquisite preparations. Yea, if he bawl it out with never so
much seeming earnestness if Reverence be not answerable to fervency, it works
but little. Of all Preaching in the world (that speaks not stark lies) I hate
that Preaching which tends to make the hearers laugh, or to move their minds
with tickling levity, and affect them as Stage Plays use to do, instead of
affecting them with a holy Reverence of the name of God. Says Hierom. (in
Epistol. ad Nepotian. page mihi 14.) Decente in Ecclesia te, non clamor populi,
sed gemitus suscitetur; Lachrymae auditorum lauds tuae sunt. We should as it
were suppose we saw the Throne of God, and the millions of Glorious Angels
attending him, that we might be awed with his Majesty, when we draw near him in
his holy things, lest we profane them, and take his name in vain.

To this I annex, that all our work must be done spiritually, as by men
possessed by the Holy Ghost, and acted by him, and men that savor the things
of the Spirit. There is in some men's preaching a spiritual strain, which
spiritual hearers can discern and relish. And in some men's this sacred tincture
is so wanting, that even when they speak of spiritual things, the manner is
such as if they were common matters. Our Evidence also and ornaments must be
spiritual, rather from the holy Scripture, (with a tautelous subservient use of
Fathers and other Writers) then from Aristotle or the authorities of men. The
wisdom of the world must not be magnified against the wisdom of God; Philosophy
must be taught to stoop and serve, while faith does bear the chiefest sway; And
great Scholars in Aristotle's School, must take heed of too much glorying in
their master, and despising those that are there below them; least themselves
prove lower in the School of Christ, and least in the Kingdom of God, while
they would be great in the eyes of men. As wise a man as any of them, would
glory in nothing but the Cross of Christ, and desired to know nothing but him
crucified. They that are so confident that Aristotle is in Hell, should not too
much take him for their Guide in the way to heaven. Its an excellent memorandum
that Greg. M. has left in his Moral. l. 33. Deus primo collegit indoctos; post
modum Philosophos; and non per oratores docuit piscatores, sed per Piscatores
sub^git Oratores. The Learned men should think of this.

Let all writers have their due esteem, but compare none of them with the word
of God. We will not refuse their service, but we must abhor them as
Competitors. Its a sign of a distempered heart that loses the relish of
Scripture excellency. For there is a connaturality in a spiritual heart to the
word of God: because this is the seed that did regenerate him; The word is that
feal that made all the holly Impressions that be in the hearts of true
believers, and stamped the Image of God upon them. And therefore they must needs
be like that word, and highly esteem it as long as they live. Austin tells us
(in his lib. 10. de Civit. Deic. 29.) Quod initium sancti Evangelii cui nomen
est secundum Joannem quidam Platonicus (sicut a sancto seen impliciano qui
postea. Mediolanensi Ecclesiae praesedit Episcopus, s^lebamus audire) aur^is
literis consoribendum, and peromnes Ecclesias in locis eminentiscimis
proponendum esse dicehat. If he could so value that which suited with his
Platonism, how should we value the whole which is suitable to the Christian
nature, and interest? God is the best Teacher of his own nature and will.

11. The whole course of our Ministry must be carried on in a tender Love to
our people: we must let them see that nothing pleases us but what profits
them; and that which does them good does us good; and nothing troubles us more
then their hurt. We must remember as Hierom says ad Nepotian. That Bishops are
not Lords but Fathers, and therefore must be affected to their people as their
children: Yea the tenderest love of a mother should nor surpass theirs. We must
even travel in birth of them till Christ be formed in them. They should see
that we care for no outward thing, not money, not liberty, not credit, not
life, in comparison of their salvation; but could even be content with Moses to
have our names wiped out of the Book of life, i. e. to be removed e numero
viventium: rather then they should perish and not be found in the Lambs book of
life, in numero salvandorum. Thus should we as John says, be ready to lay down
our lives for the brethren, and with Paul not to count our lives dear to us, so
we may but finish our course with joy in doing the work of God for their
salvation. When the people see that you unseignedly love them, they will hear
any thing, and bear any thing, and follow you the more easily. As Austin says,
Dilige, and dic quicquid voles. We will take all things well our selves from
one that we know does entirely love us. We will put up a blow that is given us
in Love, sooner then a foul word that is given us in anger or in malice. Most
men use to judge of the counsel, as they judge of the affection of him that
gives it: at least so far as to give it a fair hearing. O therefore see that
you feel a tender love to your people in your breasts, and then let them feel
it in your speeches, and see it in your dealings; Let them see that you spend
and are spent for their sakes; and that all you do is for them, and not for any
ends of your own. To this end the works of charity are necessary, as far as
your estate will reach For bare words will hardly convince men that you have
any great love to them. Amicitia a dando and accipiendo nascitur, Chrysostom. But
when you are not able to give, show that you are willing to give if you had it,
and do that sort of good that you can; Si potes dare, da^ si non potes,
affabilem tefac. Coronat Deus intus bonitatem, ubi non invenit facultatem. Nemo
dicat, non habeo. Charitas non de sacculo erogatur. August. in Psalm. 103. But
be sure to see that your love prove not carnal, flowing from pride, as one that
is a suitor for himself, rather then for Christ, and therefore does love
because he is beloved, or that he may be, pretends it. And therefore take
heed that you do not connive at their sins under pretense of love: for that
were to cross the nature and ends of Love: Amici vitia siferas, facistua.
Senec. Friendship must be cemented by piety. Tu primum exhibe to bonum, and
quaere alterum similem tibi. Sen. A wicked man can be no true friend; and if
you befriend their wickedness, you show that you are such your selves. Pretend
not to love them, if you favor their sins, and seek not their salvation.
Solisancti, and Dei sunt, and inter se amici. Basil. Improborum and stultorum
nemo amicus. Id. By favoring their sin you will show your enmity to God, and
then how can you love your brother? Amicus esse homini non potest, qui Deo
fuerit inimicus. Ambros. If you be their best friends, help them against their
worst enemies. Amicus animae custos. And think not all sharpness inconsistent
with Love; Parents will correct their children. And God himself will chasten
every son that he loves. Melius est cum severitate diligere, quam cum lenitate
decipere. Aug.

Besides this, the nature of love is to excite men to do good, and to do it
speedily, diligently, and as much as we can. Alios curat aedificare, alios
contremiscit offendere, ad alios se inclinat, cum aliis blanda, aliis severa,
nulli inimica, omnibus matter. August. de Catech. Ecce quem amas Domine
infirmatur: Non dixerunt veni; Amanti enim tantum nunciandum fuit: sufficient ut
noverit: Non onim ama^, and deserit. August. in Joan. So will it be with us.

12. Another necessary concomitant of our work is Patience. We must bear with
many abuses and injuries from those that we are doing good for. When we have
studied for them, and prayed for them, and beseeched and exhorted them with all
condescension, and spent our selves for them, and given them what we are able,
and tendered them as if they had been our children, we must look that many
should requite us with scorn, and hatred, and contempt, and cast our kindness
in our faces with disdain, and take us for their enemies because we tell them
the truth; and that the more we love, the less we shall be beloved. And all
this must be patiently undergone, and still we must unwearyedly hold on in
doing good, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance, etc. If they unthankfully scorn and
reject our Teaching, and bid us look to our selves and care not for them, yet
must we hold on: We have to deal with distracted men, that will fly in the
face of their Physician, but we must not therefore forsake the cure. He is
unworthy to be a Physician, that will be driven away from a phrenitick patient
by foul words. (...), etc. i. e. Sicut insani etiam medicum impetere conantur,
ita and illi, says Chrysostom. of the Sodomites, Hom. 43. in Genesis Et alibi,
Medici ferant aegrotum calcibus ferientem, incessentem contumel^is, and
convitiis, nec off enduntur; quia nihil aliud quam salutem agroti quaerentes,
licet facientis indecora, non ideo acura desistunt; sic concionator licet malae
patiatur ab auditoribus, etc. If we tell them that natural men favor not the
things of the spirit, and are besides themselves in matters of salvation, we
must measure our expectations accordingly, and not look thar fools should make
us as grateful a return as the wise. These are things that all of us can say,
but when we come to the practice with sinners that reproach and slander us fur
our love, and are readyer to spit in our faces, then to give us thanks for our
advice, what heart-risings w^ll there be, and how will the remnants of old Adam
(pride and passion) struggle against the meekness and patience of the new man?
And how sadly do many Ministers come off in this part of their trial?

Having given you these 12. Concomitants of our Ministerial labor as singly to
be performed by every Minister, let me conclude with one other that is
necessary to us as we are conjoined, and fellow laborers in the work: and that
is this: We must be very studious of Union and Communion among our selves, and
of the Unity and Peace of the Churches that we oversee. We must be sensible how
needful this is to the Prosperity of the whole, the strengthening of our common
cause, the good of the particular members of our flock, and the further
enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ. And therefore Ministers must smart when
the Church is wounded and be so far from being the Leaders in divisions, that
they should take it as a principal part of their work to prevent and heal them.
Day and night should they bend their studies to find out means to close such
breaches. They must not only barken to motions for Unity, but propound them and
prosecute them: Nor only entertain an offered Peace, but even follow it when it
flies from them. They must therefore keep close to the ancient simplicity of
the Christian faith, and the foundation and Center of Catholic Unity. They
must abhor the arrogance of them that frame new Engines to wrack and tear the
Church of God, under protence of obviating Errors, and maintaining the truth:
The Scripture-sufficiency must be maintained, and nothing beyond it imposed on
others; and if Papists or others call to us for the Standard and Rule of our
Religion, it is the Bible that we must show them, rather then any Confessions
of Churches, or writings of men. We must learn to difference well between
Certainties and Uncertainties, Necessaries and Unnecessaries, Catholic
verities (quae ab omnibus, ubique and semper sunt retentae, as Vincent. Lioen.
speaks) and private opinions; and to lay the stress of the Churches. Peace upon
the former, and not upon the latter. We must therefore understand the Doctrine
of Antiquity, that we may know what way men have gone to heaven by in former
ages, and know the writings of later Divines, that we may partake of the
benefit of their clearer Methods and Explications; but neither of them must be
made the Rule of our faith or charity. We must avoid the common confusion of
those that difference not between verbal and real Errors, and hate that Rabies
quorundam Theologorum, that tear their Brethren as Heretics, before they
understand them. And we must learn to see the true state of Controversies, and
reduce them to the very Point where the difference lies, and not to make them
seem greater then they are. Instead of quarreling with our Brethren, we must
combine against the common adversaries: And all Ministers must associate, and
hold Communion, and Correspondency, and Constant meetings to those ends; and
smaller differences of Judgment are not to interrupt them. They must do as
much of the work of God in Unity and Concord as they can. Which is the use of
Synods; not to Rule over one another, and make Laws; but to avoid
misunderstandings, and consult for mutual edification, and maintain Love and
Communion, and go on unanimously in the work that God has already Commanded
us. Had the Ministers of the Gospel been men of Peace, and of Catholic rather
then factious spirits, the Church of Christ had not been in the case as now it
is; the Nations of Lutherans and Calvinsts abroad, and the differing parties
here at home, would not have been plotting the subversion of one another, nor
remain at that distance, and in that uncharitable bitterness, nor strengthen
the common enemy, and hinder the building and prosperity of the Church as they
have done.

CHAP. IV.
SECT. I. Use.
REverend and dear Brethren, our business here this day is to humble our souls
before the Lord for our former negligence, especially of Catechizing and
personal instructing those committed to our charge; and to desire Gods
assistance of us in our undertaken employment for the time to come. Indeed we
can scarce expect the later without the former. If God will help us in our
future duty and amendment, he will sure humble us first for our former sin. He
that has not so much sense of his faults as unfeignedly to lament them, will
hardly have so much more as may move him to reform them. The sorrow of
Repentance may go without the change of heart and life; because a Passion may
be easier wrought then a true conversion: but the change cannot go without some
good measure of the sorrow. Indeed we may justly here begin our Confessions; It
is too common with us to expect that from our people, which we do little or
nothing in our selves. What pains take we to humble them, while our selves are
unhumbled? How hard do we squeeze them by all our expostulations, convictions,
and aggravations, to wring out of them a few penitent tears, (and all too
little) when our own eyes are dry, and our hearts too strange to true remorse
and we give them an example of hard-heartedness, while we are endeavoring by
our words to mollify and melt them. O if we did but study half as much to
affect and amend our own hearts, as we do our hearers, it would not be with
many of us as it is! Its a great deal too little that we do for their
humiliation; but I fear its much less that some of us do for our own. Too many
do somewhat for other men's souls, while they seem to forget that they have any
of their own to regard. They so carry the matter, as if their part of the work
lay in calling for Repentance, and the hearers in Repenting: theirs in speaking
tears and sorrow, and other-mens-only in weeping and sorrowing; theirs in
preaching duty, and the hearers in performing it; theirs in crying down sin,
and the peoples in forsakeing it.

But we find that the Guides of the Church in Scripture did confess their own
sins as well as the sins of the people, and did begin to them in tears for
their own and the peoples sins. Ezra confesses the sins of the Priests as well
as of the people, weeping and casting himself down before the house of God,
Ezr. 9. 6, 7, 10. and 10. 1. So did the Levites, Neh. 9. 32, 33, 34. Daniel
confessed his own sin as well as the peoples, Dan. 9. 20. And God calls such
to it as well as others, Joel 2. 15, 16, 17. When the fast is summoned, the
people gathered, the Congregation sanctified, the Elders assembled, the Priests
the Ministers of the Lord are called to begin to them in weeping, and calling
upon God for mercy. I think if we consider well of the Duties already opened,
and withal how we have done them; of the Rule and of our unanswerableness
thereto, we need not demurr upon the question, nor put it to a question,
Whether we have cause of humiliation? I must needs say, though I judge my self
in saying it, that he that reads but this one Exhortation of Paul in Acts 20.
and compares his life with it, is too stupid and hard-hearted, if he do not
melt in the sense of his neglects, and be not laid in the dust before God, and
forced to bewail his great omissions, and to fly for refuge to the blood of
Christ, and to his pardoning grace. I am confident, Brethren, that none of you
do in judgment approve of the Libertine Doctrine, that cries down the
necessity of Confession, Contrition and true humiliation, yea and in order to
the pardon of sin! Is it not pity then that our Hearts are not more Orthodox
as well as our heads? But I see our lesson is but half learnt when we know it,
and can say it: When the understanding has learned it, there is more ado to
teach it our Wills and Affections, our eyes, our tongues and hands. It is a sad
thing that so many of us do use to preach our hearers asleep: but its sadder if
we have studied and preached our selves asleep, and have talked so long against
hardness of heart, till our own grow hardened, under the noise of our own
reproofs. Though the head only have eyes, and ears, and smell, and taste, the
heart should have life, and feeling and motion as well as the head.

And that you may see that it is not a causeless sorrow that God calls us to.
I shall take it to be my duty to call to remembrance our mainfold sins, or
those that are most obvious, and set them this day in order before God and our
own faces, that God may cast them behind his back: and to deal plainly and
faithfully in a free confession; that he who is faithful and just may forgive
them; and to judge our selves that we be not judged of the Lord. Wherein I
suppose I have your free and hearty consent, and that you will be so far from
being offended with the disgrace of your persons and of others in this office,
that you will readily subscribe the charge, and be humble self-accusers; and so
far am I from justifying my self by the accusation of others, that I do
unfeignedly put my name with the first in the bill. For how can a wretched
sinner of so great transgressions, presume to justify himself with God? Or how
can he plead Guiltless, whose conscience has so much to say against him? If I
cast shame upon the Ministry, it is not on the office, but on our persons, by
opening that sin which is our shame: The glory of our high employment does not
communicate any glory to our sin; nor will afford it the smallest covering for
its nakedness. For sin is a reproach to any people, or persons, Prove. 14. 34.
And it is my self as well as others on whom I must lay the shame. And if this
may not be done, What do we here to day? Our business is to take shame to our
selves, and to give God the glory, and faithfully to open our sins that he may
cover them, and to make our selves bare by confession, as we have done by
transgression, that we may have the white raiment which cloatheth none but the
penitent; For be they Pastors or people, it is only he that confesses and
forsakes his sins, that shall have mercy, when he that hardens his heart
shall fall into mischief, Pro. 28. 13.

And I think it will not be amiss if in the beginning of our Confession we look
behind us, and imitate Daniel and other servants of God who confessed the sins
of their forefathers and predecessors. For indeed my own Judgment is so far
from denying Original sin, even the imputed part, with the ancient opposers of
it, or those of the new Edition, that it does not so much excuse me from the
Guilt of my later progenitors offenses, as most other men's do seem to excuse
them. Let us fetch up then the core of our shame, and go to the bottom, and
trace the behavior of the Minsters of the Gospel from the days of Christ till
now, and see how far they have been from innocence.

When Christ had chosen him but twelve Apostles, who kept near his person, that
they might be acquainted with his Doctrine, Life and Miracles: yet how ignorant
did they long remain, not knowing so much as that he must dye and be a
sacrifice for the sins of the world, and be buried and rise again, and ascend
into glory, nor what was the nature of his spiritual Kingdom? so that it puts
us hard to it to imagine how men so ignorant could be in a state of grace; but
that we know that those points were after of absolute necessity to salvation,
that were not so then. If any one about the time of Moses, offering sacrifice
according to the Law, were not instructed in the Doctrine of the death of our
Redeemer, but only believed that God through the means which be knows to be
most agreeable and convenient, will forgive us ou^ trespasses, it were insh^^ss
to go about to exclude such a man from salvation. Pet. Molinaeus de Tradition.
c. 19 p. 251, 252.
How often does Christ teach them publicly and apart? Mark 4. 34. and rebuke
them for their unbelief and hardness of heart: And yet after all this, so
strange were these great mysteries of Redemption to them, and these (now)
Articles of our Creed, that Peter himself disswadeth Christ from suffering and
goes so far in contradicting his gracious thoughts for our Redmption, that he
is called Satan, and tantum non excommunicate. And no wonder; for if his
counsel had been taken, the world had been lost for ever. And as there was a
Judas among them, so the twelve are before Christ's face contending for
superiority; so early did that Pride begin to work in the best, which
afterward prevailed so far in others, as to bring the Church so low as we have
seen. What should we say of their joint forsaking Christ of their failings even
after the powrings out of the Spirit! of the dissension and separation between
Paul and Barnabas; how strange Peter made of the calling of the Gentiles; of
his compliance with the Jews to the endangering the liberties of the Gentiles,
Gal. 2. Of the dissimulation of Barnabas; and the common dissertion of Paul in
his suffering: When he had found one Timothy, he says, he had no man
like-minded, that would naturally care for their estate; for all seek their
own, and not the things of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2. 20, 21. A sad charge of
self-seeking in that glory of the Church for faith and purity. And what charges
are against most of the Angels of the seven Asian Churches is expressed, Rev.
2. and 3. And its likely that Archippus: was not the only man that had need to
be warned to look to his Ministry. Col. 4. 17. Nor Demas the only man that
forsook a persecuted partner, and turned after the things of the world! Nor
Diotrephes the only man that loved to have the prehemine noe, and made
quarrels, and dealt unjustly and unmercifully in the Church upon that account.

And even while the Churches were frying in the flames, yet did the Pride and
dissentions even of godly Pastors do more then the fire of persecution could do
to turn al to ashes. How sad a story is it that Policrates with all the Eastern
Churches should be arrogantly excommunicated by Victor with his Romans, upon no
higher a crime then mis-choosing of Easterday (which our Britains also long
after were guilty of) who would think that so great weakness, and presumptuous
usurpation, and uncharitable cruelty, and Schismatical zeal, could have befalen
the Pastors of the Church in the strongest temptations of prosperity? much less
in the midst of Heathenish persecutions! What toys and trifles did the ancient
Reverend Fathers of the Church trouble their heads about, and pester the Church
with, and what useless stuff are many of their Canons composed of? Yet these
were the great matter and work of many of their famous consultations. How
quickly did they seem to forget the perfection of holy Scripture, the
non-necessity and burdensomness of ceremonious impositions; And by taking upon
them an unnecessary and unjust kind of Jurisdiction, they made the Church so
much more work then ever Christ made it, and so clogged Religion with humane
devices, that the Christian world has groaned under it ever since, and been
almost brought to ruin by it; and the Reverence of their persons has put so
much Reputation on the crime, and custom has so taught it to plead
praescription, that when the ^acerated languid Churches will be delivered from
the sad effects of their presumption, God only knows. It would make an
impartial Reader wonder that peruseth their Canons and the History of the
Church, that ever men of piety, and charity, and sobriety, could be drawn to
perplex and tear in pieces the Churches by such a multitude of vanities, and
needless determinations (^o say no worse.) And that the Preachers of the Gospel
of peace, which so enjoyneth humility, unity and love, should ever be drawn to
such a height of p^ide, as to think themselves meet to make so many Laws for
the whole Church of Christ, and to bind all their Brethren through the world to
the obedience of their dictates, and practice of their historical insnaring
Ceremonies; and that upon the penalties of being accounted no less then damned
Heretics or Schismatics. Though Paul had told them betime that he was afraid
of them, lest as the Serpent deceived Eve, so they should be deceived and drawn
from the simplic^ty that was in Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 3. Yet quickly was this
Caution forgotten, and the thing that Paul feared soon befell them, and in
stead of the simplicity of Doctrine, they vexed the Churches with curious
controversies; and instead of the simplicity of Disci^line and Government, they
corrupted the Church with Pomp and Tyran^ie, and varieties of new orders and
rules of Religions; and instead of the simplicity of worship, they set up such
a train of their own inventions, of which the Church had no necessity, that the
Bishops were become the Masters of Ceremonies, who should have been the
faithful and humble observers of the pure Laws and Ordinances of Christ. Though
their Councils were usual for the Churches Communion had they been rightly
ordered, yet so unhappily did they manage them for the most part, that Greg.
N^zianzene purposed to come at them no more, as having never seen any that did
not more harm then good; And so bold and busy were they in additions and
innovations, even in making new ^reeds, that Hilary sadly complains of it, not
sparing the Council of N^ce it self (though their Creed were allowable) because
they taught others the way, and set the rest a work. And Luther shows us at
large in his ^ook de Conciliis, what thoughts he had of those Assembli^s. Three
lamentable vices did the Prelates of the Church then commonly abound in, Pride
the root; Contention, and Vain impositions and inventions, the fruits. No
charity that is not blind can hide this guilt. We had never else had the
Christian world so plagued with their quarrels about superiority, and vain
Traditions, after such warnings, and lessons and examples as Christ had g^ven
his own Apostles. When once the fa^our of a Christ^an Prince did shine upon the
Churches, what self-exaltation and contention of the Prelates did ensue? So
that if they had not been restrained and kept in quiet by the Emperor, how soon
would they have made a sadder havoc then they did? perhaps in their first
General Council it self. And though that Council had a good occasion, even to
suppress the Arrian heresy, yet had not Constantine committed their mutual
accusations to the flames, and shamed them from their contendings, it had not
had so good an end. And yet as good as it was, Luther says, p. 226. de Council.
Ariana haeresis jocus fuit ante Nicenum Concilium, praeilla confusione quam
ipsi post Concilium excitaverunt. Angustines sad complaint of the loading of
the Church with ceremonies, and comparing them to Judaism, is commonly known.
Of which see Luthers Comment. ib. p. 55, 56. And so strange did it seem to
Luther that the learned Prelates of those bitter times should so scold circa
naenia and nugas, about pre-eminence and ceremonies, and things of naught, that
he is again and again taken up in admiring it. Read that Treatise throughout.

Is it not sad to think of the heat of an Epiphanius and Theophilus Alexand.
against Chrysostom, and of Chrysostom against them! Of Hierom against
Ruffinus, Chrysostom, and many others; and if Austin had not been more
peaceable then he, one of them must have been an Heretic, or Schismatic at
least. How many more such sad examples have we!

And for their damnatory Sentences, they were more presumptuous then their
Laws; Few men could stand in another way, or fall out, but one of them must be
an Heretic before they had made an end. Small differences were named damnable
Heresies. Though they had enough among them that were such indeed, (whereof
some of the Clergy were almost always the causes and fomenters) yet did they
so multiply them by their imputation, that their Catalogues swelled beyond the
credit of charity. And he that had the highest reputation, was usually safest
from the blot, and had power to make others heretics almost at his pleasure;
and if a man had once got the vote and fame, it was dangerous gainsaying him.
Had Vigilantius or Jovinian had Hieroms name, some of their heresies might
possibly have been articles of faith.

And as they were dangerously forward on one side to make every small mistake a
Heresy, and cause divisions in the Church by their unjust condemnations; so
many on the other hand were as forward to provoke them, by novelties or false
conceits, especially about the Trinity, and the person and natures of Christ;
So that unquiet spirits knew not when or where to rest: And multitudes of them
did turn cheaters and deluders of the vulgar, by pretending to Miracles, and
Revelations, and Visions, and drawing the people deeper into superstition by
such means, (as Bonafacius Moguntinus wrote to Pope Zachary about the
hypocritical Saint Aldebert.) And in that age especially when few learned men
(as Erasmus complains) did escape the suspicion of heresy, and he that was a
Mathematician was counted a Magitian, it had been more wit to have silenced
some unnecessary verities, then to have angered impatient ignorance. Virgilius
might have talked more of the world above us, and let the world below us alone,
rather then to force the learned Pope Zacbary to say to his brother Boniface of
Mentz: De perversa and iniqua doctrina, quam contra Deum and animam suam
locutus est; (a high crime) si clar ficatum fuerit it a eum confiteri, quod
alius mundus and alii homines sub terras sint, hunc accito Concilio, ab
ecclesia pelle sacerdotii honor privatum. vid. Usher. syllog. Hibernic.
Epistel. page 49, 50. But to mention the twentieth part of the Proud
usurpations, innovations, impositions and sentences of those following times,
especially among the Romanists, is fitter for large volumns then a cursary
Lamentation of the Churches sins. I will not meddle with the Errors, and cruel
blood shed of the Popish Clergy of late, against the Waldenses, and
Protestants; nor yet with the sad condition of the rest of the Clergy through
the Christian world, in Aethiopia, Muscovia, Greece, etc. For you will think
that this is less to us that do disclaim them: But let us come nearer our
selves, and we shall find yet matter of further lamentation. And I will
purposely say nothing of any of the sins of our foreign Reformers, nor meddle
with any of those sad contentions, which have brought the Reformed Churches
into two such exasperated partys, Lutherans and Calvinists, (as they are
commonly called) and hindered their reconciliation and frustrated all means that
have been used to that end till this day, to the exceeding shame of the Pastors
of these Churches, and the publishing of our darkness, Pride, and selfishness
to all the world. But my present business lies only at home, and that only
with the Reformed Pastors of our Churches. For though through the great mercy
of God, they are far from the Papal cruelty which made bone-fires of their
Brethren better then themselves throughout the Land, and as far from the worst
of their Errors and false worship; yet have we been so far from innocence, that
all posterity is bound to lament the miscarriages of their predecessors.

Is it not a very sad History of the troubles at Frankford, to read that so
many godly learned men that had forsaken all for the Reformed profession, and
were Exiles in a foreign Land, even in a City where they had but borrowed the
liberty of one Church should even then fall in pieces among themselves, and
that about a Liturgy and Ceremonies, so far as to make a division; and after
many plottings and counter-plottings, and underminings of one another, one part
of them must leave the City, and go seek another for their liberty! What had
not those few Exiles that left their native Country, lands and friends, and all
for the Gospel, that fled so far for the liberty of Gods worship, and had as
great advantage as most men in the world to be sensible of the excellency of
Reformation and liberty, had these I say no more Christian love and tenderness,
no more esteem of what they suffered for, then to fall out with one another,
and almost fall upon one another, for such things as these! Would not suffering
abate their pride and passions, and close their hearts, nor yet make them so
far patient as to tolerate each other in so small a difference: Even when their
dearest friends and fellow servants were frying in the flames at home, and the
prisons filled with them, and they had daily news of one after another that was
made a sacrifice to the fury of the Papists, could they yet proceed in their
own dissentions, and that to such a height! O what is man! and the best of men!
Yea before this, in King Edwards days, what rigor was used against Bishop
Hooper about such Ceremonies! But the prison abated Bishop Ridleys
uncharitableness, and they then learned more charity when they were going to
the flames.

From Frankford the sad division at the death of Queen Mary was transported
into England; and the seeds that were sown or began to spring up in the Exiled
Congregation, did too plentifully fructify in the Land of their prosperity. No
sooner does the Sun shine upon them, but contentious spirits begin to swarm;
and the prison doors are no sooner open, and their bolts knocked off, but they
continue the suppressing of their Brethren, as if they had been turned loose as
fighting Cocks to fall upon one another, and to work for Satan when they had
suffered for Christ. The party that was for Prelacy and Ceremonies, prevailed
for the countenance of the state, and quickly got the staff into their hands,
and many of their Brethren under their feet: and so contrived the business that
there was no quiet station to be had in the Ministry, for those that would not
be of their mind and way. And many of them endeavored to have a brand of
ignominy set upon their names, who desired the Discipline and order of other
reformed Churches; That all might be accounted Schismatics that would not be
ruled by them even in Ceremonies. The contrary-minded also were some of them
too intemperate, and impatient, and unpeaceable; and some few of them turned to
flat separation, and flew in the faces of the Prelates with reviling: For their
sakes many wise and peaceable men were the worse used; and they that were got
into the Chair, began to play the scorners and the persecutors: and thought
meet to impose upon them all the nickname of Puritans, as knowing how much
names of reproach and scorn could do with the vulgar for the furthering of
their cause; some of these Puritans (as now they had named them) were
imprisoned, and some put to death, and some dyed in and by imprisonment: They
are all made incapable of being Preachers of the Gospel in England, till they
would change their minds, and subscribe to the lawfulness of Prelacy, and the
Liturgy and Ceremonies, and use these accordingly when they use their
Ministry. O how much did many good men rejoice that the Lord had visited their
native Country with deliverance, and the light of the glorious Gospel of his
Son? How much did they long to lay out themselves for the saving of their dear
Countrymen, and to improve the present freedom for the most effectual
propagation of the Truth? When alas their own friends, some of their
fellow sufferers animated and assisted by many temporizers, did suddenly
disappoint their hopes and shut them out of the Vineyard of the Lord, and would
suffer none to labor in it, but themselves and theirs. Alas that persecution
should be so soon forgotten! and that they should have no more sense of the
cruelty of the Papists, to have moved them to some more tenderness of the
consciences and liberties of their Brethren. That they had no more compassion
on the Church of Christ, then to deprive it of the labors of so many choice
and worthy men; and that at such a time of necessity. When Popish Priests were
newly cast out, and multitudes of Congregations had no Preachers at all, but
some silly Readers, yet might not these men be allowed to Preach. If the
Judgments of these Prelates were never so absolute for the Divine right of
their own government, yet could it not be so for the absolute Necessity of the
Cross, Surplice, and every part of the forms in their Liturgy! Had they but
countenanced most their own party, and silenced all that did speak against
their Government and Ceremonies, and only allowed them to preach the Gospel
without subscription to the lawfulness of these things, and with a silent
forbearance of the use of the Ceremonies, they might have better secured their
own power and way, and have exercised some sense of brotherly love, and
compassion on the necessitous state of the Church, and in all likelihood might
have stood safe themselves to this day. A wonderful thing it seems to me, that
wise and good men (for such I doubt not but many of them were) should think it
better that many hundred Congregations in England (to say nothing of Ireland or
Scotland) should be without any preaching at all to the apparent hazard of the
damnation of means souls (who were so deep in Popish ignorance before) then
that a man should preach to them that durst not use the Cross or Surplice? were
these of more worth then so many souls? It was lawful in the Apostles days to
baptize without the Cross, and to pray, and praise God without the Surplice?
and why might not the Prelates of England have tolerated that in the Churches
necessities, at least as a weakness in well-meaning Brethren which the
Apostolical Churches used not at all? What if they were lawful? They that
thought so might have them. Were they now become more necessary then the
Preaching of the Gospel, when in the Apostles times they were of no necessity
or use at all? If it were obedience to the Prelates that was necessary, they
might have required obedience to undoubted and necessary things, and they
should soon have found it. Had they contented themselves to be as Officers
under Christ, to see to the execution of his Laws, and to meddle at least with
no needless new Legislation, I think few would have questioned obedience to
them but the ungodly. But it was sadly contrived to have such Impositions on
men's consciences in needless or indifferent things, as the most tender
conscienc't men were likest to disobey, and as might be snares to those that
desired to please God, (when) the business of Church Governors should be to
promote the obedience of Christs-Laws, and to encourage those that are most
fearful to disobey them) and to do as the Law makers, Dan. 6. 5. We shall not
find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning
the Law of his God.

But thus it came to pass that the enemy of the Church did too much attain his
ends: such excellent men as Hildersham, Brightman, P. Bayn, Parker, Ames,
Bradshaw, Dod, Nicolls, with multitudes more were laid aside and silenced; and
multitudes of them that petitioned for liberty in Lincolnshire, Devonshire, and
other parts, suppressed; and the Nation in the mean time abounding with gross
ignorance, was brought by observing the countenance of the times, to like their
own Readers better then painful Preachers, and to hate and scorn the zealous
obedience to the Laws of Christ, and all diligence for salvation, because they
observed, that those men that were such, were so many of them hated and
persecuted by the Rulers, though on the occasions before mentioned. And here
was the foundation of our greatest misery laid: While some of the Rulers
themselves began to turn their hatred against practical godliness (which
corrupted nature hates in all) and the common people took the hint, and no
longer confined the word Puritan to the Non-conformists, but applied it
commonly through all parts of the Land, to those that would but speak seriously
of heaven, and tell men of Death and Judgment, and spend the Lords day in
preparation thereto, and desire others to do the like; that did but pray in
their families, and keep their children and servants on the Lords day to learn
the way to salvation, in stead of letting them spend it in gaming or revelling;
they that did but reprove a swearer or a drunkard; these were become the
Puritans and the Precisians, and the hated ones of the time; so that they
became a byword in all the Towns and Villages in England that ever I knew, or
heard of (as to these things.) And thus when the Prelates had engaged the
vulgar in their cause, and partly by themselves, and partly by them, had so far
changed their cause, as that all serious Christians that feared sin, and were
most diligent for salvation, were presently engaged among their adversaries,
and they were involved with the rest, though they did nothing against the
Government or Ceremonies, and the most ignorant and impious became the friends
and agents of the times, and everywhere made the most pious and sedulous
Christians a common scorn, to the dishonor of God, and the hardening of the
wicked, and discouraging of the weak, and filling men with prejudice against a
godly life, and hindering many thousands from the way of salvation: then did God
himself appear more evidently as interested in the quarrel, and rose against
them, and shamed them that had let in scorn and shame upon his ways; And this,
even this was the very thing that brought them down.

Besides this, there was scarce such a thing as Church Government or Discipline
known in the Land; but only this harassing of those that dissented from them.
In all my life I never lived in the Parish where one person was publicly
admonished or brought to public penitence or excommunicated, though there were
never so many obstinate drunkards, whoremongers or vilest offenders. Only I
have known now and then one for getting a bastard, that went to the Bishops
Court and paid their sees; and I heard of two or three in all the Country (in
all my life) that stood in a white sheet an hour in the Church: But the ancient
Discipline of the Church was unknown. And indeed it was made by them
impossible, when one man that lived at a distance from them, and knew not one
of many hundreds of the Flock, did take upon him the sole Jurisdiction (and
executed it not by himself, but by a lay-Chancellor) excluding the Pastors of
the several Congregations, who were but to join with the Churchwardens and the
Apparitors in presenting men, and bringing them into their Courts: And an
impossible task must needs be unperformed: And so the controversy as to the
letter and outside was, Who should be the Governors of all the particular
Churches? but as to the sense and inside of it, it was, Whether there should be
any effectual Church Government, or not? Whereupon those that pleaded for
Discipline, were called by the New name of Disciplinarians; as if it had been a
kind of Heresy to desire Discipline in the Church.

At last the heat began to grow greater, and new impositions raised new
adversaries. When conformable Puritans began to bear the great reproach (there
being few of the Non-conformists left) Then must they also be gotten into the
Net; Altars must be bowed to or toward: All must publish a Book for dancing
and sports on the Lords day, disabling the Masters of Families, and parents
(though they had small time on the week-daies, by reason of their poverty or
labor) to keep in their own children or families from dancing on that day,
that they might instruct them in the matters of God. If a man as he read a
Chapter to his family, had persuaded them to observe and practice it, and with
any reasons urged them thereto, this was called expounding, and was enquired of
in their Articles, to be presented together with Adultery and such like sins:
so also was he used that had no preaching at home, and would go hear a
conformable Preacher abroad: So that multitudes have I known exceedingly
troubled or undone for such matters as these, when not one was much troubled
for scandalous crimes. Then Lectures were put down, and afternoon Sermons, and
expounding the Catechism, or Scripture in the afternoons. And the violence grew
so great, that many thousand families left the Land, and many godly, able
Ministers, Conformists as well as others, were fain to fly and become Exiles,
some in one Country and some in another, and most in the remote American parts
of the world: Thither went Cotton, Hooker, Davenport, Shephard, Allen, Cobbet,
Noyes, Parker, with many another that deserved a dwelling place in England.

Yet I must profess I should scarce have mentioned any of this, nor taken it
for so heinous a crime, had it been only cruelty to the persons of these men,
though they had dealt much hardlyer with them then they did, and if it had not
been greater cruelty to the Church, and if they had but had competent men for
their places when they were cast out. But alas the Churches were pestered with
such wretches as are our shame and trouble to this day. Abundance of mere
Readers, and drunken profane deboist men, were the Ministers of the Churches;
so that we have been this many years endeavoring to cleanse the Church of
them, and have not fully effected it to this day. And many that had more
plausible tongues, did make it their chief business, to bring those that they
called Puritans into disgrace, and to keep the people from being such. So that
I must needs say, that I knew no place in these times, where a man might not
more safely have been drunken every week, (as to their punishment) then to have
gone to hear a Sermon if he had none at home. For the common people readily
took the hint, and increased their reproach, as the Rulers did their
persec^tion; so that a man could not in any place of England that I came in,
have said to a swearer or a drunkard, O do not sin against God, and wound or
hazard your own soul, but he should have been presently ^ooted at as a Puritan:
He could not have said to an ignorant or carele^s neighbor, Remember your
everlasting state: prepare for death and Judgment: or have talked of any
Scripture matters to them, but he was presently jeered as a Puritan or
Precisian: and Scripture it self was become a reproach to him that talked of
it, and they would cry out, What! we must have talk of Scripture now! you will
preach to us! we shall have these Preachers ordered ^re long. So that it was
become commonly in England a greater reproach to be a man truly living in the
fear of God, then to live in open profaneness, and to rail at godliness, and
daily scorn it, which was so far from being a matter of danger, that many took
it up in expectation of preferment; and the Preachers of the times were well
ware that the rising way was to preach against the precise Puritans, and not to
live precisely themselves. And thus both Ministry and people grew to that sad
pass, that it was no wonder if God would bear no longer with the Land.

Even as it was in the Western Churches before the inundation of the Goths and
Vandals, as Salvian among others tells us; Indeed I know not a Writer that more
fitly painteth out the state of our times; I shall therefore borrow some of his
words to express our case, which it seems had been then the Churches case.

Ipsa Dei Ecclesia quae in omnibus esse debet placatrix Dei, quid est aliud
quam exacerbatrix Dei? aut pr^ter paucissim^s qu^sdam qui mala fugiunt, quid
est aliud pene omnis coetus Christianorum quam sentina vitiorum? Quotum enim
quemque invenies in Ecclesia non aut Ebriosum aut helluonem, aut adulterum,
etc. -- immo facilius invenias qui totum sit quam qui nihil: Et quod diximus
nihil ni^is forsitan gravis videatur esse censura; plus multo dicam, facilius
invenias reum malorum omnium quam non omnium; facilius majorum criminum quam
minorum: id est, facilius qui and major a crimina cum minoribus, quam qui minor
a tantum sin^ majoribus perpetrarint. In hanc enim morum probrositatem prope
omnis Ecclesiastica pl^bs redacta est, ut in ^uncto populo Christiano genus
quodammodo sanctitatis si^, minus esse vitiosum. Itaque Ecclesias vel potius
templa atque altaria Dei minoris reverentiae quidem habent quam cujus^^bet
minimi ac municipalis judicis domum. Siquidem intra j^nuas non modo illustrium
potestatum, sed etiam praesidum and praepositorum, non omnes passim intrare
praesumunt, nisi quos aut judex vocaverit, aut negotium traxerit, aut ipsa
honoris proprii dignitas introire permiserit: it a ^t si quispiam fu^rit
insolenter ingressus, aut caed^tur, aut propellatur aut al^qua verec^^diae
atque existimationis su^ labe mulctetur. In templa autem vel potius in altaria
atqu^ sacraria Dei passim omnes sordidi ac flagitiosi sin^ ulla penitus
reverentia sacri honor is irrumpunt, non quia non omnes ad exorandum Deum
currere debent; sed quia qui ingreditur ad placandum, non debet egredi ad
exacerbandum. Neque enim ejusde^ offic^^ est indulgentiam poscere and ^r
acundiam provocare: Novum siquidem monstrigenus est; eadem paene omnes jugiter
faciunt, quae fecisse se plangunt: Et qui intrant in Ecclesiasticam domum, ut
mala antiqua defleant, exeunt; and quid dico excunt? in ipsis pene hoc
orationibus suis moliuntur. Salv. de Gubern. l. 3. p. 86, 87.

Et page 180. O miseriam lacrymabilem. O miseriam luctuosam! quam dissimilis
nunc a seipso est populus Christian^s, id est, ab eo qui fuit quondam! -- Ecce
in quid reducti sumus, ut beatam fore Ecclesiam judicemus, si vel tantum in se
boni habeat quantum mali. Nam quomado non beatam arbitremur, si mediam plebis
partem haberet innoxiam, quam pene totam nunc esse plangimus criminosam --
superflue unius scelera deflevimus; aut omnes enim, aut pene omnes flendi atque
lugendi sunt.

Et page 195, 196. Omnia amamus; omnia colimus; solus nobis in com^aratione
omnium Deus vilis est? siquando enim veniret, (quod saepe evenit) ut eodem die
and festivitas Ecclesiastica and ludi publici agantur, quaeso ab omnium
Conscientia, quis locus majores Christianorum virorum copias haberet? Caveane
ludi publici, au atrium Dei? Et templum omnes magis sectentur, au theatrum?
dicta Evangeliorum magis diligant au thymelicorum? verba vitae, an mortis?
verba Christi, an mimi? Non est dubium quin illud magis amemus quod anteponimus.

Too like to these here described were our times grown, through the fault of
those that professed themselves to have the oversight of their souls. A most
sad thing it was to see those men that undertook to guide men in the ways of
life, to be the chief means of discouraging them; and to hear them make a mock
at holiness, that should have devoted their Doctrine and (...) thereto. The
accusation may seem harsh to those of aftertimes that knew not this! or that
by the Patrons of iniquity are persuaded of the contrary. But I say as Salvian,
l. 6. p. 197. Sed gravis est forsitan haec atque iniqua congestio. Gravis
profecto, si falsa.

Yet through the mercy of God, it was not all the Prelates of the Church that
thus miscarried: we have yet surviving our Usher, our Hall, our Morton,
learned, godly and peaceable men; whose names are as dear to us as any men's
alive. And O that it had been the will of God that all had been such! Then had
we not been like to have seen those days of blood that we have seen: nor those
great mutations in Church and state! But so far were these good men from being
able to do the good that they would, that they were maligned for their piety,
and soundness in the faith, and many a time have I heard them despised as well
as others, and scorned as Puritans for all they were Prelates.

And yet it were well if all the guilt had lain upon that party! But alas it
was not so! Those pious and painful Divines that were oppressed, and much more
that part of the people that joined with them, were too impatient under their
suffering! and bent themselves (some of them) more then was meet against the
persons of those that they suffered by; and too much endeavored to make the
Prelates odious with the people; as persecutors of the Church of God: and were
ready to go too far from them on the other hand; and to think the worse of some
things because they commanded them. Doubtless had we all suffered with more
patience, and carried our selves with meekness and gent eness to those that we
differed from, and given them so much commendation as was their due, and put
the best constructions on their actions that we could, and covered their
infirmities with the most charitable interpretations, we might have done more
to mollify their minds; or at least, to have maintained our own innocence. But
as there was no room on their part to a motion for peace, or a petition for
liberty, in the time of their prosperity; so when advantages did seem to appear
to us of vindicating our liberties, we looked upon them as unreconcileable, and
too inconsiderately rusht on, and were wanting in those peaceable endeavors
that were our duty. We did not in our Assembly invite them to a free
consultation, that their cause might have the fullest and fairest hearing,
before it had been condemned. Proposals that had any tendency to healing and
accommodation, had never that entertainment from us that they did deserve. What
moderate Proposals were made to one party by Bishop Usher, which both parties
did dislike! How many pacificatory motions and excellent Treatises came from
that Heavenly peaceable Bishop Hall, especially his Peacemaker, his Pax
terris, and his Modest Offer! But how little did they effect! Certainly some of
the men were so venerable for their admirable learning and piety, that they
deserved to have been heard, and consulted with too, as wise and most Judicious
men. And Prelacy was not so young a plant in the Church, nor had it in former
and latter ages, had so few or mean persons to adorn and credit it, but that it
well deserved the fairest hearing and debate.

But thus have we all showed our frailty, and this is the heed that we have
taken to our selves and to all the Flock. The Lord open our eyes at last, that
we may all fullyer see our own miscarriages; for surely they lie as Mountains
before us, and all the world about us may see them, and yet we will hardly see
them our selves.

A man would think now that if the heart of man be cureable, we should by this
time be all brought to the sense of our miscarriages, and be prepared to a
closure on any reasonable terms? Who would think but after all the smart of our
divisions, we should long ere this have got together, and prayed, and consulted
our selves into peace! But alas there is no such matter done; and few do I find
that mind the doing of it. We continue our quarrels as hot as ever: As Salvian
says in another case, Miseri jam sumus: and nec dum nugaces (discordes) esse
cessamus. l. 6. p. 20 2. Et page 200. Mala incessabiliter malis addimus, and
peccata peccatis cumulamus: and cum maxima nostri pars iam perierit, id agimus
ut pereamus omnes. -- Nos non vicinos nostros tantum ardere vidimus, sed ipsi
iam ex maxima nostrorum corporum part arsimus. Et quid hoc, proh nefas, mali
est? arsimus, arsimus, and tamen flammas quibus iam arsimus non timemus. Nam
quod non ubique agantur quae prius acta sunt, miseriae est beneficium, non
disciplinae. Facile hoc probo. Da enim prioris temporis statum, and statim
ubique sunt quae fuerunt.

The minds of many are as much exasperated or estranged as ever. Three sorts I
meet with, that all are too backward to any accommodation.

1. The violent men of the Prelates side, especially those of the new way, who
are so far from Reconciliation and healing of our breaches, that they labor to
persuade the world that the contrary-minded are Schismatics, and that all the
Ministers that have not Episcopal ordination are no Ministers, nor any of the
Churches that have not Prelates are true Churches, (at least, except it can be
proved to be through unavoidable necessity.) And they say, To agree with such
were to strike a Covenant with Schism it self.

2. Some on the other side say, Do you not see that except an inconsiderable
number, the Prelatical party are all, empty, careless, if not scandalous
ungodly men! Where are almost any of them whose Communion is desirable! That
set themselves to the winning and saving of souls, and are serious men in the
matters of salvation, in whom you can perceive a heavenly conversation? Has
God brought down these enemies of godliness, and persecutors and depopulaters
of his Church, and would you make a league with them again? Do you not see that
they are as bitter and implacable as ever! and have not some of them the faces
to justify all the former impositions and persecutions, and draw or continue
the guile of it upon their heads? and would make the world believe that they
are wrongfully eiected, when so many accusatians in Parliament before the
division, so many Centuries of horribly scandalous ones published by Mr. White,
and so many more Centuries that lie on Record under depositions in the several
Countyes of the Nation where the Committees eiected them, will be perpetual
witnesses of the quality of these men.

3. Others there be that are peaceable men on both sides, that will not
justify the former miscarriages, nor own the present evils of any; but think
though there be too much truth in these later accusations, yet the nature of
the Difference and the Quality of some of the persons is such, as deserves our
desires and endeavors of Reconciltation. But they think the work to be
hopeless and impossible, and therefore not to be attempted.

And thus our breach is made; but how or when it will be well healed, the Lord
knows. But this is not all; it behooves us yet to come nearer home, and
enquire into the ways of the present approved Godly Ministers, of what party
soever; and doubtless if we are willing to know our selves we may soon find
that which will lay us very low before the Lord, I shall in all have an eye at
my own corrupt heart which I am so far from Justifying in th^s common
lamentation, that I take it as my necessary duty to cast the first stone at my
self.

The great sins that we are guilty of, I shall not undertake to enumerate; and
therefore my passing over any particular is not to be taken as a denial of it
for our Justification. But I shall take it to be my duty to give instance of
some few, that cry loud for humiliation and speedy Reformation.

Only I must needs first premise this profession; That for all the faults that
are now among us, I do not believe that ever England had so able and faithful a
Ministry since it was a Nation as it has at this day: and I fear that few
Nations on earth, if any, have the like. Sure I am the change is so great
within this 12. years, that it is one of the greatest joys that ever I had in
the world to behold it. O how many Congregations are now plainly and frequently
taught, that lived then in great obscurity? How many able faithful men are
there now in a County in comparison of what were then? How graciously has God
prospered the studies of many young men, that were little children in the
beginning of the late troubles? so that now they cloud the most of their
seniors: How many miles would I have gone twenty years ago, and less, to have
heard one of those ant^ent Reverend Divines, whose Congregations are now grown
thin, and their parts esteemed mean by reason of the notable improvement of
their Juniors? And in particular, how mercifully has the Lord dealt with this
poor Country of Worcestershire, in raising up so many of these, that credit
their sacred office, and self-denyingly, and freely, zealously and unwearyedly
do lay out themselves for the good of souls! I bless the Lord that has placed
me in such a neighborhood, where I may have the brotherly fellowship of so
many able, humble, unanimous, peaceable and faithful men. O that the Lord would
long continue this admirable mercy to this unworthy Country: And I hope I
shall rejoice in God while I have a being for the common change in other parts,
that I have lived to see: That so many hundred faithful men are so hard at work
for the saving of souls, frementibus licet and frendentibus inimicis; and that
more are springing up apace. I know there are some men whose parts I reverence,
who being in point of Government of another mind from them, will be offended at
my very mention of this happy alteration: but I must profess if I were
absolutely Prelatical, if I knew my heart, I could not chose for all that but
rejoice: What not rejoice at the prosperity of the Church, because the men do
differ in one opinion, about its order! should I shut my eyes against the
mercies of the Lord! The souls of men are not so contemptible to me, that I
should envy them the bread of life, because it is broken to them by a hand that
had not the Prelatical approbation; O that every congregation were thus
supplied; but all cannot be done at once. They had a long time to settle a
corrupted Ministry; and when the ignorant and scandalous are cast out, we
cannot create abilities in others for the supply; we must stay the time of
their preparation and growth; and then if England drive not away the Gospel by
their abuse, even by their willful unreformedness, and hatred of the light,
they are like to be the happiest Nation under heaven. For, as for all the Sects
and Heresies that are creeping in and daily troubling us, I doubt not but the
free Gospel managed by an able self denying Ministry, will effectually
disperse and shame them all.

But you may say, This is not confessing sin, but applauding those whose sins
you pretend to confess?

Answ. It is the due acknowledgement of Gods graces and thanksgiving for his
admirable mercies, that I may not seem unthankful in Confession, much less to
cloud or vilify Gods graces, while I open the frailties that in many do
accompany them.

SECT. II.
AMong the many things that are yet sadly out of order in the best, I shall
touch upon these few particulars following.

1. One of our most heinous and palpable sins is Pride: A sin that has too
much interest in the best; but is more hateful and unexcusable in us then in
any men. Yet is it so prevalent in some of us, that it inditeth our discourses
for us, it chooses us our company, it forms our countenances, it puts the
accents and emphasis upon our words; when we reason, it is the determiner and
exciter of our Cogitations? It fills some men's minds with aspiring desires and
desings: It possesses them with envious and bitter thoughts against those that
stand in their light, or by any means do eclipse their glory, or hinder the
progress of their idolized Reputation. O what a constant companion, what a
tyranous commander, what a fly and subtle insinuating enemy is this sin of
Pride! It goes with men to the Draper, the Mercer, the Tailor; it choseth them
their cloth, their trimming and their fashion. It dresseth them in the morning,
at least the out side. Fewer Ministers would rustle it out in the fashion in
hair and habit, if it were not for the command of this tyrannous vice. And I
would that were all, or the worst: But alas how frequently does it go with us
to our studies, and there set with us and do our work? How often does it chose
our subject? and more often chose our words and ornaments. God bids us be as
plain as we can, for the informing of the ignorant, and as convincing and
serious as we are able, for the meiting and changing of unchanged hearts; And
Pride stands by and contradicts all; and sometime it puts in toys and
trifles, and polluteth rather then polisheth, and under pretense of laudable
ornaments, it dishonors our Sermons with childish gawdes: as if a Prince
were to be decked in the habit of a Stage Player or a painted fool. It
persuades us to paint the window that it may dim the light; and to speak to
our people that which they cannot understand, to acquaint them that we are able
to speak unprofitably: It takes off the edge, and dulls the life of all our
teachings, under pretense of filing off the roughness, unevenness and
superfluity; If we have a plain and cutting passage, it throws it away as too
rustical or ungrateful. When God charge us to deal with men as for their
lives, and beseech them with all the earnestness that we are able; this cursed
sin controlleth all, and condemns the most holy commands of God, and calls
our most necessary duty a madness; and says to us, What will you make people
think you are mad? will you make them say you rage or rave? cannot you speak
soberly and moderately? And thus does Pride make many a man's Sermons, and what
Pride makes the Devil makes; and what Sermons the Devil will make, and to what
end, we may easily conjecture. Though the matter be of God, yet if the dress,
and manner, and end be from Satan, we have no great reason to expect success.

And when Pride has made the Sermon, it goes with them into the Pulpit, it
forms their tone, it animateth them in the delivery, it takes them off from
that which may be displeasing, how necessary soever, and sets them in a
pursuit of vain applause. And the sum of all this is, that, It makes men both
in studying and preaching to seek themselves, and deny God, when they should
seek Gods glory and deny themselves. When they should ask, What should I say,
and how should I say it, to please God best, and do most good? It makes them
ask, What shall I say, and how shall I deliver it, to be thought a learned able
Preacher, and to be applauded by all that hear me? When the Sermon is done,
Pride goes home with them, and makes them more eager to know whether they
were applauded, then whether they did prevail for the saving change of souls.
They could find in their hearts, but for shame, to ask folks, how they liked
them, and to draw out their commendation. If they do perceive that they are
highly thought of, they rejoice as having attained their end; but if they
perceive that they are esteemed but weak or common men, they are displeased as
having mist the prize of the day.

But yet this is not all nor the worst, if worse may be. O that ever it should
be spoken of godly Ministers, that they are so set upon popular air, and of
sitting highest in men's estimation, that they envy the parts and names of their
Brethren that are preferred before them, as if all were taken from their
praises that is given to another, and as if God had given them his gifts to be
the mere ornaments and trappings of their persons, that they may walk as men of
reputation in the world, and all his gifts in others were to be trodden down
and vilified, if they seem to stand in the way of their honor! What, a Saint,
a Preacher for Christ, and yet envy that which has the Image of Christ, and
malign his gifts for which he should have the glory, and all because they seem
to hinder our glory! Is not every true Christian a member of the body, and
therefore partaketh of the blessings of the whole, and of each particular
member thereof? and does not every man owe thanks to God for his Brethrens
gifts, not only as having himself a part in them, as the foot has the benefit
of the Guidance of the eye; but also because his own ends may be attained by
his brethrens gifts as well as by his own? For if the glory of God and the
Churches felicity be not his end, he is not a Christian. Will any workman
malign another because he helps him to do his masters work? yet alas how
common is this heinous crime among men of parts and eminency in the Church!
They can secretly blot the Reputation of those that stand cross to their own;
and what they cannot for shame do in plain and open terms, lest they be proved
palpable liars and slanderers, they will do it in generals and malicious
intimations, raising suspicions where they cannot fasten accusations. And so
far are some gone in this Satanical vice, that it is their ordinary practice,
and a considerable part of their business to keep down the estimation of any
that they dislike, and to defame others in the slyest and most plausible way.
And some go so far, that they are unwilling that any one that is abler then
themselves should come into their Pulpits, least they should be applauded above
themselves. A fearful thing, That any man that has the least of the fear of
God, should so envy at Gods gifts, and had rather that his carnal hearers were
unconverted, and the drowsy not awakened, then that it should be done by
another who may be preferred before them. Yea so far does this cursed vice
prevail, that in great Congregations that have need of the help of many
Teachers, we can scarce in many places get two in equality to live together in
love and quietness, and unanimously to carry on the work of God! But unless one
of them be quite below the other in parts, and content to be so esteemed, or
unless one be a Curate to the other or ruled by him, they are contending for
precedence, and envying each others interest and walking with strangness and
jealousy toward one another, to the shame of their profession, and the great
wrong of the Congregation. I am ashamed to think of it, that when I have been
endeavoring with persons of public interest and capacity to further a good
work, to convince them of the great necessity of more Ministers then one in
great Congregations, they tell me, they will never agree together! I hope the
objection is ungrounded as to the most: but it is a sad case that it should be
so with any. Nay some men are so far gone in Pride, that when they might have
an equal assistant to further the work of God, they had rather take all the
burden upon themselves, though more then they can bear, then that any should
share with them in the honor; and for fear least they should diminish their
interest in the people.

Hence also it comes to pass that men do so magnify their own opinions, and
are as censorious of any that differ from them in lesser things, as if it were
all one to differ from them and from God; and do expect that all should be
conformed to their judgments, as if they were the rule of the Churches faith!
and while we cry down Papal Infallibility, and determination of Controversies,
we would too many of us be Popes our selves, and have all stand to our
determination, as if we were infallible. Its true, we have more modesty then
expressly to say so: we pretend that it is only the evidence of truth that
appears in our Reasons that we expect men should yield to, and our zeal is
for the truth and not for our selves: But as that must needs be taken for Truth
which is ours, so our Reasons must needs be taken for valid; and if they be but
freely examined, and found to be infirm and fallacious, and so discovered, as
we are exceeding backward to see it our selves, because they are ours, so how
angry are we that it should be disclosed to others? and we so espouse the cause
of our errors, as if all that were spoken against them were spoken against our
persons, and we were hainously injured to have our arguments thoroughly
confuted, by which we injured the truth and the minds of men! so that the
matter is come to that pass through our Pride, that if an error or fallacious
argument do fall under the Patronage of a Reverend Name (which is no whit rare)
we must either give it the victory, and give away the truth, or else become
injurious to that name that does patronize it. For though you meddle not with
their persons, yet do they put themselves under all the strokes which you give
their arguments; and feel it as sensibly as if you had spoken it of themselves,
because they think it will follow in the eyes of man, that weak arguing is a
sign of a weak man. If therefore you take it for your duty to shame their
errors and false reasonings, by discovering their nakedness, they take it as if
you shamed their persons; and so their names must be a Garrison or fortress to
their mistakes, and their Reverence must defend all their sayings from the
light.

And so high are our spirits, that when it becomes a duty to any man to reprove
or contradict us, we are commonly impatient both of the matter and of the
manner. We love the man that will say as we say, and be of our opinion, and
promote our reputation, though he be less worthy of our love in other respects:
But he is ungrateful to us that contradicts us, and differs from us, and
that deals plainly with us in our miscarriages, and tells us of our faults!
Especially in the management of our public arguings: where the eye of the
world is upon us, we can scarce endure any contradiction or plain dealing. I
know that Railing language is to be abhorred, and that we should be as tender
of each others reputation, as our fidelity to the truth will permit: But our
Pride makes too many of us to think all men contemn us that do not admire us,
yea and admire all that we say, and submit their judgments to our most
palpable mistakes! We are so tender that no man can touch us scarce but we are
hurt; and so stout and high-minded that a man can scarce speak to us: Like
froward children, or sick folk that cannot endure to be talked to; the fault is
not that you speak amiss to them, but that you speak to them. So our
indignation is not at men for writing or speaking injuriously or unjustly
against our words, but for confuting them. And a man that is not verft in
complementing: and skilled in flattery above the vulgar rate, can scarce tell
how to handle them so observantly, and fit their expectations at every turn,
but there will be some word, or some neglect which their high spirits will
fasten, and take as injurious to their honor; So that a plain Countryman
that speaks as he thinks, must have nothing to do with them, unless he will be
esteemed guilty of dishonouring them.

I confess I have often wondered at it, that this most heinous sin should be
made so slight of, and thought so consistent with a holy frame of heart and
life when far lesser sins are by our selves proclaimed to be so damnable in our
people! And more have I wondered to see the difference between ungodly sinners,
and godly Preachers in this respect. When we speak to drunkards, worldlings, or
any ignorant unconverted men, we disgrace them as in that condition to the
utmost, and lay it on as plainly as we can speak, and tell them of their sin,
and shame, and misery: and we expect, not only that they should bear all
patiently, but take al thankfully; and we have good reason for all this: And
most that I deal with do take it patiently, and many gross sinners will commend
the closest Preachers most, and will say that they care not for hearing a man
that will not tell them plainly of their sins. But if we speak to a godly
Minister, against his errors or any sin, (for too many of them) if we honor
them and reverence them, and speak as smoothly as we are able to speak, yea if
we mixed commendations with our contradictions or reproofs, if the applause be
not apparently predominant, so as to drown all the force of the reproof or
confutation, and if it be not more an applause then a reprehension, they take
it as an injury almost insufferable. That is railing against them, that would
be no better then flattery in them to the common people; though the cause may
be as great.

Brethren, I know this is a sad and harsh confession! but that all this should
be so among us, should be more grievous to us then to be told of it. Could this
nakedness be hid, I should not have disclosed it, at least so openly in the
view of all. But alas it is long ago open in the eyes of the world: We have
dishonored our selves by idolizing our honor; We print our shame, and preach
our shame, and tell it unto all. Some will think that I speak over charitably
to call such persons Godly men, in whom so great a sin does so much preval. I
know where it is indeed predominant, not hated, and bewailed, and mortified in
the main, there can be no true godliness; and I leave every man to a cautelous
jealousy and search of his own heart; But if all be Graceless that are guilty
of any, or most of the forementioned discoveries of Pride, the Lord be merciful
to the Ministers of this Land, and give us quickly another spirit; for grace is
then a rarer thing then most of us have supposed it to be.

Yet I must needs say that it is not all that I intend; To the praise of Grace
be it spoken, we have some among us here, (and I doubt not but it is so in
other parts) that are eminent in humility and lowlyness and condescension, and
exemplary herein to their flocks and to their Brethren: and it is their glory
and shall be their glory; and makes them truly honorable and amiable in the
eyes of God and all good men; yea and in the eyes of the ungodly themselves:
And O that the rest of us were but such! But alas this is not the case of all.

O that the Lord would lay us at his feet, in the tears of unfeigned sorrow for
this sin! Brethren, may I take leave a little to expostulate this case with my
own heart and you, that we may see the shame of our sin and be reformed? Is not
Pride the sin of Devils? the firstborn of Hell? is it not that wherein Satan's
Image does much consist? and is it tolerable evil in a man that is so engaged
against him and his Kingdom as we are? The very design of the Gospel does tend
to self abasing; and the work of grace is begun and carried on in Humiliation.
Humility is not a mere ornament of a Christian, but an essential part of the
new creature. It is a contradiction to be a sanctified man, or a true
Christian, and not humble. All that will be Christians must be Christ's
Disciples, and come to him to learn; and their lesson is, to be meek and lowly,
Mat. 11. 28. O how many precepts and admirable examples has our Lord and
master given us to this end? Can we once conceive of him as purposely washing
and wiping his servants feet, and yet be stout and Lordly still? shall he
converse with the meanest, and we avoid them as contemptible people, and think
none but persons of riches and honor to be fit for our society? How many of us
are oftener found in the houses of Gentlemen, then in the poor cottages of those
that have most need of our help? There are many of us that would think it a
baseness, to be daily with the most needy and beggarly people, to instruct them
in the matters of life, and supply their wants? As if we had taken charge only
of the souls of the rich! Alas what is it that we have to be proud of? Of our
body? why, are they not made of the like materials as the brutes? and must they
not shortly be as loathsome and abominable as the dung? is it of our Graces? Why
the more we are proud of them, the less we have to be proud of. And when so
much of the nature of Grace is in Humility its a great absurdity to be proud of
it. Is it of our Learning, Knowledge, abilities and gifts? Why sure if we have
any knowledge at all, we must needs know much reason to be humble; and if we
know more then others, we must know more reason then others do to be humble.
How little is it that the most Learned know, in comparison of that which yet
they are ignorant of? And to know that things are past your reach, and to know
how ignorant you are, one would think should be no great cause of Pride!
However, do not the Devils know more then you? And will you be Proud of that
which the Devils do excel you in? Yea to some I may say as Salvian, li. 4. de
Gubern. p. 98. Quid tibi blandiris O homo quisquis es, Credulitate, quae sine
timore atque obsequio Dei nulla est? aliquid plus Daemones habent. Tu emin unam
rem habes tantummodo; illi duat. Tu Credulitatem habes; non habes timorem: illi
and Credulitatem habent pariter and timorem. Our very business is to teach the
great lesson of self-denial and humility to our people; and how unfit is it
then that we should be proud our selves? We must study Humility, and Preach
Humility; and must we not possess and practice it? A proud Preacher of
Humility, is at least a self-condemning man.

What a sad case is it that so vile a sin is no more easily discerned by us?
but many that are most Proud, can blame it in others, and take no notice of it
in themselves. The world takes notice of some among us, that they have aspiring
minds, and seek for the highest room, and must be the Rulers, and bear the sway
wherever they come, or else there is no standing before them. No man must
contradict them that will not partake of the fruits of their indignation: In
any consultations, they come not to search after truth, but to dictate to
others that perhaps are fit to teach them. In a word, they have such arrogant
domineering spirits, that the world rings of it; and yet they will not see it
in themselves.

Brethren I desire to deal closely with my own heart and yours. I beseech you
consider. Whether it will save us to speak well of the grace that we are
without? or to speak against the sin that we live in? Have not many of us cause
to enquire once and again, Whether sincerity will consist with such a measure
of Pride? When we are telling the drunkard that he cannot be saved unless he
become temperate, and the fornicator, that he cannot be saved unless he become
chaste (an undoubted truth); have we not as great reason if we are proud, to
say of our selves, that we cannot be saved unless we become humble? Certainly,
Pride is a greater sin then whoredom or drunkenness: and Humility is as
necessary as Chastity and Sobriety. Truly Brethren, a man may as certainly, and
more slily and dangerously, make haste to hell in a way of Profession and
earnest preaching of the Gospel, and seeming zeal for a Holy life, as in a way
of drunkenness and filthyness. For what is true Holiness but a devotedness to
God and a living to him? and what is a wicked and damnable state, but a
devotedness to our carnal selves, and a living to our selves? And does any man
live more to himself then the proud? or less to God? And may not Pride make a
Preacher study for himself, and pray, and preach, and live to himself, even
when he seems to out-go others in the work, if he therefore out-go them that
he may have the glory of it from men? It is not the work without the principle
and end that will prove us upright. The work may be Gods, and yet we do it, not
for God but for our selves. I confess I feel such continual danger in this
point, that if I do not watch against it, least I should study for my self, and
preach for my self, and write for my self, rather then for Christ, I should
soon miscarry; and after all, I justify not my self, when I must condemn the
sin. Consider I beseech you Brethren, what baits there are in the work of the
Ministry, to entice a man to be selfish, that is, to be carnal and impious,
even in the highest works of piety! The fame of a godly man is as great a snare
as the fame of a learned man: And woe to him that takes up with the fame of
godliness instead of godliness. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward.
When the times were all for learning and empty formalities, then the Temptation
of the proud did lie that way; But now through the unspeakable mercy of God,
the most lively practical preaching is in credit, and godliness it self is in
credit: and now the Temptation to Proud men is here, even to pretend to be
zealous Preachers and godly men. O what a fine thing does it seem to have the
people crowd to hear us, and to be affected with what we say, and then we can
command their Judgments and Affections! What a taking thing is it to be cried
up as the ablest and godlyest man in the Country! and to be famed through the
Land for the highest spiritual excellencies. Alas Brethren a little grace will
serve turn to make you to join your selves with the forwardest of those men,
that have these inducements or encouragements. To have the people plead for you
as their felicity, and call you the Pillars of the Church of God, and their
Fathers, the Chariots and horsemen of Israel, and no lower language then
excellent men, and able Divines and to have them depend upon you and be ruled
by you; though this may be no more then their duty, yet I must again tell you,
that a little grace may serve to make you seem zealous men for this. Nay Pride
may do it without any special Grace. O therefore be jealous of your selves, and
in all your studies, be sure to study Humility. He that exalieth himself shall
be brought low, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted. I observe
commonly that almost all men good and bad do loath the Proud, and love the
Humble: so far does Pride contradict it self, unless it be where it purposely
hides it self, and as conscious of its own deformity does borrow the homely
dress of humility. And we have cause to be the more jealous, because it is the
most radicated vice, and as hardly as any extirpated from the soul. Nam saepe
sibi de se men's ipsa mentitur, and fingit se de bono opere amare quod non amat;
de mundi autem gloria, non amare quod amat; inquit Gregor. M. de cura Pastor.
P. 1. c. 9. When it was a disgrace to a man to be a godly zealous Preacher,
then Pride had not such a bait as now: As the same Gregor. says, ibid. p. 21.
c. 8. Eo tempore quo quisquis plebibus praeerat, primus ad Martyris tormenta
ducebatur; Tunc laudabile fuit Episcopatum quaerere, quando per hunc quemque
dubium non erat ad supplicia major a pervenire.

But it is not so now, as he says in another place, Cap. 1. initio, Sed quia
authore Deo ad Religionis reverentiam omne jam praesentis seculi culmen
inclinatur, sunt nonnulli qui intra sanctam Ecclesiam per speciem regiminis
gloriam affectant honoris; Videri Doctores appetunt, transcendere caeteros
concupiscunt, atque attestante veritate, primas salutationes in foro, primos
recubitus in coenis, primas cathedras in conventibus quaerunt, qui susceptum
curae pastoralis officium ministrare digne tanto magis nequeunt, quanto ad
hujus humilitatis magisterium ex sola elatione pervenernat; ipsa quippe in
Magisterio lingua confunditur, quando aliud discitur, and aliud docetur.
Hactenus Gregorius, and ipse nimis magnus.

But I have stood longer upon this sin then is proportionable to the rest of my
work; I shall be the shorter in the confession of some of the rest.

SECT. III.
2. ANother sin the Ministers of England, and much more of many other Churches,
are sadly guilty of, is, An undervaluing the Unity and Peace of the whole
Church. Though I scarce ever met with any that will not speak for Unity and
Peace, or at least, that will expressly speak against it: yet is it not common
to meet with those that are addicted to promote it; but too commonly do we find
men averse to it, and jealous of it, if not themselves the instruments of
division. The Papists have so long abused the name of the Catholic Church,
that in opposition to them many do either put it out of their Creeds, or only
fill up a room with the name, while they understand not or consider not the
nature of the thing; or think it enough to believe that there is such a Body,
though they behave not themselves as sensible members of it. If the Papists
will Idolize the Church, shall we therefore deny it, disregard it, or divide
it? It is a great and common sin through the Christian world, to take up
Religion in a way of faction; and instead of a love and tender care of the
Universal Church, to confine that love and respect to a party. Not but that we
must prefer in our estimation and Communion the purer parts before the impure,
and refuse to participate with any in their sins; but the most infirm and
diseased part should be compassionated and assisted to our utmost power; and
communion must be held as far as is lawful, and nowhere avoided but upon the
urgency of necessity: As we must love those of our neighborhood that have the
plague or leprosy, and afford them all the relief we can, and acknowledge all
our just relations to them, and communicate to them, though we may not have
local Communion with them: and in other diseases which are not so infectious,
we may be the more with them for their help, by how much the more they need it.
Of the multitude that say they are of the Catholic Church, it is too rare to
meet with men of a Catholic Spirit: Men have not an Universal consideration of
and respect to the whole Church; but look upon their own party as if it were
the whole. If there be some called Lutherans, some Calvinists, some (among
these) of subordinate divisions, and so of other parties among us, most of them
will pray hard for the prosperity of their party, and rejoice and give thanks
accordingly, when it goes well with them: but if any other party suffer, they
little regard it, as if it were no loss at all to the Church If it be the
smallest parcel that possesses not many Nations, no nor Cities on earth, they
are ready to carry it as if they were the whole Church, and as if it went well
with the Church when it gots well with them. We cry down the Pope as Antichrist
for including the Church in the Romish pale, and no doubt but it is an
abominable schism: But alas how many do imitate them too far, while we reprove
them! And as they foist the word Roman into their Creed, and turn the Catholic
Church into the Roman Catholic Church: as if there were no other Catholics,
and the Church were of no larger extent; so is it with many others as to their
several parties. Some will have it to be the Lutheran Catholic Church, and
some the Reformed Catholic Church (as if it were all reformed) some the
Anabaptist Catholic Church, and so of some others. And if they differ not
among themselves, they are little troubled at differing from others, though it
be from almost all the Christian world. The Peace of their party, they take for
the Peace of the Church: No wonder therefore if they carry it no further.

How rare is it to meet with a man that smarteth or bleedeth with the Churches
wounds, or sensibly takes them to heart as his own? or that ever had
solicitous thoughts of a cure? No but almost every Party thinks that the
happiness of the rest consists only in turning to them; and because they be
not of their mind, they cry, Down with them, and are glad to hear of their
fall, as thinking that is the way to the Churches rising; that is, their own.
How few be there that understand the true state of Controversies between the
several parties? or that ever well discerned how many of them are but Verbal,
and how many are Real? And if those that understand it do in order to right
information and accommodation, disclose it to others, its taken as an
extenuation of their error, and a carnal compliance with them in their sin. Few
men grow zealous of Peace, till they grow old, or have much experience of men's
spirits and principles, and see better the true state of the Church, and the
several differences, then they did before. And then they begin to write their
Irenicon's; and many such are extant at this day. Pareus, Iunius, and many more
have done their parts; as our Davenant, Morton, Hall, (whose excellent Treatise
called the Peacemaker, and his Pax terris, deserve to be transcribed upon all
our hearts) Hattonus, Amyraldus also have done: But recipiuntur ad modum
recipientis; As a young man in his heat of lust and passion was judged to be no
fit auditor of Moral Philosophy; so we find that those same young men who may
be zealous for Peace and Unity, when they are grown more experienced, are
zealous for their factions against these in their youthful heat. And therefore
such as these before mentioned, and Duraeus who has made it the business of
his life, do seldom do much greater good then to quiet their own consciences in
the discharge of so great a duty, and to moderate some few and save them from
further guilt, and to leave behind them when they are dead, a witness against a
wilful, self-conceited and unpeaceable world.

Nay commonly it brings a man under suspicion either of favoring some
heresy, or abating his zeal, if he do but attempt a pacificatory work. As if
there were no zeal necessary for the great fundamental verities for the
Churches Unity and Peace, but only for parties and some particular truths.

And a great advantage the Devil has got this way, by employing his own
Agents, the unhappy Socinians in writing so many Treatises for Catholic and
Arch-catholike Unity and Peace, which they did for their own ends, and would
have done it on insufficient terms: By which means the enemy of Peace has
brought it to pass that whoever makes motion for Peace, is presently under
suspicion of being one that has need of it for an indulgence to his own
Errors. A fearful case! that heresy should be so credited, as if none were
such friends to Unity and Peace as they! And that so great and necessary a
duty, upon which the Churches welfare does so depend, should be brought into
such suspicion or disgrace.

Brethren, I speak not all this without apparent reason. We have as sad
divisions among us in England, considering the piety of the persons, and the
smallness of the matter of our discord, as most Nations under heaven have
known. The most that keeps us at odds is but about the right form and order of
Church Government. Is the distance so great that Presbyterian, Episcopal and
Independent might not be well agreed? Were they but heartily willing and
forward for peace, they might, I know they might. I have spoken with some
moderate men of all the parties, and I perceive by their concessions it were an
easy work. Were men's hearts but sensible of the Churches case, and unfeignedly
touched with Love to one another, and did they but heartily set themselves to
seek it, the settling of a safe and happy Peace were an easy work. If we could
not in every point agree, we might easily find out, and narrow out differences,
and hold Communion upon our agreement in the main; determining of the safest
way for the managing of our few and small disagreements, without the danger or
trouble of the Church. But is this much done? It is not done. To the shame of
all our faces be it spoken, it is not done. Let each party flatter themselves
now as they please, it will be recorded to the shame of the Ministry of
England, while the Gospel shall abide in the Christian world. What will be
recorded? What? Why this; That learned and godly Ministers in England, did
first disagree among themselves, and head and lead on their people in those
disagreements! That they proceeded in them for the space of 14. years (already;
how much more will be, God knows) and in all that time had as great advantages
and opportunities for Agreement, as any people in the world. They had the sad
experience of the conflagration of the Commonwealth, and were scourged to it
by a calamitous war. They saw the fearful confusions in the Church; and the
perverting of multitudes of seduced souls, some to be Seekers, some Socinians,
some Ranters, Quakers or Infidels; They saw the continual exasperation of
minds, and the jealousies and bitterness that their distance bred, and how it
was the ^uel of a daily course of sin. And yet for all these, they were not
moved to effectual endeavors for a cure. They could let a course of sin run
on: they could let divisions and heresies increase, they see the Church of
Christ so low, and yet forbear the cheapest cure, that ever a people could be
called to use. They could see, and hear, and know that we were all made a very
derision to our enemies, and the public scorn or pity of the world; and yet
set still, as if all this were little to them. They had Magistrates that did
not hinder them from the work: but gave them full liberty to have consulted and
endeavored a full agreement. They lived near together, and might have easily
met together for the work: and if one or two or an hundred meetings could not
have accomplished it, they might have held on till it was done. And yet for all
this there is no such thing done, not any considerable attempt yet made. And O
what heinous aggravations do accompany this sin? Never men since the Apostles
days I think, did make greater profession of godliness: The most of them are
bound by solemn Oaths and Covenants, for unity and reformation: They all
confess the worth of peace: and most of them will preach for it, and talk for
it, while they set still and neglect it, as if it were not worth the looking
after: They will read and preach on those Texts that command men to follow
peace with all men, and as much as in us lies if it be possible, to live
peaceably with them: and yet we are so far from following it, and doing all
that possibly we can for it, that too many will snarl at it, and malign and
censure any that endeavor it, as if all zeal for Peace did proceed from an
abatement of our zeal for holiness; and as if holiness and peace were so fallen
out that there were no reconciling them; when yet they have found by long
experience, that concord is a sure friend to Piety, and Piety always moves to
Concord. We have seen how Errors and Heresies breed by Discord as Discord is
bred and fed by them. We have seen to our sorrow, that where the servants of
God should live together as one, of one heart and one soul, and one lip, and
should promote each others faith and holiness, and admonish and assist each
other against sin, and rejoice together in the hope of their future glory, we
have contrarily lived in mutual jealousies, and drowned holy love in bitter
contendings, and have studied to disgrace and undermine one another, and to
increase our own parties by right or wrong; and we, that were wont to glory of
our Love to the Brethren as the certain mark of our sincerity in the faith,
have now turned it into a Love of a Party only; and those that are against that
Party have more of our spleen, and envy, and malice then our love. I know this
is not so with all (nor prevalently with any true Believer) but yet it is so
common that it may cause us to question the sincerity of many that are thought
by themselves and others to be most sincere. And it is not our selves only that
are scorched in this flame, but we have drawn our people into it, and cherished
them in it, so that most of the godly in the Nation are fallen into several
parties, and have turned much of their ancient Piety into vain Opinions, and
vain Disputes, and envyings, and animosities; Yea whereas it was wont to be
made the certain mark of a graceless wretch to deride the godly, how few be
there now that stick at secret deriding and slandering those that are not of
their opinion? A pious Prelatical man can reverently scorn and slander a
Presbyterian; and some of them an Independent, and an Independent both. And,
which is the worst of all: the common ignorant people take notice of all this,
and do not only deride us, but are hardened by us against Religion; and when we
go about to persuade them to be Religious, they see so many Parties, that they
know not which to join with, and think that it is as good be of none at all as
of any, when they are uncertain which is the right; And thus thousands are
grown into a contempt of all Religions by our divisions; and poor carnal
wretches begin to think themselves in the better case of the two, because they
hold to their old formalities, when we hold to nothing Yea, and these Pious
contenders do more effectually plead the Devils cause against one another, then
any of the ignorant people can do; They can prove one another Deceivers and
Blasphemers, and what not? and this by secret slanders among all that they can
handsomely vent them to; and perhaps also by public disputations and Printed
slanderous books. So that when the obstinate drunkards are at a loss, and have
nothing to say of their own against a man that would drive them from their sin
they are prompted by the raling books or reports of factious zealous malice;
Then they can say, I regard him not nor his Doctrine; such a man has proved
him a Deceiver and a Blasphemer; Let him answer him if he can. And thus the
lies and slanders of some (for that is no news) and the bitter opprobriou,
speeches of others, have more effectually done the Devils service, under the
name of Orthodoxness and Zeal for Truth, then the malignant scorners of
Godliness could have done it. So that the matter is come to that pass, that
there are few men of note of any party, but the reproaches of the other parties
are so publikly upon them, that the ignorant and wicked rabble that should be
converted by them, have learnt to be Orthodox and to vilify and scorn them.
Mistake me not! I do not slight Orthodoxness nor jeer at the name; but disclose
the pretenses of Devilish Zeal, in Pious or seemingly Pious men. If you are
offended with me for my harsh language, because I can tell you that I learnt it
of God I dare be bold therefore to tell you further, that you have far more
cause to be offended at your Satanical Practices. The thing it self is sure
odious, if the name be so odious as to turn your stomachs How should the
presence and guilt of it terrify you, if the name make you start? I know that
many of these Reverend Calumniators do think that they show that soundness in
the fairh, and love to truth which others want. But I will resolve the case in
the words of the Holy Ghost, Iam. 3. Who is a wise man, and endued with
knowledge among you? Let him show out of a good conversation his works with
meekness of wisdom; But, if you have bitter envying (or zealousness) and strife
in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the Truth; This wisdom
descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish. For where envying
(or zeal) and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work: But the
wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, without
hypocrisy: And the fruit of Righteousness is sown in peace of them that make
Peace. I pray you read these words again and again, and study them.

O doleful case to think of; that a while ago we were afraid of nothing, but
least Papists and Deboist persons should have swallowed up the Gospel and our
liberty, and destroyed us together; And now when the work has been put into
the hands of those men, that were joined in these fears, and are joined in the
strictest profession of Piety, and are of one judgment in all the Articles of
the faith; they cannot or will not unanimously join in carrying on the work;
but they either fall upon one another, or live at a distance, and cast their
work upon a hundred disadvantages by the bitter disagreements that are among
themselves. O what a Nation might England have been ere now, if it had not been
for the proud and obstinate contentions of godly Ministers? What abundance of
good might we have done! Nay, what might we not have done, if our perverseness
had not marred our work? Did we but agree among our selves, our words would
have some Authority with the people; But when they see us some of one mind, and
some of another, and snarling and reviling at each other, they think they may
well enough do so too: Why may not we call them Sectaries or Deceivers, say
they, when they call one another so? Nay, if we were not all of a mind in some
smaller matters, yet if we did but hold Communion and Correspondency, and join
together in the main, and do as much of Gods work as we can in concurrent
unanimity, the people would far more regard us, and we might be in a greater
capacity to do them good: But when we are single, they slight us; and when we
disagree and divide, they despise us: and who can marvel at it, when we despise
one another? What, say they, (when a Minister does his duty alone) Must we he
ruled by every singular man? Are you wiser then all the Ministers in the
Country? Are not such and such as learned as you? But when we go hand in hand,
it stops their mouths. They think either themselves may be wiser then one or
two Ministers, or at least, other Ministers may be wiser then they; but common
modesty will not suffer them to think that they are wiser then all the
Ministers in the Country, or in the world. I know that matters of faith are not
to be received upon our credit alone: but yet our credit may do much to remove
prejudice, and to unblock the entrance into men's minds, and procure the truth a
more equal hearing, and therefore is necessary to our peoples good.

Nay, more then all this; I know it; I see and hear it; that there are some
Ministers that are g^^d when they perceive the people despise their Brethren
that differ from them in some lesser things (...) would have it so, and they
foment it as (...) can for shame; and they secretly rejoice (...) they hear the
news of it. This is next to Prelat^^^ ^^lencing them, and casting them out of
the Church* And I confess I cannot but suspect that such men would go near to
silence them, if they had their will and way. For he that would have a Minister
under disgrace, would have him useless; which is next to silencing him, and
tends to the same end. You will say, we do not desire that he should be
disabled to do good, but to do hurt. I answer; but the question is, Whether his
error be so great, that the holding or propagating it does more hurt, then all
his Preaching, and the labors of that whole party which you would disgrace, is
like to do good? If so, then I think it is a desirable work to disgrace him,
and silence him in a just measure, and by just means, and I would concur
therein; but if it be otherwise, we are bound to keep up that reputation of
others, which is necessary ordinarily to the success of their labors.

I may not here without wrong to my conscience, pass over the late practices of
some of our Brethren of the New Prelatical way; (For those of the ancient
Prelacy are more moderate.) I know it will be displeasing to them: and I have
no mind to displease them: but yet I will more avoid the treacherous or
unfaithful silence which may wrong them, then the words of faithful friendship,
which may displease them. And I will say no more to them, then (if I know my
self) I should say if I were resolved for Prelacy. It is the judgment of these
men that I now speak of, that a Prelate is essential to a Church, and there is
no Church without them; and that their Ordination is of necessity to the
essence of a Presbyter: and that those that are ordained without them (though
some will except a case of necessity) are not Ministers of Christ. Hereupon
they conclude that our Congregations in England are no true Churches (except
where the Presbyter depends on some Prelate) and the Ministers ordained by
Presbyters only are no true Ministers; and they will not allow men to hear them
or communicate with them, but withdraw from our Congregations like Separatists
or Recusants. And the same note many of them brand upon all the Reformed
Churches abroad, that have no Prelates, as they do on us: So that the Church of
Rome is admirably gratified by it; and instead of demanding where our Church
was before Luther, they begin to demand of us, Where it is now? And indeed had
it been no more visible in the ages before Luther then a Reformed Prelatical
Church is now, they would have a fairer pretense then ^ow they have, to call
upon us for the proof of its visibility. Suppose that the Presbyters who
rejected Prelacy were guilty of all that schism and other sin, as they are
ordinarily accused of. (For I will now go on such suppositions.) Must the
people therefore turn their back on the Assemblies and Ordinances of God? Is it
better for them to have no preaching, and no Sacraments, and no public
Communion in Gods worship, then to have it in an Assembly that has not a
Prelate over it; or from a Minister ordained without his consent? I confess I
would not for all the world stand guilty before God of the injury that this
Doctrine has already done to men's souls, much less of what it evidently
tends to. There are through the great mercy of God, abundance of painful and
able young Ministers, that were in the Universities in the time of the wars,
and had no hand in it, and were ordained since Bishops became to them either
invisible, or inaccestible; and its like they judge not their Ordination to be
of necessity. They lay out themselves faithfully for the healing of that
ignorance and common profaneness which got so much head under their careless
or drunken predecessors. They desire nothing more then the saving of souls;
They preach sound Doctrine: They live in Peace. And it is the greatest of their
grief that many of their hearers remain so ignorant and obstinate still. And
see what a help these poor impenitent sinners have for their cure? They are
taught to turn their backs upon their Teachers; and whereas before they heard
them but with disregard, they are now taught not to hear them at all. And if we
privately speak to them, they can tell us that its the Judgment of such and
such learned men, that we are not to be heard, nor our Churches to be
communicated with, nor we to be at all regarded as Christ's Ministers. And thus
Drunkards, and Swearers, and worldlings, and all sorts of sensualists are got
out of gunshot, and beyond the reach of our teaching or reproof: And those
that do not (for shame of the world) obey their Doctrine to stay from the
Assembly, yet do they there hear us with prejudice and contempt, and from the
Communion of the Church in the Lords Supper they commonly abstain. Were it only
the case of those few Civil persons, that conscientiously go this way, and
address themselves to these kind of men for Government and Sacraments, I would
never have mentioned the thing; For it is not them that I intend. For what care
I what Minister they hear or obey, so it be one that leads them in the ways
of truth and holiness? Let them follow Christ and forsake their sins, and go to
heaven, and I will never much contend with them for the forsaking of my
Conduct. But it is the common sort of profane and sensual men, that are
everywhere hardened against the Ministry, and they have nothing but the
reputation of the Prelatical Divines to countenance it with. If their Teachers
do but differ in a gesture from these men, they vilify them, and reject their
guidance, having nothing but the authority of such men to support them. Fain
would we reach their consciences to awaken them from their security; for it
pittyeth us to see them so near unto perdition. But we can do no good upon
them; for our Ministry is in contempt because of the contrary judgment of
these men. Not that the poor people care any more for a Prelate, as such, then
for an ordinary Minister: For if Prelates would have troubled them as much with
their preaching, and reproofs, and discipline, they would have hated them as
much as they do the Ministers: But because they found by experience, that under
their Government they might sin quietly, and make a scorn of godliness without
any danger or trouble, and that to this day, the men of that way are so much
against those precise Ministers, that will not let them go quietly to hell,
therefore are they all for Prelacy, and make this the great shelter for their
disobedience and unreformed lives. So that I confess I think that the hurt that
Separatists and Anabaptists do in England at this day, is little to the hurt
that is done by these men. For I count that the greatest hurt, which hardens
the greatest number in the state and way of greatest danger. An Anabaptist may
yet be a penitent and godly person, and be saved; But the sensual and
impenitent worldlings can never be saved in that condition. I see by
experience, that if separation infect two or three, or half a score in a
Parish; or if Anabaptistry infect as many (and perhaps neither of them
mortally) this obstinate contempt of Ministerial exhortation, encouraged by the
countenance of the contrary minded, does infect them by the scores or hundreds.
If we come to them in a case where they have no countenance from the Ministry,
how mute, or tractable comparatively do we find them! But if it be a case where
they can but say, that the Prelatical Divines are of another judgment, how
unmovable are they, though they have nothing else to say? Try when we come to
set afoot this work that we are now upon, of Catechizing and private
instruction, whether this will not be one of our greatest impediments; though
in a work of unquestioned lawfulness and necessity: Even because they are
taught that we are none of their Pastors, and have no authority over them. I
know that some of these men are Learned and Reverend, and intend not such
mischievous ends as these. The hardening of men in ignorance is not their
design. But this is the thing effected. To intend well in doing ill, is no
rarity. Who can in reverence to any men on earth, sit still and hold his
tongue, while he sees people thus run to their own destruction, and the souls
of men be undone by the contendings of Divines for their several parties and
interests? The Lord that knows my heart, knows that (if I know it my self) as I
am not of any one of these parties, so I speak not a word of this in a sactious
partiality, for one party, or against another, as such; much less in spleen
against any person; but if I durst in conscience, I would have silenced all
this, for fear of giving them offense whom I much honor: But what am I but a
servant of Christ? and what is my life worth, but to do him service? and whose
favor can recompense for the ruins of the Church? and who can be silent while
souls are undone? Not I for my part, while God is my Master, and his word my
Rule; his work my business: and the success of it, for the saving of men, my
end. Who can be reconciled to that which so lamentably crosses his Masters
interest, and his main end? Nor yet would I have spoken any of this, if it had
been only in respect to my own charge; yet I bless God, the sore is but small,
in comparison of what it is in many other places. But the observation of some
neighbor Congregations and others more remote, me thinks, should make the very
contrary minded Divines relent, if they were present with them.

Would it be a pleasant hearing to them, to hear a crowd of scandalous men to
reproach their Ministers that would draw them to repentance, and to tell them
they have no authority over them, and all this under the pretense and shelter
of their judgments? Had they rather men went to Hell, then be taught the way
to Heaven by Presbyters that had not their Imposition of hands? Is that point
of order more necessary then the substance of the work, or the end it self?
Nay, I must needs in faithfulness say yet more; That it is no credit to the
cause of these Reverend men, nor ever was, that the generality of the most
wicked men, and haters and contemners of all Devotion, are the great friends
and maintainers of it. And the befriending of such a party did more to gain
their love, then to save their souls. And the engageing such a Party for them,
has not been the least cause of their fall. This is true, however it be taken.

And what a case would the Churches of England be in, if we should yield to the
motions of these Reverend men! supposing that men's judgments are not at their
own wills, and therefore many cannot see the reasons for Prelacy; must we all
give up our charges as no true Ministers, and desert the Congregations as no
true Churches? Why, whom will they then set over them in our stead? First, it
is known that they cannot, if they had fit men, procure them what liberty their
way requires, because of the discountenance of authority; and it is known that
they have not fit men for one Congregation of very many. And had they rather
that the doors were shut up, and God had no public worship, nor the people any
public teaching or Sacraments, then any but they should have a hand in the
performance of it? Or if the Ministers keep their places, can they wish all the
Congregations to stay at home, and live like Heathens? Nay, are they not angry
with us for casting out a grossly ignorant, insufficient, scandalous sort of
Ministers, who were the great means of the perdition of the people, whose souls
they had taken charge of? As for the casting out of any able godly men upon
mere differences about the late troubles and State affairs; I speak not of it,
I approve not of it; If any such thing were done, let them maintain it if they
can that did it; for I neither can nor will. But its a very sad case, that any
men of judgment and piety should not only be indifferent in matters of such
moment, but should think it a persecution and an injury to their party and
cause, to have hundreds of unworthy wretches to be ejected, when it was a work
of so great necessity to the Church.

And indeed by all this they plainly show what a condition they would reduce
this Nation into again, if it were in their power. Sure they that would have
the people disown and withdraw from them as being no Ministers, and turn their
backs on the word and Sacraments, would silence them if they could: I think
there is no doubt of that. And surely they that are so offended that the
insufficient and scandalous ones are cast out, would have them in again if they
could. And if this be the change that they desire, let them not blame men that
believe the Scripture, and value men's salvation, if they have no mind of their
change. If it were a matter of mere opinion, we should be more indifferent with
them: Or if the question were only whether men should be conducted in ways of
holiness by a Prelate, or by mere Presbyters only, we should think it of less
moment, then the matter that is before us: But when it comes to this pass, that
the Prince of darkness must be so gratified. and so much of the Church of
Christ delivered overmuch into his power, and the people led by multitudes to
perdition, and all for the upholding of our own parties, or interests, or
conceits; we cannot make light of such matters as these: These are not mere
speculations, but matters that are so obvious to sense and Christian
experience, that they must not think much that serious experienced Christians
are against them.

But that I be not mistaken, it is far from my thoughts to speak what I have
done of any peaceable man of the Prelatical way, or to meddle in the
Controversy of the best way of Government; nor do I speak to any of the New
Prelatical way, but only those who are guilty of the miscarriages which I have
spoken of; and for them, I had rather bear their indignation, then the Church
should bear the fruits of their destructive intemperate conceits.

The most common cause of our Divisions and unpeaceableness, is, men's high
estimation of their own Opinions. And it ordinarily works these two ways;
sometimes by setting men upon Novelties; and sometimes by a censorious
condemning of all that differ from the party that they are of.

Some are as busy in their enquiries after new Doctrines, as if the Scripture
were not perfect, or Christ had not told us all that is necessary; or the way
to heaven were not in all ages one and the same, from Christ to the end of the
world; or the Church were not still the same thing. And they look not only
after new discoveries in lesser things, but they are making us new Articles of
faith, and framing out new ways to heaven. The body of Popery came in at this
door; Their new fundamentals were received on these terms; Their new Catholic
Church, which their forefathers knew not, was thus set up. Before, it
consisted of all Christians through the world; and now it must consist of none
but the Popes subjects. So is it with the Anabaptists; They must now in the end
of the world have a new Church for Christ, even in the natural capacity of the
matter I Never since the creation can it be proved that God had any where a
Church on earth where Infants were excluded from being members (if there were
any among them.) They were members before the Law, under the Promise, under the
Law, and under the Gospel, through the Christian world to this day ^ and yet
they would needs make Christ a Church now without them. As if Christ had mist
it in the forming of his Church till now! Or as if he begun to be aweary of
infants in his Church now at last! Or as if the Providence of God did now begin
to be awakened to have a right formed Church in the conclusion of the world,
and to eject those infants as incapable, who till now have been in the bosom of
his family.

Yea this disturbing vice does also work by setting a higher rate of necessity
upon some truths, then the Church of Christ had ever done; When we will needs
make that to be of absolute Certainly, which has been either not before
received, or but as a dark and doubtful thing; and we will make that to be of
necessity to salvation, which the former ages did hold but as a point of a far
lower nature, which some were for, and some against, without any great
disagreement or mutual censure. I confess I do hold some points of Doctrine my
self to be true, which I cannot find that the Church or any in it did hold of
many ages after the Apostles; but then I cannot lay such a stress on them, as
to think them of flat necessity to the welfare of the Church, and the saving of
souls; As the Doctrine of the certain perseverance of all the Justified, and
some few more: If I may think that Austin, Prosper, and all the Church in those
Ages did err therein (as I think they did): Yet to think that they erred
fundamentally, were to think that Christ had no Church: I will not take the
Judgment or Practice of the Church in any age since the Apostles as my Rule of
faith and life: but I will suppose that they had all things in the most defiled
age, that were of absolute necessity to salvation. I know that we must be
Justified in the same way as they were, and upon the same terms. Faith is the
same thing now as it was then; and has the same object to apprehend for our
Justification, and the same office in order to our Justification. Many new
notions are brought in by Disputers, which must not be made matters of
necessity to the soundness or integrity of the Churches faith. We may talk of
Peace as long as we live; but we shall never obtain it but by returning to the
Apostolical simplicity. The Papists faith is too big for all men to agree upon:
or all their own, if they enforced it not with arguments drawn from the fire,
the halter, and the strappado. And many Anti-Papists do too much imitate them
in the tedious length of their subscribed Confessions, and novelty of
impositions, when they go furthest from them in the quality of the things
imposed. I shall speak my mind to these in the words of Vincentim Lirinensis,
cap. 26. (...) satis nequeo tantam quorundam hominum vaesaniam, tantam
excoecatae mentis impietatem; tantam postremo errandi libidinem, ut contenti
non sint tradita semel and accepta antiquitus credendi reguld, sed nova ac nova
in diem quaerant, semperque aliquid gestiant religioni addere, mutare,
detrabere: Quasi non coeleste dogma sit quod semel revelatum esse sufficiat,
sed terrena institutio, quae aliter perfici nisi assidua emendations, immo
potius reprehensione non possit. When we once return to the ancient simplicity
of faith, then, and not till then, we shall return to the ancient love and
peace.

But the Pride of men's hearts does make them so overvalve their own
conceptions, that they expect all men else should be of their mind, and bow
down to those reasons which others can see through, while they are as confident
as if there were no room for doubting. Every Sect is usually confident in their
own way, and as they value themselves, so they do their reasons. And hereupon
arise such breaches in affections and communion as there are, while most men
cry down the divisions of others, but maintain the like. Some will have no
Communion with our Churches, because we have some Members that they take to be
ungodly, and do not pull up the Tares in doubtful unproved cases, where we
cannot do it without pulling up the Wheat. Others are so confident that Infants
should be unbaptized, and out of the Church, that they will be of no Church
that has infant members, till these scandalous infants be (I say not
excommunicated, for that supposes a former right, but) taken as such that have
no part or fellowship in the business, they will not join with such a society;
Christ tells us, that except we become as little children, we shall not enter
into his Kingdom; and they say, except little children be kept out of the
Church, they will not enter or abide in it. Is not this extreme height of
spirit, to be so confident, as to avoid Communion upon it, in a case where the
Church has been in all ages (or almost all by their own confession) so much
against them? Would they not have separated from the whole Church on the same
ground, if they had lived in these times? Others (as is before said) are so
confident that we are no Ministers or Churches for want of Prelatical
Ordination and Government, that they separate also, or deny Communion with us.
And thus every party in the height of their self-conceitedness is ready to
divide, and condemn all others that be not of their mind.

And it usually falls out that this confidence does but bewray men's ignorance,
and that too many make up that in passion and wilfulness, which they want in
reason. How many have I heard zealously condemning what they little understand?
Its a far easier matter to say that another man is erroneous, or heretical, or
rail at him as a deceiver or blasphemer, then to give a sound account of our
belief. And as I remember twenty years ago, I have observed it the common trick
of a company of ignorant formal Preachers, to get the repute of that learning
which they wanted, by railing at the Puritans, as being all unlearned: so is it
now the trick of some that can scarce give a sound reason for any controverted
part of their belief, (nor it may be of the fundamentals) to use this as the
chief remedy, to get the name of sound Divines, by reproaching some that
differ! from them, as unsound; and to be esteemed Orthodox, by calling others
Erroneous or Heterodox.

The truth is, most Ministers in the world do take up their opinions in
compliance with their several parties; and they look more who believes it,
then what is believed, and on what ground, or they have nothing but what is
spoken by the men that they must concur with: And thus too many take up their
Religion in a faction; even the truth it self. And therefore they must speak
against those that they hear that party speak against. As Proster said of the
detractors of Austin, Praef, ad capit. Gall. Injustis opprobriis Catholici
praedicatoris memoria carpitur: in quod peccatum c^dunt, qui aliena
instigatione commoti, scriptorem celeberrimi nominis promptius habent culpare^*
quam nesse. And as Salvian says in his Preface ad Salonium: ad Cathol. Eccles.
Tam imbecilla sunt judicia huius temporis, ac pene tam nulla, ut qui legunt,
non tam considerant quid legant, quam cujus legant; nec tam dictionis vim atque
virtutem quam dictatoris cogitant dignitatem. How many a hot dispute have I
heard of several subjects, which the disputants have been forced to manifest
that they understood not? And yet they will drive all to damnatory conclusions,
when the parties understand not one another meaning, and take not the subject
of the dispute in the same sense, or at least not the several predications. One
disputes for Free Will, another against it; and call them to give you their
definition of Freewill, and you shall see to what purpose it was. And so in
many other cases.

And thus do we proceed in a contentious zeal to divide the Church, and censure
our brethren, and make our differences seem greater then they are, while we
know not well what they are our selves, who so eagerly manage them.

SECT. IV.
3. THE next sin which I shall mention, that we are lamentably guilty of, is
this; We do not so seriously, unreservedly and industriously, lay out our
selves in the work of the Lord, as beseems men of our profession and
engagements. I bless the Lord that there are so many that do his work with all
their might! But alas, for the most part, even of those that we take for Godly
Ministers, how reservedly and how negligently do we go through our work? How
few of us do so behave our selves in our office, as men that are wholly devoted
thereto, and have devoted all that they have to the same ends? And because you
shall see my grounds for this Confession, I shall mention to you some of the
sinful discoveries of it, which do too much abound.

1. It is too common with us to be negligent in our studies; and few men will
be at that pains that is necessary, for the right informing of their
understandings, and fitting them for their further work. Some men have no
delight in their studies, but take only now and then an hour, as an unwelcome
task which they are forced to undergo, and are glad when they are from under
the yoke. Will neither the natural desire of knowing, nor the spiritual desire
of knowing God and things divine, nor the consciousness of our great ignorance
and weakness, nor the sense of the weight of our Ministerial work, will none of
all these keep us closer to our studies, and make us more painful in seeking
after the truth? This diligence is now the more necessary for Ministers,
because the Necessity of the Church does draw so many from the Universities so
young, so that they are fain to Teach and Learn together: And for my part, I
would not discourage such young ones, so be it they be but competently
qualified, and quickened with earnest desires of men's salvation, and are drawn
out by the present Necessities, sooner then they would go, if the Church could
longer wait for their preparation; and will but study hard in the Country. For
I know that as Theology is a practical Science, so the knowledge of it shines
best in a practical course: And laying out here is a means of gathering in; and
a hearty endeavor to communicate and do good, is not the smallest help to our
own proficiency. Many men have not been ashamed to confess how young and raw
they were at their entrance, who yet have grown to eminent parts. Vigilius the
Martyr was made Bishop of Trent at twenty years old. Ambrose de Offic. li. c.
1. says thus, Homines discunt priusquam decent, and ab illo accipiunt quod
aliis tradant: Quod ne ipsum quidem mihi accidit: Ego enim de tribunalibus
atque administratienis infulis ad sacer dotium captus, docere vos coepi quod
ipse non didici. Itaque factum est ut prius docere inciperem quam discere.
Discendum igitur mihi simul and docendum est, quoniam non vacavit ante discere.
Et quantumlibet quisque profecerit, nemo est qui doceri non egeat dum vivit.

O what abundance of things are there that a Minister should understand? and
what a great defect is it to be ignorant of them? and how much shall we miss
such knowledge in our work! Many Ministers study only to compose their Sermons,
and very little more, when there are so many books to be read, and so many
matters that we should not be unacquainted with. Nay in the study of our
Sermons we are too negligent, gathering only a few naked heads, and not
considering of the most forcible expressions by which we should set them home
to men's hearts. We must study how to convince and get within men, and how to
bring each truth to the quick, and not leave all this to our extemporarie
promptitude, unless it be in cases of necessity. Certainly Brethren, experience
will teach you, that men are not made learned or wise without hard study, and
unwearied labors and experience.

SECT. V.
2. IF Ministers were set upon the work of the Lord, it would be done more
vigorously then by the most of us it is. How few Ministers do Preach with all
their might? or speak about everlasting Joy or Torment in such a manner as may
make men believe that they are in good sadness. It would make a man's heart ache
to see a company of dead and drowsy sinners sit under a Minister, and not have
a word that is like to quicken or awake them. To think with our selves, O if
these sinners were but convinced and awakened, they might yet be converted and
live. And alas we speak so drowsily or gently, that sleepy sinners cannot hear:
The blow falls so light, that hard-hearted persons cannot feel it. Most
Minister will not so much as put out their voice, and stir up themselves to an
earnest utterance: But if they do speak loud and earnestly, how few do answer
it with earnestness of matter! and the voice does little good; the people will
take it but as mere bauling, when the matter does not correspond. It would
grieve one to hear what excellent Doctrines some Ministers have in hand, and
let it die in their hands for want of close and lively application. What fit
matter they have for convincing sinners: and how little they make of it; and
what a deal of good it might do if it were set home; and yet they cannot or
will not do it. O sirs, how plain, how close and earnestly should we deliver a
message of such a nature as ours is? when the everlasting life or death of men
is concerned in it: Me thinks we are nowhere so wanting as in this seriousness?
There is nothing more unsuitable to such a business, then to be slight and
dull. What! speak coldly for God! and for men's salvation! Can we believe that
our people must be converted, or condemned and yet can we speak in a drowsy
tone! In the name of God, Brethren, labor to awaken your hearts, before you
come, and when you are in the work, that you may be fit to waken the hearts of
sinners. Remember that they must be wakened or damned; and a sleepy Preacher
will hardly wake them. If you give the holy things of God the highest praises
in words, and yet do it coldly, you will seem in the manner to unsay what you
said in the matter. It is a kind of contempt of great things, especially so
great to speak of them without great affection and fervency: The manner as well
as the words must set them forth. If we are commanded what ever our hand
finds to do, to do it with all our might; then certainly such a work as
preaching for men's salvation should be done with all our might: But alas how
few, how thin are such men! here one and there one, even among good Ministers,
that have an earnest persuading working way, or that the people can feel him
preach when they hear him.

SECT. VI.
3. IF we are all heartily Devoted to the work of God, why do we not
compassionate the poor unprovided Congregations about us, and take care to help
them to able Ministers? and in the mean time, step out now and then to their
assistance, when the business of our own particular charge will give us any
leave. A Lecture in the more ignorant places purposely for the work of
conversion, performed by the most lively working-preachers, might be a great
help where constant means is wanting.

SECT. VII.
4. THE negligent execution of acknowledged duties, does show that we be not so
wholly Devoted to the work as we should be. If there be any work of Reformation
to be set a foot, how many are there that will go no further then they are
drawn? And it were well if all would do but that much.

If any business for the Church be on foot, how many neglect it for their own
private business? when we should meet and consult together for the unanimous
and successful performance of our work, one has this business of his own, and
another that business, which must be preferred before Gods business.

And when a work is like to prove difficult and costly, how backward are we to
it, and make excuses and will not come on? For instance; What has been for
more talked of, and prayed for, and contended about in England for many years
past, then the business of Discipline? And there are but few men (the
Erastians) but they seem zealous in disputing for one side or other: some for
the Prelatical way, and some for the Presbyterian, and some for the
Congregational. And yet when we come to the practice of it, for ought I see we
are most of us for no way. It has made me admire sometimes; to look on the
face of England, and see how few Congregations in the Land have any
considerable execution of Discipline, and to think withal what volumns they
have written for it; and how almost all the Ministry of the Nation is engaged
for it? how zealously they have contended for it, and made many a (just)
exclamation against the opposers of it; and yet for all this will do little or
nothing in the exercise of it. I have marvelled what should make them so
zealous in siding for that which their practice shows that their hearts are
against. But I see a disputing zeal is more natural then a holy obedient
practizing zeal. How many Ministers in England be there that know not their own
charge, that plead for the truth of their particular Churches, and know not
which they be, or who be members of them? and that never cast out one obstinate
sinner; no nor brought one to public Confession, and expression of Repentance
and promise of reformation; No nor admonished one publicly to call him to such
Repentance. But they think they do their duties if they give them not the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, (when it is perhaps avoided voluntarily by
themselves, and thousands will keep away themselves without our prohibiting
them) and in the mean time we leave them stated members of our Churches, and
grant them all other Communion with the Church, and call them not to personal
Repentance for their sin. Read Albaspinaens, a sober Papist in his Observat. 1.
and 2. and 3. after his Annot on O tatus, and see whether Church Communion in
former times was taken to consist only ^n co-partaking of the Lords Supper.
Either these hundreds that we communicate not with in the Supper are members of
our Churches, or not; If not; then we are Separatists while we so much disclaim
it; for we have not cast them out nor have we called them to any profession,
whether they own or disown their membership, but only whether they will be
examined in order to a Sacrament nor do we use to let them know that we take
their refusal of Examination for a refusal of Church membership, and exclusion
of themselves. It follows therefore that we have gathered Churches out of
Churches before they were unchurched, or before we took Gods way to cast any of
them (much less all of them) out. But if they are taken for members, how can we
satisfy our consciences to forbear all execution of Discipline upon them? It
is not Gods Ordinance that they should be personally rebuked and admonished,
and then publicly called to Repentance and be cast out if they remain
impenitent? If these be no duties, why have we made such a noise and stir about
them in the world as we have done? If they be duties, why do we not practice
them* If none of all these persons be scandalous, why do we not admit them to
the Lords Supper? If they keep away themselves, is not that a sin which a
brother should not be permitted to remain in? Is it not a scandal for them to
avoid the Ordinances of God and the Communion of the Church for so many years
together as they do? Yea and many a one of them avoideth also the very hearing
of the word: The ancient Discipline was stricter, when the sixth general
Council at Trull, in Constantinop. ordained Can. 80. that whosoever was three
days together from Church, without urgent necessity, was to be excommunicated.

Brethren, for my part, I desire not to offend any party, nor to bring the
least dishonor to them; but I must needs say that these sins are not to be
cloaked over with excuses, extenuations or denyals. We have long cried up
Discipline, and every party their several ways. Would you have people value
your way of Government or not? No doubt but you would; Why if you would have
them value it, it must be for some excellency: show them then that excellency.
What is it? and wherein does it consist? And if you would have them believe
you, show it them not only in paper, but in practice, not only in words, but in
deeds. How can the people know the worth of bare notions and names of
Discipline, without the thing? Is it a name and a shadow that you have made all
this noise about? How can they think that that is good which does no good?
Truly I fear we take not the right way to maintain our cause, but even betray
it, while we are hot disputers for it. Speak truly; is it not these two things
that keep up the Reputation of the long-contended for Discipline among men;
viz. with the godly, the mere reputation of their Ministers that stand for it;
and with many of the ungodly, the nonexecution of it, because they find it to
be tooth-less, and not much troublesome to them? Verily Brethren, if we get the
late Prelates carnal wisdom and go their way to work, by ingratiating our way
of Government with the ungodly multitude, by the mere neglect of practice, and
the befriending of their sins, we may well look for the same blessing and issue
as the Prelates had. If once our Government come to be upholden by the votes of
those who should be corrected or ejected by it, and the worst men be friends to
it, because it is a friend to them in their ungodliness, we then engage it
against the Lord, and he will appear as engaged against us. Set all the
execution of Discipline together that has been practiced in a whole County
ever since it was so contended for, and I doubt it will not appear so
observable as to draw godly people into a liking of it for the effects. How can
you wonder if many that desire deeds and not words, Reformation and not the
mere name of Reformation, do turn over to the separated Congregations, when you
show them nothing but the bare name of Discipline in yours? All Christians
value Gods Ordinances, and think them not vain things; and therefore are
unwilling to live without them. Discipline is not a needless thing to the
Church: If you will not difference between the precious and the vile by
Discipline, people will do it by separation. If you will keep many score or
hundreds in your Churches that are notoriously scandalous, and contemners of
Church Communion, and never openly (nor perhaps privately) reprove them nor
call to Repentance, nor cast them out, you cannot marvel if some timorous souls
do run out of your Churches as from a ruinous aedifice, that they fear is ready
to fall upon their heads. I pray you consider, if you should do in the same
manner with them in the Sacrament, as you do in Discipline, and should only
show the bread and wine, and never let them taste of it, could you expect that
the name of a Sacrament should satisfy them, or that they should like your
Communion? Why should you think then that they will be satisfied with the empty
sound of the word, Church Government? And consider but what a disadvantage you
cast your cause upon in all your disputations with men of another way. If your
principles be righter then theirs, and their practice be righter then yours,
the people will suppose that the Question is, Whether the name or the thing,
the shadow or the substance, be more desirable? and they will take your way to
be a mere delusory formality, because they see you but formal in the use of it,
yea that you use it not at all. I speak not against your Government, but for
it, all this while; and tell you, that its you that are against it, that seem
so earnest for it; while you more disgrace it for want of exercise, then you
credit it by your bare arguments: And you will find before you have done, that
faithful execution will be your strongest argument. Till then, the people will
understand you as if you openly proclaimed, We would have no Public
Admonitions, Confessions or Excommunications; our way is to do no good, but to
set up the naked name of a Government. Doubtless it was a sault more past all
disputation, for the Prelates to destroy Discipline and do little or nothing in
it, then for them to be Prelates; and if they had but done the good that
Discipline is ordained for, Prelacy might have stood to this day for ought I
know; I am sure it would have had no opposition from many a hundred godly
people that have opposed it. And again I say, if you will run into their error,
you may expect their fate.

And what are the hindrances now that keep the Ministers of England from the
Execution of that Discipline which they have so much contended for? I hear not
all speak: but I hear some, and see more. The great Reason as far as I can
learn, is, The difficulty of the Work, and the trouble or suffering that we are
like to incurr by it: We cannot publicly reprehend one sinner, but he will
storm at it, and bear us a deadly malice. We can prevail with very few to make
a public profession of true Repentance. If we proceed to excommunicate them,
they will be raging mad against us: They will be ready to vow revenge against
us, and to do us a mischief: If we should deal as God requires with all the
obstinate sinners in the Parish, there were no living among them; they would
conspire in hatred against us to the hazard of our lives. We should be so hated
of all, that as our lives would be uncomfortable, so our labors would become
unprofitable; for men would not hear us when they are possessed with a hatred
of us; therefore duty cease to be duty to us, because the hurt that would
follow would be greater then the good; and affirmatives bind not ad semper.

These are the great Reasons for the non execution of Discipline, together with
the great labor that private admonition of each offender would cost us. And to
these I answer.

1. Are not these reasons as valid against Christianity it self in some times
and places, as now against Discipline? Christ came not to send us peace; we
shall have his Peace, but not the worlds; for he has foretold us that they
will hate us. Might not Mr. Bradford, or Hooper, or any that were burnt in
Queen Mary's days have alleged more then this against duty? They might have
said, It will make us hated, if we own the Reformation, and it will expose our
lives to the flames. How is he concluded by Christ to be no Christian, who
hates not all that he has and his own life for him! and yet we can take the
hazard of our life as a reason against his work; What is it but hypocrisy to
shrink from sufferings, and take up none but safe and easy works, and make our
selves believe that the rest are no duties? Indeed this is the common way of
escaping suffering, to neglect the duty that would expose us thereunto. If we
did our duty faithfully, Ministers should find the same lot among professed
Christians, as their predecessors have done among the Infidels. But if you
could not suffer for Christ, why did you put your hand to his plough? and did
not first set down and count your costs? This makes the Ministerial work so
unfaithfully done, because it is so carnally undertaken; and men enter upon it
as a life of ease, and honor, and respect from men and therefore resolve to
attain their ends, and have what they expected by right or wrong. They looked
not for hatred and suffering, and they will avoid it, though by the avoiding of
their work.

2. And as for the making your selves incapable to do them good: I answer, That
reason is as valid against plain preaching, reproof, or any other duty which
wicked men will hate us for. God will bless his own Ordinances to do good, or
else he would not have appointed them. If you admonish, and publicly rebuke
the scandalous, and call men to repentance, and cast out the obstinate, you may
do good to many that you reprove; and possibly to the excommunicate: I am sure
it is Gods means; And it is his last means, when Reproofs will do no good: It
is therefore perverse to neglect the last means lest we frustrate the foregoing
means, when as the last is not to be used but upon supposition that the former
were all frustrate before. However, those within and those without may receive
good by it, if the offender do receive none; and God will have the honor, when
his Church is manifestly differenced from the world, and the heirs of heaven
and hell are not totally confounded, nor the world made to think that Christ
and Satan do but contend for superiority, and that they have the like
inclination to holiness or to sin.

3. And I would know whether on the grounds of this objection before mentioned
all Discipline should not be cast out of the Church, atleast ordinarily; And so
is not this against the Thing it self, rather then against the present season
of it? For this reason is not drawn from any thing proper to our times, but
common to all times and places. Wicked men will always storm against the means
of their public shame; and the use of Church censures is purposely to shame
them, that sin may be shamed, and disowned by the Church. What age can you name
since the days of the Apostles wherein you would have executed the Discipline
that you now refuse, if you go on these grounds, supposing that it had not been
by Magisterial compulsion? If therefore it be Discipline it self that has such
intolerable inconveniences, why have you so prayed for it, and perhaps fought
for it, and disputed for it as you have done? What must all dissenters bear
your frowns and censures, and all for a work which your selves judge
intolerable, and dare not touch with one of your fingers? When do you look to
see all these difficulties over, that you may set upon that which you now
avoid? Will it be in your days? Or will you wait till you are dead, and leave
it as a part of your Epitaph to posterity, that you so deeply engaged and
contended for that which you so abhord to the death, that you would never be
brought to the practice of it! And does not this Objection of yours plainly
give up your cause to the Separatists? and even tell them that your contending
is not for your way of Discipline; but that there may be none, because it will
do more harm then good. Certainly if this be true, it would have been better to
speak it out at first, before all our wars, and tears, and prayers, and
contentions, then now in the conclusion to tell the world, that we did all this
but for a name or word, and that the thing is so far from being worth our cost,
that it is not tolerable, much less desirable.

4. But yet let me tell you, that there is not such a Lion in the way as you do
imagine; nor is Discipline such a useless thing. I bless God upon the small and
too late trial that I have made my self of it, I can speak by experience, it is
not vain; nor are the hazards of it such as may excuse our neglect.

But I know that pinching reason is behind; They say that, When we pleaded for
Discipline, we meant a Discipline that should be established and imposed by the
secular power: and without them what good can we do? when every man has leave
to despise our censures, and set us at naught: and therefore we will not meddle
with it (say they) without authority. To which I answer, 1. I thought it once a
scornful indignity that some fellows attempted to put upon the Ministry, that
denied them to be the Ministers of Christ, and would have had them called the
Ministers of the State, and dealt with accordingly. But it seems they did not
much cross the judgments of some of the Ministry themselves, who are ready to
put the same scorn upon their own calling. We are sent as Christ's Ambassadors
to speak in his name, and not in the Princes; and by his Authority we do our
work as from him we have our Commission. And shall any of his Messengers
question the Authority of his commands? The same Power that you have to preach
without or against the Magistrates command, the same have you to exercise
Pastoral Guidance and Discipline without it. And should all Ministers refuse
preaching if the Magistrate bid them not? yea or if he forbid them? 2. What
mean you when you say, you will not do it without Authority? Do you mean the
Leave, or the Countenance and approbation, or the Command upon your selves, or
do you mean a Force or Penalty on the People to obey you? The Magistrates Leave
we have; who hinders or forbids you to set up Discipline, and exercise it
faithfully? Does the secular Power forbid you to do it, or threaten or trouble
you for not doing it? No, they do not. To the shame of the far greatest part of
the Ministers of England it must be spoken (for we have so opened our own shame
that it cannot be hid) we have had free Liberty to have done the work of
Christ, which we have desired and pleaded for, and yet we would not do it. What
might not the Ministers of England have done for the Lord, if they had been but
willing? They had no prohibition, nor any man to rise up against them, of all
the enemies whose hearts are against their work: and yet they would not do it.
Nay more, for ought you know, you have the Approbation of Authority. You have
the commands of former powers not yet repealed. You have the Protection of the
Laws and present Governors: If any one seek revenge against you for the sake of
Discipline, you have not only Laws, but as many willing Magistrates to restrain
and punish them as ever you knew I think in England. And what would you have
more? Would you have a Law made to Punish you if you will not do your duty?
What! dare you tell God that you will not do his work unless the Magistrate
drive you to it with scourges? I confess if I had my will it should be so; and
that man should be ejected as a negligent Pastor, that will not rule his People
by Discipline (though yet I might allow him to be a Preacher to the unchurched)
as well as he is ejected as a negligent Preacher that will not preach. For
Ruling is as Essential a part of a Pastors office as preaching I am sure. And
therefore seeing these men would fain have the Magistrate interpose, if he did
eject them for unfaithful negligent Pastors (were it not for the necessity of
the Church that has not enough better) I know not well how they could blame him
for it. Its a sad discovery of our carnal hearts, when man can do so much more
with us then God, that we would obey the commands of men, and will not obey the
commands of Christ. Is he fit to be Christ's Officer, that will not take his
Command as obligatory?

But I know the thing expected is, that all the people should be forced under a
penalty to submit to our Discipline. I confess, I think that the Magistrate
should be the hedge of the Church and defend the Ministry, and improve his
power to the utmost to procure an universal obedience to Christ's Laws, and
restrain men from the apparent breach of them, especially from being false
Teachers and Seducers of others. How far I am against the two extremes of
Universal License, and Persecuting tyranny, I have frequently manifested on
other occasions. But I shall now say but this. 1. Does not this further
discover the carnal frame of our hearts, when we will not do our duty unless
the Magistrate will do his to the full, and all that we conceive may be his
duty? What! will his neglect excuse yours? Has Christ bid you use the Keys of
the Kingdom, and avoid a scandalous sinner upon condition that the Magistrate
will punish him with the sword? Is not this your meaning if you would speak it
out, that you find a great deal of difficulty in your work, and you would have
the Magistrate by terrifying offenders make it easy to you? for if it be not
safe and cheap and easy, you are resolved you will not do it; And such
servants Christ may have enough. Nay is not your meaning, that you would have
the Magistrate to do your work for you? Just as your pious people have long
cried and prayed for Discipline, and called upon Ministers to do it, but we
cannot get them to reprove offenders and deal with them seriously and lovingly
for their good and inform the Church Officers of them that are obstinate. So do
we toward the Magistrates: The work of God is so much beholden to us, that we
would all have it done, but few w^ll do it. We can easilyer censure and talk
against others for not doing it, then do it our selves. O the guile and
hypocrisy of our hearts!

2. But further, What is it that you would have the Magistrate to do? I pray
you consider it how you will answer it before God, that you should wilfully
neglect your own duty, and then make it your Religion to quarrel with others.
Is it not a fearful deceit of heart for a man to think himself a godly Minister
for finding fault with them that are less faulty then himself? I say, less
faulty. For tell me truly. Whether the Magistrate do more of his part in
Government, or you in yours. I am no more a flatterer of the Magistrate then of
you; nor was ever taken for such, that I could understand: but we must deal
justly by all men. Would you have the Magistrate to punish men eo nomine,
because excommunicated, without any particular cognizance of the fact and case?
1. That were unjust; Then he must do wrong when ever we mistake and do wrong;
If an honest man were an hangman, he would be willing to know that he hanged
not a man that was unjustly condemned: However the Magistrate is not the mere
executioner of the Ministers, but a Judge: and therefore must be allowed the
use of his Reason, to know the cause, and follow his own judgment, and not
punish men against it. 2. And excommunication is so great a punishment of it
self, that I hope you do not think it nothing, unless the Magistrate add more:
If so, then the temporal punishment might serve turn, and what need of yours?
But I suppose that this is not your sense, but you are so just, that you would
have the Magistrate to punish a man as an offender, and not as excommunicate.
And if so, I think it is not nothing that he does. Are all the penalties
against Swearers, Cursers, Drunkards, Peace-breakers, Sabboth-breakers, etc.
nothing? Certainly the Laws of the Land do punish much sin against God. Well!
What do you as Church-Governors against these same sins? The Magistrate fineth
and imprisoneth them: that is his part: It is your part to bring them to open
Repentance, or to cast them out: Have you done this as often as he has done his
part? Does not the Magistracy of England punish ten, twenty, what if I say an
hundred Swearers, Drunkards or Sabboth-breakers by the sword, for one that the
Elders of the Church do punish by censures or bring to public Repentance for
the satisfaction of the Church? Brethren, these things seem strange to me; that
the case should stand thus as it does, and yet that the deceit of our hearts
should be so great, that we should go on to account our selves such blameless
godly men, whom Magistrates and people are all bound to reverence, and to speak
against the Magistrate so much as we do. I believe they are all slack and
faulty; but are not we much more faulty? What if they should pay us in our own
coin? What language might they give the Ministers, that after so many years
talk of Discipline will do nothing in it! I say nothing in most places: To meet
together for consulation, is no exercise of Discipline, nor reformation of the
Church, which our meetings should conduce to.

3. And I give you this further answer: What had the Church of Christ done till
the days of Constantine the great, if it had no better Pastors then you that
will not Govern it without the joint compulsion of the Magistrate? Discipline,
and severe Discipline was exercised for three hundred years together, where the
Prince did not give them so much as a Protection, nor Toleration, but
perfecuted them to the death. Then was the Church at the best, and Discipline
most pure and powerful; say not then any more for shame, that it is to no
purpose without a Magistrate, when it has done so much against their wills? O
what an aggravation is it of our sin! That you cannot be content to be
negligent and unfaithful servants, but you must also fly in the face of your
Lord and Master, and obliquely lay the blame on him! What do you else, when you
blame Churchcen^ures as uneffectual, when you should blame your lazy self
seeking hearts, that shift off the use of them? Has Christ put a leaden sword
into your hands, when he bids you smite the obstinate sinner? Or are you
cowardly and careless, and then blame your sword instead of using it, as
thinking that the easier task? Are the Keys of Christ's Kingdom so unmeet and
useless, that they will not open and shut without the help of the sword? or are
you unskillful and lazy in the use of them! If they have contracted any rust,
by which they are made less fit for service, next to the Prelates we may thank
our selves, that let them lie so long unused.

4. And I must tell you, that too much interposition of the sword with our
Discipline, would do more harm then good. It would but corrupt it by the
mixture, and make it become a humane thing. Your Government is all to work upon
the conscience; and the sword cannot reach that. It is not a desirable thing to
have Repentance so obscured by mere forced Confessions, that you cannot know
when men do mean as they speak; and so it will be the sword that does all, by
forcing men to dissemble, and you will not discern the power of the Word and
Ordinance of Christ. I confess since I fell upon the exercise of some
Discipline I find by experience that if the sword did interpose and force all
those Public Confessions of sin, and Profession of Repentance, which I have
persuaded men to by the light of the word of God; it would have left me much
unsatisfied concerning the validity of such Confessions and Promises, whether
they might indeed be satisfactory to the Church: And I find that the godly
people do no further regard it then they perceive it hearty and free; and if it
were forced by Magistrates, they would take him for no Penitent person, nor be
any whit satisfied, but say, He does it because he dare do no otherwise.

And I must add this word of plainer dealing yet. You blame the Magistrate for
giving so much liberty; and is it not long of your selves that he does so? You
will scarce believe that such enemies to Liberty of Conscience, are the causes
of it: I think that you are; and that the keenest enemies have been the
greatest causes. For you would run too far to the other extreme, and are so
confident in every controversy that you are in the right, and lay such a
stress upon many Opinions of your own as if life or death did lie upon them,
(when perhaps the difference may prove more verbal then real, if it were
searched to the quick) that this occasioneth Magistrates to run too far the
other way; and if they look on such as -- and dare not trust the sword in such
hands, you may thank your selves. Truly Brethren, I see by experience, that
there is among many of the most injudicious of us, such a blind confused zeal
against all that is called error by their party, that without being able to try
and make a difference, they let fly pell mell at all alike, and make a great
outcry against errors, when either we know not what they are, nor how to
confute them, nor which he tolerable in the Church, and which intolerable, nor
how far we may hold or break Communion with the owners of them, and perhaps are
the erroneous persons our selves. The observation of this has made the
Magistrates so over-jealous of us, that they think if they set in with a party
in each contention, we shall never be without blood and misery. And I confess I
see in some Ministers so little of the fire of Divine Love, and Christian
Charity, and compassion, nor heavenly mindedness, nor humble sense of their own
infirmities, and so much of the zeal that James describes (Iam. 3. 14, 15.)
which is kindled from another fire, that makes them full of suspicions and
jealousies, and keen and eager against their Brethren, censuring, defaming and
unconscionably backbiting them, and straining an ill sense out of their well
meant words and actions, and living toward them in plain envy and malice
instead of Christian love and peace; I say I see so much of this in many that
affect the Reputation of Orthodox, while they are indeed factious, that I am
the less sorry that the Magistrate does so little interpose. For were the sword
in such envious angry hands, there would be little quiet to the Church: For
there is no two men on earth but differ in something, if they know or believe
any thing. And these men must square the world to their own judgments, which
are not always the wisest in the world: They that dare so rail at others as
Blasphemers, when they know not what they say themselves, durst su^e smite them
as Blasphemers, if they had power. This may possibly make the Magistrate think
meet, (seeing we are so quarrelsom and impatient) to let us fight it out by the
bare fists, and not to put swords into our hands till we are more sober and
know better how to use them: For if every passionate man, when he has not wit
enough to make good his cause, should presently borrow the Magistrates sword to
make it good, truth would be upon great disadvantage in the world! Magistrates
are commonly the most tempted and abused men, and therefore I know not why we
should call so loud to have them become the Arbitrators in all our quarrels,
lest error have two victories where truth gets one. I could wish the Magistrate
did more; but if he do but give us Protection and Liberty (specially if he will
but restrain Deceivers from preaching against the great unquestionable truths
of the Gospel, and give public Countenance and Encouragement to those
master-truths) I shall not fear by the Grace of God, but a prudent, sober
unanimous Ministry will ere long shame the swarm of vanities that we think so
threatening.

But I have been too long on this. I shall only conclude it with this earnest
request to my Brethren of the Ministry, that they would speedily and
faithfully put in execution, at least all the unquestionable part of the
Discipline, that they have so much contended for. When we were so offended with
the Parliament for their enumeration of scandals, as too defective, and a
Protestation was published that we acted only on supposition that it was
defective, sure we little thought then that we that were so earnest to have had
more power, would use none and we that must needs have authority to reject more
then the Parliament did enumerate, would censure so few even of them as we have
done, since we have had more liberty to do it.

But one objection is common, which I forgot: They say, We are but single
Pastors, and therefore cannot excommunicate men alone, unless we should make
every Pastor a Pope in his Parish, or a Bishop at least.

Answ. For my part I have no mind to obtrude my own opinion on such (for the
power of a single person to excommunicate) I have sufficiently already proved
my self a Novelist and singular with some, by asserting ancient and most common
Truths. But yet 1. I could with these men so much moderation, as to be sure
that they are in this as much wiser then the contrary-minded, as their
confidence does import, before they proceed in calling them Popes: Least as the
cunning of the times is by making many Antichrists, to make none; so these men
should contrary to their intention, credit the Pope, by making so many Popes,
and the Prelates too by making such kind of Prelates.

2. A Pope is the pretended head of the Catholic Church, and an universal
Bishop to govern it; Are single ruling Pastors such? A Diocesan Bishop is the
Ruler of all the Pastors and Churches in a Diocese: Is such a Pastor one of
these?

3. Why do you in your disputes against the Prelates maintain that every
Minister is a Bishop of his own Church; and do you now abhor it?

4. What if you might not excommunicate, may you not therefore do the rest? may
you not personally and publicly reprove them, pray for them, etc.

5. Must not the people avoid a Notorious drunkard. etc. whether you bid them
or not? If not; why has God commanded it? If yea; why may you not bid them do
that which is their duty?

6. Have you none in your Parish, not one or two to make Ruling Elders of, that
by their conjunction you may be authorized to do more then now you do? I mean,
according to your own principles; for I confess its not according to mine.

7. And what hinders but you may join together if you will? If it must needs
be many Pastors conjunct, that must exercise any act of Discipline, why is it
not so done? Does any forbid them, or threaten them if they do it? If you say,
I am alone, because no neighbor Minister will join with me. You speak hardly
of all the Ministers about you? What! are they all so negligent? Blame us not
then to reprove them. But its an incredible thing that they should be all so
bad that are of your judgment, that no one or two will be persuaded to assist
you. And I think you will confess that two or three may do it authoritatively,
though no one else in the County do it. I could wish that the Prelates had not
such an argument given them as this: No one Presbyter has the Power of the
Keys, by their own Confession: therefore two or three have not; least they go
further in proving the consequence then you expect. But if it must be so, I
could yet wish that no single Pastor for the excusing of himself, would lay
such a reproachful charge upon all the Ministers in the Country that be of his
own Judgment, as to say that Discipline is cast aside, because they can get
none to join with them in the execution! at least till they have thoroughly
tried whether it be so indeed, or not.

SECT. VIII.
5. ANother sad discovery, that we have not so devoted our selves and all we
have to the service of God, as we ought, is, The Prevalency of worldly fleshly
interests too much against the Interest and work of Christ. And this I shall
further manifest in these three instances following. 1. Our temporizing. 2. Our
too much minding worldly things, and shrinking from duties that will hinder our
commodity. 3. Our barrenness in works of Charity, and in the improving of all
that we have to our Masters use.

1. I would not have any to be thwart and contentious with those that govern
them, nor to be disobedient to any of their lawful commands. But it is not the
least reproach upon the Ministry, that the most of them for worldly advantage
do still suit themselves with the party that is most likely to suit to their
ends. If they look for secular advantages, they suit themselves to the secular
Power: if for the air of Ecclesiastic applause, then do they suit themselves
to the party of Ecclesiastics that is most in credit. This is not a private,
but an Epidemical malady. In Constantines days, how prevalent were the
Orthodox? In Constantius days, they almost all turned Arrians, so that there
were very few Bishops at all that did not apostatize or betray the truth; even
of the same men that had been in the Council of Nice; And when not only
Liberius, but great O sius himself fell, who had been the President or chief in
so many Orthodox Councils, what better could be expected from weaker men! Were
it not for secular advantage, or Ecclesiastic faction and applause, how could
it come to pass that Ministers in all the Countries in the world, are either
all, or almost all, of that Religion and way that is most in credit, and most
consistent with their worldly interest! Among the Greeks, they are all of the
Greek profession: and among the Abassines, the Nestorians, the Maronites, the
Iacobites, the Ministers generally go one way. And among the Papists they are
almost all Papists. And in Saxony, Sweden, Denmark, etc. almost all Lutherans:
In Holland, France, Scotland, almost all Calvinists. Its strange that they
should be all in the right in one Country, and all in the wrong in another, if
carnal advantages and reputation did not sway much. When men fall upon a
conscientious search, the variety of Intellectual capacities causes
unavoidably a great variety of conceits about some hard and lower things. But
let the Prince and the stream of men in credit go one way, and you shall have
the generality of Ministers agree to a hair, and that without any extraordinary
search. How generally did the common sort of Ministers too often change their
Religion with the Prince at several times in this land? Not all (as our
Martyrologie can witness) but the most. I will purposely forbear the mention of
any later change. If the Rulers of an University should but be corrupt, who
have the disposal of preferments, how much might they do with the most of the
students, where mere Arguments would not take? And the same tractable distemper
does so often follow them into the Ministry, that it occasioneth the enemies
to say, that Reputation and preferment is our Religion, and our Reward.

2. And for the second, How common is it with Ministers to drown themselves in
worldly business? Too many are such as the Sectaries would have them be, who
tell us that we should go to plough and cart, and labor for our living, and
preach without so much study: And this is a lesson easily learnt. Men take no
care to cast off and prevent care, that their souls and the Church may have
their care.

And especially how commonly are those duties neglected, that are like if
performed to diminish our estates? For example: Is there not many that dare
not, that will not set up the exercise of any Discipline in their Churches (not
only on the forementioned accounts but especially) because it may hinder the
people from paying them their dues? They will not offend sinners with
Discipline, least they offend them in their estates, (yea though the Law secure
their maintenance.) I find money is too strong an Argument for some men to
answer, that can proclaim the love of it to be the root of all evil, and can
make large orations of the danger of covetousness. I will say no more now to
these but this; If it was so deadly a sin in Simon Magus to offer to buy the
Gift of God with money; what is it to sell his gifts, his cause, and the souls
of men for money? and what reason have such to fear least their money perish
with them?

3. But the most that I have to say is to the third discovery. If worldly and
fleshly interest did not much prevail against the interest of Christ and the
Church, surely most Ministers would be more fruitful in good works, and would
more lay out that they have to their masters use. Experience has fully proved
it, that works of Charity do most potently remove prejudice, and open the ears
to words of piety. If men see that you are addicted to do good, they will the
easilyer belive that you are good, and the easilyer then believe that it is
good which you persuade them too. When they see that you Love them, and seek
their good, they will the easilyer trust you: And when they see that you seek
not the things of the world, they will the less suspect your intentions, and
the easilyer be drawn by you to seek that which you seek. O how much good might
Ministers do, if they did set themselves wholly to do good, and would dedicate
all their faculties and substance to that endl Say not that it is a small
matter to do good to men's bodies, and that this will but win them to us, and
not to God, nor convert the soul; For it is prejudice that is a great hindrance
of men's conversion, and this will remove it: We might do men more good, if they
were but willing to learn of us; and this will make them willing, and then our
further diligence may profit them. Brethren, I pray you do not think that it is
ordinary charity that is expected from you, any more then ordinary piety. You
must in proportion to your talents go much beyond others: It is not to give now
and them two pence to a poor man; others do that as well as you. But what
singular thing do you with your estates for your Masters use? I know you cannot
give away that which you have not: But me thinks all that you have should be
for God. I know the great objection is, We have wife and children to provide
for: a little will not serve them at present, and we are not bound to leave
them beggars. To which I answer, 1. There are few texts of Scripture more
abused then that of the Apostle, He that provideth not for his own, and
specially those of his family, has denied the faith, and is worse then an
Infidel. This is made a pretense for gathering up portions, and providing a
full estate for posterity, when the Apostle speaks only against them that did
cast their poor kindred and family on the Church to be maintained out of the
common stock, when they were able to do it themselves. As if one that has a
widow in his house that is his mother or daughter, and would have her to be
kept on the Parish when he has enough himself. His following words show that
it is present provision, and not future portions that the Apostle speaks of,
when he bids them that have widows, administer to them, or give them what is
sufficient. 2. You may so educate your children as other mean persons do, that
they may be able to get their own livings, in some honest trade or employment,
without other great provisions. I know that your charity and care must begin at
home, but it must not end there: You are bound to do the best you can to
educate your children, so as they may be capable of being most serviceable to
God, but not to leave them rich or a full estate; Nor to forbear other
necessary works of Charity. merely for a larger provision for them. There must
be some proportion kept between our provision for our families, and for the
Church and poor. A truly charitable self-denying heart, that has devoted it
self and all that he has to God, would be the best judge of the due
proportions, and would see which way of expense is likely to do God the
greatest service, and that way he would take. 3. I confess I would not have men
lie too long under endangering strong temptations to incontinency; lest they
wound themselves and their profession by their falls: But yet methinks its hard
that men can do no more to mortify the concupiscence of the flesh, that they
may live in a single freer condition, and have none of these temptations from
wife and children, to hinder them from furthering their Ministerial ends by
charitable works. If he that marryeth not, does better then he that does, sure
Ministers should labor to do that which is best. And if he that can receive
this saying, must receive it, we should endeavor after it. This is one of the
highest points of the Romish policy, which they pretend to be a duty of common
necessity, that all their Bishops, Priests and other Religious orders must not
marry, by which means they have no posterity to drain the Churches revenues,
nor to take up their care: but they make their public cause to be their
interest, and they lay out themselves for it while they live, and leave all
that they have to it when they die; So that their Churches wealth does daily
increase, as every Bishop, Abbot, Jesuit or other person does gather more in
their life time, and usually add it to their common stock. Its pity that for a
better cause we can no more imitate them in wisdom and self-denial, where it
might be done. 4. But they that must marry, should take such as can maintain
themselves and their children, or maintain them at the rate as their temporal
means will afford, and devote as much of the Church means to the Churches
service as they can.

I would put no man upon extremes; But in this case flesh and blood does make
even good men so partial, that they take their duties, and duties of very great
worth and weight to be extremes. If worldly vanities did not blind us, we might
see when a public or other greater good did call us to deny our selves and our
families. Why should we not live neerlyer and poorer in the world, rather then
leave those works undone, which may be of greater use then our plentiful
provision? But we consult in matter of duty with flesh and blood; and what
counsel it will give us, we may easily know. It will tell us we must have a
competency; and many pious men's competency, is but little below the Rich man's
rates, Luke 16. If they be not clothed with the best, and fare not deliciously
every day, they have not a competency. A man that preaches an Immortal Crown
of glory, must not seek much after transitory vanity: And he that preaches the
contempt of Riches, must himself contemn them, and show it by his life; And he
that preaches self-denial and mortification, must practice these in the eyes
of them that he preaches to, if ever he would have his Doctrine prosper. All
Christians are sanctified, and therefore themselves and all that they have are
consecrated and dedicated to their masters use; But Ministers are doubly
sanctified; They are devoted to God both as Christians and as Ministers; and
therefore they are doubly obliged to honor him with what they have.

O Brethren, what abundance of good works are before us, and how few of them do
we put our hands to? I know the world expects more from us then we have: but
if we cannot answer the expectations of the unreasonable, let us do what we can
to answer the expectations of God, and conscience, and all just men. It is the
will of God that with well doing we should put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men. Especially those Ministers that have larger maintenance must be
larger in doing good.

I will give but one instance at this time, which I mentioned before. There are
some Ministers that have 150. or 200. or 300. per an. of Church means, and have
so great Parishes that they are not able to do a quarter of the Ministerial
work, nor once in a year to deal personally with half their people for their
instruction, and yet they will content themselves with public preaching, as if
that were all that were necessary, and leave almost all the rest undone, to the
everlasting danger or damnation of multitudes, rather then they will maintain
one or two diligent men to assist them. Or if they have an assistant, it is but
some young man to ease them about baptizings or burials, or such work, and not
one that will faithfully and diligently watch over the Flock, and afford them
that personal instruction which is so necessary. If this be not a serving our
selves of God, and not a serving God, and a selling men's souls for our fuller
maintenance in the world; what is? Me thinks such men should fear least while
they are accounted excellent Preachers and godly Ministers by men, they should
be accounted cruel soul murderers by Christ? and least the cries of those souls
whom they have betrayed to damnation should ring in their ears for ever. Will
preaching a good Sermon serve the turn; while you never look more after them,
but deny them that closer help that you find to be necessary, and alienate that
maintenance to your own flesh, which should provide relief for so many souls?
How can you open your mouths against oppressors, when your selves are so great
oppressors, not only of men's bodies but their souls? How can you Preach against
unmercifulness, while you are so unmerciful? And how can you talk against
unfaithful Ministers, while you are so unfaithful your selves? The sin is not
therefore small because it is unobserved, and not become odious in the eyes of
men; nor because the charity which you withhold is such as the people blame you
not for withholding. Satan himself their greatest enemy has their consent all
along in the work of their perdition. It is no extenuation therefore of your
sin that you have their consents: For that you may sooner have for their hurt
then for their good.

I Shall proceed no further in these confessions and discoveries; but beseech
you to take what is said into Co^nsideration; and see whether this be not the
great and lamentable sin of the Ministers of the Gospel, that they be not fully
devoted to God, and give not up themselves and all that they have to the
carrying on of the blessed work which they have undertaken? and whether
flesh-pleasing and self-seeking, and an interest distinct from that of Christ,
do not make us neglect much of our duty, and walk too unfaithfully in so great
a trust, and reservedly serve God in the cheapest and most applauded part of
his work, and withdraw from that which would put us upon cost and sufferings?
And whether this do not show, that too many are earthly that seem to be
heavenly, and mind the things below while they preach for the things above, and
Idolize the world while they call men to contemn it? And as Salvian says, li.
4. ad Eccles. Cath. page 454. Nullus salutem plus neglig it quam qui Deo
aliquid anteponit. Despisers of God will prove despisers of their own salvation.

SECT. IX.
AND now Brethren what remains, but that we all cry guilty, of too much of
these forementioned sins! and humble our souls in the lamentation of our
miscarriages before the Lord! Is this Taking heed to our selves and to all the
Flock? Is this like the pattern that is given us here in the Text? If we should
prove now stout-hearted and unhumbled men, and snuff at these Confessions as
tending to our disgrace, how sad a symptom would it be to our selves and to the
Church? The Ministry has been often threatened here, and is still maligned by
many sorts of adversaries; Though all this may show their impious malice, yet
may it also intimate to us Gods just indignation. Believe it Brethren, the
Ministry of England is not the least or last in the sin of the Land; It is
they that have encouraged the common profaneness; It is they that have led the
people into divisions, and are now so backward to bring them out. And as sin
has been found in them, so Judgments have been found and laid upon them. Its
time therefore for us to take our part of that Humiliation which we have been
calling ou^ people to so long. If we have our wits about us, we may perceive
that God has been offended with us and that the voice that called this Nation
to Repentance, did speak to us as well as others. He therefore that has ears
let him hear the voice of railing enemies of all sorts, the voice of them that
cry, down with us, even to the ground, all calling us to try our ways and to
reform. He that has eyes let him see the precepts of Repentance written in so
many admirable deliverances and preservations, and written in so many lines of
blood. By fire and sword has God been calling even us to Humiliation; And as
Judgment has begun at the house of God, so if Humiliation begin not there
too, it will be a sad prognostic to us and to the Land. What! shall we deny,
or excuse, or extenuate our sins, while we call our people to such free
Confessions? Is it not better to give glory to God by a full and humble
Confession, then in tenderness of our own glory to seek for figleaves to cover
our nakedness; and to put God to it, to build his glory which we denied him,
upon the ruins of our own which we preferred before him? and to distrain for
that by a yet sorer Judgment, which we denied voluntarily to surrender to him?
Alas if you put God to get his honor as he can, he can get it to your greater
sorrow and dishonor. If any of our hearers in a day of Humiliation when sin is
fully confessed and lamented, should be offended at the Confession, and stand
up against it, and say, You wrong me; I am not so bad! You should have told me
of this in private, and not have disgraced me before the Congregation. What
could we think of such a man but that he was a hardened impenitent wretch; and
as he would have no part in the Confession, so he should have none in the
Remission. And shall we do that which we scarce ever see the most hardened
sinner do? Shall we say, This should not have been spoken of us in the ears of
the people, but we should have been honored before them? Certainly sins openly
committed are more dishonorable to us when we hide them, then when we confess
them. It is the sin and not the Confession that is our dishonor: And we have
committed them before the Sun, so that they cannot be hid. Attempts to cloak
them, do increase the guilt and shame: There is no way to repair the breaches
in our honor, which our sin has made, but by free Confession and Humiliation.
I durst not but make Confession of my own: and if any be offended that I have
confessed theirs, let them know, that I do but what I have done by my self. And
if they dare disown the confession of their sin, let them do it at their peril.
But as for all the truly humble Ministers of the Gospel, I doubt not but they
will rather be provoked more solemnly in the face of their several
Congregations, to lament their sins, and promise Reformation.

CHAP. V.
SECT. I. The Use of Exhortation.
HAving disclosed and lamented our miscarriages and neglects, our duty for the
future lies plain before us. God forbid that we should now go on in the sin
that we have confessed, as carelessly as we did before. Then would that
exclamation of Salvian fall upon us, de Gubern. l. 3. p. 87. Novum siquidem
monstri genus est; cadem pene omnes jugiter faciunt, quae fecisse plangunt. Et
qui intra^t Ecclefiasticam domum, ut mala antiqua defleant, exeunt; and quid
dico exeunt? in ipsis pene hoc orationibus suis ac supplicationibus moliuntur;
Aliud quippe or a hominum, aliud corda agunt: Et dum verbis praeterita mala
plangunt, sensu sutura meditantur: ac fi oration eorum rixa est magis criminum
quam exoratrix; ut vere illa in eis Scripturae maledictio compleatur, ut de
oratione ipsa exeunt condemnati, and oration eorum fiat in peccalum.

Be awakened therefore I beseech you brethren, by the loud and manifold voice
of God, to set more seriously to the work of God, and to do it for the future
with all your might, and to take heed to your selves and to all the Flock. The
Reasons why you should take heed to your selves, I gave you in the beginning.
The Reasons why you should take heed to all the Flock, I shall give you now, as
Motives to enforce this Exhortation; and the Lord grant that they may work with
us according to their truth and weight.

1. THE first quickening Consideration which the text here affords us, is
taken from our Relation to all the Flock. We are Overseers of it. In this I
shall further show you these subordinate particulars, which will manifest the
force of this consideration.

1. The nature of the office requires us to Take heed. What else are we
Overseers for? Episcopus est nomen quod plus oneris quam honoris significat,
says Polid. Virgil. p. 240. and a Father before him To be a Bishop or Pastor
is not to be set up as Idols for the people to bow to, or as idle slow-bellies
to live to our fleshly delight and ease; but it is to be the guide of sinners
to salvation The particulars of our duty we have somewhat touched before, and
more shall do anon. It is a sad case, that men should be of a calling that they
know not the nature of, and undertake they know not what. Do these men know and
consider what they have undertaken, that live at ease and pleasure, and have
time to take their superfluous recreations, and to spend an hour and more at
once in loitering and vain discourses, when so much work does lie upon their
hands! Why Brethren, do you consider where you stand, and what you have taken
upon you? Why you have undertaken the Conduct under Christ of a band of his
soldiers against Principalities and Powers, and spiritual wickedness in high
places. You must lead them on the sharpest conflicts. You must acquaint them
with the enemies stratagems and assault. You must watch your selves and keep
them watching. If you miscarry they and you many perish. You have a subtle
enemy, and therefore must be wise; You have a vigilant enemy, and therefore
must be vigilant. A malicious, and violent, and unwearied enemy; and therefore
you must be resolute, courageous and unwearied. You are in a crowd of enemies,
compassed with them on every side; and if you heed one and not all, you will
quickly fall. And O what a world of work have you to do? Had you but one
ignorant old man or woman to teach, though willing to learn, what a tedious
task is it? But if they be as unwilling as ignorant, how much more difficult is
it? But to have such a multitude of these, as most of us have, what work will
it find us? Who has ever tried it, that knows it not by experience? What a
pitiful life is it, to reason with men that have almost lost the use of reason,
and to talk with obstinate willful people, that know what they will and
resolve, but not why they do it? and to argue the case with them that neither
understand themselves nor you; and yet think that no man has understanding
that contradicts them, and that are confident they are in the right, when
they can show nothing but that confidence to make them confident? their will is
the reason of their judgments and lives: it satisfies them, and it must
satisfy you. O Brethren, what a world of wickedness have we to contend
against, in some one soul! and what a number of those worlds? what rooting have
their sins? what disadvantage must truth come upon? How strange are they to the
Heavenly message that we bring them: and know not what you say when you speak
in that only language that they understand? And when you think you have done
something, you leave your seed among the sowls of the air; wicked men are at
their elbows to rise up and contradict all that you have said. They will cavil,
and carp, and slander you, that they may disgrace your message, and deride and
scorn them away from Christ, and quickly extinguish the good beginnings that
you hoped you had seen. They use indeed weaker reasons then yours, but such as
come with more advantage being near them, and familiarly and importunately
urged, and such as are fetched from things that they see and feel, and which are
befriended by their own flesh. You speak but once to a sinner, for ten times or
twenty times that the Messengers of Satan speak to them; moreover, how easily
do the cares and businesses of the world devour and choke the seed which you
have sown? And if it had no enemy but what is in themselves, how easily will a
frozen carnal heart, extinguish those sparks which you have been long in
kindling? and for want of fuel and further help, they will go out of
themselves. What abundance of distemperers, and lusts, and passions, do you
cast your gracious words amongst? and what entertainment such companions will
afford them, you may easily conjecture. And when you think your work does
happily succeed, and have seen men under troubles and complaints, confessing
their sins, and promising reformation, and living as new creatures and zealous
converts, alas after all this, they may prove unsound and false at the heart,
and such as were but superficially changed, and took up new Opinions, and new
company, without a new heart: How many are after a notable change, deceived by
the profits and honors of the world, and fallen away while they think they
stand? How many are entangled again in their former sensuality? and how many do
but change a disgraceful way of flesh-pleasing for a way that is less
dishonorable, and makes not so great a noise in their consciences? How many
grow proud before they reach to a settled knowledge, and greedily snatch at
every error that is presented to them, under the name of Truth; and in
confidence of the strength of their unfurnished intellects, despise them that
they were wont to learn of, and become the greatest grief to their Teachers,
that before rejoiced in their hopeful beginnings? And like Chickens that
straggle from the hen, they are carried away by that infernal Kite, while they
proudly despise the Guidance and advice of those that Christ has set over them
for their safety. O Brethren, what a field of work is there before us? not a
person that you can see but may find you work. In the Saints themselves, how
soon do their graces languish if you neglect them? and how easily are they
drawn into scandalous ways, to the dishonor of the Gospel, and their own loss
and sorrow! If this be the work of a Minister, you may see what a life he has
to lead. Up then, and let us be doing with all our might: Difficulties must
quicken and not discourage in a Possible and Necessary work. If we cannot do
all, let us do what we can: For if we neglect it, woe to us and them. Should we
pass over all these needful things, and by a plausible Sermon only, think to
prove our selves faithful Ministers, and to put off God and man with such a
shell and formal vizor, our Reward would prove as superficial as our work.

2. Consider also that it is by your own voluntary undertaking and engagement,
that all this work is laid upon you. No man forced you to be Overseers of the
Church. And does not common honesty bind you to be true to your trust?

3. Consider also that you have the Honor to encourage you to the Labor. And
a great honor indeed it is to be the Ambassadors of God, and the instruments
of men's conversion and salvation, to save men's souls from death, and cover a
multitude of sins, Jam. 5 ult. Indeed the honor is but the attendant of the
work. To do therefore as the Prelates of the Church in all ages have done, to
strive for precedence, and fill the world with vile contentions about the
dignity and superiority of their seats, does show that they much forget the
nature and work of that office which they strive about. I seldom see men strive
so seriously who shall go first to a poor man's cottage to teach him and his
family the way to heaven; or who shall first endeavor the conversion of a
sinner; or first become the servant of all; strange! that for all the plain
expressions of Christ, men will not understand the nature of their office! If
they did, would they strive who should be the Pastor of a whole County and
more, when there are ten thousand poor sinners in it that cry for help; and
they are not so eager to engage for their relief? Nay when they can patiently
live in the houses with riotous profane persons, and not follow them seriously
and uncessantly for their change? And that they would have the Name and Honor
of the work of a County, who are unable to do all the work of a Parish, when
the Honor is but the appendix of the work? Is it Names and Honor, or the Work
and End that these desire? O if they would faithfully, humbly, and
self-denyingly lay out themselves for Christ and his Church, and never think of
Titles and Reputation, they should then have Honor whether they would or not:
but by gaping after it, they lose it: For this is the case of virtues shadow,
Quod sequitu, fugio, quod fugit ipse sequor.

4. Consider also, you have the many other excellent Privileges of the
Ministerial office to encourage you to the work. If you will not therefore do
the work, you have nothing to do with the Privileges. Its something that you
are maintained by other men's labors, and live on the commonwealths allowance.
This is for your work, that you may not be taken off it, but as Paul requires,
may Wholly give your selves to these things, and not be forced to neglect men's
souls whilst you are providing for your own bodies. Either do the work then or
take not the maintenance.

But you have far greater Privileges yet then this. Is it nothing to be bred
up to Learning, when others are bred at the plough and cart? and to be
furnished with so much delightful knowledge, when the world lies in ignorance.
Is it nothing to converse with Learned men, and talk of high and glorious
things, when others must converse with almost none but silly ignorants?

But especially, What an excellent life is it to live in the studies and
preaching of Christ? to be still searching into his mysteries, or feeding on
them! to be daily in the consideration of the blessed Nature, or Works, or
Ways of God! Others are glad of the leisure of the Lords Day, and now and then
an hour besides when they can lay hold of it: But we may keep a continual
Sabbath: We may do nothing else almost but study and talk of God and Glory, and
call upon him, and drink in his sacred, saving truths. Our employment is all
high and spiritual! Whether we be alone, or with others, our business is for
another world. O were but our hearts more suitable to this work, what a blessed
joyful life should we live! How sweet would our study be to us? How pleasant
would the pulpit be? and what a delight would our conference of these things
afford? To live among such excellent helps as our libraries afford, and have so
many silent wise companions whenever we please and of such variety. All these
and more such Privileges of the Ministry, bespeak our unwearied diligence in
the work.

5. You are related to Christ as well as to the Flock. He therefore being also
related to you, you are not only advanced but secured by the relation, if you
be but faithful in the work that it requires. You are the Stewards of his
mysteries, and Rulers of his household: And he that entrusted you will maintain
you in his work: But then, it is required of a Steward that a man be found
faithful, 1 Cor. 4. 2. Be true to him, and never doubt but he will be true to
you. Do you feed his Flock; and he will sooner feed you as he did Elias, then
forsake you. If you be in prison, he will open the doors; but then you must
relieve imprisoned souls. He will give you a tongue and wisdom that no enemy
shall resist: but then you must use it faithfully for him. If you will put
forth your hand to relieve the distressed, and willingly put it to his plough,
he will wither the hand that is stretched out against you. The Ministers of
England, I am sure, may know this by large experience. Many a time has God
rescued them from the jaws of the devourer. O the admirable preservations, and
deliverances that they have had, from cruel Papists! from tyranical
persecutors! from malicious Sectaries, and misguided passionate men! Brethren,
in the fear of God consider, Why is it that God has done all this? Is it for
your persons, or for his Church? What are you to him more then other men, but
for his work and peoples sakes? Are you Angels, or men? Is your flesh of any
better mettle then your neighbors? Are you not of the same Generation of
sinners, that need his grace as much as they? Up then and work as the Redeemed
of the Lord; as those that are purposely rescued from ruin for his service. O
do not prepare a remediless overthrow for the English Ministry by your
ingratitude after all these deliverances. If you believe that God has rescued
you for himself, live to him then, as being unreservedly his that has
delivered you.

SECT. II.
II. THE first Motive mentioned in the text, we have spoken of, which is from
the Consideration of our office it self. The second is from the efficient
cause. It is God by his spirit that makes us Overseers of his Church, therefore
it concerns us to Take heed to our selves and it. I did before show you how
the Holy Ghost is said to make Bishops or Pastors of the Church in three
several respects. By Qualifying them for the office: By directing the Ordainers
to discern their Qualifications, and know the fittest men: and by directing
them, the people and themselves for the affixing them to a particular charge.
All these were done then in an extraordinary sort, by inspiration, at least
very often. The same are all done now by the ordinary way of the spirits
assistance. But it is the same spirit still: and men are made Overseers of the
Church (when they are rightly called) by the Holy Ghost now as well as then.
Its a strange conceit therefore of the Papists to think that Ordination by the
hands of man, is of more absolute necessity to the Ministerial Office, then the
calling of the Holy Ghost. God has determined in his word, that there shall be
such an office, and what the Work and Power shall be, and what sort of men, as
to their qualifications, shall receive it: None of these can be undone by man,
or made unnecessary. God also gives men the Qualifications which he requires.
So that all that the Church has to do, whether Pastors or People, Ordainors or
Electors, is but to discern, and determine, which are the men that God has
thus Qualified, and to Accept of them that are so provided, and upon consent to
install them solemnly in this office. But I purposely cut short the
controvertible part.

What an Obligation then is laid upon us by our call? If our Commission be sent
from Heaven, its not to be disobeyed. When Paul was called by the voice of
Christ, he was not disobedient to the heavenly Vision! When the Apostles were
called by Christ from their secular employments they presently leave friends,
and house, and trade and all, and follow him. Though our call be not so
immediate or extraordinary, yet is it from the same spirit. Its no safe course
to imitate Jonah, in turning our back upon the commands of God. If we neglect
our work, he has a spur to quicken us: and if we overrun it he has
Messengers enough to over-take us, and fetch us back, and make us do it; and it
is be^^^ to do it at first then at last. This is the second Motive.

SECT. III.
III. THE third Motive in the Text, is, from the dignity of the Object. It is
the Church of God which we must Oversee, and Feed. It is that Church which the
world is much upheld for; which is sanctified by the Holy Ghost; which is
united to Christ, and is his mystical body: that Church which Angels are
present with, and attend upon as Ministering Spirits; whose very little ones
have their Angels beholding the face of God in heaven: O what a charge is it
that we have-undertaken! And shall we be unfaithful to such a charge! Have we
the Stewardship of Gods own family, and shall we neglect it! Have we the
conduct of those Saints that must live for ever with God in glory, and shall we
neglect them! God forbid! I beseech you Brethren, let this thought awaken the
negligent! You that draw back from painful, displeasing, suffering duties, and
will put off men's souls with uneffectual formalities; do you think this is an
honorable usage of Christ's Spouse? Are the souls of men thought meet by God to
see his face, and live for ever in his glory, and are they not worthy of your
utmost cost and labor? Do you think so basely of the Church of God, as if it
deserved not the best of your care and help? Were you the Keepers of sheep or
swine, you might better let them go, and say, they be not worthy the looking
after; and yet you would scarce do so if they were your own. But dare you say
so by the souls of men even by the Church of God? Christ walks among them:
Remember his presence, and keep all as clean as you can. The praises of the
most high God are in the midst of them. They are a sanctified peculiar people,
a Kingly Priesthood, an holy Nation, a choice generation, to show forth the
praises of him that has called them, 1 Pet. 2. 9. and yet dare you neglect
them? What a high honor is it to be but one of them, yea but a door keeper in
the house of God! but to be the Priest of these Priests, and the Ruler of these
Kings, this is such an honor as multiplyeth your obligations to diligence and
fidelity in so noble an employment.

SECT. IV.
IV. THE last Motive that is mentioned in my Text, is, from the Price that was
paid for the Church which we Oversee. God the Son did purchase it with his own
blood. O what an Argument is here to quicken the negligent? and what an
Argument to condemn those that will not be quickened up to their duty by it? O
says one of the ancient Doctors, if Christ had but committed to my keeping one
spoonful of his blood in a fragile glass, how curiously should I preserve it,
and how tender should I be of that glass? If then he have committed to me the
purchase of his blood, should I not as carefully look to my charge? What Sirs
shall we despise the blood of Christ? Shall we think it was shed for them that
are not worthy of our utmost care? You may see here it is not a little fault
that negligent Pastors are guilty of? as much as in them lies, the blood of
Christ should be shed in vain: They would lose him those souls that he has so
dearly bought.

O then let us hear those Arguments of Christ, when ever we feel our selves
grow dull and careless; Did I dye for them, and wilt not thou look after them?
Were they worth my blood, and are they not worth thy labor? Did I come down
from Heaven to Earth, to seek and to save that which was lost: and wilt not
thou go to the next door, or street, or Village to seek them? How small is thy
labor or condescension as to mine? I debased my self to this, but it is thy
honor to be so employed. Have I done and suffered so much for their salvation?
and was I willing to make thee a co-worker with me, and will thou refuse that
little that lies upon thy hands? Every time we look upon our Congregations,
let us believingly remember, that they are the purchase of Christ's blood, and
therefore should be regarded accordingly by us.

And think what a confusion it will be at the last day to a negligent Minister,
to have this Blood of the Son of God to be pleaded against him! and for Christ
to say, It was the purchase of my blood that thou did so make light of, and
do thou think to be saved by it thy self? O Brethren, seeing Christ will
bring his Blood to plead with us, let it plead us to our duty, le^t it plead us
to damnation.

SECT. V.
I Have done with the Motives which I find in the Text it self: There are many
more that might be gathered from the rest of this Exhortation of the Apostle;
but we must not stay to take in all. If the Lord will set home but these few
upon your hearts, I dare say we shall see reason to mend our pace: and the
change will be such on our hearts, and in our Ministry, that our selves and
our Congregations will have cause to bless God for it. I know my self unworthy
to be your Monitor; but a Monitor you must have; and its better for us to hear
of our sin, and duty, from any body, then from no body. Receive the admonition,
and you will see no cause in the Monitors unworthyness, to repent of it: but if
you reject it, the unworthyest Messenger may bear that witness against you that
will confound you. But before I leave this Exhortation, as I have applied it to
our general work, so I shall carry it a little further to some of the special
parts and modes of our Duty which were before expressed.

1. And first and above all, See that the work of saving grace be thoroughly
wrought on your own souls. It is a fearful case to be an unsanctified
Professor; but much more to be an unsanctified Preacher. Does it not make you
tremble when you open the Bible, lest you should read there the Sentence of
your own Condemnation? when you pen your Sermons, little do you think that you
are drawing up inditements against your own souls! When you are arguing against
sin, you are aggravating your own: When you proclaim to your hearers the riches
of Christ and grace, you publish your own iniquity in rejecting them, and your
unhappiness in being without them. What can you do in persuading men to Christ
in drawing them from the world in urging them to a life of faith and holiness;
but conscience if it were but awake might tell you, that you speak all this to
your own confusion? If you mention Hell, you mention your own Inheritance: If
you describe the Joys of heaven, you describe your misery that have no right
to it. What can you devise to say for the most part, but it will be against
your own souls? O miserable life! that a man should study and preach against
himself, and spend all his days in a course of self-condemning! A graceless
unexperienced Preacher, is one of the most unhappy creatures upon earth. And
yet is he ordinarily most insensible of his unhappiness. For he has so many
counters that seem like the gold of saving grace, and so many splendid stones
that seem like the Christians Jewel, that he is seldom troubled with the
thoughts of his poverty, but thinks he is Rich and wants nothing when he is
poor, and miserable, and blind, and naked: He is acquainted with the holy
Scripture, he is exercised in holy duties, he lives not in open disgraceful
sin, he serves at Gods Altar, he reproves other men's faults, and preaches up
holiness both of heart and life; and how can this man chose but be Holy? O what
an aggravated misery is this, to perish in the midst of plenty! and to famish
with the bread of life in our hands, while we offer it to others, and urge it
on them! That those Ordinances of God should be the Occasions of our delusion,
which are instituted to be the means of our conviction and salvation? and that
while we hold the Looking glass of the Gospel to others, to show them the true
face of the state of their souls, we should either look on the back side of it
our selves, where we can see nothing, or turn it aside, that it may
mis-represent us to our selves. If such a wretched man would take my counsel,
he should make a stand, and call his heart and life to an account, and fall a
preaching a while to himself, before he preach any more to others: He should
consider whether food in the mouth will nourish that goes not into the
stomach? whether it be a Christ in the mouth or in the heart that will save
men? Whether he that names him should not depart from iniquity? and whether
God will hear their prayers, if they regard iniquity in their hearts? and
whether it will serve the turn at the day of reckoning to say, Lord we have
prophesied in thy name; when they shall hear, Depart from me, I know you not?
and what comfort it will be to Judas when he is gone to his own place, to
remember that he preached with the rest of the Apostles, or that he sat with
Christ, and was called by him, Friend? and whether a wicked Preacher shall
stand in the Judgment, or sinners in the Assembly of the just? When such
thoughts as these have entered into their souls, and kindly workt a while upon
their consciences, I would advise them next to go to the Congregation, and
there preach over Origens Sermon, on Psalm. 50. 16, 17. But to the wicked, says
God, What have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my
Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and have cast my words
behind thee? And when they have read this text, to sit down, and expound, and
apply it by their tears. And then to make a free Confession of their sin, and
lament their case before the assembly, and desire their earnest prayers to God
for pardoning and renewing grace; and so to close with Christ in heart, who
before admitted him no further then into the brain; that hereafter they may
preach a Christ whom they know, and may feel what they speak, and may commend
the riches of the Gospel by experience.

Verily, it is the common danger and calamity of the Church, to have
unregenerate and unexperienced Pastors: and to have so many men become
Preachers, before they are Christians; to be sanctified by dedication to the
Altar as Gods Priests, before they are sanctified by hearty dedication to
Christ as his Disciples: and so to worship an unknown God, and to preach an
unknown Christ, an unknown spirit, an unknown state of holiness and Communion
with God and a glory that is unknown, and like to be unknown to them for ever.
He is like to be but a heartless Preacher, that has not the Christ and grace
that he preaches in his heart. O that all our Students in the University would
well consider this! What a poor business is it to themselves, to spend their
time in knowing some little of the works of God, and some of those names that
the divided tongues of the Nations have imposed on them, and not to know the
Lord himself, nor exalt him in their hearts, nor to be acquainted with that one
renewing work that should make them happy. They do but walk in a vain show, and
spend their lives like dreaming men, while they busy their wits and tongues
about abundance of names and notions, and are strangers to God and the life of
Saints. If ever God waken them by saving grace, they will have cogitations and
employments so much more serious, then their unsanctified studies and
disputations were, that they will confess they did but dream before. A world of
business they make themselves about Nothing, while they are wilful strangers to
the Primitive, independent necessary Being, who is all in all. Nothing can be
rightly known, if God be not known: nor is any study well managed, nor to any
great purpose, where God is not studied. We know little of the creature till we
know it as it stands in its Order and respects to God: single letters and
syllables uncomposed are non sense. He that over-looketh the Alpha and Omega
and sees not the beginning and end, and him in all, who is the all of all,
does see nothing at all. All creatures are as such broken syllables; they
signify nothing as separated from God. Were they separated actually, they
would cease to be, and the separation would be an annihilation: And when we
separate them in our fancies, we make Nothing of them to our selves. Its one
thing to know the creatures as Aristotle, and another thing to know them as a
Christian. None but a Christian can read one line of his Physics so as to
understand it rightly. It is a high and excellent study, and of greater use
then many do well understand; but its the smallest part of it that Aristotle
can teach us. When man was made perfect, and placed in a perfect world, where
all things were in perfect order, and very good, the whole Creation was then
man's book in which he was to read the nature and will of his great Creator;
Every creature had the Name of God so legibly engraven on it, that man might
run and read it. He could not open his eyes, but he might see some image of
God: but no where so fully and lively as in himself. And therefore it was his
work to study the whole volume of Nature; but first and most to study himself.
And if man had held on in this prescribed work he would have continued and
increased in the knowledge of God and himself; but when he would needs know and
love the creature and himself, in a way of separation from God, he lost the
knowledge of all, both of the creature himself and God, so far as it could
beatifie, and was worth the name of knowledge, and instead of it he has got
the unhappy knowledge which he affected, even the empty notions, and
fantastic knowledge of the creature and himself as thus separated: And thus
he that lived to the Creator and upon him, does now live to, and as upon the
(other) creatures and himself; and thus, Every man at his best estate (the
Learned as well as the illiterate) is altogether vanity: Surely every man
walks in a Vain Show: surely they are disquieted in vain, Psalm. 39. 5, 6. And
it must be well observed, that as God laid not by the Relation of a Creator by
becoming our Redeemer, nor the Right of his Propriety and Government of us in
that Relation, but the, work of Redemption stands in some subordination to
that of Creation, and the Law of the Redeemer to the Law of the Creator: so
also the duties that we owed God as Creator are not ceased; but the duties that
we own to the Redeemer, as such, are subordinate thereto. It is the work of
Christ to bring us back to God, whom we fell from, and to restore us to our
perfection of Holiness and Obedience; and as he is the way to the Father, so
faith in him, is the way to our former employment and enjoyment of God. I hope
you perceive what all this drives at, viz. That to see God in his creatures,
and to love him and converse with him, was the employment of man in his upright
state; That this is so far from ceasing to be our duty, that it is the work of
Christ by faith to bring us back to it: and therefore the most holy men are the
most excellent students of Gods works: and none but the holy can rightly study
them, or know them. His works are great, sought out of all them that have
pleasure therein, Psalm. 111. 2. But not for themselves but for him that made
them. Your study of Physics and other Sciences, is not worth a rush, if it be
not God by them that you seek after. To see and admire to reverence and adore,
to love and delight in God appearing to us in his works, and purposely to
peruse them for the knowledge of God, this is the true and only Philosophy, and
the contrary is mere foolery, and so called and called again by God himself.
This is the sanctification of your studies, when they are devoted to God, and
when he is the life of them all, and they all intend him as the end, and the
principal Object.

And therefore I shall presume to tell you by the way, that it is a grand
error, and of dangerous Consequence in the Christian Academies, (pardon the
Censure from one so unfit for it, seeing the necessity of the Case commands
it) that they study the Creature before the Redeemer, and set themselves to
Physics, and Metaphysics, and Mathematics, before they set themselves to
Theology: when as no man that has not the vitals of Theology is capable of
going beyond a fool in Philosophy; and all that such do is but doting about
questistions, and opposition of sciences falsely so called. 1 Timothy 6. 20. 21.
And as by affecting a separated Creature-knowledge Adam fell from God, so those
that mind these (...), they miss the end of all right studies; (...): while
they will needs prefer these, they miss that faith which they pretend to aim
at. Their pretense is, that Theology being the end, and the most perfect, must
be the last, and all the subservient sciences must go first: But, 1. There is
somewhat of Natural knowledge indeed prerequisite, and somewhat of art, before
a man can receive Theology; but that is no more then their mothers can teach
them before they go to school. 2. And its true that all right natural knowledge
does tend to the increase of Theological knowledge: but that which is a means
to its perfection, may be the effect or Consequent of its beginning: And 3. The
end must be first known, because it must be intended before the choice or use
of means: And 4 The Scripture reveals to us the things of God himself in the
most easy way, and therefore he must be first learned there: And 5. The book
of the Creatures is not to show us more of God then the Scripture does; but by
representing him to us in more sensible appearances, to make our knowledge of
him the more intense and operative, and being continually before our eyes, God
also would be continually before them, if we could aright discern him in them.
Its evident therefore that Theology must lay the ground, and lead the way of
all our studies, when we are once acquainted with so much of words and things
as is needful to our understanding the sense of its Principles. If God must be
searched after in our search of the Creature, and we must affect no separated
knowledge of them, then Tutors must read God to their Pupils in all; and
Divinity must be the beginning, the middle, the end, the life, the all of their
studies: And our Physics and Metaphysics must be reduced to Theology; and
nature must be read as one of Gods books, which is purposely written for the
revelation of himself. The holy Scripture is the easier book: when you have
first learnt God and his will there, in the necessary things, address your
selves cheerfully to the study of his works, that you may there see the
Creature it self as your Alphabet, and their Order as the Composure of
syllables, words and sentences, and God as the subject matter of all, and the
respect to him as the sense or signification; and then carry on both together,
and never more play the mere Scriveners, stick no more in your letters and
words, but read every Creature as a Christian or a Divine. If you see not your
selves and all things as living, and moving and having being in God, you see
nothing, what ever you think you see. If you perceive not in your perusals of
the Creatures, that God is all, and in all, and see not (...), (Rom 11. 36.)
you may think perhaps that you know something, but you know Nothing as you
ought to know (1 Cor. 8. 2.) But he that sees and loves God in the Creature,
the same is known and loved of him. (Verse. 3.) Think not so basely of the works
of God, and your physics, as that they are only preparatory studies for boys;
It is a most high and noble part of holiness to search after, behold, admire,
and love the great Creator in all his works: How much have the Saints of God
been employed in it! The beginning of Genesis, the books of Job and the Psalms
may acquaint us that our Physics are not so little kin to Theology as some
suppose. I do therefore in zeal to the good of the Church, and their own
success in their most necessary labors, propound it to the consideration of
all pious Tutors, whether they should not as timely, and as diligently read to
their Pupils (or cause them to read) the chiefest parts of Practical Divinity
(and there is no other) as any of the Sciences? and whether they should not go
together from the very first? It is well that they hear Sermons; but that is
not enough: If they have need of private help in Philosophy besides public
Lectures, much more in Theology? If Tutors would make it their principal
business to acquaint their Pupils with the doctrine of Life, and Labor to set
it home upon their hearts that all might be received according to its weight,
and read to their hearts as well as to their heads, and so carry on the rest of
their instructions, that it may appear they make them but subservient unto
this, and that their Pupils may feel what they drive at in all, and so that
they would teach all their Philosophy in habitu Theologico, this might be a
happy means to make happy souls, and a happy Church and Commonwealth. (The same
I mean also along of the Course of Schoolmasters to their scholars.) But when
Languages and Philosophy have almost all their time and diligence, and instead
of reading Philosophy like Divines, they read Divinity like Philosophers, as if
it were a thing of no more moment then, a lesson of Music, or Arithmetic, and
not the doctrine of Everlasting life; this is it that blasteth so many in the
bud, and pestereth the Church with unsanctified Teachers! Hence it is that we
have so many worldlings to preach of the invisible felicity, and so many carnal
men to declare the mysteries of the Spirit; and I would I might, not say, so
many Infidels to preach Christ, or so many Atheists to preach the living God:
And when they are taught Philosophy before or without Religion, what wonder if
their Philosophy be all or most of their Religion; and if they grow up into
admirations of their unprofitable fancies, and deifie their own deluded brains,
when they know no other God; and if they reduce all their Theology to their
Philosophy, like Campanella, White, and other self-admirers; or if they take
Christianity for a mere delusion, and fall with Hobbs to write Leviathans, or
with the L. Herbert to write such Treatises de veritate, as shall show the
world how little they esteem of verity; or at best, if they turn Paracelsian
Behmenists, and spin them a Religion from their own inventions! Again therefore
I address my self to all them that have the education of youth, especially in
order to preparation for the Ministry; You that are Schoolmasters and Tutors
begin and end with the things of God. Speak daily to the hearts of your
Scholars those things that must be wrought into their hearts, or else they are
undone. Let some piercing words fall frequently from your mouths, of God, and
the state of their souls, and the life to come; Do not say, They are too young
to understand and entertain them. You little know what impressions they may
make which you discern not; Not only the soul of that boy, but a Congregation,
or many souls therein may have cause to bless God for your zeal and diligence,
yea for one such seasonable word. You have a great advantage above others to do
them good; You have them before they are grown to the worst, and they will hear
you when they will not hear another. If they are destinated to the Ministry,
you are preparing them for the special service of God; and must they not first
have the knowledge of him whom they must serve! O think with your selves, what
a sad thing it will be to their own souls, and what a wrong to the Church of
God, if they come out from you with common and carnal hearts, to so holy, and
spiritual and great a work! Of an hundred Students that be in one of your
Colleges, how many may there be that are serious experienced godly men! some
talk of too small a number. If you should send one half of them on a work that
they are un it for, what bloody work will they make in the Church or Countries.
Whereas if you be the means of their through-sanctification, how many souls may
bless you, and what greater good can you do the Church? When once their hearts
are savingly affected with the Doctrine which they study and preach, they will
study it more heartily, and preach it heartily: their own experience will
direct them to the fittest subjects, and will furnish them with matter, and
quicken them to set it home; and I observe that the best of our hearers can
feel and favor such experimental preachers, and usually do less regard others,
what ever may be their accomplishments. See therefore that you make not work
for Sequestrators nor for the groans and lamentation of the Church, nor for the
great Tormenter of the murderers of souls.

SECT. VI.
2. MY second particular Exhortation is this: Content not your selves to have
the main work of grace, but be also very careful that your graces be kept in
life and action, and that you preach to your selves the Sermons that you stud^,
before you preach them to others. If you did this for your own sakes, it would
be no lost labor; but I am speaking to you upon the public account, and that
you would do it for the sake of the Church. When your minds are in a heavenly
holy frame, your people are like to partake of the fruits of it. Your prayers,
and praises, and doctrine will be heavenly and sweet to them! They will likely
feel when you have been much with God: That which is on your hearts most, is
like to be most in their ears: I confess I must speak it by lamentable
experience, that I publish to my Flock the distempers of my soul: when I let my
heart grow cold, my preaching is cold; and when it is confused, my preaching
will be so; and so I can observe too, often in the best of my hearers, that when
I have a while grown cold in preaching, they have cooled accordingly; and the
next Prayers that I have heard from them has been too like my preaching. We
are the Nurses of Christ's little ones. If we forbear our food, we shall famish
them; they will quickly find it in the want of Milk; and we may quickly see it
again on them, in the lean and dull discharge of their several duties: If we
let our Love go down; we are not so like to raise up theirs: If we abate our
holy care and fear, it will appear in our Doctrine: If the matter show it not,
the manner will. If we feed on unwholsom food, either errors, or fruitless
controversies, our hearers are like to fare the worse for it. Whereas if we
could abound in Faith, and Love, and Zeal, how would it overflow to the
refreshing of our Congregations, and how would it appear in the increase of the
same graces in others! O Brethren, watch therefore over your own hearts: keep
out lusts and passions, and worldly inclinations; Keep up the life of Faith and
Love; Be much at home: and be much with God. If it be not your daily serious
business to study your own hearts, and subdue corruptions, and live as upon
God, if you make it not your very work which you constantly attend, all will go
amiss, and you will starve your auditors; or if you have but an affected
servency, you cannot expect such a blessing to attend it; Be much, above all,
in secret prayer and meditation. There you must fetch the heavenly fire that
must kindle your sacrifices; Remember you cannot decline and neglect your duty,
to your own hurt alone; but many will be losers by it as well as you. For your
peoples sakes therefore look to your hearts. If a pang of spiritual Pride
should overtake you, and you should grow into any dangerous or schismatical
conceits, and vent your own over-valued inventions, to draw away Disciples
after you, what a wound might this prove to the Church that you are set over!
and you might become a plague to them instead of a blessing, and they might
wish they had never seen your faces. O therefore take heed of your own
Judgments and Affections. Error and vanity will slily insinuate, and seldom
come without fair pretenses; Great distempers and apostacies, have usually
small beginnings. The Prince of darkness does frequently personate the Angels
of light, to draw children of light again into his darkness. How easily also
will distempers creep in upon our affections, and our first love, and fear, and
care abate! Watch therefore for the sake of your selves and others.

And more particularly, me thinks a Minister should take some special pains
with his heart, before he is to go to the Congregation: if it be then cold, how
is he like to warm the hearts of the hearers! Go therefore then specially to
God for life: and read some rowsing waking book, or meditate on the weight of
the subject that you are to speak of, and on the great necessity of your
peoples souls, that you may go in the zeal of the Lord into his house.

SECT. VII.
3. MY next particular Exhortation is this, Star up your selves to the great
work of God, when you are upon it, and see that you do it with all your might.
Though I move you not to a constant lowdness (for that will make your fervency
contemptible) yet see that you have a constant seriousness; and when the matter
requires it (as it should do it, the application at least of every Doctrine)
then lift up your voice, and spare not your spirits, and speak to them as to
men that must be awakened, either here or in Hell. Look upon your Congregations
believingly and with compassion, and think in what a state of Joy or Torment
they must all be for ever; and then me thinks it should make you earnest, and
melt your heart in the sense of their condition. O speak not one cold or
careless word about so great a business as heaven or hell! What ever you do,
let the people see that you are in good sadness. Truly Brethren, they are great
works that are to be done, and you must not think that trifling will dispatch
them. You cannot break men's hearts by jesting with them, or telling them a
smooth tale, or patching up a gaudy oration. Men will not cast away their
dearest pleasures upon a drowsy request of one that seems not to mean as he
speaks, or to care much whether his request be granted. If you say, That the
work is Gods, and he may do it by the weakest means; I answer, Its true, he may
do so; But yet his ordinary way is to work by means; and to make not only the
matter that is preached, but also the manner of preaching to be instrumental to
the work: Or else it were a small matter whom he should employ that would but
speak the truth. If grace made as little use of the Ministerial persuasions as
some conceive, we need not so much mind a Reformation, nor cast out the
Insufficient.

A great matter also with the most of our hearers, does lie in the very
pronunciation and tone of speech; The best matter will scarce move them, if it
be not movingly delivered. Especially, see that there be no affectation, but
that we speak as familiarly to our people as we would do if we were talking to
any of them personally. The want of a familiar tone and expression, is as great
a defect in most of our deliveries, as any thing whatsoever, and that which we
should be very careful to amend. When a man has a Reading or Declaming tone,
like a Schoolboy saying his lesson or an Oration, few are moved with any thing
that he says. Let us therefore rowse up our selves to the work of the Lord,
and speak to our people as for their lives, and save them as by violence,
pulling them out of the fire: Satan will not be charmed out of his possession:
we must lay siege to the souls of sinners which are his garrisons, and find out
where his chief strength lies, and lay the battery of Gods Ordinance against
it, and ply it close till a breach be made; and then suffer them not by their
shifts to make it up again; but find out their common objections, and give them
a full and satisfactory answer. We have reasonable creatures to deal with; and
as they abuse their reason against the truth, so they will expect better reason
for it before they will obey. We must therefore see that our Sermons be all
convincing, and that we make the light of Scripture and Reason shine so bright
in the faces of the ungodly, that it may even force them to see unless they
wilfully shut their eyes. A Sermon full of mere words, how neatly soever it be
composed, while there is wanting the light of Evidence and the life of Zeal, is
but an image or a welldrest carcass; In preaching there is intended a communion
of souls, and a communication of somewhat from ours unto theirs. As we and they
have understandings, and wills, and affections, so must the bent of our
endeavors be to communicate the fullest Light of Evidence from our
understandings unto theirs, and to warm their hearts by kindling in them holy
affections, as by a communication from ours. The great things which we have to
commend to our hearers, have reason enough on their side, and lie plain before
them in the word of God; we should therefore be so furnished with all store of
Evidence, as to come as with a torrent upon their understandings, and bear down
all before us, and with our dilemma's and expostulations to bring them to a
nonplus, and pour out shame upon all their vain objections, that they may be
forced to yield to the power of truth, and see that it is great and will
prevail.

SECT. VIII.
4. MOreover, if you would prosper in your work; Be sure to keep up earnest
desires and expectations of success. If your hearts be not set on the end of
your labors; and you long not to see the conversion and edification of your
hearers, and do not study and preach in hope, you are not likely to see much
fruit of it. Its an ill sign of a false self-seeking heart, that can be content
to be still doing, and see no fruits of their labor; so I have observed that
God seldom blesses any man's work so much as his whose heart is set upon the
success; Let it be the property of a Judas to have more regard to the bag then
to his business, and not to care much for what they pretend to care; and to
think if they have their Tithes, and the love and commendations of the people,
that they have enough to satisfy them: but let all that preach for Christ and
men's salvation, be unsatisfied till they have the thing they preach for: He had
never the right end of a Preacher, that is indifferent whether he do obtain
them, and is not grieved when he misseth them, and rejoiced when he can see the
desired issue. When a man does only study what to say, and how with
commendation to spend the hour, and looks no more after it, unless it be to
know what people think of his own abilities, and thus holds on from year to
year, I must needs think that this man does preach for himself, and drive on a
private trade of his own, and does not preach for Christ even when he preaches
Christ, how excellently soever he may seem to do it. No wise or charitable
Physician is content to be still giving Physic, and see no amendment among his
Patients, but have them all to die upon his hands: nor will any wise and honest
Schoolmaster be content to be still teaching though his Scholars profit not;
but either of them would rather be weary of the employment. I know that a
faithful Minister may have comfort when he wants success and though Israel be
not gathered, our reward is with the Lord: and our acceptance is not according
to the fruit, but according to our labor; and as Greg. M. says, Et Aethiops
etsi balneum niger intrat, and niger egreditur, tamen balneat or nummos
accipit. If God set us to wash Blackamores, and cure those that will not be
cured; we shall not lose our labor, though we perform not the cure. But then
1. He that longs not for the success of his labors, can have none of this
comfort, because he was not a faithful labourer: This is only for them that I
speak of, that are set upon the end, and grieved if they miss it 2. And this is
not the full comfort that we must desire, but only such a part as may quiet us
though we miss the rest. What if God will accept a Physician though the Patient
dye? He must work in compassion, and long for a better issue, and be sorry if
he miss of it, for all that: For it is not only our own Reward that we labor
for, but other men's salvation. I confess for my part, I marvel at some ancient
Reverend men, that have lived 20. or 40. or 50 years with an unprofitable
people, where they have seen so little fruit of their labors, that it was
scarce discernable, how they can with so much patience there go on? Were it my
case, though I durst not leave the Vineyard, nor quit my calling, yet I should
suspect that it was Gods will, I should go some whether else, and another come
thither that might be fitter for them; and I should not be easily satisfied to
spend my days in such a sort.

SECT. IX.
5. Do well as well as say well: be zealous of good works. Spare not for any
cost, if it may promote your masters work.

1. Maintain your innocence, and walk without offense. Let your lives condemn
sin, and persuade men to duty. Would you have your people be more careful of
their souls, then you will be of yours? If you would have them redeem their
time, do not you misspend yours. If you would not have them vain in their
conference, see that you speak your selves the things which may edify, and
tend to minister grace to the hearers. Order your own families well if you
would have them do so by theirs. Be not Proud and Lordly if you would have them
to be lowly. There is no virtue wherein your example will do more, at least to
abate men's prejudice, then humility, and meekness, and self-denial. Forgive
injuries, and be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good: Do as our
Lord, who when he was reviled, reviled not again; If sinners be stubborn, and
stout, and contemptous, flesh and blood will persuade you to take up their
weapons, and to master them by their carnal means; but that's not the way,
(further then necessary self-preservation or public good requires it) but
overcome them with kindness, and patience, and gentleness. The former may show
that you have more worldly power then they (wherein yet they are ordinarily too
hard for the faithful); but its the later only that will tell them that you
overtop them in spiritual excellency, and in the true qualifications of a
Saint. If you believe that Christ was more imitable then Caesar or Alexander,
and that its more glory to be a Christian then to be a Conqueror, yea to be a
man then a beast, (who often exceed us in strength) contend then with charity,
and not with violence; and set Meekness, and Love, and Patience against force,
and not force against force: Remember you are obliged to be the servants of
all. Condescend to men of low estate; be not strange to the poor ones of your
Flock. They are apt to take your strangeness for contempt: Familiarity improved
to holy ends, is exceeding necessary, and may do abundance of good. Speak not
stoutly or disrespectively to any one: but be courteous to the meanest as your
equal in Christ. A kind and winning carriage is a cheap way of advantage to do
men good.

2. Remember what I said before of works of Bounty and Charity: Go to the poor,
and see what they want, and show at once your compassion to soul and body. Buy
them a Catechism and some small Books that are likest to do them good, and
bestow them on your neighbors, and make them promise you to read them, and
specially to spend that part of the Lords day therein, which they can spare
from greater duties. Stretch your purse to the utmost, and do all the good you
can. Think not of being rich, seek not great things for your selves or
posterity. What if you do impoverish your selves to do a greater good; will it
be loss or gain! If you believe that God is your safest purse-bearer, and that
to expend in his service is the greatest usury, and the most thriving trade,
show them that you do believe it. I know that flesh and blood will cavil before
it will loose its prey, and will never want somewhat to say against that duty
that is against its interest; But mark what I say, and the Lord set it home
upon your hearts; That man that has any thing in the world so dear to him that
he cannot spare it for Christ if he call for it, is no true Christian, And
because a carnal heart will not believe that Christ calls for it when he cannot
spare it, and therefore makes that his self deceiving shift, I say furthermore;
that That man that will not be persuaded that duty is duty, because he cannot
spare that for Christ which is therein to be expended, is no true Christian:
For a false heart corrupts the understanding, and that again increases the
delusions of the heart. Do not take it therefore as an undoing to make you
friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, and to lay up a treasure in heaven,
though you leave your selves but little on earth. Nemo tam pauper potest esse
quam natus est; Aves sine patrimonio vivunt, and in diem pecua pascuntur; and
haec nobis tamen nata sunt; quae omnia si non concupiscimus possidemus, inquit
Minutins Felix. p. (mihi) 397. You lose no great advantage for heaven by
becoming poor; Qui viam terit, eo faelicior quo levior incedit. Id.

I know where the heart is carnal and covetous, words will not wring their
money out of their hands; They can say all this, and more to others; but saying
is one thing, and believing is another. But with those that are true believers,
me thinks such considerations should prevail. O what abundance of good might
Ministers do if they would but live in a contempt of the world, and the riches
and glory of it, and expend all they have for the best of their Masters use,
and pinch their flesh that they might have wherewith to do good. This would
unlock more hearts to the reception of their Doctrine, then all their oratory
will do; and without this, singularity in religiousness will seem but
hypocrisy, and its likely that it is so. Qui innocentiam colit, Domino
supplicat. -- qui hominem periculo surripit, opimam victimam caedit; Haec
nostra sacrificia; haec Dei sacra sunt; sic apud nos Religiosior est ille qui
justior, inquit idem Minutius Felix. ib. Though we need not do as the Papists,
that will betake them to Monasteries, and cast away Propriety, yet we must have
nothing but what we have for God.

SECT. X.
6. THE next branch of my Exhortation is, that you would maintain your
Christian and brotherly Unity and Communion, and do as much of Gods work as you
can in unanimity and holy concord. Blessed be the Lord that it is so well with
us in this County in this regard as it is. We lose our Authority with our
people when we divide. They will yield to us when we go together, who would
resist and contemn the best of us alone.

Two things in order to this I beseech you to observe. The first is, that you
still maintain your meetings for communion: Incorporate, and hold all Christian
correspondency; Grow not strange to one another; Do not say, that you have
business of your own to do, when you should be at any such meeting or other
work for God. It is not only the mutual edification that we may receive by
Lectures, disputations or conferences (though that's not nothing) but it is
specially for consultations for the common good, and the maintaining of our
Communion, that we must thus assemble. Though your own person might be without
the benefit of such meetings, yet the Church and our common work requires
them. Do not then show your selves contemners or neglecters of such a necessary
work. Distance breeds strangeness, and somenteth dividing flames and
jealousies, which Communion will prevent or cure. It will be our enemies chiefest
plot to divide us that they may weaken us: conspire not with the enemies, and
take not their course. And indeed Ministers have need of one another, and must
improve the gifts of God in one another: and the self-sufficient are the most
deficient, and commonly proud and empty men. Some there be that come not among
their brethren to do or receive good, nor afford them any of their assistance
in consultations for the common good, and their excuse is only we love to live
privately. To whom I say, why do you not on the same grounds forbear going to
Christ, and say You love to live privately? Is not Ministerial Commnnion a
duty, as well as common-Christian Communion? and has not the Church always
thought so, and practiced accordingly? If you mean that you love your own ease
or commodity better then Gods service, say so and speak your minds. But I
suppose there are few of them so silly as to think that is any just excuse,
though they will give us no better. Somewhat else sure lies at the bottom.
Indeed some of them are empty men, and afraid their weakness should be known,
when as they cannot conceal it by their folitariness, and might do much to heal
it by Communion: some of them are careless or scandalous men: and for them we
have no desire of their Communion, not shall admit it, but upon public
Repentance and Reformation. Some of them are so in love with their parties and
opinions, that they will not hold communion with us because we are not of their
parties and opinions: whereas by Communication they might give or receive
better information, or at least carry on so much of Gods work in unity as we
are agreed in. But the mischief of schism is to make men censorious and proud,
and take others to be unmeet for their communion, and themselves to be the only
Church, (or pure Church) of Christ.

The Papists will have no Catholic Church but the Romans, and unchurch all
beside themselves. The Separatists and many Anabaptists say the like of their
parties: The new prelatical party will have no Catholic Church but Prelatical,
and unchurch all except their party, and so avoid Communion with others; and
thus turning Separatists and Schismatics, they imitate the Papists, and make
an opposition to schism their pretense. First, All must be accounted
schismatics that he not of their opinion and party (when yet we find not that
opinion in the Creed), and they must be avoided because they are Schismatics.
But were solve by the grace of God to adhere to more Catholic principles and
practices, and to have Communion with all Godly Christians that will have
Communion with us, so far as they force us not to actual sin. And for the
separating Brethren, as by distance they are like to therish misinformations of
us, so if by their wilful estrangedness, and distance, any among us do
entertain injurious reports of them, and think worse of them, and deal worse by
some of them, then there is cause, they may partly thank themselves.

Sure I am by such means as these we are many of us grown so hardened in sin,
that men make no great matter what they say one against another, but stand out
of hearing and sight, and vent their spleen against each other behind their
backs. How many jeers and scorns have they among their Companions for those
that are against their party! and they easily venture be'the matter never so
false. A bad report of such is easily taken to be true; and that which is true
is easily made worse: when as Seneca says, [Multos absolvemus, si coeperimus
ante judicare quam irasci: nunc autem primum impetum sequimur] It is passion
that tells the tale, and that receives it.

The second thing therefore that I entreat of you is, that you would be very
tender of the Unity and Peace of the Catholic Church; not only of your own
parties, but of the whole. And to this end these things will prove necessary.
1. Do not too easily introduce any Novelties into the Church either in faith or
practice: I mean not, that which seems a novelty to men that look no further
then yesterday; for so the restoring of Ancient things will seem novelty to
those that know not what was Anciently; and the expulsion of prevailing
novelties will seem a novelty to them that known not what is such indeed. So
the Papists censure us as Novelists for casting out many of their Innovations;
and our common people tell us we bring up new Customs if we do not kneel at the
receiving of the Lords Supper: (A notorious Novelty: Even in the sixth General
Council at Trull. in Constantinop. this was the ninth Canon: Ne Dominicis
diebus genua flectamus; a Divinis Patribus nostris Canonice accepimus: Quare
post vespertinum ingressum Sacerdotum in Sabbato ad Altar ut more observatum
est, nemo genu flectii usque ad sequentem vesperem post dominicam.) It is that
which is indeed Novelty that I dissuade you from, and not the demolishing of
Novelties. Some have already introduced such New Phrases, at least, even about
the great points of faith, lustification and the like, that there may be reason
to reduce them to the Primitive Patterns.

A great stir is made in the world about the test of a Christian and true
Church, with whom we may have Communion, and about that true Center and Cement
of the Unity of the Church, in and by which our Common calamitous breaches must
be healed. And indeed the true Cause of our Contrived divisions and misery is
for want of discerning the center of our unity, and the terms on which it must
be done: which is great pity, when it was once so easy a matter, till the
ancient test was thought insufficient! If any of the Ancient Creeds might
serve, we might be soon agreed. If Vinc^ntius Lirineus. test might serve, we
might yet make some good shift, viz. To believe (explicitly) all that quod
ubique quod semper quod ab omnibus creditum est For as he adds [hoc est
etenim vere proprieque Catholicum] But then we must come 1. That the first age
may not be excluded which gave the rule to the rest. 2. And that this extend
not to every Ceremony which never was taken for unalterable, but to matters of
faith; and that the acts and Canons of Councils, which were not about such
matters of faith, but mere variable order, and which newly constituted those
things, which the Apostolic Age knew not, and therefore were not properly
Credita, much less, semper, and ab omnibus, may have no hand in this work. I
say if either the ancient Western, or Eastern Creed, or this Catholic faith of
Vincentius might be taken as the test for explicit says, or else rather all
those Scripture texts, that express the Credenda with a note of necessity, and
the the whole Scripture moreover be confessed to be Gods word, and so believed
(in other points) at least implicitly; this Course might produce a more general
Communion and agreement; and more lines would meet in this Center then
otherwise are like to meet. And indeed till men can be again content to make
the Scripture the sufficient Rule, in Necessaries to be explicitly believed,
and in all the rest implicitly, we are never like to see a Catholic Christian
durable Peace. If we must needs make the Council of Trent, or the Papal
Judgment our test; or if we must make a blind bargain, with the Papists to
come as near them as ever we dare, and so to compass another Interim, and make
that a test (when God never made it so, and all Christians never be of a mind
in it, but some dare go nearer Rome, then others dare, and that in several
degrees) or if we must thrust in all the Canons of the former Councils about
matters of order, discipline and ceremonies into our test, or gather up all the
opinions of the Fathers for the three or four first ages, and make them our
test; None of all these will ever seem to do the business! and a Catholic
Union will never be founded in them. It is an easy matter infallibly to
foretell this. Much less can the writings of any single man, as Austin, Aquinas,
Luther, Calvin, Beza, etc. or yet the late Confessors of any Churches that add
to the ancient test, be ever capable of this use and honor.

I know it is said that a man may subscribe the Scripture, and the ancient
Creeds, and yet maintain Socinianism or other heresies: To which I answer, 1.
So he may another test which your own brains shall contrive; and while you make
a snare to catch heretics, instead of a test for the Churches Communion, you
will miss your end, and the heretic by the slipperyness of his conscience will
break through, and the tender Christian may possibly be ensnared. And by your
new Creed the Church is like to have new divisions, if you keep not close to
the words of Scripture. 2. In such cases when heretics contradict the
Scripture, which they have subscribed, this calls not for a new or more
sufficient test, but the Church must take notice of it, and call him to
account, and if he be impenitent exclude him their Communion. What I must we
have new Laws made every time the old ones are broken? as if the Law were not
sufficient because men break it? Or rather must not the penalty of the violated
Law be executed? It is a most sad case that such reasons as these should
prevail with so many learned godly men, to deny the sufficiency of Scripture as
a test for Church Communion, and to be still framing new ones that depart (at
least) from Scripture Phrase, as if this were necessary to obviate heresies?
Two things are necessary to obviate heresies, the Law and good execution; God
has made the former, and his Rule and Law is both for sense and phrase
(translated) sufficient: and all their additional inventions as to the foresaid
use are as spiders webs. Let us but do our part in the Due execution of the
Laws of Christ, by questioning offenders in orderly Synods, for the breaking of
these Laws, and let us avoid Communion with the impenitent; and what can the
Church do more? The rest belongs to the Magistrate (to restrain him from
seducing his subjects) and not to us.

Well! this is the thing that I would recommend therefore to all my Brethren as
the most necessary thing to the Churches peace, that you Unite in necessary
truths, and tolerate tolerable failings; and bear with one another in things
that may be born with; and do not make a larger Creed, and more necessaries
then God has done. And to that end, let no man's writings, nor the judgment of
any party though right, be taken as a test, or made that rule. And I, Lay not
too great a stress upon controverted opinions, which have godly men, and
specially whole Churches on both sides. 2. Lay not too great a stress on those
Controversies that are ultimately resolved into Philosophical uncertainties (as
some unprofitable controversies are about Free Will, and the manner of the
spirits operation of Grace, and the Divine Decrees and Pre-determination.) 3.
Lay not too great a stress on those controversies that are merely verbal, and
if they were anatomized would appear to be no more. Of which sort are far more,
(I speak it confidently upon certain knowledge) that now make a great noise in
the world, and tear the Church, then almost any of the eager contenders that
ever I spoke with do seem to discern, or are like to believe. 4. Lay not too
much on any point of faith which was disowned of, or unknown to the whole
Church of Christ in any age since the Scriptures were delivered us. 5. Much
less should you lay too much on those which any of the more pure or judicious
ages were wholly ignorant of. 6. And least of all, should you lay too much on
any point which no one age since the Apostles did ever receive, but all
commonly hold the contrary. For to make such an error which all the Church
held, to be such as is damning were to unchurch all the Church of Christ: and
to make it such, as must exclude them from our Communion. 1. Does make the
whole Church excommunicable, which is absurd. 2. And does show that i^ we had
lived in that age, you would it seems have separated from the whole Church. To
give an instance of the difference among errors. That any elect person shall
fall away totally and finally, is a palpable condemned error; of dangerous
consequence. But that there are some justified ones not elect that shall fall
away and perish, is an error of a lower nature, which may not break the
Communion of Christians: For otherwise we must renounce Communion with the
Catholic Church in Augustines days, and much more before (as is said before.)
What then? Shall I take this therefore for a truth which the Church then held?
some will think me immodest to say, No; as if I were wiser then all the Church,
and that in so learned an age if not for so many: But yet I must be so
immodest, as long as Scripture seems to me to warrant it! Why might not
Augustine, Prosper, and all the rest mistake in such a thing, as that? But then
I am not so immodest nor unchristian as to unchurch all the Church on that
account: Nor would I have separated from Austin, and all the Church, if I had
then lived; Nor will do now from any man on that account. Both sides will be
displeased with this resolution, one, that I suppose all the Church to err, and
our selves to be in the right; and the other, that I take it for no greater an
error: but what remedy! it will, it must be so; Read Prospers Respad Capit.
Gall. and you may quickly know both Austins mind and his.

He that shall live to that happy time, when God will heal his broken Churches,
shall see all this that I am now pleading for, reduced to practice, and this
moderation take place of the new dividing zeal, and Scripture-sufficiency take
place, and all men's Confessions and Comments to be valued only as subservient
helps, and not to be the test of Church Communion, any further then they are
exactly the same with Scripture. And till the healing Age come, we cannot
expect that healing truths be entertained, because there are not healing
spirits in the Leaders of the Church. But when the work is to be done, the
workmen will be fitted for it; and blessed will be the agents of so glorious a
work.

But because the Love of Unity and Verity, Peace and Purity must be conjunctly
manifested, we must avoid the extremes both in Doctrine and Communion. The
extremes in Doctrine are on one side, by Innovating Additions: on the other
side by envying or hindering the progress of the light. The former is the most
dangerous, of which men are guilty these ways.

1. By making new points of faith, or duty.

2. By making those points to be fundamental or necessary to salvation, that
are not so.

3. By pretending of Prophetical and other obscurer passages of the Scriptures
that they have a greater objective Evidence, and we a greater certainty of
their meaning, then indeed is so.

As I have met with some so confident of their right understanding of the
Revelation (which Calvin durst not expound, and professed he understood it not)
that they have framed part of their Confessions or Articles of faith out of it;
and grounded the weightyest actions of their lives upon their exposition; and
could confidently tell in our late changes and differences, which side was in
the right and which in the wrong, and all from the Revelation; and thence would
fetch such arguments as would carry all, if you would but grant the soundness
of their expositions; but if you put them to prove that, you marred all.

And these corruptions of sacred Doctrine by their Additions are of two sorts:
some that are the first Inventers: and others that are the propagators and
maintainers: and these when Additions grow old, do commonly maintain them under
the notion of ancient verities, and oppose the ancient verities under the
notion of Novelty, as is before said.

The other extreme about Doctrine is by hindering the progress of knowledge: and
this is commonly on pretense of avoiding the Innovating extreme. It must be
considered therefore, how far we may grow, and not be culpable Innovaters. And
1. Our Knowledge must increase extensively ad plura; we must know more
verities, then we knew before, though we may not feign more. There is much of
Scripture that will remain unknown to us when we have done our best. Though we
shall find out no more Articles of faith which must be explicitly believed by
all that will be saved, yet we may find out the sense of more particular Texts,
and several Doctrinal Truths, not contrary to the former, but such as befriend
them, and are connexed with them. And we may find out more the Order of Truths
and how they are placed in respect to one another, and so see more of the true
method of Theology then we did, which will give us a very great light into the
matter it self, and its consectaries.

2. Our knowledge also must grow sub^ectively, intensively and in the manner,
as well as in the matter of it. And this is our principal growth to be sought
after. To know the same great and necessary truths with a sounder and clearer
kn^wledge then we did: which is done,

1. By getting strong Evidence and Reasons in stead of the weak ones which we
trusted to before; (for many young ones receive Truths on some unsound grounds.)

2. By multiplying our Evidence and Reasons for the same truth.

3. By a clearer and deeper apprehension of the same Evidence and Reasons which
before we had but superficially received* For one that is strong in knowledge
sees the same truth, as in the clear light, which the weak do see, but as in
the twi light. To all this must be added also the fuller Improvement of the
Truth received to its ends.

I shall give you the sum of my meaning in the words of that great enemy of
Innovation, Vincent. Lirinens. c. 28. Sed for sitan dicit aliquis: Nullusneergo
in Ecclesia Christi profectus haeb^bitur? Religionis Habeatur plane, and
maximus: Nam quis ille est tam invidus hominibus, tam exosus Deo, qui isiud
probibere conetur? sed it a tamen ut vere profect^^ sit ille fidei, non
permutatio. Siquidem ad perfectum pertinet, ut in semet ipsa unaquaeque res
amplificetur: ad permutationem vero ut aliquid ex alio in aliud transvertatur.
Crescat igitur oportet, and multum, vehementerque proficiat, tam si^gulorum
quam omnium; tam unius hominis quam totius Ecclesiae aetatum ac seculorum
gradib^s intelligentia, scientia; sapientiae; sed in quo duntoxat gene^e, in
eodem scilicet dogmate, eodem sensu, e^demque sententia.

And more plainly, and yet more briefly, Cap. 30. Ius est etenim, ut prisca
illa caelestis Philosophiae dogmata processu temporis excurentur, limentur,
poliantur; sed nefas est, ut commutentur. Accipiant licet Evidentiam, Lu^em,
Distinctionem; sed retineant necesse est plenitudinem, integritatem,
proprietatem. Let this mean then be observed if we would perform both Truth and
Peace.

2. About Church Communion the common extremes are; on one side, the neglect or
relaxation of Discipline, to the corrupting of the Church, the encouragement of
wickedness, and confounding the Kingdom of Christ and Satan: And on the other
side, the unnecessary separation of Proud men, either because the Churches own
not their own opinions, or because they are not so reformed and strict in
Discipline as they would have them or as they should be. I have ever observed
the humblest men very tender of making separations: and the proudest most prone
to it. Many corruptions may be in a Church, and yet it may be a great sin to
separate from it, so that we be not put upon an owning of their corruptions,
nor upon any actual sin. ^here is a strange inclination in proud men to make
the Church of Christ much narrower then it is, and to reduce it to almost
nothing, and to be themselves the members of some singular society, as if they
were loath to have too much company in heaven. And by a strange delusion through
the workings of a proud fancy, they are fuller of joy in their separted
societies, then they were, while they kept in the union of the Church. At least
such power of Ordinances, and presence of the spirit, purity and peace, is
promised to the weak by the Leaders that would seduce them, as if the
Holy Ghost were more eminently among them then any where else in the world.
This has ever been the boasting of Heretics. As the foresaid Vincentius
says, cap. 37. Jam vero illis quae sequuntur permissionibus miro modo incautos
homines haeretici decipere consueverunt. Audent etenim polliceri and docere,
quod in Ecclesia sua, id est, in Communionis suae Conventiculo, magna and
specialis ac plane personalis quaedam sit Dei gratia, adeo ut sine ullo labor,
sine ullo studio, sine ulla industria, etiamsi nec quaerant, nec petant, nec
pulsent, quicunque illi ad numerum suum pertinent, tamen ita divinitus
dispensentur, etc. But their consolations and high enjoyments being the effect
of self-conceitedness and fancies are usually so mutable and of short
continuance, that either the heat of oppositions, or mutation to other sects
must maintain their life, or else they will grow stale and soon decay.

Having said thus much of the means, I return to the end of this Exhortation
beseeching all the Ministers of Christ to compassionate the poor divided
Church, and to entertain such Catholic principles, and charitable
dispositions, as tend to their own and the common peace. Has any thing in the
world done more to lose our authority, and disable us for Gods service then our
differences and divisions? If Ministers could but be all of a mind, or at least
concur in the substance of the work, so that the people that hear one, might
as it were hear all, and not have any of us to head a party for the
discontented to fall into or to object against the rest, we might then do
wonders for the Church of Christ. But if our tongues and hearts be divided,
what wonder if our work be spoiled, and prove liker a Babel then a Temple of
God. Get together then speedily, and consult for peace, and cherish not
heart-burnings, and continue not uncharitable distances and strangeness. If
dividing has weakened you, closing must recover your authority and strength.
If you have any dislike of your Brethren or their ways, manifest it by a free
debate to their faces, but do not unnecessarily withdraw from them. If you will
but keep together, you may come to better understanding of each other, or at
least may chide your selves. Friends, specially quarrel not upon points of
precedence or reputation, or any interest of your own. No man will have settled
peace in his mind, nor be peaceable in his place, that proudly envyeth the
precedence, of others, and secretly grudgeth at them that seem to cloud their
parts and name. One or other will ever be an eyesore to such men. There is too
much of the Devils image on this sin, for an humble servant of Christ to
entertain. Moreover, be not too sensible of injuries: and make not a great
matter of every offensive word or deed. At least do not let it interrupt your
Communion and Concord in Gods work: For that were to wrong Christ and his
Church, because another has wronged you. And if you be of this impatient
humor, you will never be quiet: For we are all faulty, and cannot live together
without wronging one another. Ubique causae supersunt nisi deprecator animus
accessit, says Seneca. And these proud over-tender men are often hurt by their
own conceits: Like a man that has a sore that he thinks does smart more when
he conceits that some one hits it. They will think a man jeareth them, or
contemns them, or means them ill, when it never came into his thoughts!
Till this self be taken down, we shall every man have a private interest and of
his own, which will lead us all into several ways, and spoil the peace and
welfare of the Church: while every man is for himself and his own Reputation,
and all mind their own things, no wonder if they mind not the things of Christ.

And as for those opinions which hinder our union (alas the great dividers of
this age) me thinks if I cannot change their minds, I might yet rationally
expect of every Party among us that profefs themselves Christians, that they
should value the whole before a part; and therefore not so perversely seek to
promote their party, as may hinder the common good of the Church, or so to
propagate their supposed Truths, as to hinder the work of the main body of
divine Truths. And me thinks a little humility should make men ashamed of that
common conceit of unquiet spirits; viz. That the welfare of the Church does so
lie upon their opinions, that they must needs vent and propagate them whatever
come of it. If they are indeed a living part of the body, the hurt of the whole
will be so much their own, that they cannot desire it for the sake of any
party, or opinion. Were men but impartial to consider in every such case of
difference, how far their promoting their own judgment may help or hurt the
whole, they might escape many dangerous ways that are now trod. If you can see
no where else, look in the face of the Churches enemies, how they rejoice and
deride us. And as Seneca says to demulce the angry, Vide ne inimici^ iracundia
tua voluptati sit. When we have all done, I know not what party of us will
prove a gayner: so true are the old proverbs, Dissensio ducum hostium succum.
And Gaudent praedones, dum discordant regiones. And is it not a wonder that
godly Ministers that know all this how the common adversary derideth us all and
what a scandal our divisions are through the world, and how much the Church
does lose by it, should yet go on, and after all the loudest calls and
invitations to peace, go on still, and few, if any sound a retreat? and
seriously call to their Brethren for a retreat: Can an honest heart be
insensisile of the sad distractions and sadder Apostacies that our divisions
have occasioned? Saep^rixam conclamatum in vicino incendium solvit, says
Seneca. What scolds so furious that will not give over, when the house is on
fire over their heads? Well; if the Lord has given that evil spirit whose name
is Legion, such power over the hearts of any, that yet they will sit still, yea
and quarrel at the pacificatory endeavors of others who hunger after the
healing of the Church, and rather carp, and reproach, and hinder such works
then to help them on, I shall say but this to them: How diligently soever such
men may preach, and how pious soever they may seem to be, if this way tend to
their everlasting peace, and if they be not preparing sorrow for themselves,
then I am a stranger to the way of peace.

SECT. XI.
7. THE next branch of my Exhortation is, that You would no longer neglect the
execution of so much Discipline in your Congregations, as it of confessed
necessity and right. I desire not to sour on any one to an unseasonable
performance of the greatest duty. But will it never be a fit season? Would you
forbear Sermons and Sacraments so many years on pretense of unseasonableness?
Will you have better season for it, when you are dead? How many are dead
already before they ever did any thing in this work that were long preparing
for it? It is now near three years since many of us here did engage our selves
to this duty: And have we been faithful in performance of that engagement? I
know some have more discouragements and hindrances then others: But what
discouragements can excuse us from such a duty? Besides the Reasons that we
then considered of, let these few be further laid to heart.

1. How sad a sign do we make it to be in our preaching to our people, to live
in the willful continued omission of any known duty? And shall we do so even
year after year and all our days. If excuses will take off the danger of this
sign, what man will not find them as well as you? Read Amesius medul. cap. 37.
de Discipline. Eccles. and Gelespi's, Aarons rod, with Rutherford and many more
that are written to prove the Need and Dueness of Discipline, says Ames. ib.
sect. 5. Immo peccat in Christum authorem ac institutorem quisquis non facit
quod in se est, ad hanc Disciplinam in Ecclesiis Dei constituendam and
promovendam. And do you think it safe to live and dye in such a known sin?

2. You gratify the present designs of dividers, whose business is to unchurch
us and unchristen us: to prove our Parishes no true Churches (and our selves no
baptized Christians.) For if you take them for people incapable of Discipline,
they must be incapable of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper and other
Church Communion; and then they are no Church. And so you will plainly seem to
preach merely as they do, to gather Churches where there were none before. And
indeed if that be your case that your people are not Christians, and you have
no particular Churches, and so are no Pastors, tell us so and manifest it, and
we shall not blame you.

3. We do manifest plain laziness and sloth, if not unfaithfulness in the work
of Christ. I speak from experience; It was laziness that kept me off so long,
and pleaded hard against this duty. It is indeed a troublesome and painful work,
and such as calls for some self-denial, because it will cast us upon the
displeasure of the wicked. But dare we prefer our carnal ease, and quietness,
and the love or peace of wicked men, before our service to Christ our Master?
Can sloathful servants look for a good reward? Remember Brethren, that we of
this County have thus Promised before God in the second Article of our
Agreement, We agree and resolve by Gods help, that so far as God does make
known our duty to us, we will faithfully endeavor to discharge it, and will
not, desist through any fears or losses in our estates, or the frowns and
displeasure of men, or any the like carnal inducements whatsoever. I pray you
study this promise, and compare your performance with it. And do not think that
you were ensnared by thus engaging; for Gods Law has laid an obligation on you
to all the same duty, before your engagement did it. Here is nothing but what
others are bound to, as well as you.

4. The Ministry that are for the Presbyterian Government have already by
their common neglect of the execution, made those of the separating way
believe, that they do it in a mere carnal compliance with the unruly part of
the people, that while we exasperate them not with our Discipline, we might
have them on our side. And we should do nothing needless, that has so great an
appearance of evil and is so scandalous to others. It was the sin and ruin of
many of the Clergy of the last times, to please and comply with them that they
should have reproved and corrected; by unfaithfulness in preaching, and neglect
of Discipline.

5. The neglect of Discipline has a strong tendency to the deluding of souls;
by making them think they are Christians that are not: while they are permitted
to live in the reputation of such, and be not separated from the rest by Gods
Ordinance: and it may make the scandalous to think their sin a tolerable thing
which is so tolerated by the Pastors of the Church.

6. We do corrupt Christianity if self in the eyes of the world; and do our
part to make them believe, that to be a Christian is but to be of such an
Opinion, and to have that faith which James says the Devils had, and to be
solifidians; and that Christ is no more for Holiness, then Satan, or that the
Christian Religion exacteth Holiness no more, then the false Religions of the
world: For if the Holy and unholy are all permitted to be sherp of the same
fold, without the use of Christ's means to difference them, we do our part to
defame Christ by it, as if he were guilty of it, and as if this were the strain
of his prescripts

7. We do keep up separation, by permitting the worst to be uncensured in our
Churches, so that many honest Christians think they are necessitated to
withdraw. I must profess that I have spoke with some members of the separated
(or gathered) Churches, that were moderate men, and have argued with them
against their way; and they have assured me, That they were of the Presbyterian
judgment, or bad nothing to say against it, but they joined themselves with
other Churches upon mere necessity, thinking that Discipline being an Ordinance
of Christ, must be used by all that can, and therefore they durst no longer
live without it when they may have it; and they could find no Presbyterian
Churches that executed Discipline, as they wrote for it; and they told me, that
they did thus separate only protempore, till the Presbyterians will use
Discipline, and then they would willingly return to them again. I confess I was
sorry that such persons had any such occasion to withdraw, and the least ground
for such a reason of their doings. It is not keeping them from the Sacrament
that will excuse us from the further exercise of Discipline, while they are
Members of our Churches.

8. We do too much to bring the wrath of God upon our selves and our
Congregations, and so to blast the fruit of our labors. If the Angel of the
Church of Thyatira was reproved for suffering Seducers in the Church, we may be
reproved on the same ground for suffering open, scandalous, impenitent ones.
Rev. 2 20.

9. We seem to justify the Prelates who took the same course in neglecting
Discipline, (though in other things we differ.)

10. We have abundance of aggravations and witnesses to rise up against us,
which though I will purposely now over-pass, lest I seem to press too hard in
this point, I shall desire you to apply them hither, when you meet with them
anon under the next branch of the Exhortation.

I know that Discipline is not essential to a Church; but what of that? Is it
not therefore a duty; and necessary to its well-being; Yea more, The power of
Discipline is essential to a particular Political Church: And what is the Power
for, but for the work and use? As there is no Commonwealth that has not
partem imperantem, as well as partem subditam, so no such Church that has not
partem regentem, in one Pastor or more.

SECT. XII.
8. THE last particular branch of my Exhortation is, that You will now
faithfully discharge the great duty which you have undertaken, and which is the
occasion of our meeting here to day, in personal Catechizing and Instructing
every one in your Parishes that will submit thereto. What our undertaking is
you know, you have considered it, and it is now published to the world. But
what the performance will be I know not: but I have many reasons to hope well
of the most, though some will always be readyer to say, then to do. And
because this is the chief business of the day, I must take leave to insist
somewhat the longer on it. And 1. I shall give you some further Motives to
persuade you to faithfulness in the undertaken work; Presupposing the former
general Motives, which should move us to this as well as to any other part of
our duty. 2. I shall give to the younger of my Brethren, a few words of Advice
for the manner of the performance.

CHAP. VI.
SECT. I.
1. THE first reasons by which I shall persuade you to this duty are taken from
the benefits of it. The second sort are taken from the difficulty. And the
third from the Necessity, and the many obligations that are upon us for the
performance of it. And to these three heads I shall reduce them all.

1. And for the first of these; when I look before me, and consider what
through the blessing of God, this work well managed is like to produce, it
makes my heart to leap for joy. Truly Brethren, you have begun a most blessed
work: and such as your own consciences may rejoice in, and your Parishes
rejoice in, and the Nation rejoice in, and the child that is yet unborn; yea
thousands and millions for ought we know may have cause to bless God for, when
we have finished our course. And though it be our business here to humble our
selves for the neglect of it so long, as we have very great cause to do, yet
the hopes of a blessed success are so great in me, that they are ready to turn
it into a day of Rejoicing I bless the Lord that I have lived to see such a day
as this, and to be present at so solemn an engagement of so many servants of
Christ to such a work. I bless the Lord, that has honored you of this County
to be the beginners and awakeners of the Nation hereunto. Is it not a
controverted business, where the exasperated minds of divided men might pick
quarrels with us, or malice it self be able to invent a rational reproach: Nor
is it a new invention, where envy might charge, you as innovators, or proud
boasters of any new discoveries of your own; or scorn to follow in it, because
you have led the way. No; it is a well known duty: It is but the more diligent
and effectual management of the Ministerial work, and the teaching of our
Principles, and the feeding of babes with milk. You lead indeed, but not in
invention of novelty, but the restoration of the ancient Ministerial work, and
the self-denying attempt of a duty that few, or none can contradict. Unless men
do envy you, your labors and sufferings, or unless they envy the saving of
men's souls, I know not what they can envy you for, in this. The age is so
quarrel^om, that where there is any matter to fasten on, we can scarce explain
a truth or perform a duty, but one or other, if not many, will have a stone to
cast at us, and will speak evil of the things which they do not understand, or
which their hearts and interests are against. But here I think we have silenced
malice it self: and I hope we may do this part of Gods work quietly, (as to
them); If they cannot endure to be told what they know not, or contradicted in
what they think, or disgraced by discoveries of what they have said amiss, I
hope they will give us leave to do that which no man can contradict, and to
practice that which all are agreed in; I hope we may have their good leave, or
silent patience at least, to deny the ease and pleasure of our flesh, and to
set our selves in good earnest to help men to heaven, and to propagate the
knowledge of Christ with our people. And I take it for a sign of a great and
necessary work, which has such universal approbation; the commonly
acknowledged truths and duties being, for the most part, of greatest necessity
and moment. A more noble work it is to practice faithfully the truths and
duties that all men will confess, then to make new ones, or discover somewhat
more then others have discovered. I know not why we should be ambitious of
finding out new ways to heaven: To make plain, and to walk in the old way, is
our work, and our greatest honor.

And because the work in hand is so pregnant of great advantages to the Church,
I will come down to the particular benefits which we may hope for, that when
you see the excellency of it, you may be the more set upon it, and the lother
by any negligence or failing to destroy or frustrate it. For certainly he that
has the true intentions of a Minister, will rejoice in the appearances of any
further Hopes of the attaining of his ends, and nothing can be more welcome to
him, then that which will further the very business of his life; And that our
present work is such, I shall show you more particularly.

I. AND first; It will be the most hopeful advantage for the conversion of many
souls, that we can expect. For it has a concurrence of those great things
which must further such a work.

1. For the matter of it, it is about the most needful things: the Principles
or Essentials of the Christian faith.

2. For the manner of exercise, It will be by private conference, where we may
have opportunity to set all home to the heart.

3. The common concord of Ministers will do much to bow their hearts to a
consent. Were it but a meeting to resolv some controverted questions it would
not have so direct a tendency to conversion Were it but occasional, we could
not handsomely fall on them so closely: but when we make it the appointed
business, it will be expected, and not so strangely taken. And if most
Ministers had singly set upon this work, perhaps but few of the people would
have submitted, and then you might have lost your chiefest opportunities, and
those that had most needed your help, would have had least of it. Whereas now
we may hope that when it is a general thing, few will refuse it; and when they
see that other neighbors do it, they will be ashamed to be so singular or
openly ungodly as to deny.

The work of conversion consists of two parts.

1. The well informing of the judgment in the necessary points. 2. The change
of the will, by the efficacy of this truth. Now in this work; we have the most
excellent advantage for both. For the informing of their understandings, it
must needs be an excellent help to have the sum of all Christianity still in
memory. And though bare words not understood, will make no change, yet when the
words are plain English, he that has the words is far liker to know the
meaning and matter, then another; For what have we to make known things by,
that themselves are invisible, but words and other subservient signs? Those
therefore that will deride all Catechisms and Professions, as unprofitable
forms, may better deride themselves for talking and using the form of their own
words to make known their minds to others: And they may deride all Gods word on
the same account, which is a standing Form for the guiding of preachers, and
teaching all others the doctrine of eternal life. Why may not written words
that are still before their eyes and in their memories; instruct them, as well
as the transient words of a Preacher? These Forms therefore of wholesome words
are so far from being unprofitable (as some fantastical persons do imagine)
that they are of admirable use to all.

And then, we shall have the opportunity by personal conference to try them how
far they understand it, and how far not? and so to explain it to them as we go:
and to chose out and insist on those particulars which the persons that we
speak to have most need to hear. So that these two conjunct: A form of words,
with a plain Explication, may do more, then either of them could do alone.

Moreover, we have the best opportunity to imprint the same Truths upon their
hearts; When we can speak to each ones particular necessity, and say to the
sinner, Thou art the man; and plainly mention his particular case, and set home
the truth with familiar importunity; if any thing in the world is likely to do
them good, it is this. They will understand a familiar speech, that hear a
Sermon, as if it were nonsense: And they have far greater help for the
Application of it to themselves. And withal you shall hear their Objections,
and know where it is, that Satan has most advantage on them, and what it is
that stands up against the truth, and so may be able to show them their errors,
and confute their objections, and more effectually to convince them: we can
better drive them to a stand, and urge them to discover their resolutions for
the future, and to promise the use of means and reformation, then otherwise we
could do. What need we more for this, then our experience? I seldom deal with
men purposely on this great business, in private serious conference, but they
go away with some seeming convictions, and promises of new obedience, if not
some deeper remorse, and sense of their condition. And I hope your own
experiences are the same.

O Brethren, what a blow may we give the Kingdom of darkness by the faithful
and skilful managing of this work! If then the saving of souls, of your
neighbors souls, of many souls, from everlasting misery, be worth your labor,
Up and be doing! If the increase of the true Church of Christ be desirable,
this work is Excellent, which is so likely to promote it. If you would be the
Fathers of many that shall be new born to God, and would see the travail of
your souls with comfort, and would be able to say at last, Here am I, and the
children that thou have given me; Up then and ply this blessed work. If it will
do you good to see your holy converts among the Saints in glory, and praising
the Lamb before his Throne; if you will be glad to present them blameless and
spotless to Christ; be glad then of this singular opportunity that is offered
you. If you are Ministers of Christ indeed, you will long for the perfecting of
his body, and the gathering in of his Elect, and your hearts will be set upon
it, and you will travail as in birth of them till Christ be formed in them. And
then you will take such opportunities as your harvest-time, and as the un-shine
days in a rainy harvest, in which it is unreasonable and unexcusable to be
idle. If you have any spark of Christian compassion in you, it will sure seem
worth your utmost labor to save so many souls from death, and to recover so
great a multitude of sins. If you are indeed coworkers with Christ, set then to
his work, and neglect not the souls, for whom he dyed. O remember when you are
talking with the unconverted, that now there is an opportunity in your hands to
save a soul, and to rejoice the Angels of heaven, and to rejoice Christ
himself, and that your work is to cast Satan out of a sinner, and to increase
the family of God. And what is your own Hope, or Joy, or Crown of rejoicing? Is
it not your saved people in the presence of Christ Jesus at his coming? Yea
doubtless, they are your glory and your joy, 1 These. 2. 19, 20.

2. THE second happy Benefit of our work if well managed, will be, The most
orderly building up of those that are converted, and the stablishing them in
the faith.

It hazardeth the whole work, or at least much hinders it, when we do it not
in the order that it must be done. How can you build if you first lay not a
good foundation? or how can you set on the top-stone while the middle parts are
neglected? Gratia non facit saltum, any more than nature. The second order of
Christian Truths have such dependence upon the first, that they can never be
well learned, till the first are learned. This makes so many deluded novices,
that are pust up with the vain conceits of knowledge while they are grossly
ignorant, and itch to be preaching before they well know what it is to be
Christians; because they took not the work before them, but learnt some lesser
matters which they heard most talk of, before they learnt the vital Principles.
And this makes many labor so much in vain, and are still learning, but never
come to the knowledge of the Truth, because they would learn to read before
they learn to spell, or to know their letters; And this makes so many fall
away, and shaken with every wind of temptation, because they were not well
settled in the fundamentals. It is these Fundamentals that must lead men to
further truths: It is these they must bottom and build all upon. It is these
that they must live upon, and that must actuate all their graces, and animate
all their duties; It is these that must fortify them against particular
temptations; and he that knows these well, does know so much as will make him
happy; and he that knows not these, knows nothing; and he that knows these
best, is the best and most understanding Christian. The most godly people
therefore in your Congregations will find it worth their labor to learn the
very words of a Catechism. And if you would safely edify them and firmly
stablish them, be diligent in this work.

3. A Third Benefit that may be expected by the well-managing of this work, is
this, It will make our public preaching to be better understood and regarded.
When you have acquainted them with the Principles, they will the better
understand all that you say. They will perceive what you drive at, when they
are once acquainted with the main. This prepares their minds, and opens you
a way to their hearts: when without this you may lose the most of your labor:
and the more pains you take, in accurate preparations, the less good you do. As
you would not therefore lose your public labor, see that you be faithful in
this private work.

4. AND this is not a contemptible Benefit, that by this course you will come
to be familiar with your people, when you have had the opportunity of familiar
conference. And the want of this with us, that have very numerous Parishes, is
a great impediment to the success of our labors. By distance and
unacquaintedness, slanderers and deceivers have opportunity to possess them
with false conceits of you, which prejudice their minds against your doctrine:
and by this distance and strangeness abundance of mistakes between Ministers
and people are fomented. Besides that, familiarity it self does tend to beget
those affections, which may open their ears to further teaching. And when we
are familiar with them, they will be more encouraged to open their doubts and
seek resolution, and deal freely with us. But when a minister knows not his
people, or is as strange to them as if he did not know them, it must be a great
hindrance to his doing them any good.

5. BEsides, by the means of these private Instructions, we shall come to be
the better acquainted with each persons spiritual state, and so the better know
how to watch over them, and carry our selves toward them ever after. We may
know the better how to preach to them when we know their temper, and their
chief objections, and so what they have most need to hear. We shall the better
know wherein to be jealous of them with a pious jealousy, and what temptations
to help them most against. We shall the better know how to lament for them and
to rejoice with them, and to pray for them to God. For as he that will pray
rightly for himself, will know his own sores and wants, and the diseases of his
own heart; so he that will pray rightly for others, should know theirs as far
as he may, and as is meet. If a man have the charge but of sheep or cattle, he
cannot so well discharge his trust if he know them not, and their state and
qualities. So is it with the Master that will well teach his Scholars, and
Parents that will rightly educate their children: And so with us.

6. AND then this trial of, and acquaintance with our peoples state, will
better satisfy us in the administration of the Sacraments. We may the better
understand how far they are fit or unfit. Though this give them not the state
or relation of a Member of that Church whereof we are Overseers; yet because
the Members of the Church Universal, though they are of no particular Church,
may in some cases have a right to the Ordinances of Christ in those particular
Churches where they come, and in some cases they have no right, we may by this
means be the better informed how to deal with them, though they be no members
of that particular Church. And whereas many will question a Minister that
examineth his people in order to the Lords Supper, by what authority he does
it, the same work will be done this way, in a course beyond exception. Though I
doubt not but a Minister may require his Flock to come to him at any convenient
season, to give an account of their faith and proficiency, and to receive
instruction, and therefore he may do it in preparation to the Sacrament; yet
because Ministers have laid the stress of that examination upon the mere
necessity of fitness for that Ordinance, and not upon their common duty to see
the state and proficiency of each member of their Flock at all fit seasons, and
upon the peoples duty to submit to the guidance and instruction of the Pastors
at all times, they have therefore occasioned people ignorantly to quarrel
against their examinations, and call for the proof. Whereas it is an easy
thing to prove that any Scholar in Christ's School is bound at any time to be
accountable to his Teachers, and to obey them in all lawful things in order to
their own edification and salvation; though it may be more difficult to prove a
necessity that a Minister must so examine them in order to the Lords Supper,
any more then in order to a day of Thanksgiving or a Lords day, or the
Baptizing of their children.

Now by this course, we shall discern their fitness in an unquestionable way.

7. ANother Benefit will be this, We shall by this means be the better enabled
to help our people against their particular temptations, and we shall much
better prevent their entertainment of any particular errors or heresies; or
their falling into Schism to the hazard of themselves and the Church. For men
will freelyer open their thoughts and scruples to us, and if they are infected
already or inclined to any error or schism, they will be ready to discover it,
and so may receive satisfaction before they are past cure. And familiarity with
their Teachers, will the more encourage them to open their doubts to them at
any other time. The common cause of our peoples infections and heresies is the
familiarity of Seducers with them, and the strangeness of their own Pastors.
When they hear us only in public, and hear Seducers frequently in private
unsaying all that we say, and we never know it, or help them against it, this
fettleth them in heresies before we are aware of it. Alas our people are most
of them so weak, that whoever has 1. Most interest in their estimations and
affections: and 2. Most opportunity in private frequent conferences to instill
his opinions into them, of that man's religion will they ordinarily be. It is
pity then that we should let deceivers take such opportunities to undo them,
and we should not be as industrious, and use our advantages to their good. We
have much advantage against Seducers in many respects, if our negligence and
their diligence did not frustrate them.

8. ANother, and one of the greatest Benefits of our work will be this, It will
better inform men of the true nature of the Ministerial office, or awaken them
to better consideration of it, then is now usual. It is now too common for men
to think that the work of the Ministry is nothing but to preach well, and to
Baptize and administer the Lords Supper, and visit the sick: and by this means
the people will submit to no more, and too many Ministers are negligently or
wilfully such strangers to their own calling, that they will do no more. It
has often grieved my heart to observe some eminent able Preachers, how little
they do for the saving of souls, save only in the Pulpit; and to how little
purpose much of their labor is, by this neglect. They have hundreds of people
that they never spoke a word to personally for their salvation, and if we may
judge by their practice, they take it not for their duty: and the principal
thing that hardens men in this oversight, is the common neglect of the
private part of the work by others. There are so few that do much in it; and
the omission is grown so common among pious able men, that they have abated the
disgrace of it by their parts, and a man may now be guilty of it, without any
common observance or dishonor. Never does sin so reign in a Church or State,
as when it has gained reputation, or at least is no disgrace to the sinner,
nor a matter of any offense to beholders. But I make no doubt through the mercy
of God, but the restored practice of personal oversight will convince many
Ministers, that this is as truly their work as that which they now do: and may
awaken them to see that the Ministry is another kind of business, then too
many excellent Preachers do take it to be. Brethren, do but set your selves
closely to this work, and follow on diligently, and though you do it silently,
without any words to them that are negligent, I am in hope that most of you
here may live to see the day, that the neglect of private personal Oversight of
all the Flock shall be taken for a scandalous and adious omission, and shall be
as disgraceful to them that are guilty of it, as preaching but once a day was
heretofore. A School master must not only read a common Lecture, but take a
personal account of his Scholars, or else he is like to do little good. If
Physicians should only read a public Lecture of Physic, their patients would
not be much the better for them: Nor would a Lawyer secure your estate by
reading a Lecture of Law. The charge of a Pastor requires personal dealing as
well as any of these. Let us show the world this by our practice; for most men
are grown regardless of bare words.

The truth is, we have been occasioned exceedingly to wrong the Church in this,
by the contrary extreme of the Papists, who bring all their people to Auricular
confession: For in the overthrowing of this error of theirs, we have run into
the contrary extreme, and led our people much further into it then we are gone
our selves. It troubled me to read in an Orthodox Historian, that
licentiousness, and a desire to be from under the strict enquiries of the
Priests in Confession, did much further the entertainment of the Reformed
Religion in Germany. And yet its like enough to be true, that they that were
against Reformation in other respects, yet partly for the change, and partly on
that licentious account, might join with better men in crying down the Romish
Clergy. But by this means, lest we should seem to favor the said Auricular
Confession, we have too commonly neglected all personal instruction; except
when we occasionally fall into men's company, few make it a stated part of their
work: I am past doubt that the Popish Auricular Confession, is a sinful
novelty, which the ancient Church was unacquainted with. But perhaps some will
think strange that I should say, that our common neglect of personal
Instruction is much worse, if we consider their Confessions in themselves, and
not as they respect their connexed Doctrines of satisfaction and purgatory.
Many of the Southern and Eastern Churches do use a Confession of sin to the
Priest. And how far Mr. Tho. Hocker in his Souls Preparat and other Divines do
ordinarily require it, as necessary or useful, is well known. If any among us
should be guilty of this gross mistake as to think when he has preached, he
has done all his work, let us show him to his face by our practice of the
rest, that there is much more to be done, and that taking heed to all the Flock
is another business then careless lazy Ministers do consider of. If a man have
the least apprehension that duty, and the chiefest duty, is no duty; he is like
to neglect it, and be impenitent in the neglect.

9. ANother singular Benefit which we may hope for from the faithful
performance of this work, is, that It will help our people better to understand
the nature of their duty toward their Overseers, and consequently to discharge
it better. Which were no matter if it were only for our sakes; but their own
salvation is very much concerned in it. I am confident by sad experience, that
it is none of the least impediments to their happiness, and to a true
Reformation of the Church: that the people understand not what the work and
power of a Minister is, and what their own duty toward them is. They commonly
think that a Minister has no more to do with them but to preach to them, and
visit them in sickness, and administer Sacraments, and that if they hear him,
and receive the Sacrament from him, they owe no further obedience, nor can he
require any more at their hands. Little do they know that the Minister is in
the Church as the Schoolmaster in his School, to teach and take an account of
every one in particular, and that all Christians ordinarily must be Disciples
or Scholars in some such School They think not that a Minister is in the Church
as a Physician in a Town, for all people to resort to, for personal advice for
the curing of all those diseases that are fit to be brought to a Physician: and
that the Priests lips must preserve knowledge, and the people must ask the Law
at their mouths, because he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. And that
every soul in the Congregation is bound for their own safety, to have personal
recourse to him, for the resolving of their doubts, and for help against their
sins, and for direction in duty, and for increase of knowledge and all saving
grace! and that Ministers are purposely settled in Congregations to this end,
to be still ready to advise and help the Flock. If our people did but know
their duty, they would readily come to us when they are desired to be
instructed, and to give an account of their knowledge, faith and lives; and
they would come themselves without sending for, and knock oftener at our doors,
and call for advice and help for their souls; and ask, What shall we do to be
saved? Whereas now the matter is come to that sad pass, that they think a
Minister has nothing to do with them, and if he admonish them, they will bid
him look to himself, he shall not answer for them: and if he call them to be
Catechized or instructed, or to be prepared for the Lords Supper, or other holy
Ordinance, or would take an account of their faith and profiting, they will ask
him, By what authority he does these things? and think that he is a busy
pragmatical fellow, that loves to be meddling where he has nothing to do; or a
proud fellow that would bear rule over their consciences. When they may as well
ask him, By what authority he preaches, or prays for them, or gives them
the Sacrament; or they may as well ask a Schoolmaster, By what authority he
calls his Scholars to learn or say their lesson? Or a Physician, By what
authority he enjoyment them to take his Medicine? people consider not, that all
our authority is but for our work: even a Power to do our duty and our work is
for them; so that it is but an authority to do them good: And the silly
wretches do talk no wiselyer, then if they should thus quarrel with a man that
would held to quench the fire in their thatch, and ask him, By what authority
he does it? Or that would give his money to relieve the poor, and they should
ask him, By what authority do you require us to take this money? Or as if I
offered my hand to one that is fallen, to help him up, or to one that is in the
water, to save him from drowning, and he should ask me, By what authority I do
it? Truly we have no wiser nor thankfuller dealing from these men: Nay, it is
worse, in that we are doubly obliged, both by Christian Charity, and the
Ministerial office to do them good. I know not of any Simile that does more
aptly express the Ministerial power and duty, and the peoples duty, then these
two conjunct; viz. even such as a Physician is in an Hospital, that has taken
the charge of it, and such as a Schoolmaster is in his School, especially such
as the Philosophers, or teachers of any science or art, whose Schools have the
aged and voluntary members, as well as children (Christ's has all ages) even
such is a Minister in the Church, and such is their work and their authority to
do it, and the duty of the people to submit thereto, allowing such differences
as the subject requires.

And what is it that has brought people to this ignorance of their duty, but
custom? Its long of us, Brethren to speak truly and plainly, its long of us;
that have not used them nor our selves to any more then the common public
work. We see how much custom does with the people. Where it is the custom, they
stick not among the Papists at the confessing of all their sins to the Priest:
And because it is not the custom among us, they disdain to be questioned,
catechized or instructed. They wonder at it as a strange thing, and say, such
things were never done before. And if we can but prevail to make this duty
become as usual as other duties, they will much more easily submit to it then
now. What a happy thing would it be, if you might live to see the day, that it
should be as ordinary for people of all ages to come in course to their
Teachers for personal advice, and help for their salvation, as it is now usual
for them to come to Church, or as it is for them to send their children thither
to be Catechized. Our diligence in this work, is the way to do this.

10. MOreover, our practice will give the Governors of the Nation some better
information about the nature and burden of the Ministry, and so may procure
their further assistance. It is a lamentable impediment to the Reformation of
the Church and the saving of souls, that in most populous Congregations, there
is but one or two men to over-see many thousand souls, and so there are not
laborers in any measure answerable to the work, but it becomes an impossible
thing to them to do any considerable measure of that personal duty which should
be done by faithful Pastors to all the Flocks. I have often said it, and still
must say it, that this is a great part of Englands misery, and a great degree
of spiritual famine which reigns in most Cities and great Towns through the
Land, even where they are insensible of it, and think themselves well provided;
Alas we see multitudes of carnal, ignorant, sensual sinners round about us,
here is a family, and there a family, and there almost a whole street or
village of them; and our hearts pity them, and we see that their necessities
cry loud for our speedy and diligent relief, so that he that has ears to hear
must needs hear it. And if we would never so fain, we cannot help them: Not
only through their obstinacy, but also through our want of opportunity. We have
experience, that if we could but have leisure to speak to them, and to open
plainly to them their sin and danger, there were great hopes of doing good to
many of them, that receive little by our public teaching. But we cannot come
at them: more necessary work prohibits us: we cannot do both at once: and the
public must be preferred, because there we deal with many at once. And it is
as much as we are able to do, to perform the public work, or some little more;
And if we do take the time when we should eat or sleep, (besides the ruining of
weakened bodies by it) we shall not be able after all, to speak to one of very
many of them. So that we must stand by and see poor people perish, and can but
be sorry for them, and cannot so much as speak to them to endeavor their
recovery. Is not this a sad case in a Nation that glories of the fullness of
the Gospel? An Infidel will say, No: but me thinks no man that believes an
everlasting Joy or Torment should say so. I will give you the instance of my
own case. We are together two Ministers, and a third at a Chapel, willing to
bestow every hour of our time in Christ's work. Before we undertook this work
that we are now upon, our hands were full, and now we are engaged to set apart
two days every week from morning to night for private catechizing and
instruction; so that any man may see that we must leave undone all that other
work that we were wont to do at that time: and we are necessitated to run upon
the public work of preaching with small preparation, and so must deliver the
Message of God, so rawly and confusedly, and unanswerably to its dignity, and
the needs of men's souls that it is a great trouble to our minds to consider it,
and a greater trouble to us when we are doing it. And yet it must be so: there
is no remedy, unless we will omit this personal instruction, we must needs run
thus unpreparedly into the Pulpit! And to omit this we dare not, it is so great
and necessary a work. And when we have incurred all the forementioned
inconveniences, and have set two whole days a week apart for the work that we
have now undertaken, it will be as much as we shall be able to do, to go over the
Parish but once in a year (being about 800. families) And which is worse then
that, we shall be forced to cut it short, and do it less effectually to those
that we do it, having above 15. Families a week to deal with. And alas, how
small a matter is it to speak to a man once only in a year, and that so
cursorily as we must be forced to do, in comparison of what their necessities
do require? yet are we in hope of some fruit of this much, but how much more
might it be, if we could but speak to them once a quarter, and do the work
more fully and deliberately (as you that are in smaller Parishes may do.) And
many Ministers in England have ten times, (if not more) the number of
Parishoners as I have: so that if they should undertake the work that we have
done, they can go over the Parish but once in ten years. So that while we are
hoping for opportunities to speak to them, we hear of one dying after another,
and to the grief of our souls are forced to go with them to their graves before
we could ever speak a word to them personally to prepare them for their change.
And what is the cause of all this misery? Why our Rulers have not seen a
necessity of any more Ministers then one or two in such Parishes; and so they
have not allowed any maintenance to that end: Some have alienated much from the
Church (the Lord humble all them that consented to it effectually, lest it
prove the consumption of the Nation at last) while they have left this famine
in the chief parts of the Land. Its easy to separate from the multitude, and
gather distinct Churches, and let the rest sink or swim, and if they will not
be saved by public preaching, let them be damned: but whether this be the most
charitable and Christian course, one would think should be no hard question.
But what is the matter that wise and godly Rulers should be thus guilty of our
misery, and that none of our cries will awake them to compassion? What, are
they so ignorant as not to know these things? Or are they grown cruel to the
souls of men? Or are they false-hearted to the interest of Christ, and have a
design to undermine his Kingdom? No, I hope it is none of these; but for ought
I can find, it is even long of us, even of us the Ministers of the Gospel, whom
they should thus maintain. For those Ministers that have small Parishes, and
might do all this private part of the work, yet do it not (but very few of
them) nor will not do it. And those in great Towns and Cities, that might do
somewhat, though they cannot do all, will do just nothing, but what
accidentially falls in their way, or next to nothing; so that the Magistrate is
not wakened to an observance or consideration of the weight of our work: If it
be not in their eyes, as well as in their ears, they will not regard it. Or if
they do apprehend the usefulness of it, yet if they see that Ministers are so
careless and lazy that they will not do it, they think it in vain to provide
them a maintenance for it: it would be but to cherish idle droans: and so they
think, that if they maintain Ministers enough to preach in the Pulpit, they
have done their parts. And thus are they involved in heinous sin, and we are
the occasions of it. Whereas if we do but heartily all set our selves to this
work, and show the Magistrate to his face, that it is a most weighty and
necessary part of our business, and that we would do it thoroughly if we could,
and that if there were hands enough at it, the work might go on, and withal
when he shall see the happy success of our labors, then no doubt, if the fear
of God be in them, and they have any love to his truth and men's souls, they
will set to their helping hand, and not let men perish, because there is no man
to speak to them to prevent it. They will one way or other raise maintenance in
such populous places for laborers proportioned to the number of souls, and
greatness of the work. Let them but see us fall to the work, and see it prosper
in our hands; (as if it be well managed through Gods blessing, there is no
doubt but it will do) and then it will draw out their hearts to the promoting
of it: and instead of laying Parishes together to diminish the number of
teachers, they will either divide them, or allow more teachers to a Parish. But
when they see that many carnal Ministers do make a greater stir to have more
maintenance to themselves, then to have more help in the work of God, they are
tempted by such worldlings to wrong the Church, that particular Ministers may
have ease and fullness.

11. ANother benefit that is like to follow our work, is this; It may
exceedingly facilitate the Ministerial service to the next generation that
shall succeed us; and prevent the Rebellion of people against their Teachers.
As I said, custom is the thing that swaies much with the multitude; and they
that first break a destructive custom, must bear the brunt of their
indignation; some body must do this. If we do it not, it will lie upon our
successors; And how can we look that they should be more hardy and resolute,
and faithful then we? Its we that have seen the heavy Judgments of the Lord,
and heard him pleading by fire and sword with the Land. Its we that have been
our selves in the furnace, and should be the most refined (Mal. 3. 23.) Its we
that are most deeply obliged by oaths and covenants, by wonderful deliverances,
experiences and mercies of all sorts. And if we yet flinch and turn our backs,
and prove false-hearted, why should we expect better from them, that have not
been driven by such scourges as we, nor drawn by such cords. But if they do
prove better then we, and will do it, the same odium and opposition must befall
them, which we avoid, and that with some increase, because of our neglect; For
the people will tell them, that we their predecessors did no such things. But
if we would now break through that are set in the front, and break the ice for
them that follow us, their souls will bless us, and our names shall be dear to
them, and they will feel the happy fruits of our labor every week and day of
their Ministry. When the people shall willingly submit to their private
instructions and examinations, yea and to discipline too because we have
acquainted them with it, and removed the prejudice, and broke the evil custom
that our fore-goers had been the cause of. And so we may do much to the saving
of many thousand souls in all ages to come, as well as in the present age that
we are working in.

12. ANother Benefit will be this; We shall keep our peoples minds and times
from much of that vanity that now possesses them. When men are at work in
their Shops almost all their talk is vanity: the children also learn foolish
and ribbald songs and tales; and with such filth and rubbish are their memories
furnished. Many an hour is lost, and many a thousand idle thoughts and words
are they guilty of. Whereas when they once know that Catechisms must be learnt,
and that they must all give account, it will turn much of their thoughts and
time that way.

13. MOreover, It will do much to the better ordering of families, and better
spending of the Lords day. When we have once got the Master of the family to
undertake it, that he will once every Lords day examine his family, and hear
them what they can say of the Catechism, it will find them the most profitable
employment: whereas otherwise, many of them would be idle, or ill employed: And
many Masters that know little themselves, may yet be brought to do this for
others.

14. MOreover, It will do some good to many Ministers that are apt to be too
idle, and mispend their time in unnecessary discourses, businesses, or
journeys, or recreations; and it will let them see that they have no time to
spare for such things. And so when they are engaged in so much pressing
employment of so high a nature, it will be the best cure for all that idleness
or loss of time: And withal, it will cut off that scandal which usually
follows thereupon: For people use to say, such a Minister can sit in an
Alehouse or Tavern, or spend his time at bowls, or other sports, or vain
discourse; and why may not we do so as well as he? Let us all set close to this
part of our work, and then see what time we can find to spare? and live idly,
or in a way of voluptuousness, yea or worldliness, if we can.

15. AND many personal Benefits to our selves, are consequential to these. It
will do much, 1. To exercise and increase our own graces. And 2. to subdue our
own corruptions. And 3. besides our safety, it will breed much peace to our own
consciences, and comfort us when our time and actions must be reviewed.

1. To be much in provoking others to Repentance, and heavenly-mindedness, may
do much to excite them in our selves.

2. To cry down the sin of others, and engage them against it, and direct them
to overcome it, will do much to shame us out of our own: and conscience will
scarce suffer us to live in that which we make so much ado to draw others from.
And that very constant employment for God, and busying our minds and tongues
against sin, and for Christ and holiness, will do much to habituate us, and to
overcome our fleshly inclinations, both by direct mortification, and by
diversion, leaving our fancies no room nor time for their old employment, I
dare say, that all the Austerities of Monks and Hermits (that addict themselves
to unprofitable solitude, and are the true imitators of the unprofitable
servant, Mat. 25. that hid his Talent because his Master was an austere man,
and that think to save themselves by neglecting to show compassion on others)
will not do near so much in the true work of Mortification, as this fruitful
diligence for Christ will do.

16. AND it will be some Benefit, that by this means we shall take off our
selves and our people from vain controversies, and from letting out our care
and zeal, and talk upon the lesser things in Religion, which least tend to
their spiritual edification. For while we are taken up in teaching, and they in
learning the Fundamentals, we shall divert our minds and tongues, and have less
room for lower things. And so it will cure much wranglings and contentions
between Ministers and people: For we do that which we need not and should not,
because we will not fall closely to do that, which we need and should.

And if we could handsomely contrive the more understanding sort of our people
to assist us in private helping others (though prejudice of others, and their
own unripeness, and unfitness much hinder) it would be the most effectual way
to prevent their running into preaching distempers, or into schisms; For this
employment would take them up, and content the teaching humor that they are
inclined to. And it might make their parts more useful in a safe and lawful way.

17. MOreover, The very dilgent practice of this work that we are are upon,
would do much to set men right about many controversies that now trouble the
Church, and so to put an end to our differences. Especially most of those about
the Ministry, Churches and Discipline, would receive more convincing light by
practice, then all our idle talking, or writing will afford us. We have fallen
of late into parties, and troubled the Church about many controversies
concerning excommunication. in such and such cases, which perhaps never will
fall out; or if they do, they cannot be so well decided by any man that is not
engaged in the practice. It is like the profession of a Physician, a soldier,
a Pilot, etc. who can never be worth a straw at his work, by all the precepts
in the world, without practice and experience. This will be the only course to
make, 1. Sound Divines in the main, which bare studying will not do 2. And
recover us again to the Primitive simplicity, to live upon the substantial
necessary things. 3. And to direct and resolve us in many of ou^ quarrels that
will no other way be well resolved. For example; If this work had been set on
foot, and it had been but visible what it is to have the oversight of souls
durst any Prelates have contended for the sole Oversight of 200. or 400. or
1000 Churches? and that the Presbyters might be but their curates and
informers? Durst they have striven with might and main to have drawn upon
themselves such impossibilities, and have carried such mountains on their
backs, and to answer God as Overseers and Pastors of so many thousand people,
whose faces they were never like to see, much less were they ever like to speak
one word to them for their everlasting life? Would they not have said, If I
must be a Bishop, let me be a Parochial Bishop, or have no more to oversee then
I am capable of overseeing, and let me be such as the Primitive Bishops were,
that had but one Church, and not hundreds to take care of; and let me not be
engaged to natural impossibilities, and that on pain of damnation, and to the
certain destruction of the business that I undertake; sure these would rather
have been their strivings. I speak not this against any Bishops that
acknowledge the Presbyters to be true Pastors to rule and teach the Flock, and
take themselves only to be the chief or Presidents among the Presbyters, yea or
the Rulers of Presbyters, that are the Rulers of the Flock; but of them that
null the Presbyters office, and the Churches Government and Discipline, by
undertaking it alone as their sole prerogative.

Many other Disciplinary controversies I might instance in, that will be better
resolved by this course of practice, by the abundant experience which it will
afford, then by all the disputations or writings that have attempted it.

18. AND then for the extent of the foresaid Benefits, (which in the two next
places shall now be considered) The design of this work is, the Reforming and
saving of all the people in our several Parishes; For we shall not leave out
any man that will submit to be instructed. And though we can scarce hope that
every particular person will be reformed and saved by it, yet have we reason to
hope, that as the attempt is universal, so the success will be more general or
extensive then hitherto we have seen of our other labors. Sure I am it is most
like to the spirit, and precept and offers of the Gospel, which requires us to
preach the Gospel to every creature, and promises life to every man if he will
accept it by believing! If God would have all men to be saved, and to come to
the knowledge of the truth (that is, as Rector and Benefactor) of the world, he
has manifested himself willing to save All men if they will themselves, though
his Elect he will also make willing) then sure it beseems us to offer salvation
unto all men, and to endeavor to bring them to the knowledge of the truth. And
if Christ tasted death for every man, its meet we should preach his death for
every man. This work has a more excellent design, then our accidental
conferences with now and then a particular person. And I observe that in such
occasional discourses men satisfy themselves to have spoken some good words,
but seldom set plainly and closely to the matter, to convince men of sin, and
misery, and mercy; as in this purposely appointed work we are now more like to
do.

19. AND further, It is like to be a work that shall reach over the whole Land,
and not stop with us that have now engaged in it. For though it be at the
present neglected, I suppose the cause is the same with our Brethren as it has
all this while been with us; who by vain expectations of the Magistrates
interposition, or by that inconsiderateness, and lazyness which we are
bewailing here this day, have so much omitted it till now as we have done; but
specially a despair of a common submission of the people has been the
hindrance. But when they shall be remembered of so clear and great a duty, and
excited to the consideration of it, and see with us the feisableness of it, in
a good measure, when it is done by common consent, no doubt they will
universally take it up, and gladly concur with us in so blessed a work. For
they are the servants of the same God, as regardful of their Flocks, and as
conscientious as we, and as sensible of the Interest of Christ, and as
compassionate to men's souls, and as self-denying, and ready to do or suffer for
such excellent ends: seeing therefore they have the same Spirit, Rule and Lord,
I will not be so uncharitable as to doubt, whether all that are godly, (or the
generality of them) will gladly join with us through all the Land And O what a
happy thing it will be to see such a general combination for Christ? and to see
all England so seriously called upon, and importuned for Christ, and set in so
fair a way to heaven! Me thinks, the consideration of it should make our hearts
rejoice within us, to see so many faithful servants of Christ all over the
Land, to fall in with every particular sinner with such industrious
solicitations for the saving of their souls, as men that will hardly take a
denial. Me thinks, I even see all the godly Ministers of England, even setting
upon the work already, and resolving to take the opportunity, the unanimity may
facilitate it. Which if they do, no doubt but God will succeed them. Is it not
then a most happy undertaking that you are all setting your hands to, and
desiring the assistance of Christ in, this day?

20. LAstly, of so great weight and excellency is the duty that we are upon,
that The chiefest part of Church-Reformation that is behind, (as to means)
consists in it; and it must be the chiefest means to answer the Judgments,
the Mercies, the Prayers, the Promises, the cost, and the endeavors, and blood
of the Nation; and without this it will not be done; the ends of all these will
never be well attained; a Reformation to purpose will never be wrought; the
Church will be still low, the interest of Christ will be much neglected; and
God will still have a controversy with the Land, and above all, with the
Ministry that have been deepest in the guilt.

How long have we talked of Reformation, how much have we said and done for it
in general, and how deeply and devoutly have we vowed it for our own parts (of
which more anon.) And after all this, how shamefully have we neglected it, and
neglect it to this day! We carry our selves as if we had not known or
considered what that Reformation was that we vowed. As carnal men will take on
them to be Christians, and profess with confidence that they believe in Christ,
and accept of his salvation and may contend for Christ, and fight for him, and
vet for all this, would have none of him, but perish for refusing him, who
little dreamt that ever they had been refusers of him; and all because they
understood not what his salva ion is, and how it is carried on, but dream of a
salvation without flesh-displeasing, and without self-denying, and renouncing
the world, and parting with their sins, and without any holiness or any great
pains and labor of their own in subserviency to Christ and the spirit: Even so
did too many Ministers and private men talk and write, and pray, and fight, and
long for Reformation, and would little have believed that man, that should have
presumed to tell them, that for all this, their very hearts were against
Reformation, and that they that were praying for it and fasting for it, and
wading through blood for it, would never accept it, but would themselves be the
rejecters and destroyers of it? And yet so it is, and so it has too plainly
proved: and whence is all this strange deceit of heart? That good men should no
better know themselves? Why, the case is plain: They thought of a Reformation
to be given by God, but not of a Reformation to be wrought on and by
themselves. They considered the blessing, but never thought of the means of
accomplishing it. But as if they had expected that all things besides
themselves should be mended without them; or that the Holy Ghost should again
descend miraculously, or every Sermon should convert its thousands, or that
some Angel from heaven, or some Eliis should be sent to restore all things; or
that the Law of a Parliament, and the sword of a Magistrate would have
converted or constrained all, and have done the deed; and little did they think
of a Reformation that must be wrought by their own diligence and unwearied
labors, by earnest preaching, and catechizing, and personal instructions, and
taking heed to all the Flock, whatever pains or reproaches it should cost them
They thought not that a through Reformation must multiply their own work, but
we had all of us too carnal thouhgts, that when we had ungodly men at our mercy
all would be done, and conquering them was converting them, or such a means as
would have frightened them to, heaven. But the business is far otherwise, and
had we then known how a Reformation must be atrained, perhaps some would have
been colder in the persecution of it. And yet I know that even foreseen labors
seem small matters at a distance, while we do, but hear and talk of them: but
when we come nearer them, and must lay our hands to the work and put on our
armor, and charge through the thickest of opposing difficulties then is the
sincerity and the strength of men's hearts brought to trial, and it will appear
how they purposed and promised before. Reformation is to many of us, as the
Messiah was to the Jews. Before he came, they looked and longed for him, and
boasted of him and rejoiced in hope of him, but when he came they could not
abide him, but hated him, and would not believe that he was indeed the person,
and therefore persecuted and put him to death to the curse and confusion of the
main body of their Nation, Mal. 3. 1, 2, 3. The Lord whom we seek shall
suddenly come to his Temple, even the Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye del
gbt in: But who may abide the day of his coming, and who shall stand when he
appears? For he is like a refiners fire, and like Fullers soap: and he shall
sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi,
and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer to the Lord an offering
in righteousness. And the reason was, because it was another manner of h^st
that the Jews expected, then Jesus was that did appear to them; it was one to
bring them riches. and liberty, and to this day they profess that they will
never believe in any but such. So it is with too many about Reformation. They
hoped for a Reformation, that should bring them more wealth and honor with the
people, and power to force men to do what they would have them: and now they
see a Reformation that must put them to more condescension and pains then ever
they were before, this will not down with them. They thought of having the
opposers of godliness under their feet; but now they see they must go to them
with humble entreaties and put their hands under their feet, if it would do
them good, and meekly beseech even those that sometime sought their lives, and
make it now their daily business to overcome them by kindness, and win them
with love. O how many carnal expectations are here crossed.

Hence also it is, that most men do lay so great a part of Reformation in their
private opinions, or singular ways. The Prelatical party think that the true
Reformation is to restore them to power. The Presbyterians have thought that if
Prelacy and Independancy were well down, and Classes up, the work were much
done: And the Independents have thought that if they had gathered a separated
body of godly people under Covenant, much of the Reformation were wrought: And
the Anabaptists have thought, that if they could but get people to be Baptized
again, they had done a great matter for Reformation. I am not now reproving any
of these in the matter, (though the last especially well deserve it) but that
they lay so much upon their several orders and formalities as many of them do:
When indeed if we had our will in all such matters of order, and had the
rightest form of Government in the world, it is the painful execution, and the
diligent and prudent use of means for men's conversion and edification, by able
faithful men, that must accomplish the Reformation. Brethren, I dare
confidently tell you, that if you will but faithfully perform what you have
Agreed upon both in this business of Catechizing and personal instruction, and
in the matter of Discipline formerly (where we have well waved all the
controverted part, which has so much ascribed to it) you will do more for the
true Reformation, that is so desirable, and has been so long prayed and hoped
for, then all the changes of forms and orders so eagerly contended for, are
ever like to effect. If Bishops would do this work, I would take them for
Reformers: And if Presbyters will do it, I will take them for Reformers: and it
was those that neglected and hindered it, that I ever took for Deformers. Let us
see the work well done, that God has made so necessary for men's conversion,
preservation, restoration and salvation, and the doers of it, whether Prelates
or Presbyters, shall never have any fierce opposition of mine. But it is not
bare Canons and Orders, and Names and Shows, that any wise man will take for
the substance of Reformation! It is not Circumcision or uncircumcision, to be a
Jew or a Gentile, bond or free, that avails any thing, but a new creature,
and faith that works by love. That is the Reformation which best heals the
Ignorance, and Infidelity, and Pride, and Hypocrisy, and Worldliness, and
other killing sins of the Land, and that most effectually brings men to faith
and holiness. Not that I would have the least truth or duty undervalued, or any
part of Gods will to be rejected: But the Kingdom of God consists not in
every truth or duty; not in ceremonies, or circumstances, not in meats or
drinks; but in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

Dear Brethren, it is you and such as you, that under Christ must yet give this
Nation the fruit of all their prayers and pains, their cost and blood, and
heavy sufferings. All that they have been doing, for the good of the Church,
and for true Reformation for so may years, was but to prepare the way for you,
to come in and do the work which they desired. Alas what would they do by fire
and sword, by drums and trumpets, for the converting of souls! The actions of
Armies and famous Commanders, which seem so glorious, and make so great a noise
that the world rings of them, what have they done, or what can they do that is
worth the talking on without you? In themselves considered, all their victories
and great achievements, are so far from being truly glorious, that they are
very lamentable: and a Butcher may as well glory that he has killed so many
beasts, or a hangman that he has executed so many men, as they can glory in
the thing considered in it self. For war is the most heavy temporal judgment.
And far less cause would they have to glory, if their cause and ends were
wrong. And if their hearts, and ends, and cause be right, and they mean as
honestly as any men in the world, yet are these great Commanders but your
pioneers, to cut up the thorns that stand in your way, and to cast out the
rubbish, and prepare you the way to build the house. Alas they cannot with all
their victories, exalt the Lord Jesus in the soul of any sinner; and therefore
they cannot set up his spiritual Kingdom; for the hearts of men are his house
and throne: If the work should stop with the end of theirs, and go no further
then they can carry it, we should be in the end but where we were in the
beginning, and one generation of Christ's enemies would succeed another, and
they that take down the wicked, would inherit their vices, as they possess
their rooms, and the last would be far the worst, as being deeper in the guilt,
and more engaged in evil-doing. All this trouble then, and stir of the Nation,
has been to bring the work to your hands: and shall it dye there? God forbid!
They have opened you the door, and at exceeding cost and sufferings have
removed many of your impediments, and put the building instruments into your
hands: and will you now stand still, or loyter? God forbid! up then Brethren,
and give the Nation the fruit of their cost and pains; frustrate not all the
preparers work: fail not the long expectations of so many thousands, that have
prayed in hope of a true Reformation, and paid in hope, and ventured in hope,
and suffered in hope, and waited till now in hope. In the name of God take heed
that now you fail not all these Hopes. Have they spent so long time in fencing
the Vineyard, and weeding and pruning it, and making it ready for your hands:
and will you now fail them that are sent to gather in the vintage, and lose all
their labors? When they have plowed the field, will you sow it by the halves?
If they had known beforehand that Ministers would have proved idle and
unfaithful, how many hundreds would have spared their blood, and how many
thousands would have sat still, and have let the old Readders and formalists
alone, and have said, If we must have dullards and unprofitable men, it is as
good have one as another: It is not worth so much cost and pains to change one
careless Minister for another.] The end is the mover and life of the agent in
all the means. How many thousands have prayed, and paid, and suffered, and
more, upon the expectations of a great advantage to the Church, and more common
illumination and reformation of the Nation, by your means. And will you now
deceive them all! Again I say, God forbid. Now it is at your hands that they
are expecting the happy issue of all. The eyes of the Nation are or should be,
all (under God) upon you, for the bringing in the harvest of their cost and
labors. I profess, it makes me admire at the fearful deceitfulness of the
heart of man, to see how every man can call on others for duty, or censure them
for the omitting it, and what excellent Judges we are in other men's cases, and
how partial in our own? The very judicious Teachers of the Nation can cry out
(and too justly) against one sect and another sect, and against unfaithful
underminers of those that they thought would have done the work, and against
the disturbers of the Reformation that was going on, and say, [These have
betrayed the Church, and frustrated the Nations cost and hopes, and undone all
that has been so long a doing.] And yet they see not, or seem not to see, that
it is we that are guilty of this, as much as they. It was not the Magistrates
driving, but the Ministers drawing, that was the principal saving means that we
have waited for. Brethren, it were a strange mistake sure, if any of us should
think, that the price of the Nations wealth and blood was purposed to settle us
in good Benefices, and to pull down the Bishops, and give us the quiet
possession of our livings which they would have deprived us of. Was this the
Reformation, that we might live in greater ease and fullness, and succeed the
ejected Ministers in their less disgraced sins! Why sirs? what are we more then
other men, that the people should do all this for us? that they should
impoverish the whole Nation almost to provide us a livelihood! What can they
see in our Persons or Countenances for which they should so doat upon us? Are
we not men, frail and corruptible flesh, unworthy sinners like themselves?
Surely it was for our work, and the ends of our work, and not for our Persons
(but in order to our work) that they have done all this- What say you now
Brethren? Will you deal faithfully with your Creditors, and pay the Nation the
debt which you owe them? Shall all the blood and cost of this People be
frustrated, or not? You are now called upon to give your answer, and it is you
that must give it. The work is now before you: And in these personal
Instructions of all the Flock, as well as in public preaching does it consist.
Others have done their part, and born their burden, and now comes in yours. You
may easily see how great a matter lies upon your hands, and how many will be
wronged by your failings, and how much by the sparing of your labor will be
lost. If your labor be more worth then all our treasures, hazards and lives,
and then the souls of men, and the blood of Christ, then sit still, and look
not after the ignorant or the ungodly; follow your pleasure or worldly
business, or take your ease, displease not sinners, nor your own flesh, but let
your neighbors sink or swim; and if public preaching will not save them, let
them perish. But if the case be far otherwise, you were best look about you.
(But I shall say more of this anon.)

SECT, II.
II. HAving given you the first sort of moving Reasons, which were drawn from
the Benefits of the present undertaken work. I come to the second sort, which
are taken from the difficulties; which if they were taken alone, or in a
needless business, I confess might be rather discouragements then motives: But
taking these, with those that go before and follow, and the case is otherwise.
For difficulties must excite to greater diligence in a necessary work.

And difficulties we shall find many, both in our selves and in our people;
which because they are things so obvious that your experience will leave no
room for doubting, I shall take leave to pass them over in a few words.

1. In ourselves there is much dullness and laziness, so that there will be much
ado to get us to be faithful in so hard a work. Like a sluggard in bed, that
knows he should rise, and yet delayeth and would stay as long as he can; so do
we by duties that our corrupt natures are against, and put us to the use of all
our powers. More sloth will tie the hands of many.

2. We have also a base man-pleasing disposition, which will make us let men
perish lest we lose their love, and let them go quietly to hell, least we
should make them angry with us for seeking their salvation: and we are ready to
venture on the displeasure of God, and venture our people into everlasting
misery, rather then get ill will to ourselves. This distemper must be
diligently resisted,

3. We have some of us also a foolish bashfulness, which makes us very backward
to begin with them, and to speak plainly to them: we are so modest forsooth,
that we blush to speak for Christ, or to contradict the Devil, or to save a
soul: when shameful works we are less ashamed of.

4. We are so carnal, that we are prone by our fleshly interests, to be drawn
to unfaithfulness in the work of Christ. Lest we lose our Tithes, or bring
trouble upon ourselves, or set people against us, and many such like. All these
require diligence for their resistance.

5. The greatest impediment of all is, that we are too weak in the faith: So
that when we should set upon a man for his conversion with all our might, if
there be not the stirrings of unbelief within us, to raise up actual
questionings of Heaven and Hell, whether the things that we should earnestly
press be true, yet at least the belief of them is so weak, that it will hardly
excite in us so kindly, resolute, and constant zeal: So that our whole motion
will be but weak, because the spring of faith is so weak. O what need therefore
have all Ministers for themselves and their work, to look well to their faith,
especially that their Assent to the truth of Scripture, about the Joy and
Torments of the life to come, be sound and lively.

6. And lastly, we have commonly a great deal of unskilfulness and unfitness
for this work. Alas how few know how to deal with an ignorant worldly man for
his salvation! To get within him, and win upon him, and suit all speeches to
men's several conditions and tempers, to choose the meetest subjects, and follow
them with the holy mixture of seriousness, and terror, and love, and meekness,
and evangelical allurements! O who is fit for such a thing! I profess
seriously, it seems to me (by experience) as hard a matter to confer aright
with such a carnal person in order to his change, as to preach such Sermons as
ordinarily we do, if not much more. All these Difficulties in our selves should
waken us to resolutions, preparation and diligence, that we be not overcome by
them, and hindered from, or in the work.

2. AND for our people, we have as many Difficulties to encounter with in them.
1. Too many of them will be obstinately unwilling to be taught; and scorn to
come at us, as being too good to be catechized, or too old to learn: unless we
deal wisely with them in public and private, by the force of Reasons, the
power of Love to conquer their perverseness; which we must carefully endeavor.

2. And so great is the dullness of many that are willing, that they can scarce
learn a leaf of a Catechism in a long time, and therefore will keep away, as
ashamed of their ignorance, unless we are wise and diligent to encourage them.

3. And when they do come, so great is their ignorance and unapprehensiveness,
that you will find it a wonderful hard matter to get them to understand you, so
that if you have not the skill of making things plain, you will leave them as
strange to it, as before.

4. And yet harder will you find it to work things upon their hearts, and set
them so close to the quick, as to make that saving change which is our end, and
without which our labor is almost lost. Oh what a block, what a rock is a
hardened carnal heart! How stiffly will it resist the most powerful
persuasions! and hear of everlasting life or death as a thing of nothing! If
you have not therefore great seriousness, and fervency, and working matter, and
fitness of expression, what good can you expect? And when all is done, the
spirit of Grace must do the work: But as God and men do use to choose
instruments most suitable to the nature of the agent, work or end, so here the
spirit of wisdom, life, and holiness, does not use to work by foolish, dead or
carnal instruments, but by such persuasions of Light, and Life, and Purity, as
are likest to it self, and to the work that is to be wrought thereby.

5. And when you have made some desirable Impressions on their hearts, if you
look not after them, and have not a special care of them when they are gone,
their hearts will soon return to their former hardness, and their old
companions, and temptations will work off all again. I do but briefly hint
these things which you so well know. All the difficulties of the work of
conversion, which you use to acquaint the people with, are here before us in
our present work; which I will forbear to enumerate, as supposing it
unnecessary.

SECT. III.
III. THE third sort of moving Reasons are drawn from the Necessity of the
undertaken work: For if it were not Necessary, the lazy might be discouraged
rather then excited, by the forementioned difficulties, as is aforesaid. And if
we should here expatiate, we might find matter for a volumn by it self. But
because I have already been longer then I did intend, I shall only give you a
brief hint of some of the general grounds of this Necessity.

And 1. it is Necessary by Obligation, Ut Officium, Necessitate praeceoti: and
2. It is necessary ad finem; and that, 1. For God. 2. For our neighbors. 3.
And for our selves.

1. For the first of these. 1. We have on us the Obligation of
Scripture-precepts. 1. General. 2. Special. And 2. the subservient obligation
(or the first bound faster on us) by Promises and Threatenings. 3. And these
also seconded by executions, even 1. by actual Judgments: 2. and mercies. And
lastly, we have the Obligation of our own undertaking upon us. These all
deserve your Consideration, but may not be insisted on by me, lest I be over
tedious.

1. Every Christian is Obliged to do all that he can for the salvation of
others, but every Minister is doubly obliged, because he is separated to the
Gospel of Christ, and is to give up himself wholly to that work. Romans 1. 1. 1 Timothy 4. 15. It is needless to make any further question of our Obligation, when
we know that this work is needful to our peoples conversion and salvation, and
that we are in general commanded to do all that is needful to those ends, as
far as we are able. That they are necessary to those ends has been showed
before; and shall be more anon. Even the ancient professors, have need to be
taught the Principles of Gods Oracles, if they have neglected it, or forgot it,
says the Apostle, (...) Heb. 5. 12. Whether the unconverted have need of
conversion and the means of it, I hope is no doubt among us: And whether this
be a means, and a needful means, experience may put us far out of doubt, if we
had no more. Let them that have taken most pains in public, examine their
people, and try whether many of them be not yet as ignorant and careless
almost, as if they had never heard the Gospel. For my part, I study to speak as
plainly and movingly as I can, (and next my study to speak truly, these are my
chief studies) and yet I frequently meet with those that have been my hearers
this 8. or 10. years, who know not whether Christ be God or man, and wonder
when I tell them the history of his birth, and life, and death, and sending
abroad the Gospel, as if they had never heard it before, and that know not that
Infants have any original sin: And of those that know the History of the
Gospel, how few are they that know the nature of that faith, repentance, and
holiness, that it requires; Or at least, that know their own hearts? But most
of them have an ungrounded affiance in Christ, trusting that he will pardon,
justify and save them, while the world has their hearts, and they live to the
flesh: And this assiance they take for a justifying-faith. I have found by
experience, that an ignorant sot that has been an unprofitable hearer so long,
has got more knowledge and remorse of conscience in half an hours close
discourse, then they did from ten years public preaching. I know that
preaching of the Gospel publicly is the most excellent means, because we speak
to many at once: But otherwise, it is usually far more effectual to preach it
privately to a particular sinner, as to himself. For the plainest man that is,
can scarce speak plain enough in public for them to understand; but in private
we may much more. In public, we may not use such homely expressions, or
repetitions, as their dullness does require, but in private we may: In public
our speeches are long, and we quite overrun their understandings and memories,
and they are confounded and at a loss, and not able to follow us, and one thing
drives out another and so they know not what we said: But in private we can
take our work gra^^tim, and take our hearers with us as we go; and by questions
and their answers, we can see how far they go with us, and what we have next to
do. In public, by length and speaking alone, we lose their attentions: But
when they are Interlocutors, we can easily cause them to attend. Besides that,
we can (as was abovesaid) better answer their Objections, and engage them by
Promises before we leave them, which in public we cannot do. I conclude
therefore that public preaching will not be sufficient: For though it may be
an effectual means to convert many, yet not so many; as experience, and Gods
appointment of further means, may assure us. Long may you study and preach to
little purpose, if you neglect this duty.

2. And for instances of particular special Obligations, we might easily show
you many, both from Christ's own example, who used this interlocutory preaching,
both to his Disciples and to the Jews, and from the Apostles examples, who did
the like: But that indeed it would be needless tediousness to recite the
passages to those that so well know them, it being the most ordinary way of the
Apostles preaching, to do it thus interlocutorily and by discourse: And when
they did make a speech any thing long to the people, yet the people and they
discourse it out in the conclusion. Thus Peter preached to the Jews, Acts 2 and
to (...) and his friends, Acts 10. and thus Philip preached to the Eunuch, Acts
9. and thus Paul preached to the Jailer, Acts 16. and to many others. Its plain
that it was the commonest preaching of those times, which occasioneth the
Quakers to challenge us to show where any ever took a text, and preached as we
do: (though they might have found that Christ did so, Luke 4. 18.) Paul
preached privately to them of reputation, l^st he should have run, and labored
in vain, Gal. 2. 2. And that earnest charge no doubt includes it, 2 Timothy 4. 1,
2. I charge thee therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
Judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom; Preach the word,
be instant in season, and out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all
long-suffering and Doctrine. Both public preaching, and all sorts of Reproofs
and Exhortations are here required.

3. And how these preceptss are seconded with promises and threatenings, is so
well known, that I shall pass it over with the rest.

2. THere is a Necessity also of this Duty ad finem; and first, To the Creater
Glory of God, by the fuller success of the Gospel: Not simply to his Glory, as
if he could not have his Glory without it: for so our salvation is not
Necessary to his Glory: but to his Greater Glory: because he is most honored
and pleased when most are saved: For he has sworn that he has no pleasure in
the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he return and live. And doubtless as
every Christian lives to the Glory of God, as his End so will he gladly take
that course that may most effectually promote it: For what man would not attain
his Ends? O Brethren if we could generally set this work a foot in all the
Parishes of England, and get our people to submit to it, and then prosecute it
skilfully and zealously our selves, what a Glory would it put upon the face of
the Nation, and what Glory would redound to God thereby? If our common
Ignorance were thus banished, and our vanity and idleness turned into the study
of the way of life, and every Shop, and every house were busied in learning of
Catechisms, and speaking of the word and works of God, what Pleasure would God
take in our Cities and Countries? He would even dwell in our habitations and
make them his delight. It is the Glory of Christ that shines in his Saints;
and all their Glory is his Glory; that therefore which honors them, in
Number, or excellency, that honors him; Will not the Glory of Christ be most
wonderful and conspicuous in the new Jerusalem, when the Church shall have that
shining luster that is described in Rev. 21.? It is he that is the sun and the
shield of his Church, and his light is it in which they shall have light; and
the business of every Saint is to glorify him: If therefore we can increase
the Number or strength of the Saints, we thereby increase the honor of the
King of Saints; For he will have service and praise where before he had
disobedience and dishonor. Christ also will be honored in the fruits of his
bloodshed, and the spirit of Grace in the fruit of his operations; And do not
all these Ends require that we use the means with diligence?

2. This Duty also is necessary to the welfare of our people: How much does it
conduce to their salvation is manifest. Brethren can you look believingly on
your miserable neighbors, and not perceive them calling for your help? There
is not a sinner whose case you should not so far compassionate, as to be
willing to relieve them at dearer rates then this comes to. Can you see them as
the wounded man by the way, and unmercifully pass by? Can you hear them cry to
you, as the man of Macedonia to Paul in his vision, come and help us? and yet
will you refuse your help? Are you entrusted with an hospital, where one
languisheth in one corner, and another groaneth in another, and cries out, O
help me, pity me for the Lords sake, and a third is raging mad, and would
destroy himself and you, and yet will you sit idle, or refuse your help? If it
may be said of him that relieveth not men's bodies, how much more of them that
relieve not men's souls, that if you see your brother have need, and shut up the
bowels of your Compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in you? You
are not such Monsters, such hard-hearted men, but you will pity a Leper, you
will pity the naked, imprisoned or desolate, you will pity him that is
tormented with grievous pain or sickness; And will you not pity an ignorant
hard-hearted sinner? will you not pity one that must be shut out from the
presence of the Lord, and i will under his remediless wrath, if through Repentance
speedily prevent it not? O what a heart is it that will not pity such a one?
what shall I call the heart of such a man? a heart of stone, or a very rock, or
adamant, or the heart of a Tiger? or rather the heart of an Infidel? for sure
if he believed the misery of the impenitent, it is not possible but he should
have pity on him! Can you tell men in the Pulpit, that they shall certainly be
damned except they repent, and yet have no pity on them when you have
proclaimed such a danger? And if you pity them, will you not do this much for
their salvation? what abundance round about you are blindly hastening to
perdition? and your voice is appointed to be the means of reclaiming them. The
Physician has no excuse who is doubly bound to relieve the sick, when every
neighbor is to help them. Brethren, what if you heard sinners cry after you in
the streets, O Sir; have pity on me, and afford me your advice! I am afraid of
the everlasting wrath of God! I know I must shortly leave this world, and I am
afraid lest I shall be miserable in the next I Could you deny your help to such
a sinner? What if they came to your Study-door, and cried for help, and would
not away, till you had told them how to escape the wrath of God? could you find
in your hearts to drive them away without advice? I am confident you could not.
Why, alas such persons are less miserable then they that cannot cry for help.
It is the hardened sinner that cares not for your help that most needs it:
and he that has not so much life as to feel that he is dead, nor so much light
as to see his danger, nor so much sense left as to pity himself, this is the
man that is most to be pityed. Look upon your neighbors round about you, and
think what abundance need your help in no less a case then the apparent danger
of damnation. And every impenitent person that you see and know about you,
suppose that you hear them cry to you for help as ever you pitied poor wretches
pity us, lest we should be tormented in the flames of hell: if you have the
hearts of men, pity us: And do that for them that you would do if they
followed you with such complaints. O how can you walk and talk, and be merry
with such people, when you know their case? Me thinks when you look them in the
face, and think how they must lie in perpetual misery, you should break forth
into tears (as the Prophet did when he looked upon Hazael,) and then fall on
with the most importunate Exhortations! when you must visit them in their
sickness, will it not wound your hearts, to see them ready to depart into
misery, before you have ever dealt seriously with them for their recovery? O
then for the Lords sake, and for the sake of poor souls, have pity on them, and
bestir your selves, and spare no pains that may conduce to their salvation.

3. ANd I must further tell you, that this Ministerial fidelity is Necessary to
your own welfare, as well as to your peoples. For this is your work, according
to which (among others) you shall be judged. You can no more be saved without
Ministerial diligence and fidelity, then they or you can be saved without
Christian diligence and fidelity, If you care not for others, at least care for
your selves. O what is it to answer for the neglect of such a charge? and what
sins more heinous then the betraying of souls? Does not that threatening make us
tremble? [If thou warn not the wicked -- their blood will I require at thy
hands.] I am afraid, nay I am past doubt, that the day is near when unfaithful
Ministers will wish that they had never known that charge. But that they had
rather been Colliars or Tinkers, or sweepers of Channels, then Pastors of
Christ's flock! when besides all the rest of their sins, they shall have the
blood of so many souls to answer for. O Brethren, our death as well as our
peoples is at hand! and it is as terrible to an unfaithful Pastor as to any.
When we see that dye we must, and there is no remedy, no wit or learning, no
credit or popular applause can put by the stroke, or delay the time; but
willing or unwilling, our souls must be gone, and that into a world that we
never saw, where our persons and worldly interest will not be respected, O then
for a clear Conscience, that can say [I lived not to my self but to Christ, I
spared not my pains, I hid not my talent; I concealed not men's misery, nor the
way of their recovery.] O Sirs, let us therefore take time while we may have
it, and work while it is day, for the night comes when none can work. This is
our day too: and by doing good to others, we must do good to our selves. If you
would prepare for a comfortable death, and a sure and great Reward, the harvest
is before you: g^rd up the loins of your minds, and quit your selves like men;
that you may end your days with that confident triumph [I have fought a good
fight, I have kept the faith, I have finished my course; henceforth is laid up
for me a crown of Righteousness, which God the righteous Judge shall give me]
And if you would be blessed with those that dye in the Lord; Labor now, that
you may rest from your labors then, and do such works as you would wish should
follow you, and not such as will prove your terror in the review.

SECT. IV.
HAving found so great Reason to move us to this work, I shall, before I come
to the Directions. 1. Apply them further for our Humiliation and Excitation.
And 2. answer some Objections that may be raised.

And 1. what cause have we to bleed before the Lord this day, that have
neglected so great and good a work so long? That we have been Ministers of the
Gospel so many years, and done so little by personal instructions and
conference for the saving of men's souls! If we had but set a work this business
sooner, that we have now agreed upon, who knows how many more might have been
brought over unto Christ? and how much happyer we might have made our Parishes,
ere now? And why might we not have done it sooner as well as now? I confess
many impediments were in our way, and so there are still, and will be while
there is a Devil to tempt, and a corrupt heart in man to resist the light: But
if the greatest impediment had not been in our selves, even in our own
darkness, and dullness, and undisposedness to duty, and our dividedness and
unaptness to close for the work of God, I see not but much might have been done
before this. We had the same God to command us, and the same miserable objects
of compassion, and the same liberty from Governors of the Commonwealth. But we
stood looking for changes, and we would have had the Magistrate not only to
have given us leave to work, but have done our work for us, or at least to have
brought the game to our hands, and while we looked for better days, we made
them worse, by the lamentable neglect of a chief part of our work. And had we
as much petitioned Parliaments for the interposition of their Authority to
compel men to be catechized and instructed by the Minister, as we did for
maintenance and other matters; its like we might have obtained it long ago,
when they were forward to gratify us in such undisputable things. But we have
sinned, and have no just excuse for our sin; somewhat that may perhaps excuse a
tanto, but nothing a toto; and the sin is so great, because the duty is so
great, that we should be afraid of pleading excuse too much. The Lord of Mercy
forgive us, and all the Ministry of England, and lay not this or any of our
Ministerial negligences to our charge. O that he would cover all our
unfaithfulness, and by the blood of the everlasting Covenant, would wash away
our guilt of the blood of souls, that when the chief Shepherd shall appear, we
may stand before him in peace, and may not be condemned for the scattering of
his Flock. And O that he would put up his controversy which he has against
the Pastors of his Church, and not deal the hardlyer with them for our sakes;
nor suffer underminers or persecutors to scatter them, as they have suffered
his Sheep to be scattered! and that he will not care as little for them, as
they have done for the souls of men; nor think his salvation too good for them,
as they have thought their labor and sufferings too much for men's salvation:
and as we have had many days of Humiliation in England, for the sins of the
Land, and the Judgments that have lain upon us, I hope we shall hear that God
will more thoroughly humble the Ministry, and cause them to bewail their own
neglects, and to set apart some days through the Land to that end; that they
may not think it enough to lament the sins of others, while they overlook
their own; and that God may not abhor our solemn National humiliations, because
they are managed by unhumbled Guides; and that we may first prevail with him
for a pardon for our selves, that we may be the fitter to beg for the pardon of
others.

And O that we might cast out the dung of our Pride, Contention, Self-seeking
and Idleness, lest God should cast our sacrifices as dung in our faces, and
should cast us out as the dung of the earth, as of late he has done many
others for our warning! and that we might presently Resolve in concord to mend
our pace, before we feel a sharper spur then hitherto we have felt.

SECT. V.
2. AND now Brethren, what have we to do for the time to come, but to deny our
lazy contradicting flesh, and rouse up our selves to the business that we are
engaged in. The harvest is great, the laborers are too few; the loyterers and
contentious hinderers are many; the souls of men are precious; the misery of
sinners is great; and the everlasting misery that they are near to is greater;
the beauty and glory of the Church is desirable; the joy that we are helping
them to, is unconceivable; the comfort that follows a faithful steward-ship
is not small; the comfort of a full success also will be greater; to be
co-workers with God and his Spirit, is not a little honor; to subserve the
bloodshed of Christ for men's salvation is not a light thing: to lead on the
Armies of Christ through the thickest of the enemies, and guide them safely
through a dangerous wilderness, and steer the vessel through such storms, and
rocks, and sands, and shelves, and bring it safe to the harbor of Rest,
requires no small skill and diligence: the fields now seem even white unto
harvest, the preparations that have been made for us are very great; the season
of working is more warm and calm, then most ages before us have ever seen: we
have carelessly loytered too long already; the present time is posting away;
while we are trifling, men are dying, and how fast are men passing into another
world? And is there nothing in all this to awaken us to our duty, and to
resolve us to speedy and unwearied diligence? Can we think that a man can be
too careful and painful under all these motives and engagements? Or could that
man be a fit instrument for other men's illumination, that were himself so
blind? or for the quickening of others, that were himself so senseless? What
Sirs, are you that are men of wisdom as dull as the common people? and do we
need to heap up a multitude of words to persuade you to a known and weighty
duty? One would think it should be enough to set you on work, to show a line in
the Book of God, to prove it to be his will? or to prove to you that the work
has a tendency to men's salvation? One would think that the very sight of your
miserable neighbors should be motive sufficient to draw out your most
compassionate endeavors for their relief? If a cripple do but unlap his sores,
and show you his disabled limbs, it will move you without words? and will not
the case of souls that are near to damnation move you? O happy Church, if the
Physicians were but healed themselves! and if we had not too much of that
Infidelity and stupidity which we daily preach against, in others! and were
soundlyer persuaded of that which we persuade men of, and deeplyer affected
with the wonderful things, wherewith we would affect them! Were there but such
clear and deep impressions upon our souls, of those glorious things that we
daily preach, O what a change would it make in our Sermons, and in our private
course! O what a miserable thing it is to the Church and to themselves, that
men must preach of Heaven and Hell, before they soundly believe that there are
such things! Or have felt the weight of the Doctrines which they preach! It
would amaze a sensible man to think what matters we preach and talk of! What it
is for the soul to pass out of this flesh, and go before a righteous God, and
enter upon unchangeable Joy or Torment! O with what amazing thoughts do dying
men apprehend those things! How should such matters be preached and discourst
of? O the gravity, the seriousness, the uncessant diligence, that these things
require! I know not what others think of them, but for my part, I am ashamed of
my stupidity, and wonder at my self that Ideal not with my own and others
souls, as one that looks for the great day of the Lord; and that I can have
room for almost any other thoughts or words, and that such astonishing matters
do not wholly take me up: I marva^l how I can preach of them slightly and
coldly! and how I can let men alone in their sins! and that I do not go to them
and beseech them for the Lords sake to Repent, how ever they take it, and
whatever pains or trouble it should cost me! I seldom come out of the Pulpit,
but my Conscience smites me that I have been no more serious and servent in
such a Case.

It accuses me not so much for want of humane ornaments or elegancy, nor for
letting fall an unhansom word But it asks me How could thou speak of Life
and Death with such a Heart? How could thou Preach of Heaven and Hell, in
such a careless sleepy manner? Do thou believe what thou say? Art thou in
earrest or in jest? How can thou tell people that sin is such a thing, and
that so much misery is upon them and before them, and be no more affected with
it? should thou not weep over such a people, and should not thy tears
interrupt thy words? should thou not cry aloud, and show them their
transgressions? and entreat and beseech as for life and death. Truly this is
the peal that Conscience does ring in my ears, and yet my drouzie soul will not
be awakened! O what a thing is a senseless hardened heart! O Lord save us from
the plague of Infidelity and Hard-heartedness our selves, or else how shall we
be fit Instruments of saving others from it! O do that on our own souls, which
thou would use us to do on the souls of others! I am even confounded to think
what difference there is between my sickness apprehensions, and my Pulpit and
discoursing apprehensions of the life to come? That ever that can seem so light
a matter to me now, which seems so great and astonishing a matter then; and I
know will do so again when death looks me in the face, when yet I daily know
and think of that approaching hour! and yet those fore thoughts will not
recover such working apprehensions? O Brethren sure if you had all conversed
with neighbour-death as often as I have done, and as often received the sentence
in your selves, you would have an unquiet Conscience, if not a reformed life in
your Ministerial diligence and fidelity; and you would have something within
you that would frequently ask you such questions as these: Is this all thy
Compassion on lost sinners? will thou do no more to seek and to save them? Is
there not such and such, and such a one, O how many round about thee, that are
yet the visible sons of death? What have thou said to them or done for their
recovery? shall they dye, and be in Hell before thou will speak to them one
serious word to prevent it? shall they there curse thee for ever that did no
more in time to save them? such cries of Conscience are daily in mine ears,
though the Lord knows I have too little obeyed them. The God of Mercy pardon
me, and awake me, with the rest of his servants that have been thus sinfully
negligent, I confess to my shame, that I seldom hear the Bell toll for one that
is dead, but Conscience asks me What have thou done for the saving of that
soul before it left the body? There is one more gone to Judgment: what did
thou to prepare them for Judgment? and yet I have been slothful and backward
to help the rest that do survive. How can you choose, when you are laying a
Corpse in the grave, but think with your selves, Here lies the body, but where
is the soul? and what have I done for it, before it departed? It was part of my
charge, what account can I give of it, O Sirs, is it a small matter to you to
answer such questions, as these? It may seem so now, but the hour is coming
when it will not seem so. If our hearts condem us. God is greater then our
hearts, and will condemn us much more ^even with another kind of Condemnation
then Conscience does. The voice of conscience now is a still voice, and the
sentence of Conscience is a gentle sentence, in comparison of the voice, and
the sentence of God. Alas! Conscience sees but a very little of our sin and
misery, in comparison of what God sees. What mountains would these things
appear to your souls, which now seem mole hills? What beams would these be in
your eyes that now seem motes, if you did but see them with a clearer light? (I
dare not say, As God sees them) we can easily make shift to plead the Cause
with Conscience, and either bribe it, or bear its sentence: but God is not so
easily dealt with, nor his sentence so easily born. Wherefore we receiving (and
preaching) a Kingdom that cannot be moved, let us have grace whereby we may
serve God acceptably, with reverence, and Godly fear: for our God is a
Consuming fire, Heb. 12. ult. But because you shall not say, that I affright my
self or you with bug bears, and tell you of dangers and terrors when there are
none, I will here add the certainty and sureness of that Condemnation, that is
like to befall the negligent Pastors, and particularly that will befall us that
are here this day, if we shall hereafter be wilful neglecters of this great
work; How many will be ready to rise up against us to our Condemnation?

1. Our Parents that destinated us to the Ministry may condemn us, and say,
Lord we devoted them to thy service, and they made light of it, and served
themselves.

2. Our Masters that taught us, our Tutors that instructed us; The Schools and
Universities that we lived in, and all the years that we spent in study, may
rise up in judgment against us, and Condemn us: For why was all this, but for
the work of God?

3. Our Learning and Knowledge and Ministerial gifts will condemn us* For to
what are we made partakers of these, but for the work of God?

4 Our voluntary undertaking the Charge of souls will condemn us; For all men
should be true to the trust, that they have undertaken?

5. All the Care of God for his Church, and all, that Christ has done and
suffered for them, will rise up in judgment against us, if we be negligent and
unfaithful, and condemn us: For that we did by our neglect destroy them for
whom Christ dyed.

6. All the severe Precepts and Charges of holy Scripture, with the Promises of
Assistance and reward and the threatenings of punishment, will rise up against
the unfaithful and condemn them; For God did not speak all this in vain.

7. All the Examples of the Prophets and Apostles and other Preachers recorded
in Scripture, will rise up against such and condemn them: even this pattern
that is set them by Paul, Acts 20. And all the examples of the diligent
servants of Christ in these latter times, and in the places about them. For
these were for their imitation, and to provoke them to a holy emulation in
fidelity and Ministerial diligence.

8. The Holy Bible that is open before us, and all the Books in our studies
that tell us of our duty, directly or indirectly, may condemn the lazy and
unprofitable servant: For we have not all these helps and furniture in vain.

9. All the Sermons that we preach to persuade our people to work out their
salvation with fear and trembling, to lay violent hands upon the Crown, and
take the Kingdom as by force, to strive to enter in at the strait gate, and so
to run as they that may obtain, etc. will rise up against the unfaithful and
condemn them. For if it so nearly concern them to labor for their salvation,
does it not concern us who have the charge of them to be also violent,
laborious, and unwearied in striving to help on their salvation? Is it worth
their labor, and patience, and is it not also worth ours?

10. All the Sermons that we preach to them to set out the danger of a natural
state, the evil of sin, the need of Christ, and Grace, the Joys of heaven, and
the torments of hell, yea and the truth of Christian Religion, will rise up in
Judgment against such and condemn them. And a sad review it will be to
themselves, when they shall be forced to think Did I tell them of such great
dangers and hopes in public, and w^^ld I do no more to help them in private?
What tell them daily of threatened damnation, and yet let them run into it so
easily? Tell them of such a Glory, and scarce speak a word to them personallly
to help them to it? Were these such great matters with me at Church, and so
small when I came home?] All this is dreadful self-condemnation.

11. All the Sermons that we have preached to persuade other men to such
duties, as neighbors to exhort one another daily, and plainly to rebuke them,
and parents and masters to do it to their children and servants, will rise up
in Judgment against such, and condemn them. For will you persuade others to
that which you will not do (as far as you can) your selves? When you threaten
them for neglecting it, you threaten your own souls.

12. All our hard censures of the Magistrate for doing no more, and all our
reproofs of him for permitting Seducers, and denying his further assistance to
the Ministers, does condemn our selves if we refuse our own duty. What must all
the Rulers of the world be servants to our sloathfulness, or light us the
candle to do nothing, or only hold the stirrup to our Pride, or make our beds
for us, that we may sleep by daylight? Should they do their part in a
subordinate office to protect and further us, and should not we do ours who
stand nearest to the end?

13. All the maintenance that we take for our service if we be unfaithful will
condemn us: For who is it that will pay a servant to take his pleasure, or sit
still or work for himself? If we have the Fleece, it is sure that we may look
to the ^lock. And by taking the wages, we oblige our selves to the work.

14. All the honor that we expect or receive from the people, and all the
Ministerial Privileges before mentioned will condemn the unfaithful: For the
honor is but the encouragement to the work, and obliges to it.

15. All the witness that we have born against the scandalous negligent
Ministers of this age, and the words we have spoken against them, and all the
endeavors that we have used for their removal, will condemn the unfaithful.
For God is no respecter of persons: If we succed them in their sins, we spoke
all that against ourselves. And as we condemned them, God and others will
condemn us, if we imitate them. And though we be not so bad as they, it will
prove sad to be too like them.

16. All the Judgments that God has executed on them in this age before our
eyes, will condemn us if we be unfaithful: Has he made the idle Shepherds and
sensual drones, to stink in the nostrils of the people? and will he honor us,
if we be idle and sensual? Has he sequestered them, and cast them our of their
habitations, and out of the Pulpits, and laid them by, as dead, while they are
alive, and made them a hissing and a byword in the Land? and yet dare we
imitate them? Are not their sufferings our warnings? and did not all this
befall them for our examples? If any thing in the world should waken Ministers
to selfdenyal and diligence, one would think we had seen enough to do it! If
the Judgments of God on one man should do so much, what should so many years
judgment on so many hundreds of them do? Would you have imitated the old
world, if you had seen the flood that drowned them! Would you have taken up the
sins of Sodom, Pride, Fullness of bread, Idleness, if you had stood by and seen
the flames of Sodom! This was Gods argument to deter the Israelites from the
Nations sins, because, for all these things they had seen them cast one before
them. Who would have been a Judas that had seen him hanged and burst? and who
would have been a lying sacrilegious hypocrite, that had seen ^nanias and
Saphira dye? And who would not have been afraid to contradict the Gospel, that
had seen ^l^mas smitten blind? And shall we prove self-seeking, idle Ministers,
when we have seen God scourging such out of his Temple, and sweeping them away
as dirt into the Channels? God forbid! For then how great, and how manifold
will our condemnation be?

17. All the Disputations and eager contests that we have had against
unfaithful men, and for a faithful Ministry, will condemn us, if we be
unfaithful? And so will the Books that we have written to those ends. How many
score, if not hundreds of Catechisms are written in England? and yet shall we
forbear to use them? How many Books have been written for Discipline, by
English and Scottish Divines? and how fully has it been defended? and what
reproach has been cast upon the adversaries of it through the Land? And yet
shall we lay it by, as useless, when we have free leave to use! O fearful
hypocrisy! What can we call it less? Did we think when we were writing against
this sect, and the sect that opposed Discipline, that we were writing all that
against our selves? O what Evidence do the Booksellers shops, and their own
Libraries contain against the greatest part, even of the godly Ministers of the
Land! The Lord cause them seasonably to lay it to heart.

18. All the days of fasting and prayer that have been of late years kept in
England so a Reformation, will rise up in Judgment against the unreformed,
that will not be persuaded to the painful part of the work. And I confess it is
so heavy an aggravation of our sin, that it makes me ready to tremble to think
of it. Was there ever a Nation on the race of the earth that has so solemnly
and so long, followed God with fasting and prayer as we have done? Before the
Parliament began, how frequent and servent were wein secret: After that for
many years time together, we had a monthly Fast commanded by the Parliament:
besides frequent private and public Fa^^s on the by. And what was all this
for? What ever was sometime the means that we looked at, yet still the end of
all our Prayers was Church-Reformation, and therein especially these two
things; A faithful Ministry; and Exercise of Discipline in the Church: And did
it once enter then into the hearts of the people, yea or into our own hearts to
imagine, that when we had all that we would have, and the matter was put into
our own hands, to be as painful as we could, and to exercise what Discipline we
would, that then we would do nothing (but publicly preach) that we would not
be at the pains of Catechizing and Instructing our people personally? nor
exercise any considerable part of Discipline at all? It astonisheth me to think
of it! What a depth of deceit is it, the heart of man! What, are good men's
hearts so deceitful? Are all men's hearts so deceitful? I confess I told many
soldiers and other sensual men then, that when they had fought for a
Reformation, I was confident they would abhor it and be enemies to it, when
they saw and felt it: thinking that the yoke of Discipline would have pincht
their necks: and that when they had been catechized and personally dealt with,
and reproved for their sin, in private and public, and brought to public
confestion and repentance, or avoided as impenitent, they would have scorned
and spurned against all this, and have taken the yoke of Christ for tyranny:
But little did I think that the Ministers would have let all fall, and put
almost none of this upon them, but have let them alone for fear of displeasing
them, and have let all run on as it did before.

O the earnest prayers that I have heard in secret days heretofore for a
Painful Ministry, and for Discipline! As if they had even wrestled for
salvation it self? Yea they commonly called Discipline, The Kingdom of Christ;
or the Exercise of his Kingly office in his Church; and so preached and prayed
for it, as if the setting up of Discipline, had been the setting up of the
Kingdom of Christ. And did I then think that they would refuse to set it up
when they might! What is the Kingdom of Christ now reckoned among the things
indifferent!

If the God of heaven that knew our hearts, had in the midst of our Prayers and
Cries on one of our Public monthly Fasts, returned us this answer with his
dreadful voice, in the audience of the Assembly, You deceitful hearted sinners;
what Hypocrisio is this, to weary me with your cries for that which you will
not have if I would give it you! and thus to lift up your voices for that which
your souls abhor! what is Reformation, but the instructing and importunate
persuading of sinners to entertain my Christ and Grace as offered them, and the
Governing my Church according to my word? and these which are your work, you
will not be persuaded to when you come to find it troublesome and ungreatful!
when I have delivered you, it is not me but your selves that you will serve;
and I must be as earnest to persuade you to reform the Church in doing your own
duty, as you are earnest with me to grant you liberty for reformation? and when
all is done, you will leave it undone, and will be long before you will be
persuaded to my work. I say, if the Lord or any Messenger of his, had given us
in such an answer, would it not have amazed us, and have seemed incredible to
us, that our hearts should have been such as now they prove! and would we not
have said as Hazael, Is thy servant a dog, that he should do this thing? Or as
Peter, Though all men forsake or deny thee, I will not! Well Brethren! too sad
experience has showed us our frailty: We have denied the troublesome and costly
part of the Reformation, that we prayed for! But Christ yet turns back, and
looks with a merciful eye upon us. O that we had yet the hearts, immediately
to go out and weep bitterly, and to do so, as we have done, no more, lest a
worse thing come unto us, and now to follow Christ through labor and
suffering, though it were to the death, whom we have so far forsaken.

19. All the Judgments upon the Nation, the cost, the labor, the blood, and
the deliverances, and all the endeavors of the Governors for Reformation, will
rise up against us if we now refuse to be faithful for a Reformation, when it
is before us, and at our will.

I have said somewhat of this before. Has God been hewing us out a way with
his sword, and levelling opposers by his terrible Judgments, and yet will we
sit still or play the sluggards? Have England, Scotland and Ireland paid so
dear for a Reformation, and now shall some men treacherously strangle it in the
birth, and others expose it to contempt, and overrun it? and others sit still
and look on it as a thing not worth the trouble: How many thousand persons may
come to the condemnation of such men? The whole Countries may say, Lord we have
been plundered, and ruined or much impover shed, we have paid taxes these many
years, and it was a Reformation that was pretended, and that we were promised,
in all; and now the Ministers that should be the instruments of it do neglect
it: Many thousands may say, Lord we ventured our lives in obedience to a
Parliament, that promised Reformation, and now we cannot have it. The souls of
many, that have dyed in these wars may cry out against us, Lord it was the
hopes of a Reformation that we fought and suffered for, in obedience to those
Governors that professed to intend it; and now the Pastors reject it by their
idleness. The Parliament may say, How long did we sit and consult about
Reformation; and now the Ministers will not execute the power that is granted
them? The Nation may say, How often did we beg it of God, and Petition the
Parliament for it, and now the Ministers deny us the enjoyment of it? Yea God
himself may say, How many prayers have I heard! and what dangers have I
delivered you from! how many! and how great! and in what a wonderful manner!
And what do you think it was, that I delivered you for? Was it not that you
should do my work! And will you betray it, or neglect it after all this? Truly
Sirs, I know not what others think, but when I consider the Judgments that we
have felt, and the wonders of Mercy that my eyes have seen, to the frequent
astonishment of my soul, as I know it is great matters that these things oblige
us to, so I am afraid lest they should be charged on me as the aggravations of
my neglect. I hear every exasperated party still flying in the faces of the
rest, and one says It was you that killed the King, and the other says It was
you that fought against a Parliament, and put them to defend themselves, and
drencht the land in blood. But the Lord grant that it be not we, if we prove
negligent in our Ministry, and betray the Reformation that God has called us
to, that shall have all this blood and misery charged on us, yea though we had
never any other hand therein: And that the Lord say not of us, as of John, even
when he had destroyed the house of Ahab by his command, because he accomplished
not the Reformation which that execution tended to, Yet a little while, and I
will avenge the blood of Iezrael on the house of Jehn, Hof. 1. 4. O Sirs, can
we find in our hearts to lose all the cost and trouble of the three Nations,
and all to save us a little trouble in the Issue, and so to bring the guilt of
all upon our selves. Far be it from us if we have the hearts of Christians.

20. Lastly, if we should yet refuse a Reformation, in our Instructing of the
Ignorant or our exercise of Christ's Discipline, how many Vows and Promises of
our own may rise up in Judgment against us and condemn us^ 1. In the National
Covenant those that entered into it did vow and Promise most solemnly before
the Lord and his people, that Having before our eyes the Glory of God, and the
advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ -- we would
sincerely, really and constantly endeavor in our several places and callings
the Reformation of Religion ^n Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government --
and we did profess our true and unfeigned purpose, desire and endeavor for our
selves and all others under our power and charge, both in public and private,
in all dutes we ow to God and man, to amend our lives, and each one to go
before another in the Example of a Real Reformation. And this Covenant we made
as in the presence of God the searcher of all hearts with a true intention to
perform the same as we shall answer at the great day when the secrets of all
hearts shall be disclosed. O dreadful case then that we have put our selves
into, if infinite mercy help us not out! May we not say after the reading of
this as Iosi^h after the reading o^ the Law, a Kings 22. 13. 2 Chronicles. 34. 21.
Great is the wrath of the Lord that is kindled against us, because we have not
done according to this Covenant. Could a people have devised a readrer way to
thrust themselves under the curse of God by such a solemn dreadful Covenant,
and when they have done so long, so wilfully, so openly to violate it? Does not
this plainly bind us to the private as well as the public part of our duty?
and to a Real Reformation of Discipline in our practice? Again therefore I must
needs say, what a bottomless depth of deceit is the heart of man! O what heavy
charges have we brought against many others of these times for breaking this
solemn Vow and Covenant (from which I am far from undertaking to acquit them)
when yet we that led the way, and drew on others, and daily preached up
Reformation and Discipline, have so horribly violated this Covenant our selves,
that in a whole Country it is rare to find a Minister, that has set up
Discipline or private Instruction. And he that can see much done toward it in
England, has more acquaintance, or better eyes then I have.

2. Also in our frequent solemn Humiliation days in the time of our deep
distress and fear, how publicly and earnestly did we beg deliverances, not as
for our sakes, but for the Church and Gospel sake, as if we had not cared what
had become of us, so that the Reformation of the Church might go on, and we
promised if God would hear and deliver us, what we would do toward it. But O
how unfaithful have we been to those Promises! as if we were not the same men
that ever spoke such words to God! I confess it fills my own soul with shame,
to consider the unanswerableness of my affections and Endeavors to the many
fervent prayers, rare deliverances, and confident Promises of those years of
advesity! And such experiences of the almost incredible unfaithfulness of our
hearts, is almost enough to make a man never trust his heart again; and
Consequently to shake his Certainty of sincerity: Have we now, or are we like
to have any higher Resolutions, then those were which we have broken! And it
tends also to make us question in the next extremity, even at the hour of
death, whether God will hear and help us any more, who have forfeited our
Credit with him by proving so unfaithful. If so many years public humiliations
spurred on by such calamities as neither we nor our fathers for many
Generations had ever seen, had no more in them then now appears, and if this be
the issue of all, how can we tell how to believe our selves hereafter? It may
makes us fear lest our case be like the Israelites, Psalm 78. 34, 35, 36, 37,
43, 42, 57. Who when he slew them, then they sought him, and they returned, and
enquired early after God: and they remembered that God was their Rock, and the
high God their Redeemer, Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth:
and they lied unto him with their tongues; For their heart was not right with
God, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. They remembered not his hand,
nor the day when he delivered them from the Enemy. -- But turned back, and
dealt unfaithfully like their fathers: they were turned aside like a deceitful
bow.

3. Moreover, if we will not be faithful in duties that we are engaged to, our
own Agreements and Engagements which remain subscribed by our hands, and are
published to the view of the world, will rise up in judgment against us and
condemn us. We have engaged our selves under our hands near three years ago,
that we will set up the exercise of Discipline, and yet how many have neglected
it to this day without giving any just and reasonable excuse? We have now
subscribed another Agreement and Engagement, for Catechizing and Instructing
all that will submit. We have done well so far; But if now we should flag and
prove remiss and superficial in the performance, Our subscriptions will condemn
us; this days humiliation will condemn us. Be not deceived: God is not mocked:
it is not your Names only, but your hearts and hands also that he requires:
There is no dallying with God by feigned Promises; He will expect that you be
as good as your words. He will not hold him guiltless, that by false Oaths, or
Vows, or Covenants with him does take his holy Name in vain? When thou vowest a
vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he has no pleasure in fools; pay that
which thou have vowed. Better it is that thou should not vow, then that thou
should vow and not pay; suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin:
neither say thou before the Angel, that it was an Error; wherefore should God
be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thy hands, Eccless. 5 4 5, 6.

And thus I have showed you what will come on it, if you shall not set your
selves faithfully to this work, to which you have so many obligations and
engagements? and what an unexcusable thing our neglect would be, and how great
and manifold a condemnation it would expose us to. Truly Brethen, if I did not
apprehend the work to be of exceeding great moment, to your selves, to the
people, and to the honor of God. I would not have troubled you with so many
words about it, nor have presumed to have spoken so sharply as I have done. But
when it is for life and death men are apt to forget their reverence, and
courtefie and complements, commonly called Good manners! For my part I
apprehend this as one of the best and greatest works that ever I put mine hand
to in my life. And I verily think that your thoughts of it are as mine: and
then you will not think my words too many or too keen. I can well remember the
time when I was earnest for the Reformation of matters of Ceremony: and if I
should be cold in such a substantial matter as this, how disorderly, and
disproportionable would my Zeal appear! Alas, can we think that the Reformation
is wrought, when we cast out a few Ceremonies, and changed some vestures, and
gestures, and forms! O no Sirs! it is the converting and saving of souls that
is our business: That's the chiefest part of the Reformation that does most
good, and tends most to the salvation of the people. Let others take it how
they will, I will so far speak my conscience for your just encouragement, as to
say again, that I am verily persuaded that as you are happily agreed and
combined for this work, so if you will but faithfully execute this Agreement,
together with your former Agreement for Discipline, you will do much more for a
true Reformation, and that peaceably without meddling with controverted points
then I have heard of any part of England to have done before you, and yet no
more than is unquestionably, your Duty.

SECT. VI.
I Am next to answer some of those Objections, which backward minds may cast in
our way. And 1. some may object, that this course will take up so much time
that a man shall have no time to follow his studies: Most of us are young and
raw, and have need of much time to improve our own abilities, which this course
will prohibit us. To which I answer: 1. We suppose them whom we persuade to
this work, to understand the substance of the Christian Religion, and to be
able to teach it others: And the addition of lower and less necessary things,
is not to be preferred before this needful communication of the fundamentals. I
highly value common knowledge, and would not encourage any to set light by it:
But I value the saving of souls before it. That work which is next the end must
be done, whatever be undone: Its a very desirable thing for a Physician to be
thoroughly studied in his art; and to be able to see the reason of his
experiments, and to resolve such difficult controversies as are before him: But
if he had the charge of an Hospital, or lived in a City that had the raging
Pestilence, if he would be studying de fermentatica^, de circulatione
sanguinis, de vesicule chyli, de instrumentis sanguificationis, and such like
excellent useful points, when he should be looking to his patients, and saving
men's lives, and should turn them away and let them perish, and tell them that
he cannot have while to give them advice, because he must follow his own
studies, I should take that man for a preposterous student, that preferred the
remote means before the end it self of his studies: and indeed I should think
him but a civil kind of Murderer. Men's souls may be saved without knowing,
whether God did predetermine the creature in all its acts? whether the
understanding necessarily determines the will? whether God works Grace in a
Physical or Moral way of causation? What free will is? Whether God have
scientiam mediam? Or positive decrees de malo culpae; with a hundred such like,
which are the things that you would be studying when you should be saving
souls. Get well to heaven, and help your people thither, and you shall know all
these things in a moment, and a thousand more which now by all your studies you
can never know: and is not this the most expeditious and certain way to
knowledge.

2. If you grow not extensively in knowledge, you will by this way of diligent
practice obtain the intensive more excellent growth: If you know not so many
things as others, you will know the great things better then they: For this
serious dealing with sinners for their salvation, will help you to far deeper
apprehensions of their saving principles, then will be got by any other means.
And a little more of the knowledge of these is worth all the other knowledge in
the world. O when I am looking heavenward, and gazing toward the inaccessible
light, and aspiring after the knowledge of God, and find my soul so dark and
distant, that I am ready to say, [I know not God; he is above me: quite out of
my reach] this is the most killing and grievous Ignorance! One thinks I could
willingly exchange all other knowledge that I have for one glimpse more of the
knowledge of God and the life to come. O that I had never known a word in
Logic, Metaphysics, etc. Nor known what ever Schoolmen said, so I had but
one spark more of that light that would show me the things that I must shortly
see. For my part, I conceive that by serious talking of everlasting things, and
teaching the Creed and shortest Catechism, you may grow more in knowledge
(though not in the knowledge of more things) and prove much wiser men, then if
you spent that time in common or curious less necessary things.

3. Yet let me add, that though I count this the chief, I would have you to
have more; because those subservient sciences are very useful: and therefore I
say, that you may have competent time for both: Lose none upon vain recreations
and employn ents: Trifle not away a minute: Consume it not in needless sleep:
Do that you do with all your might: and then see whether you have not a
competent time. If you set apart but two days in a week in this great work
that we are Agreed on, you may find some for common studies out of all the
other five.

4. Duties are to be taken together: the greatest to be preferred; but none to
be neglected that can be performed; not one to be pleaded against another, but
each to know its profession: but if there were such a case of Necessity, that
we could not read for our selves in the course of our further studies, and
Instruct the Ignorant both, I would throw by all the Libraries in the world,
rather then be guilty of the perdition of one soul; or at least, I know that
this is my duty.

Obj. 2. But this course will destroy the health of our bodies, by continual
spending the spirits, and allowing us no time for necessary recreations; and it
will woolly lock us up from any civil friendly visitations, so that we must
never stir from home, nor take our delight at home one day with our friends,
for the relaxation of our minds; but as we shall seem discourteous and morose
to others, so we shall tire our selves, and the bow that is still bent will be
in danger of breaking at last.

Answ 1. This is the mere plea of the flesh for its own interest: The sluggard
says, there is a Lion in the way. He will not plough because of the cold.
There is no duty of moment and self-denial, but if you consult with flesh and
blood, it will give you as wise reasons as these against it. Who would ever
have been burnt at a stake for Christ, if this reasoning had been good? Yea or
who would ever have been a Christian?

2. We may take time for necessary Recreation for all this? An hour or half, an
hours walk before meat, is as much Recreation as is of necessity for the health
of most of the weaker sort of students. I have reason to know somewhat of this
by long experience. Though I have a body that has languished under great
weaknesses many years, and my diseases have been such as require as much
exercise as almost any in the world, and I have found exercise the principal
means of my preservation till now, and therefore have as great reason to plead
for it as any man that I know alive, yet I have found that the foresaid
proportion has been blessed to my preservation (though I know that much more
had been like to have tended to my greater health.) And I do not know one
Minister of an hundred, that needs so much as my self. Yea I know abundance
of Ministers that scarce ever use any exercise at all (though I commend it not
in them) I doubt not but it is our duty to use so much exercise as is of
necessity for the preservation of our health, so far as our work requires:
else we should for one days work lose the opportunity of many: But this may be
done, and yet the works that we are engaged in, be done too. On those two days
a week that you set apart for this work, what hinders but you may take an hour
or two to walk for the exercise of your bodies? Much more on other days.

But as for those men that limit not their Recreations to their stated hours,
but must have them for the pleasing of their voluptuous humor, and not only to
fit them for their work, such sensualists have need to study better the nature
of Christianity, and learn the danger of living after the flesh, and get more
mortification and self-denial before they preach these things to others. If you
must needs have your pleasures, you should not have put your selves into that
calling that requires you to make God and his service your pleasure, and
restrains you so much from fleshly pleasures. Is it your baptismal engagement
to fight against the flesh? and do you know that much of the Christian warfare
consists in the combat between the flesh and the spirit? and that is the
very difference between a true Christian and a wicked wretch, that one lives
after the spirit, and mortifyeth the deeds and desires of the body, and the
other lives after the flesh? and do you know that the overcoming the flesh is
the principal part of our victory, on which the Crown of life depends; and do
you make it your calling to preach all this to others; and yet for all this
must you needs have your pleasures? If you must, then for shame give over the
preaching of the Gospel, and the profession of Christian self-denial, and
profess your selves to be as you are, and as you sow to the flesh, so of the
flesh shall you receive the wages of corruption. Does such a one as Paul say? I
therefore so run, not as uncertainly: so fight I, not as one that beats the
air: But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, least that by any
means, when I have preached to others, I my self should be a castaway, 1 Cor.
4. 26, 27. And have not such sinners as we, need to do so? Shall we pamper our
bodies, and give them their desires in unnecessary pleasures, when Paul must
keep under his body, and bring it into subjection? Must Paul do this, least
after all his preaching he should be a castaway? and have not we cause to fear
it of our selves much more? I know that some pleasure it self is lawful: that
is, when it is of use to the fitting us for our work. But for a man to be so
far in love with his pleasures, as that he must unnecessarily wast his precious
time in them, and neglect the great work of God for men's salvation, yea and
plead for this as if it must or might be done, and so to justify himself in
such a course, is a wickedness inconsistent with the common fidelity of a
Christian, much more with the fidelity of a Teacher of the Church: And such
wretches as are lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God, must look to
beloved of him accordingly, and are fitter to be cast out of Christian
Communion, then to be the chief in the Church for we are commanded, from such
to turn away, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Recreations for a student, must be specially for the
exercise of his body, he having before him such variety of delights to his
mind. And they must be as whetting is with the Mower, that is only to be used
so far is necessary to his work. And we must be careful that it rob us not of
our precious time, but be kept within the narrowest bounds that may be. I pray
peruse well Mr. Wheatley's Sermon of Redemption of time. 2. And then the labor
that we are now engaged to perform, is not likely much to impair our health.
Its true, it must be serious; but that will but excite and revive our spirits,
and not so much spend them. Men can talk all the day long of other matters
without any abatement of their health: and why may not we talk with men about
their salvation without such great abatement of ours?

3. It is to be understood that the direction that we give, and the work which
we undertake is not for dying men, that be not able to preach or speak, but for
men of some competent measure of strength, and whose weaknesses are tolerable,
and may admit of such labors.

4. What have we our time and strength for, but to lay it out for God? What is
a Candle made for, but to be burnt? Burnt and wasted we must be, and is it not
fitter it should be in lighting men to heaven, and in working for God, then in
living to the flesh? How little difference is there between the pleasure of a
long life and of a short, when they are both at an end? What comfort will it be
at death, that you lengthened your life by shortening your work? He that works
much; lives much: Our life is to be esteemed according to the ends and works
of it, and not according to the mere duration. As Seneca can say of a drone,
ibi jacet, non ibi vivit; and diu fuit, non diu vixit: Will it not comfort us
more at death to review a short time faithfully spent, then a long time
unfaithfully?

4. And for the matter of Visitations and Civilities, if they be for greater
ends, or use, then our Ministerial employments are, you may break a Sabbath for
them; you may forbear preaching for them, and so may forbear this private work;
But if it be otherwise, how dare you make them a pretense to neglect so great a
duty? Must God wait on your friends? What if they be Lords, or Knights, or
Gentlemen? Must they be served before God? Or is their displeasure or censure a
greater hurt to you, then Gods displeasure? Or dare you think, when God shall
question you for your neglects, to put him off with this excuse, Lord I would
have spent more of my time in seeking men's salvation, but that such a Gentleman
and such a friend would have taken it ill if I had not waited on them. If you
yet seek to please men, you are no longer the servants of Christ. He that dares
spend his life in flesh-pleasing and man-pleasing, is bolder then I am. And he
that dares wast his time in complements, does little consider what he has to
do with it. O that I could but improve my time according to my convictions of
the necessity of improving it! He that has looked death in the face as often as I
have done, I will not thank him to value his time. I profess I admire at those
Ministers that have time to spare, that that can hunt, or shoot, or bowl, or
use the like recreations two or three hours, yea whole days almost together,
That can sit an hour together in vain discourses; and spend whole days in
complemental visitations, and journeys to such ends. Good Lord, what do these
men think on! when so many souls about them cry for their help, and death gives
no respite; and they know not how short a time their people and they may be
together? When the smallest Parish has so much work that may employ all their
diligence night and day! Brethren, I hope you are content to be plainly dealt
with. If you have no sense of the worth of souls, and of the preciousness of
that blood that was shed for them, and of the glory that they are going to, and
of the misery that they are in danger of; then are you no Christians, and
therefore very unfit to be Ministers: And if you have, how can you find time
for needless recreations, visitations or discourses? Dare you like idle
Gossips, chat and trifle away your time, when you have such works as these to
do, and so many of them? O precious time! How swiftly does it pass away! How
soon will it be gone! What are the 40 years of my life that are past! Were
every day as long as a month, me thinks it were too short for the work of a
day! Have we not lost enough already in the days of our vanity? Never do I
come to a dying man that is not utterly stupid, but he better sees the worth of
time! O then if they could call time back again, how loud would they call? If
they could but buy it, what would they give for it? And yet can we afford to
trifle it away! Yea and to allow our selves in this, and wilfully cast off the
greatest works of God! O what a befooling thing is sin, that can thus distract
men that seem so wise! Is it possible that a man of any true compassion and
honesty, or any care of his Ministerial duty, or any sense of the strictness of
his account, should have time to spare for idleness and vanity?

And I must tell you further Brethren, that if another might take some time for
mere delight which were not necessary, yet so cannot you; for your undertaking
binds you to stricter attendance then other men are bound to. May a Physician
in the plaguetime, take any more relaxation or reereation then is necessary for
his life, when so many are expecting his help in a case of life and death! As
his pleasure is not worth men's lives, so neither is yours worth men's souls.
Suppose your Cities were besieged, and the enemy on one side watching all
advantages to surprise it, and on the other seeking to fire it with grenades
which are cast in continually. I pray you tell me now, if certain men undertake
it as their office to watch the ports, and others to quench the fire that shall
be kindled in the houses, what time will, you allow these men for their
recreation or relaxation? When the City is in danger, or the fire will burn on
and prevail if they intermit their diligence! Or would you excuse one of these
men if he come off his work, and say, I am but flesh and blood, I must have
some pleasure or relaxation? At the utmost sure you would allow him none but of
necessity?

Do not grudge at this now and say, This is a hard saying, who can bear it? For
it is your mercy; and you are well, if you know when you are well, as I shall
show you in answering this next Objection.

Object. 3. I do not think that it is required of Ministers that they make
drudges of themselves. If they preach diligently, and visit the sick, and do
other Ministerial duties, and occasionally do good to those they converse with,
I do not think that God does moreover require that we should thus tie our
selves to Instruct every person distinctly, and to make our lives a burden and
a slavery?

Answ. 1. Of what use and weight the duty is, I have showed before land how
plainly it is commanded. And do you think God does not require you to do all
the good you can? Will you stand by and see sinners gasping under the pangs of
death, and say, God does not require me to make my self a drudge to save them?
Is this the voice of Ministerial or Christian Compassion? or rather of sensual
Lazarus, and diabolical cruelty I Does God set you work to do, and will you not
believe that he would have you do it? Is that the voice of obedience, or of
rebellion? It is all one whether your flesh do prevail with you to deny
obedience to acknowledge duty, and say plainly I will obey no further then it
pleases me. Or whether it may make you wilfully reject the evidence that
should convince you that it is a duty, and say I will not believe it to be my
duty unless it please me. Its the true Character of an hypocrite, to make a
Religion to himself of the cheapest part of Gods service, which will stand with
his fleshly ends and felicity; and to reject the rest, which is inconsistent
therewith. And to the words of Hypocrisy, this objection superaddeth the words
of gross impiety. For what a wretched Calumny is this against the most high
God, to call his service a slavery and drudgery! what thoughts have these men
of their Master, their work and their wages? the thoughts of a believer or of
an Infidel; Are these men like to honor God, and promote his service that have
such base thoughts of it themseves? Do these men delight in Holiness, that
account it a slavish work? Do the believe indeed the Misery of sinners, that
account it such a slavery to be diligent for to save them. Christ says that he
that denies not himself and forsakes not all and takes not up his cross and
follows him, cannot be his Disciple. And these men count it a slavery to
labor hard in his vineyard, and deny their ease, in a time when they have all
accomodations and Encouragements? How far is this from forsaking all? and how
can these men be fit for the Ministry that are such enemies to self-denial, and
so to true Christianity? Still therefore I am forced to say, that all these
Objections are so prevalent, and all these carnal reasonings hinder the
Reformation, and in a word, hence is the chief misery of the Church, that so
many are made Ministers before they are Christians. If these men had seen the
diligence of Christ in doing good, when he neglected his meat to talk with one
woman, Joh. 4. and when they had no time to eat bread, Mark 3. 22. would not
they have been of the mind of his carnal friends that went to lay hold on him,
and said, He is besides himself, verse. 21. They would have told Christ he made
a drudge or a slave of himself, and God did not require all this ado. If they
had seen him all night in prayer, and all day in preaching and healing, it
seems he should have had this censure from them for his labor! I cannot but
advise these men to search their own hearts, whether they unfeignedly believe
that word, that they preach? Do you believe indeed that such Glory attends
those that dye in the Lord, and such Torment attends those that dye
unconverted? If you do, how can you think any labor too much, for such weighty
ends? If you do not, say so, and get you out of the vine ard, and go with the
Prodigal to keep swine, and undertake not the feeding of the Flock of Christ.

Do you not know that it is your own benefit which you grudge at? The more you
do, the more you receive: the more you lay out, the more you have coming in: If
you are strangers to these Christian Paradoxes, you should not have taken on
you to peach them to others. At the present, our incomes of spiritual life and
peace are commonly in way of duty; so that he that is most in duty has most of
God: Exercise of Grace increases it: And is it a slavery to be more with God,
and to receive more him, then other men? It is the chief solace of a gracious
soul to be doing Good, and receiving by doing: and to be much exercised about
those Divine things which have his heart. A good stomach will not say at a
feast, what a slavery is it to bestow my time and pains so much to feed my
self? Besides, that we prepare for fuller receivings hereafter: we set our
Talents to usury, and by improving them we shall make five become ten, and so
be made Rulers of ten Cities. We shall be judged according to our works. Is it
a drudgery to send to the utmost parts of the world, to exchange our trifles
for Gold and Jewels? Do not these men seek to Justify the profane, that make
all diligent godliness a drudgery, and reproach it as a precise and tedious
life, I say, they will never believe but a man may be saved without all this
ado? Even so say these in respect to the works of the Ministry, They take this
diligence for ungrateful tediousness, and they will not believe but a man may
be a faithful Minister without all this ado! It is a heinous sin to be
Negligent in so great a business: but to approve of that negligence, and so to
be impenitent, and to plead against duty as if it were none, and when they
should lay out themselves for the saving of souls, to say I do not believe that
God requires it; this is so great an aggravation of the sin that (where the
Churches Necessity does not force us to make use of such, for want of better) I
cannot but think them worthy to be cast out as the rubbish, and as sale that
has lost its savor, that is neither fit for the land, nor yet for the
dunghill, but men cast it out: he that has ears to hear (says Christ in these
words) let him hear, Luke 14. 34. 35. And if such Ministers become a byword
and reproach, let them thank themselves: for it is their own sin that makes
them vile, 1 Samuel 3. 13. And while they thus debase the service of the Lord,
they do but debase themselves, and prepare for a greater abasement at the last.

Object. 4. BUt if you make such severe Laws for Ministers, the Church will be
left without. For what man will put himself upon such a toilsom life; or what
Parents will choose such a burden for their children? Men will avoid it both
for the bodily toil, and the danger to their Consciences, if they should not
well discharge it.

Ans. 1. It is not we, but Christ that has made and imposed these Laws which
you call severe. And if I should silence them or mis-interpret them, or tell
you that there is no such things, that would not relax them nor disoblige or
excuse you. He that made them, knew why he did it, and will expect the
performance of them. Is infinite Goodness it self to be questioned or suspected
by us, as making bad or unmerciful Laws? Nay it is mere mercy in him that
imposes this great duty upon us? If Physicians be required to be as diligent
in Hospitals or Pesthouses or with other patients, to save their lives, were
there not more mercy, then rigor in this Law? what, must God let the souls of
your Neighbors perish, to save you a little Labor and suffering: and this in
mercy to you? O what a miserable world should we have, if blind self-conceited
man had the ruling of it?

2. And for a supply of Pastors, Christ will take care. He that imposes duty,
has the fullness of the Spirit, and can give men hearts to obey his Laws. Do
you think Christ will suffer all men to be as cruel, unmerciful, fleshly and
self-seeking as you? He that has undertaken himself the work of our
Redemption, and born our transgressions, and been faithful as the chief
Shepherd and Teacher of the Church, will not lose all his Labor and suffering
for want of Instruments to carry on his work, nor will he come down again to do
all himself because no other will do it: but he will provide men to be his
Servants and Ushers in his School that shall willingly take the labor on them,
and rejoice to be so employed, and account that the happiest life in the world
which you account so great a toil, and would not change it for all your ease
and carnal pleasure, but for the saving of souls, and the propagating of the
Gospel of Christ, will be content to bear the burden and heat of the day, and
to fill up the measure of the sufferings of Christ in their bodies, and to do
what they do with all their might, and to work while it is day, and to be the
servants of all, and not to please themselves but others for their Edification,
and to become all things to all men that they may save some, and to endure all
things for the elects sake, and to spend and be spent for men, though the more
they love, the less they should be beloved, and should be accounted their
enemies for telling them the truth; such Pastors will Christ provide his people
after his own heart, that will feed them with knowledge: as men that seek not
theirs, but them. What, do you think Christ can have no servants, if such as
you shall with Demas turn to the present world and forsake him? If you dislike
his service, you may seek you a better where you can find it, and boast of your
gain in the Conclusion: but do not threaten him with the loss of your service.
He has made such Laws as you will call severe, for all that will be saved as
well as for his Ministers (though he impose not on them the same employment):
for all must deny themselves and mortify the flesh, and be crucified to the
world, and take up their Cross and follow Christ, that will be his Disciples:
And yet Christ will not be without Disciples, nor will he hide his seeming hard
terms from men to tice them to his service, but will tell them of the worst,
and then let them come or choose: He will call to them before hand to count what
it will cost them, and tell them that the foxes have holes and the birds of the
air have nests, but the son of man has not where to lay his head; he comes not
to give them worldly Pea^ce and Prosperity, but to call them to suffer with him
that they may reign with him, and in patience to possess their souls, and
conquer, that they may be crowned with him and sit down on his throne. And all
this he will cause his chosen to perform. If you be at that pass with Christ as
the Israelite: were once with David, and say will the son of Jesse give you
fields and vineyard? Every man to your tents O Israel: and if you say, Now look
to thy owi house O David you shall see that Christ will look to his own house,
and do you look to yours as well as you can, and tell me at the hour of death
or Judgment which is the better bargain, and whether Christ had more need of
you, or you of him.

And for scrupling it in Conscience for fear of failing, 1. It is not
involuntary imperfections that Christ will take so hainously; but it is
unfait^ulness and wilful negligence: 2. And it shall not serve your turns to
run out of the Vineyard or harvest, on pretense of scruples, that you cannot do
the work as you ought. He can follow you and overtake you as he did Jonas with
such a storm, as shall lay you in the belly of Hell: Totally to cast off a
duty, because you cannot endure to be faithful in the performance of it, will
prove but a poor excuse at last. If men had but reckoned well at first, of the
difference between things temporal and eternal, and of what they shall lose or
get by Christ, and had that faith which is the evidence of things not seen, and
lived by faith and not by sense, all these objections would be easily resolved;
and all the plea's of flesh and blood for its interest, would appear to have no
more reason, then a sick man's plea for cold water in a Pestilential fever.

Obj. 5. But to what purpose is all this, when most of the people will not
submit? They will but make a scorn at your motion, and tell us, they will not
come to us to be Catechized, and that they are too old now to go to School; And
therefore it is as good let them alone, as trouble our selves to no purpose.

Answ. I. Its not to be denied, but too many people are obstinate in their
wickedness, and too many simple ones love simplicity, and too many scorners
delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge, Prove. I.22. But the worse they
are, the sadder is their case, and the more to be pityed, and the more diligent
should we be for their recovery. 2. I would it were not too much long of
Ministers, that a great part of the people are so obstinate and contemptuous?
If we did shine and burn before them as we should, had we convincing Sermons
and convincing lives, did we set our selves to do all the good we could what
ever it cost us: Were we more humble and meek, more loving and charitable, and
let them see that we set light by all worldly things in comparison of their
salvation; much more might be done then is, and the mouths of many would be
slopt, and though still the wicked will do wickedly, yet more would be
tractable, and the wicked would be fewer and calmer then they are. If you say,
that the ablest and godliest Ministers in the world have had as untractable and
scornful Parishoners as any others, I answer, that even able godly men have
some of them been too Lordly and strange, and some of them too uncharitable and
worldly, and backward to costly, though necessary works, and some of them have
done but little in private, when they have done excellently in public; and so
have hindered the fruit of their labors. But where these impediments are
absent, experience teleth us that the success is much greater, at least, as to
the bowing of people to more calmness and teachableness: but we cannot expect
that all should be brought to so much reason.

3. Their wilfulness will not excuse us from our duty: If we offer them not our
help, how know we who will refuse it: Offering it is our part, and accepting is
theirs: If we offer it not, we leave them excusable (for then they refuse it
not) but its we that are lest without excuse. But if they refuse our help when
its offered, we have done our part, and delivered our own souls.

4. If some refuse our help, others will accept it: and the success with them
may be so much, as may answer all our labor were it more. It is not all that
are wrought on by our public preaching, and yet we must not therefore give it
over as unprofitable.

Obj. 6. BUT what likelihood is there that men will be informed or converted by
this means, that will not by the preaching of the word? when that is Gods chief
Ordinance appointed to that end: Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word preached.

Answ. 1. The advantages I have showed you before, and therefore will not stand
to repeat them; only, lest any think that this will wrong them by hindering
them from preaching, I add to the 20. Benefits before mentioned, that it will
be an excellent means to help you in preaching: For as the Physicians work is
half done when he fully knows the disease, so when you are acquainted well with
your peoples case, you will know what to preach on; and it will furnish you
with matter to talk an hour with an ignorant or obstinate sinner, as much as an
hours study will do: for you will know what you have need to insist on, and
what objections of theirs to refell.

2. I hope there is none so silly as to think this conference is not preaching.
What does the number we speak to make it preaching? Or does interlocution make
it none? Sure a man may as truly preach to one as to 1000. And (as is
aforesaid) if you search, you will find, that most of the Gospel preaching in
those days, was by conference, or serious speeches to people occasionally, and
frequently interlocutory: and that with one or two, fewer or more, as
opportunity served. Thus Christ himself did most commonly preach. Besides, we
must take account of our peoples learning, if we mind the success of our work.

There is nothing therefore from God, from the spirit, from right reason, to
cause us to make any question of our work, or to be unwilling to it. But from
the world, from the flesh and the Devil, we shall have much, and more perhaps
then we yet expect. But against temptations, if we have recourse to God, and
look on his great Obligations on one side, and the hopeful Effects and Reward
on the other, we shall see that we have little cause to draw back or to faint.

Let us set before us this pattern in the text, and learn our duty thence, and
imitate it. From Verse. 19. To serve the Lord (and not men or our selves) with
all humility of mind (and not proudly) and with many tears, etc. Verse. 20. To
keep back nothing that is profitable to the people, and to Teach them publicly
and from house to house: Verse. 21. That the matter of our preaching be
Repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Verse. 22, 23,
24. That though we go bound in the spirit, not knowing particularly what shall
befall us, but knew that every where bonds and afflictions do abide us, yet
none of these things should move us, neither should we count our Life dear to
our selves, so that we might finish our course with joy, and the Ministry which
we have received of the Lord Jesus to testify the Gospel of the grace of God.
From Verse. 28 To take heed to our selves and all the flock, particularly
against domestic Seducers and Schisms. From Verse 31. Without ceasing to warn
every one day and night with tears. Verse. 3. 3. To covet no man's silver, or
gold, or apparel, as counting it more honorable to give then to receive. O
what a lesson is here before us! But how ill is it learned by those that still
question whether these be their duty. I confess some of these words of Paul
have so often been presented before mine eyes, and stuck upon my conscience,
that I have been much convinced by them of my duty and neglect: And I think
this one speech, better deserves a twelve-moneths study, then most things that
young students do lay out their time in. O Brethren write it on your study
doors, or set it as your Copy in Capital letters still before your eyes: Could
we but well learn two or three lines of it, What preachers should we be? 1. For
our general business, [SERVING THE LORD WITH ALL HUMILITY OF MIND.] 2. Our
special work, [TAKE HEED TO YOUR SELVES, AND TO ALL THE FLOCK.] 3. Our
Doctrine, [REPENTANCE TOWARD GOD, AND FAITH TOWARD OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST.] 4.
The place and manner of Teaching, [I HAVE TAUGHT YOU PUBLICLY, AND FROM HOUSE
TO HOUSE.] 5. The Object, and internal manner, [I CEASED NOT TO WARN EVERY ONE
NIGHT AND DAY WITH TEARS] This is it that must win souls and preserve them. 6.
His innocence and self-denial for the advantage of the Gospel, [I HAVE COVETED
NO MAN'S SILVER OR GOLD.] 7. His patience, [NONE OF THESE THINGS MOVE ME,
NEITHER COUNT I MY LIFE DEAR.] 8. And among all our motives, these have need to
be in Capital letters before our eyes. 1. We oversee and feed THE CHURCH OF
GOD, WHICH HE HAS PURCHASED WITH HIS OWN BLOOD. 2. [GRIEVOUS WOLVES SHALL
ENTER IN AMONG YOU, NOT SPARING THE FLOCK] and [OF YOUR OWN SELVES SHALL MEN
ARISE SPEAKING PERVERSE THINGS, TO DRAW AWAY DISCIPLES AFTER THEM.] Write all
this upon your hearts, and it will do your selves and the Church more good,
then twenty years study of those lower things, which though they get you
greater applause in the world, yet separated from these, will make you but
sounding brass, and tinkling Cymbals.

The great advantage of a sincere heart is, that God and Glory, and the saving
of souls are their very end: and where that end is truly intended, no labor or
suffering will stop them, or turn them back. For a man must have his end,
whatever it cost him: He still retains this lesson, whatever he forget, [ONE
THING IS NECESSARY] and Seek first the Kingdom of God, and therefore says,
Necessity is laid upon me, and woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel. And this
is it that will most effectually make easy all our labors, and make light all
burdens, and make our sufferings seem tolerable, and cause us to venture on
any hazards in the way. That which I once made the Motto of my colors in
another warfare, I desire may be still before my eyes in this, (which yet
according to my intentions, is not altogether another.) On one side, He that
saves his life shall lose it. On the other, Nic propter vitam vivendi perdere
causas; Which Doctor Io. Reignolds thought had reason enough in it, to hold him
to his labors though it cost him his life. He that knows that he serves a
God that will never suffer any man to be a loser by him, need not fear what
hazards he runs in his cause: And he that knows that he seeks a prize, which if
obtained will infinitely over-match his cost, may boldly engage his whole
estate on it, and sell all to purchase so rich a Pearl. Well Brethren, I will
spend no more words in exhorting wise Merchants to such a bargain, nor telling
Teachers themselves of such common Truths; and If I have said more then needs
already, I am glad. I hope now I may take it for granted, that you are Resolved
of the utmost diligence and fidelity in the work. On which supposition I shall
now proceed.

CHAP. VII.
SECT. 1.
Directions for the right managing this Work.
IT is so happy a work which we have before us, that it is a thousand pities it
should be destroyed in the birth, and perish in our hands. And though I know
that we have a knotty generation to deal with, and that its past the power of
any of us all to change a carnal heart without the effectual grace of the
Holy Ghost; yet it is so usual with God to work by means, and to bless the
right endeavors of his servants, that I cannot fear, but great things will be
done, and a wonderful blow will be given to the Kingdom of Darkness by our
undertaken work, if it do not miscarry through the fault of the Ministers
themselves. And the main danger is in these two defects. 1. Of diligence. 2. Of
skill. Against the former I have spoken much already. As for the later, I am so
conscious of my own unskilfulness, that I am far from imagining that I am fit
to give directions to any but the younger, and unexperienced of the Ministry;
and therefore must expect so much Justice in your interpretation, as that you
will suppose me now to speak to none but such. But yet something I shall say,
and not pass over this part in silence, because the number of such is so great,
and I am so apprehensive that the welfare of the Church and Nation, does much
depend on the management of this work.

The points wherein you have need to be solicitous are these two.

1. To bring your people to submit to this course of private Catechizing or
Instruction. For if they will not come at you, what good can they receive.

2. To do the work so as may most tend to the success of it, when they do come
to you.

And for the first, the best directions that I can give are these following.

1. The chief means of all is, for a Minister so to behave himself in the main
course of his Ministry and life, as may tend to convince his people of his
ability, sincerity and unfeigned Love to them. For if they take him to be
ignorant, they will despise his Teaching, and think themselves as wise as he.
And if they think him self-seeking, or hypocritical, and one that does not mean
as he says, they will suspect all that he says and does for them, and will
not be regardful of him. And if they think he intends but to domineer over
their consciences, and to trouble and disgrace them, or merely to exercise
their wits and memories, they will fly away from him as an adversary, and from
his endeavors as noxious and ungrateful to them. Whereas when they are
convinced that he understands what he does, and have high thoughts of his
abilities, they will Reverence him, and the easilyer stoop to his advice. And
when they are persuaded of his uprightness, they will the less suspect his
motions: And when they perceive that he intends no private ends of his own,
but merely their good, they will the sooner be persuaded by him. And because
those that I write to are supposed to be none of the most able Ministers, and
therefore may despair of being reverenced for their parts; I say to such;

1. You have the more need to study and labor for their increase.

2. You must necessarily have that which Amesius makes the lowest degree
tolerable, viz. to be supra vulgus fidelium: and it will produce some
reverence when they know you are wiser then themselves.

3. And that which you want in ability, must be made up in the other
qualifications; and then your advice may be as successful as others.

If Ministers were content to purchase an interest in their people at the
dearest rates to their own flesh, and would condescend to them, and be
familiar, and loving, and prudent in their carriage, and abound according to
their ability in good works, they might do much more with their people then
ordinarily they can do. Not that we should much regard an interest in them for
our own sakes, but that we may be more capable of promoting the interest of
Christ, and of furthering their own salvation: Were it not for their own sakes,
it were no great matter whether they love or hate us: but what Commander can do
any great service by an Army that hate him? and how can we think that they will
much regard our counsel, while they abhor or dis-regard the persons that give
it them? Labor therefore for some competent interest in your peoples
estimation and affection, and then you may the better prevail with them.

Obj. But what should a Minister do that finds he has quite lost his
interest in them?

An. If they be so vile a people that they hate him not for any weakness, nor
through mis-reports about particular things, but merely for endeavoring their
good, though in prudence as well as zeal, and would hate any other that should
do his duty; then must he in patience and meekness continue to instruct these
that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them Repentance to the
acknowledgement of the truth. But if it be upon any weaknesses of his, or
difference in lesser opinions, or prejudice merely against his own person, let
him try first to remove the prejudice by all lawful means; and if he cannot,
let him tell them, It is not for my self, but for you that I labor: and
therefore seeing that you will not obey the word from me, I desire that you
will agree to accept of some other that may do you that good, which I cannot:]
and so leave them, and try whether another man may not be fitter for them, and
he fitter for another people: For an ingenious man can hardly stay with a
people against their wills; and a sincere man can more hardly for any Commodity
of his own, remain in a place where he is like to be unprofitable, to hinder
the good which they might receive from another man, who has the advantage of a
greater interest in their estimation and affection.

2. Supposing then this general preparation, the next thing to be done is, To
use the most effectual means to convince them of the Benefit and Necessity of
this course, to their own souls. The way to win the consent of any man to any
thing that you offer, is to prove it to be good for him, and to do this in
Evidence that has some fitness and proportion with his own understanding: For
if you cannot make him believe that it is Good or Necessary for him, he will
never let it down, but spit it out with loathing or contempt. You must
therefore preach to them some effectual convincing Sermons to this purpose
beforehand; which shall fully show them the Benefit and Necessity of Knowledge
of Divine truths in General, and of Knowing the Principles in special, and that
the Aged have the same duty and need as others, and in some respects much more:
E. G. from Heb. 5. 12. which affords us many observations suitable to our
present business.

As 1. That Gods Oracles must be a man's Lessons.

2. Minsters must teach these, and people must learn them of them.

3. The Oracles of God have some Principle; or fundamentals that all must know,
that will be saved.

4. These Principles must be first learned: that's the right order.

5. It may be well expected that people thrive in knowledge according to the
means or teaching which they profess: and if they do not, it is their great sin.

6. If any lived long in the Church under the means of knowledge, and yet be
ignorant of these Principles, he has need to be taught them yet, (how old
soever he be). All this is plain from the Text: Whence we have fair opportunity
by twenty clear convincing Reasons to show them; 1. The Necessity of knowing
Gods Oracles. 2. And more especially of the Principles. And 3. especially for
the aged, that have sinfully lost so much time already; that have so long
promised to repent when they were old; that should be teachers to the younger,
whose ignorance is a double sin and shame; who have so little time to learn in,
and are so near their Judgment; and who have souls to save or lose as well as
others, etc. Convince them how impossible it is to go the way to heaven without
knowing it, when there are so many difficulties and enemies in our way? and
when men cannot do their worldly business without knowledge, nor learn a trade
without an apprentiship? Who can love, or seek, or desire that which he knows
not? Convince them what a contradiction it is to be a Christian, and yet to
refuse to learn; For what is a Christian but a Disciple of Christ? and how can
he be his Disciple, that refuses to be taught by him? and he that refuses to
be taught by his Ministers, refuses to be taught by him: for Christ will not
come down from heaven again to teach them by his own mouth, but has appointed
his Ministers to keep School and teach them under him: To say therefore that
they will not be taught by his Ministers, is to say, they will not be taught by
Christ, and that is to say, they will be none of his Disciples, or no
Christians. Abundance of such undeniable Evidences, we have at hand to convince
them of their duty. Make them understand that it is not an arbitrary business
of our own devising and imposing, but Necessity is laid upon us, and if we look
not to every member of the flock according to our power, they may perish in
their own iniquities, but their blood will be required at our hands: It is God
and not we, that is the contriver and imposer of the work: therefore they blame
God, more then us in accusing it: Would they be so cruel as to wish a Minister
to cast away his own soul knowingly and wilfully, for fear of troubling them in
hindering their damnation? especially acquaint them fully with the true nature
of the Ministerial office, and the Churches necessity of it: how it consists
in Teaching and Guiding all the Flock; and that as they must come to the
Congregation as Scholars to School; so must they be content to give account of
their learning, and to be instructed man by man.

Let them know what a tendency this has to their salvation; What a profitable
improvement it will be of their time? And how much vanity and evil it will
prevent? And when they once find that it is for their own good, they will the
easilyer yield to it.

3. When this is done, it will be very necessary that according to our
Agreement, we give one of the Catechisms to every family in the Parish, poor
and rich, that so they might be so far without excuse: For if you leave it to
themselves, perhaps half of them will not so much as get them: Whereas, when
they have them put into their hands, the receiving is a kind of engagement to
learn them: and if they do but read the exhortation (as its likely they will
do) it will perhaps convince them, and incite them to submit. And for the
delivery of them, the best way is, for the Minister first to give notice in the
Congregation, that they shall be brought to their houses, and then to go
himself from house to house and deliver them, and take the opportunity of
persuading them to the work; and as they go, to take a Catalogue of all the
persons at years of discretion in the several families, that they may know whom
they have to take care of, and instruct, and whom to expect when it comes to
their turns. I have formerly in the distributing of some other Books among
them, desired every family to fetch them; but I found more confusion and
uncertainty in that way, and now took this as the better. But in small
Parishes, either way may serve.

And for the charge of the Books, if the Minister be able, it will be well for
him to bear it: If not, the best affected of his people of the richer sort
should bear it among them. Or at a day of Humiliation in preparation to the
work, let the Collection that is wont to be for the poor, be employed to buy
the Catechisms, and the people be desired to be the more liberal, and what is
wanting, the well-affected to the work may make it up.

And for the order of proceeding in small Parishes, the matter is not great,
but in greater it will be needful that we take them in order family by family,
beginning the execution a month or six weeks after the delivery of the Books,
that they may have time to learn. And thus taking them together in common, they
will the more willingly come, and the backward will be the more ashamed to keep
off.

4. BEsure that you deal gently with them; and take off all discouragements as
effectually as you can. 1. Tell them publicly, that if they have learnt any
other Catechism already, you will not urge them to learn this, unless they
desire it themselves. For the substance of all Catechisms (that are Orthodox)
is the same: Only our reasons for offering them this, was the brevity and
fullness; that we might give them as much as we could in a few words, and so
make their work more easy. Or if any of them had yet rather learn any other
(Orthodox) Catechism, let them have their choice.

2. As for the old people that are of weak memories, and not like to live in
the world, and complain that they cannot remember the words, tell them that you
expect not that they should overmuch perplex their minds about it, but hear it
often read over, and see that they understand it, and get the matter into their
minds and hearts, and then they may be born with, though they remember not the
words.

3. And let your dealing with those that you begin with be so gentle,
convincing and winning, that the report of it may be an encouragement to others
to come.

6. IF all this will not serve to bring any particular persons to submit, do
not so cast them off, but go to them and expostulate the case with them, and
know what their reasons are, and convince them of the sinfulness and danger of
their contempt of the help that is offered them. A soul is so precious that we
should not lose one for want of labor, but follow them while there is any
hope, and not give them up as desperate, till there be no remedy. Before we
give them over as dogs or swine let us try the utmost, that we may have the
experience of their obstinate contempt, or renting us, to warrant our forsaking
them: Charity bears and waits long.

SECT. II.
2. HAving used these means to procure them to come in and submit to your
teaching, the next thing to be considered is, how you should deal most
effectually with them in the work; And again I must say, that I think it an
easier matter by far, to compose and preach a good Sermon, then to deal rightly
with an Ignorant man for his instruction in the Necessary Principles of
Religion. As much as this work is contemned by some, I doubt not but it will
try the parts and spirits of Ministers, and show you the difference between one
man and another, more fully then Pulpit-preaching will do. And here I shall as
fitting to my purpose; transcribe the words of a most Learned, Orthodox and
godly man, Bishop Usher, in his Sermon before King James at Wan^^ed, on Ephesians. 4.
13. page 44, 45. (but Impres. 3. page 34, 35.) Your Majesty's care can never be
sufficiently commended, in taking order that the chief heads of the Catechism
should in the ordinary Ministry be diligently propounded and explained unto the
people throughout the Land. Which I wish were as duly executed every where, as
it was piously by you intended. Great Scholars possibly may think, that it
stands not so well with their credit, to stoop thus low, and to spend so much
of their time, in teaching these rudiments and first principles of the Doctrine
of Christ. But they should consider that the laying of the foundation
skillfully, as it is the matter of greatest importance in the whole building;
so is it the very Masterpiece of the wisest builder; 1 Cor. 3. 10. According
to the grace of God which is given to me, as a wise Master Builder I have laid
the foundation, says the great Apostle. And let the learned of us all try it
when ever we please, we shall find that to lay this groundwork rightly (that
is, to apply our selves to the capacity of the common Auditory, and to make an
Ignorant man to understand these mysteries in some good measure) will put us to
the trial of our skill, and trouble us a great deal more, then if we were to
discuss a Controversy, or handle a subtle point of learning in the Schools.
Yet Christ did give as well his Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, as his
ordinary Pastors and Teachers to bring us all both learned and unlearned, unto
the Unity of this faith and knowledge: and the neglecting of this, is the
frustrating of the whole work of the Ministry. For let us preach never so many
Sermons to the people, our labor is but lost as long as the foundation is
unlaid; and the first principles untaught, upon which all other Doctrine must
be builded.

So far the Reverend Bishop.

The Directions which I think necessary to be observed in the managing of the
work, for matter and manner are these following.

Direct. 1. When your Neighbors come to you, one family or more, begin with a
brief Preface, to demulce their minds, and take off all offense, unwillingness
or discouragement, to prepare them to entertain your following Instructions. E.
g. Neighbors, it may perhaps seem to some of you, as an unusual, so a
troublesome business, that I put you upon: but I hope you will not think it
needless: For if I had thought so, I should have spared you and my self this
labor: But my Conscience has told me, yea God has told me in his word, so
roundly^, what it is to have the Charge of men's souls, and how the blood of
them that perish in their sins, will be required at the hands of a Minister
that neglects them, that I dare not be so guilty of it as I have been. Alas,
all our business in this world is to get well to Heaven; and God has appointed
us to be Guides to his people, to help them safe thither; If this be well done,
all is done; and if this be not done we are for ever undone! The Lord knows how
little a while you and I may be together; and therefore it concerns us to do
what we can for our own and your salvation, before we leave you or you leave
the world. All other business in the world are but toys and dreams in
comparison of this! The labors of your calling are but to prop up the cottages
of your flesh, while you are making ready for death and Judgment; which God
knows is near at hand. And I hope you will be glad of help in so needful a
work, and not think it much that I put you to this trouble; when the trifles of
the world will not be got without greater trouble] This, some of this, or
somewhat to this purpose may tend to make them more willing to hear you, and
receive instruction, or give you an account of their knowledge or practice,
which must be the work of the day.

Direct. 2. When you have (to spare time) spoken thus to them, all, take then
the persons one by one, and deal with them as far as you can in private, out of
the hearing of the rest; For some cannot speak freely before others, and some
will not endure to be questioned before others, because they think that it
tends to their shame, to have others hear their answers; and some persons
that can make better answers themselves will be ready when they are gone to
twattle of what they heard, and to disgrace those that speak not so well as
they; and so people will be discouraged, and backward persons will have
pretenses to forbear and forsake the work, and say, they will not come to be
made a scorn or a laughing stock. You must therefore be very prudent to prevent
all these inconveniences. But the main reason is, as I find by experience,
people will better take plain close dealing about their sin and misery and duty
when you have them alone then they will before others; And if you have not
opportunity to set it home and deal freely with them, you will frustrate all.
If therefore you have convenient place, let the rest stay in one room, while
you confer with each person by themselves in another room, Only for the
necessary avoiding of scandal, we must speak to the women, only in the presence
of some others; and if we do lose some advantage by it of the success of our
instructions, there is no remedy: Its better do so, then by giving matter of
reproach to the malicious, to destroy all the work. Yet we may so contrive it,
that though some other be in the room, yet what passages are less fit for
others observance, may be spoken submissa voce that others may be no hearers of
it; and therefore they may be placed at the remotest part of the room. Or at
least let none be present but the members of the same family, that be more
familiar, and not so likely to reproach one another. And then, in your most
rouzing examinations and reproofs, deal most with the most ignorant, and secure
and vicious, that you may have the clearer ground for your closest dealing, and
the hearing of it may awaken the standers by, to whom you seem not so directly
to apply it. These small things deserve observance, because they be in order to
a work that is not small: and small errors may hinder a great deal of good.

Direct. 3. Let the beginning of your work be, by taking an account of what
they have learned of the words of the Catechism; receiving their answer to each
question. And if they are able to recite but a little or none of it, try
whether they can rehearse the Creed, and the Decalogue.

Direct. 4. Then choose out some of the weightiest points, and try by further
Questions how they understand them. And therein be careful of these things
following. 1. That you do not begin with less necessary points, but these which
themselves may perceive are of nearest concernment to them. As, E. G. [What do
you think becomes of men when they are dead? [What shall become of us after the
end of this world? Do you believe that you have any sin? Or that you were born
with sin? And what does every sin deserve? What remedy has God provided for
the saving of sinful miserable souls? Has any one suffered for our sins in our
stead, or must we suffer for them our selves? Who be they that God will pardon?
and who shall be saved by the blood of Christ? What change must be made on all
that shall be saved? and how is it made? Where is our chief Happiness? and what
is it that our hearts must be most set upon?] with such like as these.

2. Take heed of asking them nice or needless or doubtful and very difficult
questions, though about those matters that are of greatest weight in
themselves. Specially be very cautelous how you put them upon definitions or
descriptions. Some self conceited men will be as busy with such questions
which they cannot answer themselves, and as censorious of the poor people that
cannot answer them, as if life and death did certainly depend on them. You will
ask them perhaps What is God? and how defective an answer must you make your
selves? specially if it be the Quid, and not the Qualis that you mean. You may
tell what he is not, sooner then what he is. If you ask What is faith? Or what
is Repentance? how sorrily would many very learned Divines answer you? Or else
they would not be at so great difference among themselves about them not only
disagreeing about the Definitions of them, but so widely disagreeing. If you
ask them what is Forgiveness of sin? how many Ministers may you ask before you
have a right answer? Or else they would not be so disagreed in the point? Much
more may I say so about Justification (though perhaps the same thing with
Remission) so if you ask them what Regeneration is? What Sanctification is? Why
Divines be not agreed, what they are themselves? But you will say perhaps, If
men know not what God is; what Faith, Repentance, Conversion, Sanctification,
and Pardon of sin, or Justification be, how can they be true Christians and be
saved? I answer. It Is one thing to know exactly what they be, and another thing
to know them in the nature of them in the main, though with a more general,
indistinct and undigested knowledge: and its one thing to know and another
thing to tell what this or that is. The very Name as Commonly used does
signify to them and express from them the thing without a Definition: and they
partly understand what that Name signifies, when they cannot tell it you in
other words. As they know what it is to Believe, to Repent, to be forgiven; by
custom of speech they know what these mean, and yet cannot define them, but
perhaps put you off with the Country answer. To Repent is, to Repent; and to
be forgiven is, to be forgiven, or if they can say, It is to be pardoned, it is
fair. Yet do I not absolutely dissuade you from the use of such questions; but
do it cautelously, in case you suspect some gross Ignorance in the point:
specially about God him self. And (which is the next part of this Direction.)

3. In such a Case, so contrive the predicate into your Question that they may
perceive what you mean, and that it is not a nice Definition, but a necessary
solution that you expect, and look not after words but things, and there leave
them to a bare Yea or Nay, or the mere elocution of one of the two descriptions
which your self shall propound. As E. G. What is God? is he made of flesh and
blood as we are? or is he an invisible spirit? Is he a man or is he not? Had he
any beginning? Can he dye? what is faith? Is it a Believing all the word of
God? what is it to Believe in Christ? Is it all one as to become a true
Christian? Or to believe that Christ is the Savior of the world, and to Accept
him for your Savior to pardon, teach, govern and glorify you? What is
Repentance? Is it only to be sorry for sin, or is it, The change of the mind
from sin to God, or both?

4. And as you must do thus when you come to hard points as Definitions or the
like, so in all points where you perceive that they understand not the meaning
and stress of your question? there you must first draw out their answer by an
Equipollent or expository question, or if that will not do, thus frame the
answer into your question, and demand but his Yea or Nay: yea if it be never so
easy a point that you are upon, you must do thus at last in case by the first
question you have an unsatisfactory answer. E. G. I have often asked some very
ignorant people, How do you think of your sins, so many and great sins shall be
pardoned? And they tell me by their Repenting and mending their lives; and
never mention Jesus Christ. I ask them further, But do you think that your
amendment can make God any amendt or satisfaction for the sin that is past?
They will answer we hope so, or else we know not what will? A man would think
now that these men had no knowledge of Christ at all, in that they make no
mention of him; And some I find have indeed none and when I tell them over the
history of the Gospel, and what Christ is, did and suffered and why, they stand
wondering at it as a strange thing that they had never heard before; and some
say; They never heard this much before, nor knew it, though they came to Church
every Lords day. But some I perceive do give such answers, because they
understand not the scope of my question; but think that I take Christ's death as
granted, and only ask them what shall make God satisfaction as their part under
Christ (Though thus also they discover sad ignorance.) And when I ask them
whether their deeds can Merit any thing of God? they say No; but they hope God
will accept them. And if I ask further Can you be saved without the death of
that? they say, No; And if I ask what has he done or suffered for you? They
will say He dyed for us; or shed his blood for us: and will profess that they
place their confidence in that for salvation. Many men have that in their
minds, which is not ripe for utterance; and through ill education and disuse,
they are strangers to the expressions of those things which they have some
Conceptions of. And, by the way you may here see the cause to deal very
tenderly with the common people for matter of knowledge and defect of
expression; if they are are teachable, and tractable, and willing to use means,
and to live obediently: For many even ancient godly persons cannot speak their
minds in any tolerable expressions: no nor cannot learn when expressions are
put into their mouths. Some of the most pious experienced, approved Christians
that I know (aged people) complain exceedingly to me with tears that they
cannot learn the words of the Catechism, and when I consider their advantages
that they have lived under the most excellent helps, in constant duty, and in
the best company for forty or fifty or sixty years together, it teaches me
what to expect from poor ignorant people that never had such company and
converse for one year or week: and not to reject them so hastily as some hot
and too high professors would have us do. But this is on the by.

5. This also must be observed, that if you find them at a loss, and unable to
answer your questions, drive them not on too hard or too long with question
after question, lest they conceive you intend but to puzzle them and disgrace
them: but presently, when you perceive them troubled that they cannot answer,
then step in your self and take the burden off them, and make answer to the
question your selves; and then do it thoroughly and plainly, and make a full
explication of the whole business to them, that by your Teaching they may be
brought to understand it before you leave them. And herein it is commonly
necessary that you fetch up the matter ab origin, and take it on in order till
you come to the point in question.

6. And usually with the grossly ignorant, it is flatly necessary that you do
run over all the sum of our Religion to them in the most familiar way that you
can possibly devise: But this must be the next Direction.

Direct. 5. When you have done what you see Cause in the trial of their
knowledge, proceed next to instruct them your selves: And this must be
according to their several Capacities. If it be a Professor that understands
the Fundamentals, fall upon somewhat which you perceive that he most needs,
either explaining further some of the mysteries of the Gospel, or laying the
Grounds of some duty which he may doubt of, or showing the necessity of what he
neglects, or meeting with his sins or mistakes, as may be most convincing and
edifying to him. If it be one that is grossly ignorant, give him a plain
familiar recital of the sum of the Christian Religion in a few words: for
though it be in the Catechism already yet a more familiar way may better help
them to understand it. As thus [You must know, that from Everlasting there was
one only God that had no beginning, and can have no end, who is not a Body as
we are, but a most pure, spiritual Being that knows all things, and can do
all things, and has all Goodness and Blessedness in himself. This God is but
one, but yet three Persons, the Father, the Son and holy Ghost in an
incomprehensible manner, above our reach; yet we have somewhat in our selves
and other creatures that may give us some resemblance of it. As in a man, his
Power and his understanding and will, be but One soul, and yet they are not one
faculty, but differ one from another: Or as in the Sun, the Being or Power, and
the Heat and the Light, are not all one; and yet there is but one Sun; so in a
more incomprehensible manner it is in God. And you must know that this One God
did make all the world by his word; the heavens he made to be the place of his
Glory, and made a world of holy Angels to serve him, in his Glory: but some of
these did by Pride or other sin fall from God and are become Devils that shall
be miserable in torments for ever, when he had made the rest of this lower
world, he made man, as his noblest creature here, even one man and one woman
Adam and Eve, and he made them perfect without any sin or fault, and put them
into the gardan of Eden, and forbad them to eat but of one tree in the garden,
and told them that if they did, they should dye. But the Devil that had first
fallen himself did tempt them to sin, and they yielded to his temptation, and
by wilful sinning they fell under the curse of Gods Law, and fell short of the
Glory of God. But God of his infinite Wisdom and Mercy did send his own son
Jesus Christ to be their Redeemer, who as he was promised in the beginning, so
in the fullness of time 1655. years ago was made man, and was born of a Virgin
by the power of the Holy Ghost, and lived on earth among the Jews about 33
years, and he preached the Gospel himself and wrought many miracles to prove
his doctrine, and bring men to believe in him, healing the lame, the blind, the
sick, and raising the dead by the word of his mouth by his Divine power; and at
the end by the malice of the Jews, and his own Consent he was offered upon the
Cross, as a sacrifice for our sins, to bear that Curse that we should have
born; and when he was buried, he rose again the third day, and lived on earth
forty days after: And before his departure he sent his Apostles and other
Ministers to preach the Gospel of salvation to the world, and to call home lost
sinners by Repentance, and to assure them in his Name, that if they will but
believe in him and take him for their Savior, and unfeignedly lament their
former sins, and turn from them to God, and will take Everlasting Glory for
their portion, and be content to resign their carnal Interests and desires, he
will pardon freely all that is past, and be merciful to them for the time to
come, and will lead them up into spiritual Communion with God, and bring them
to his Glory when this life is Ended, but for them that make light of their
sins and of his Mercy, and will not forsake the pleasures of this world for the
hopes of another, they shall be condemned to everlasting punishment. This
Gospel Christ has appointed his Ministers to preach to all the world; and when
he had given this in charge to his Apostles, he ascended up into heaven before
their faces, where he is now in Glory with God the Father in our Nature, ruling
all: And at the end of this world, he will come again in that nature, and will
call the dead to life again, and set them all before him to be judged: and all
that truly Repented and believed in him and were renewed by his spirit, and
renounced this world for the hopes of a better shall be judged to live with God
in Glory, and shall be like to his Angels, and praise him for ever; and the
rest that repented not, and believed not in him, but lived to the flesh and the
world, shall be condemned to everlasting misery. So that you may see by this,
that man's Happiness is not in this world but in the next, and that all men have
lost their hopes of that Happiness by sin, and that Jesus Christ the only Son
of God and the Redeemer of the world has recovered it for us by the price of
his blood shed and has made a New Covenant with us, assuring us of Life and
Salvation, if we Repent and believe in him for that life, and mortify our
fleshly desires: To which end he sends forth his holy Spirit to convert all
that shall be saved, and to turn their hearts from this world to God. If ever
you mean to be saved, therefore it must be thus with you: Your formersins must
be the grief of your soul, and you must fly to a crucified Christ as your only
Refuge from the deserved Curse, and the Spirit of Christ must Convert you, and
dwell in you and make you wholly a new Creature: or there is no salvation.]
Some such short plain rehearsal of the Principles of Religion in the most
familiar manner that you can devise, with a brief touch of application in the
end, will be necessary when you deal with the grossly ignorant: And if you
perceive they understand you not, go over it again, and ask them whether they
understand it, and seek to leave it fixed in their memories.

Direct. 6. Whether they begrosly Ignorant or not, if you suspect them to be
ungodly, fall next upon a prudent enquiry into their states, And the best and
least offensive way will be this: to take your occasion from some Article of
the Catechism, as the fifth or seventh; and then to make way by a word that may
demulce their minds, by convincing them of the necessity of it; as E. g. thus,
or to this purpose, You see in the 7. Article proved by Scripture, that the
Holy Ghost does by the word enlighten men's minds, and soften and open their
hearts, and turn them from the power of Satan to God by faith in Christ, and so
makes them a Sanctified peculiar people to God; and that none but these are
made partakers of Christ and life: Now though I have no desire needlessly to pry
into any man's secrets, yet because that it is the office of Ministers to give
advice to a people in the matters of salvation, and because it is so dangerous
a matter to be mistaken, where life or death everlasting does lie upon it, I
would entreat you to deal truly and tell me, Whether ever you found this great
change upon your own heart, or not? Did you ever find the spirit of God by the
word, come in upon your understanding, with a new heavenly life, which has
made you a new creature? The Lord that sees your heart does know whether it be
so or not? Therefore I pray you, see that you speak the truth.

If he tell you, that he hopes he is converted; all are sinners; but he is
sorry for his sins, or the like; then tell him more particularly in a few words
of the plainest notes, or by a short description, what true conversion is, and
so renew and enforce the enquiry: as thus: Because your salvation or damnation
lies upon it, I would fain help you a little in this, that you may not be
mistaken in a business of such consequence, but may find out the truth before
it be too late: for as God will judge us impartially, so we have his word
before us, by which we may know, now, how God will judge us, then: for this
word tells us most certainly who they be that shall go to heaven, and who to
hell. Now the Scripture tells us that the state of an unconverted man is this;
He sees no great matter of felicity in the Love and Communion of God in the
life to come, which may draw his heart thither from this present world, but he
lives to his carnal self, or to the flesh, and the main bent of his life is,
that it may go well with his body here, and that religion that he has is but a
little on the by, lest he should be damned when he can keep the world no
longer; so that the world and flesh are highest in his esteem, and nearest to
his heart, and God and Glory stand below them and further off, and all their
service of God is but a giving them that which the world and flesh can spare.
This is the true case of every unconverted man; and all that are in this case,
are in a state of misery. But he that is truly converted, has had a light
shining into his soul from God, which has showed him the greatness of his sin
and misery, and made it a heavy load upon his soul, and showed him what Christ
is and has done for sinners, and made him admire at the riches of Gods grace
in him! O what glad news is it to him, that yet there is hope for such lost
sinners as he; That so many and so great sins may be pardoned! and that this is
offered to all that will accept it! How gladly does he entertain this Message
and offer? And for the time to come, he resigneth himself and all that he has
to Christ to be wholly his, and disposed of by him, in order to the everlasting
glory which he has promised: He has now such a sight of the blessed state of
the Saints in glory, that he despises all this world as dross and dung in
comparison of it, and there he lays up his happiness and his hopes, and takes
all the matters of this life but as so many helps or hindrances in the way to
that: so that the very bent and main care and business of his life is to be
happy in the life to come. This is the case of all that are truly converted,
and shall be saved. Is this your case, or not? Have you found such a change or
work as this upon your soul? If he say, he hopes, he has, descend to some
particulars distinctly. E. G. I pray you then answer me to these two or three
questions. 1. Can you truly say, that all the known sins of your life past are
the grief of your heart, and that you have felt that everlasting misery is due
to you for them, and that in the sense of this heavy burden, you have felt your
self a lost man, and have gladly entertained the news of a Savior, and cast
your soul upon Christ alone for pardon by his blood. 2. Can you truly say, that
your heart is so far turned from your former sins, that you hate the sins that
formerly you loved, and love that holy life that you had no mind to before, and
that you do not now live in the willful practice of any known sin: Is there no
sin which you be not heartily willing to leave whatever it cost you? And no
duty which you be not willing to perform? 3. Can you truly say, that you have
so far taken the everlasting enjoyments of God for your happiness, that it has
the most of your heart, of your love, desire, and care: and that you are
resolved by the strength of grace to let go all that you have in the world
rather then hazard it; and that it is your daily principal business to seek it?
Can you truly say, that though you have your failings and sins, yet your main
care and the bent of your whole life is to please God and enjoy him for ever,
and that you give the world Gods leavings, as it were, and not God the worlds
leavings, and that your worldly business is but as a travelers seeking for
provision in his jorney, and heaven is the place that you take for your home.

If he say, yea, to the first and third, tell him how great a thing it is for a
man's heart to abhor his sin, and to lay up his happiness unfeignedly in another
world, and to live in this world, for another that is out of sight! And
therefore desire him to see that it be so indeed. If he say, yea, to the second
question, then turn to the ninth, tenth, eleventh or twelfth Articles of the
Catechism, and read over some of those Duties which you most suspect him to
omit; and ask him, Whether he do perform such or such a duty: Especially Prayer
(in a family or private) and the holy spending of all the Lords day: because
these are of so great moment (of which anon.)

Direction 7. When you have either by former discovery of gross ignorance, or
by these later enquiries into his spiritual state, discerned an apparent
probability that the person is yet in an unconverted state; your next business
is, to fall on with all your skill and power, to bring his heart to the sense
of his condition: E. G. Truly neighbors, I have no mind, the Lord knows, to
make your condition worse then it is, nor to put any causless fear or trouble
into your mind: but I suppose you would take me but for a flattering enemy, and
not a faith full friend, if I should daub with you, and not tell you the truth:
If you sought to a Physician in your sickness, you would have him tell you the
truth, though it were the worst: Much more here; For, there the knowledge of
your disease may by fears increase it, but here you must know it, or else you
can never be recovered from it. I much fear that you are yet a stranger to the
new life of all them that Christ will save: For if you were a Christian indeed
and truly converted, your very heart would have been set on God and the life to
come, and you would have admired the riches of grace in Christ, and you would
have made it your business to prepare for Everlasting; and you durst not, you
would not, live in any wilful sin, nor in the neglect of such duties! Alas!
what have you done? how have you spent your time till now? Did you not know,
that you had a soul to save or lose? and that you must live in heaven or hell
for ever! and that you had your life and time in this world for that purpose,
to prepare for another! Alas! what have you been doing all this while that you
are so ignorant, or so unprepared for death if it should now find you? If you
had but had as much mind of heaven as of earth, you would have known more of
it, and done more of it, and enquired more diligently after it, then you have
done! You can learn how to do your business in the world, and why could you not
have learned more of the will of God, if you had but minded it. You have
neighbors that could learn more, that have had as much to do in the world as
you, and as little time? Do you think that heaven is not worth your labor? or
that its like it can be had without any care or pains? when you cannot have the
trifles of this world without? and when God has bid you, first seek his
Kingdom and the righteousness thereof? Alas Neighbor, what if you had dyed
before this hour in an unconverted state what had become of you? and where had
you now been? why you did not know all this while that you should live a day to
an end! O that ever you would be so cruel to your selves as to venture your
Everlasting state so desperately as you have done! what did you think of? Did
you not all this while know that you must shortly dye, and be judged as you
were then found? Had you any greater work to do? or any greater business to
mind then your salvation? Do you think that all that you can get in this world
will comfort you at a dying hour, or purchase your salvation, or ease the pains
of Hellfire?

Set these things home with a more earnest voice then the former part of your
conference was managed with. For if you get it not to heart, you do little or
nothing and that which affects not is soon forgotten.

Direct. 8. Next this, conclude the whole, with a Practical Exhortation, which
must contain two parts, First, the duty of the heart in order to a closure with
Christ, and that which is contained in that closure: and Secondly, The use of
external means for the time to come, and the avoiding of former sins. E. g.
[Neighbour, I am heartily sorry to find you in so sad a case; but I should be
more sorry to leave you in it; and therefore let me entreat you for the Lords
sake and for your own sake to to regard what I shall say to you, as to the time
to come. It is the Lords great mercy that he did not cut you off in your
unconverted natural state, and that you have yet life and time, and that there
is a sufficient Remedy provided for your soul in the blood of Christ, and he is
yet offered with Pardon and life to you as well as any others; God has not
left sinful man to utter desperation for want of a Ransom by a Redeemer as he
has done the Devils; nor has he made any exception in the offer or promise of
pardon and life against you any more then against any other. If you had yet but
a bleeding heart for sin, and could come to Christ believingly for recovery,
and resign your selves to him as your Savior and Lord, and would be a new man
for the time to come, the Lord will have mercy on you in the pardon of your
sins, and the saving of your soul; And I must tell you, that as it must be the
great work of Gods grace to give you such a heart, so if ever he mean to pardon
and save you, he will make this change upon you that I have before mentioned;
he will make you feel your sin as the heaviest burden in the world, as that
which is most odious in it self and has laid you open to the Curse of God; he
will make you see that you are a lost man, and that there is no way but one
with you, even everlasting damnation, unless you are pardoned by the blood of
Christ, and sanctified by his spirit: he will you make you see the need you
have of Christ, and how much you are beholden to him for his bloodshed, and how
all your hope and life is in him he will make you see the vanity of this world
and all that it can afford you, and that all your happiness is with God, in
that everlasting life, where with Saints and Angels you may behold his Glory
and live in his loves and praises, when those that reject him shall be
tormented with the devils: And because it is only Christ the Redeemer that can
bring you to that glory, and deliver you from that torment, he will make you
look to him as your hope and life, and cast your burdened soul upon him, and
give up your selves to be saved and taught and ruled by him; and he will
possess you with the spirit of holiness, that your heart shall set upon God and
heaven as your treasure, and the care of your mind and the business of your
life shall be to obtain it, and you shall despise this world and deny your
fleshly interests and desires, and cast away the sin with abhorrence which you
delighted in, and count no pains too great, nor no suffering too dear for the
obtaining of that everlasting life with God. Let me tell you, that till this
work be done upon you, you are a miserable man, and if you dye before its done,
you are lost for ever: Now, you have hope and help before you, but then there
will be none. Let me therefore entreat these two or three things of you, and do
not deny them me as you love your soul. First, That you will not rest in this
Condition that you are in. Be not quiet in your mind, till you find a true
conversion to be wrought. Think when you rise in the morning, O what if this
day should be my last, and death should find me in an unrenewed state? Think
when you are about your labor, O how much greater a work have I yet to do, to
get my soul reconciled to God and possessed of his Spirit! Think when you are
eating or drinking or looking on any thing that you possess in the world, what
good will all this do me, if I live and die an enemy to God, and a stranger to
Christ and his Spirit, and we must perish for ever. Let these thoughts be day
and night upon your mind till your soul be changed. The second thing that I
would entreat of you is, that you would bethink you seriously what a vain thing
this world is, and how shortly it will leave you to a cold grave, and to
everlasting misery, if you have not a better treasure then this: and bethink
you what it is to live in the sight of the face of God, and to reign with
Christ, and be like the Angels? and that this is the life that Christ has
procured you, and is preparing for you and offers you if you will accept it
in and with himself upon his easy reasonable terms; bethink your self whether
it be not madness to slight such an endless glory, and to prefer these fleshly
dreams, and earthly shadows before it. Use your self to such considerations as
these, when you are alone, and let them dwell upon your mind. The third thing
that I would entreat of you is, that you will presently without any more delay,
Accept of this felicity and this Savior: close with the Lord Jesus that
offers you this eternal life: Joyfully and thankfully accept his offer, as
the only way to make you happy: and then you may believe that all your sins
shall be done away by him. My fourth request to you is, that you will resolve
presently against your former sins: find out what has defiled your heart and
life, and cast it up now by the vomit of Repentance, as you would do Poison out
of your stomach, and abhor the thought of taking it in again. My fifth and last
request to you is that you will set your selves close to the use of Gods means
till this change be wrought, and then continue his means till you are
confirmed, and (at last) perfected. 1. Because you cannot of your selves make
this change upon your heart and life betake your self daily to God for it by
prayer, and beg earnestly as for your life that he will pardon all your former
sins, and change your heart, and show you the riches of his Grace in Christ,
and the Glory of his Kingdom, and draw up your heart to himself. Follow God day
and night with these requests. 2. That you will fly from temptations and
occasions of sin, and forsake your former evil company, and betake your selves
into the company of those that fear God, and will help you in the way to
heaven. 3. That you will specially spend the Lords day in holy exercises both
public and private, and lose not one quarter of an hour of any of your time,
but specially of that most precious time, which God has given you purposely
that you may set your mind upon him, and be instructed by him and to prepare
your self for your latter end. What say you will you do this presently? at
least so much of it as you can do if you will. Will you promise me to think of
these things that I before mentioned, and to pray daily for a changed heart
till you have obtained it, and to change your Company and Courses, and fall
upon the use of Gods means in reading or hearing the Scriptures, meditating on
them, specially on the Lords day?

And here be sure if we can, to get their promise, and engage them to
amendment, especially to use means, and change their company, and forsake
actual sinning, because these are more in their reach, and in this way they may
wait for the accomplishing of that change that is not yet wrought. And do this
solemnly, remembering them of the presence of God that hears their promises,
and will expect the performance. (And when you have afterward opportunity, you
may remember them of that promise.)

Direction 9. At the dismissing of them do these two things. 1. Again lenifie
their minds by a deprecation of offense in a word; E. G. [I pray you take it
not ill that I have put you to this trouble, or dealt thus freely with you: Its
as little pleasure to me as to you, if I did not know these things to be true
and necessary, I would have spared this labor to my self and you: But I know
that we shall be here together but a little while: we are almost at the world
to come already; and therefore its time for us all to look about us, and see
that we be ready when God shall call us.]

2. Because it is but seldom that we our selves shall have opportunity to speak
with the same persons, set them in a way for the perfecting of what is begun.
1. Engage the Governor of each family to call all his family to account every
Lords day before they go to bed, what they can rehearse of the Catechism: and
so to continue till they have all learned it perfectly: and when they have done
so, yet still to continue to hear them recite it, at least once in two or three
Lords days, that they may not forget it. For, even to the most judicious it
will be an excellent help to have still in memory, a sum of the Christian
Doctrine, for matter, method and words. 2. As for the Rulers of families
themselves or those that are under such rulers as will not help them, if they
have learnt some small part of the Catechism only, engage them either to come
again to you (though before their course) when they have learnt the rest, or
else to go to some able experienced neighbor, and recite it to them, and take
their assistance when you cannot have time your self.

Direction 10. Have all the names of your Parishioners by you in a book: and
when they come and recite the Catechism, note in your Book who come and who do
not; and who are so grossly ignorant as to be utterly incapable of the Lords
Supper and other holy Communion, and who not: and as you perceive the
necessities of each, so deal with them for the future. But for those, that are
utterly obstinate, and will not come to you nor be instructed by you, remember
the last Article of our Agreement, to deal with them as the obstinate despisers
of Instruction should be deals with, in regard of Communion, and the
application of sealing and confirming Ordinances: which is to avoid them, and
not hold holy or familiar Communion with them, in the Lords Supper or other
Ordinances: and though some Reverend Brethren are for admitting their children
to Baptism (and offended with me for contradicting it) yet so cannot I be, nor
shall I dare to do it upon any pretenses of their Ancestors faith, or of a
Dogmatical faith of these Rebellious Parents, supposing them both to be such as
in that Article we have mentioned. To these particulars, I add this General.

D^rection 11. Through the whole course of your conference with them, see that
the manner as well as the matter be suited to the end. And concerning the
manner observe these particulars.

1. That you make a difference according to the difference of the persons that
you have to deal with. To the dull and obstinate you must be more earnest and
sharp: To the tender and timorous that are already humbled, you must rather
insist on direction and confirmation. To the youthful you must lay greater
shame on sensual voluptuousness, and show them the nature and necessity of
mortification: To the Aged you must do more to disgrace this present world, and
make them apprehensive of the nearness of their change, and the aggravations of
their sin, if they shall live and dye in ignorance, or impenitency. To
Inferiors and the Younger, you must be more free, to Superiors and Elders more
reverend: To the rich this world must be more disgraced, and the nature and
necessity of self-denial opened, and the damnableness of preferring the present
prosperity to the future, with the necessity of improving their talents in
well-doing. To the poor we must show the great Riches of Glory which is
propounded to them in the Gospel, and how well the present things may be
spared, where the everlasting may be got. Also those sins must be most insisted
on, which each ones age, or sex, or temperature of body, or calling and
employment in the world, does most incline tehm to. As in females, loquacity,
evil speeches, passion, malice, pride, etc. In males, drunkenness, ambition,
etc. Of all which and abundance more differences, calling to us for different
carriage; See Gregor. Mag. de Officio Pastor.

2. Be as condescending, familiar and plain as is possible, with those that are
of the weaker capacity.

3. Give them the Scripture proof, the light of full evidence and reason of all
as you go, that they may see that it is not you only, but God by you that
speaks to them.

4. Be as serious in all, but specially in the Applicatory part as you can. I
scarce fear any thing more, then least some careless Ministers will slubber
over the work, and do all superficially and without life, and destroy this as
they do all other duties, by turning it into a mere formality: putting a few
cold questions to them, and giving them two or three cold words of advice,
without any life and feeling in themselves, nor likely to produce any feeling
in the hearers: But sure he that valueth souls, and knows what an opportunity
is before him, will do it accordingly.

5. To this end, I should think it very necessary that we do both before and in
the work, take special pains with our own hearts; especially to excite and
strengthen our Belief of the Truth of the Gospel, and the Invisible Glory and
Misery that is to come. I am confident this work will exceedingly try the
strength of our belief: For he that is but superficially a Christian, and not
sound in the faith, will likely feel his Zeal quite fail him (specially when
the duty is grown common) for want of a Belief of the things which he is to
treat of to keep it alive. An affected fervency and hypocritical stage-action,
will not hold up in such kind of duties long: A Pulpit shall have more of them,
then a conference with poor ignorant souls: For the Pulpit is the hypocritical
Ministers stage: There, and in the Press, and in Public acts, where there is
room for oftentation, you shall have his best, and almost all. It is other kind
of men that must effectually do the work now in hand.

6. It is therefore very meet that we prepare our selves to it by private
prayer; and if time would permit, and there be many together; if we did begin
and end with a short prayer with our people, it were best.

7. Carry on all (even the most earnest passages) in clear demonstrations of
love to their souls, and make them feel through the whole, that you aim at
nothing but their own salvation; and avoid all harsh discouraging passages,
throughout.

8. If you have not time to deal so fully with each one particularly as is here
directed, then 1. Omit not the most necessary parts. 2. Take several of them
together that are friends, and will not seek to divulge each others weaknesses,
and speak to them in common as much as concerns all; and only the
Examinations of their Knowledge and state, and convictions of misery and
special directions, must be used to the individuals alone: But take heed of
slubbering it over (uponan unfaithful laziness, or being too brief) without a
real Necessity.

Direction 12. Lastly, if God enable you, extend your charity to those of the
poorest sort, before they part from you: Give them somewhat toward their
relief, and for the time that is thus taken from their labors: Especially for
encouragement of them that do best; and to the rest, promise them so much when
they have learned the Catechism. I know you cannot give what you have not, but
I speak to them that can. And so much shall serve for Directions to the younger
Ministers, in their dealing with the more ignorant or carnal sort of persons,

AS for them, that are under fears and troubles of mind, who yet give us hopes
of the work of saving grace on their souls, though it deserve a full discourse
to direct us in dealing with them, yet I shall not meddle with it now. 1.
Because I intended this discourse for another end. 2. Because Divines being at
some variance about the methods of comforting and confirming troubled minds,
are many of them so impatient of reading any thing which is not cut out
according to their present opinions; that I perceive it my duty as far as I
can, to avoid points controverted. 3. Because I have done so much as I think
necessary already in my Directions for peace of Conscience.

CHAP. VIII.
SECT. 1.
ANother fort there are, that we may have occasion of conference with, though
they will scarce stoop to be Catechized; and that is, Opinionative
Questionists, that being tainted with Pride and self-conceitedness, are readyer
to teach, then to be taught, and to vent their own conceits, and quarrel with
you, as being ignorant or erroneous your selves, then to receive instruction:
and if they are tainted with any notable error or schismatical disposition,
they will seek to waste the time in vain janglings, and to dispute, rather then
to learn. I am not now directing you what to do with those men at other times
(of that I shall give a touch anon;) but only if they come to you at this time,
which is appointed for Catechizing and edifying Instruction: Nor is it my
thought to presume to direct any but the weaker sort of Ministers in this, any
more then in the former:

Its like you will have some come to you amongst the rest, that when they
should give an account of their faith, will fall into a Teaching and
Contentious d^scourse, and one will tell you, that you have no true Church,
because you have such bad members: another will ask you, by what authority you
baptize Infant^? another will ask you, how you can be a true Minister, if you
had your Ordination from Prelates? and another will tell you, that you are no
true Minister because you had not your Ordination from Prelates: another will
ask you, What Scripture you have for Praying or singing Psalm^ in a mixed
Assembly? and another will quarrel with you, because you administer not the
Lords Supper to them, in the gesture and manner as they desire, and were ^ont
to receive it; or because you exercise any Discipline among them. If any such
person should come to you, and thus seek to divert your better discourse, IN
should think it best to take this course with them.

1. Let them know that this meeting is appointed for another use; that is, for
the Instructing of the people in the Principles of Religion; and you think it
very unmeet to pe^vert it from that use; it being a sin to do Gods work
disorderly, or to be doing a lesser work, when you should be doing a greater:
And therefore as you durst not turn Gods public worship on the Lords day into
vain or contentious disputings, which discompose men's minds, and spoil a
greater work; so neither do you think it lawful to abuse these times to lower
uses, which are appointed for higher.

2. Yet let him know, that you do not this to avoid any trial of the truth: and
that he may know so much, you will at any other fit season, when he will come
on purpose to that end, endeavor to give him full satisfaction; or you will as
willingly receive instruction from him, if he be able and have the truth, as
you desire he should receive instruction from you: and if it must be so, you
will yield to his desire before you part, if there be but time when you have
dispatched the greater work: but upon condition only, that he will submit to the
greater first.

3. Then desire him first to give you some account of the Principles in the
Catechism: And if he deny it, convince him before all, of the iniquity of his
course.

1. In that it is the Principles that salvation most depends on, and
therefore being of greatest Excellency and Necessity, are first to be taken
into consideration.

2. In that it is the appointed business of this day.

3. It is orderly to begin with the fundamentals, because they bear up the
rest, which suppose them, flow from them, and cannot be understood without them.

4. It is the note of a Proud vainglorious hypocrite, to make a flourish about
lesser things, and yet either to be ignorant of the greater, or to scorn to
give that account of his knowledge, which the people whom he despises, refuse
not to give.

If he yield to you, ask him only such questions as seem to be of great weight,
and yet strain him up a peg higher, then you do the common people; and
especially keep out the predicate usually from your Question, and put him most
upon defining or distinguishing, or expounding some terms or sentences of
Scripture, etc. As such questions as these may be put to him, which call for
definitions, wherein its ten to one, but you will find him ignorant. E. G [What
is God? What is Jesus Christ? What is the Holy Ghost? What is Person in the
Trinity? How many natures has Christ? Was Christ a creature before his
Incarnation, or the Creation? Is he called the firstborn of all creatures as
God, or as man? Is he called, the Image of the Invisible God, and the express
Image of the Fathers person or subsistence as a creature, or as God? Was Adam
bound to believe in Christ? Was one, or two Covenants made with Adam before his
fall? Did the first Covenant of Nature make any promise of everlasting
celestial glory? Did it threaten hell fire, or only temporal death? Did it
threaten eternal torment to the soul only, or to the body also? Should there
have been any Resurrection of the body, if Christ had not come to procure it?
Should Christ have com, or been our Head, or have brought us to glory, if man
had not fallen? What is the first Covenant? what, its conditions? What the
second Covenant, and its Conditions? What was the difference between the
Covenant with Adam, and that by Moses? Was it a Covenant of Works, or of Grace
that was made by Moses? What were the conditions of salvation before Christ's
Incarnation? What is forgiveness of sin? What is Justification? How are we said
to be Justified by faith? how by works? What is faith? What repentance? What
Sanctification, Vocation, Regeneration? Is the Covenant of Works Abrogated, or
not? Is the Covenant of Grace made with the Elect only? or with all? or with
whom? What is Freewill? Is there any conversion without the word? What is the
true nature of special grace? and what is the proper difference of a Regenerate
man from all others? What is the Catholic Church? How will you know the true
Church? How know you the Scripture to be the word of God? What is Christ's
Priestly, Prophetical, Kingly office? Be they three offices, or but one: and be
they all?] with abundance the like.

And if it be Sacrament Controversies which he raises, tell him it is
necessary, that you be first agreed, what Baptism is? (what the Lords Supper
is?) before you dispute who should be Baptized, etc. And its twenty to one, he
is not able truly to tell you what the Sacrament it self is.

A true Definition of Baptism or the Lords Supper is not so commonly given as
pretended to be given.

4. If he discover his Ignorance in the cases propounded, endeavor to humble
him in the sense of his pride and presumption; And let him know what it is, and
what it signifies, to go about with a Teaching, Contentious, proud behavior,
while he is indeed so ignorant in things of greater moment.

5. But see that you are able to give him better information your selves in the
points wherein you find him ignorant.

6. But specially take care that you discern the spirit of the man: And if he
be a settled perverse Schismatic, or Heretic, so that you see him peremptory
and resolved, and quite transported with pride, and have no great hopes of his
recovery, then do all this that I have before said openly before all that are
present; that he may be humbled or shamed before all, and the rest may be
confirmed. But if you find him godly and temperate, and that there is any hope
of his reduction, then see that you do all this privately between him and you
only: and let not fall any bitter words, nor that tend to his disparagement.
And thus I advise, both because we must be as tender of the reputation of all
good men, as fidelity to them and to the truth will permit: we must bear one
another burdens, and not increase them, and we must restore those with a
spirit of meekness, that fall through infirmity; remembering that we our selves
also may be tempted: and also because there is small hope that you should ever
do them good, if once you exasperate them, and dis-affect them toward you.

And therefore 7. See that to such erring persons as you have any hopes of, you
carry your selves with as much tenderness and love as will consist with your
duty to the Church of God. For most of them when they are once tainted this
way, are so selfish and highminded, that they are much more impatient of
reproof then many of the prophaner sort of people.

This way did Musculus take with the Anabaptists, visiting them in Prison, and
relieving them even while they railed at him as Antichristian, and so continued
without disputing with them, till they were convinced that he loved them, and
then they sought to him for advice themselves, and many of them were reclaimed
by him.

8 Either in the Conclusion of your meeting, or at another appointed time, when
you come to debate their Controversy with them, tell them, That seeing they
think you unable to teach them, and think themselves able to teach you, it is
your desire to learn; You suppose disputing (as tending usually to ex^sperate
men's minds, rather then to satisfy them) is to be used as the last remedy;
Therefore you are here ready, if they are able to Teach you, to learn of them
and desire them to speak their minds: Which if they refuse, tell them, you
think it the humblest and most Christian edifying way for him that has most
knowledge to Teach, and the other to Learn; and therefore your purpose is to be
either a Learner or a Teacher, and not be Disputant, till they make it to be
Necessary. When they have declared their minds to you in a teaching way, if it
be nothing but the common pleas of the seduced (as its like it will not till
then) that this is no new thing to you; it is not the first time that you have
heard it, or Considered of it, and if you had found a Divine Evidence in it you
had received it long ago: You are truly willing to receive all truth; but you
have received that which is contrary to this doctrine, with far better
Evidence then they bring for it, etc. If they desire to hear what your Evidence
is, tell them if they will hear as learners you shall communicate your Evidence
in the meetest way you can, which if they promise to do, let them know that
this promise obliges them to impartialitie and an humble free entertainment of
the truth, and that they do not turn back in cash carping and contention but
take what shall be delivered into sober Consideration: which if they promise,
1. If you are so far vers't in the point in hand as to manage it well ex
tempore, or the person be temperate and fit for such debates, then come in with
your evidence in a discoursive way, first showing your reasons against the
grossest imperfections of his own discourse, and then giving him your grounds
from Scripture; not many but rather a few of the clearest best improved. And 2.
When you have done (or without verbal teaching if you find him unfit to learn
that way) give him some book that most effectually defends the questioned
truth, and tell him, that it is a vain thing to say that over so often, which is
so fully said already, and a man may better consider of what he has before
his eyes, then of that which slideth through his ears, and is mistaken or
forgotten: and therefore you desire him as an humble learner to peruse that
Book with leisurely consideration; because there are the same things, that you
would say to him; and desire him to bring you in a sober and solid answer to
the chief strength of it, if after perusal he judge it to be unsound. But, if
it may be, fasten some one of the most sticking Evidences on him before you
leave him. If he refuse to read the book, endeavor to convince him of his
unfaithfulness to the Truth and his own soul? Does he think that Gods truth is
not worth his study? or will he venture his soul (as the ungodly do) and the
Churches peace with it, and all to save himself so small a labor? Is it not
just with God to give him over to delusion, that will not be at a little pains
to be informed, nor afford the truth an equal hearing?

9. But above all, before you part, yea or before you debate the Controversy,
see that you do sum up the precedent Truths wherein you are both agreed. 1.
Know whether he agree to all that is in the Catechism, which you teach the
people? 2. Whether he suppose that you may attain salvation, if you be true to
so much as you are agreed in? 3. Whether they that are so far agreed as you
are, should not live in Love and Peace, as children of the same God, and
members of the same Christ, and heirs of the same Kingdom? 4. Whether you are
not bound, notwithstanding your smaller difference, to be helpers in the main
work of the Gospel for the conversion and saving of souls? 5. Whether then they
are not bound to manage the private difference so as they may not hinder the
main work, and therefore to let the lesser stoop to the greater? 6 Whether they
ought not to hold communion in public worship, and Church-relation, with those
that are so far agreed, and walk in the fear of God? 7. And whether it be not
schism to separate from them, for the sake of that small disagreement,
themselves being not necessitated by Communion to any actual sin?

I speak all this only of the tolerable differences that are among men, fearing
God. And in that case, if the person be sober and understanding, he must needs
yield to the affirmative of these Questions: Which if he do (or to any of them)
let him subscribe it, or openly averr it: And then let all the standers by be
made apprehensive, that none of the great matters that you deal with them
about, are questioned, but all yielded unquestionable; (And the affixed
Scripture leaves them so:) therefore there is no cause for them to receive the
least discouragement in their way.

I conceive its past doubt, that differing brethren may well join in
recommending the truths that they are agreed in to the ignorant people! Bishop
Usher told King James in his Sermon at Wansted on the Churches Unity, that he
made this motion even to the Papists Priests themselves that they might join in
teaching the people of that barbarous Nation the Common Principles that both
were agreed in: A motion too Christian for sullen factious Zeal to entertain. I
will repeat his own words, page 33. [The danger then of this ignorance being by
the Confession of the most judicious Divines of both sides acknowledged to be
so great; the woeful estate of the poor Country wherein I live is much to be
lamented, where the people generally are suffered to perish for want of
knowledge (he meant the Papists) the vulgar superstitions of Popery not doing
them half that hurt, that the ignorance of those Common principles of the faith
does, which all true Christians are bound to learn. The consideration whereof
has sometime drawn me to treat with those of the opposite party to move them,
that however in other things we did differ one from another, yet we should join
together in teaching those main points the knowledge whereof was so necessary
to salvation, and of the truth whereof there was no Controversy betwixt us.
But what, for the Jealousies which these distractions in matters of Religion
have bred among us, and what, for other respects, the motion took small effect:
and so betwixt us both, the poor people are kept still in miserable ignorance,
neither knowing the grounds of the one Religion nor of the other.] So far this
learned Christian Bishop.

And what wonder if Popish Priests refuse this motion, when now among us it is
so rare a matter to find any in England, though he differ only in the point of
Infant Baptism, that will calmly and without fraudalent designs of secret
promoting his own opinions by it, entertain and prosecute such a motion for the
common good! As if they had rather, that Christianity were thrust out of the
world, or kept under, then Infants should be admitted into the Church! well,
let any party or person pretend what they will of Zeal or Holiness, I will ever
take the Dividatur for an ill sign: The true Mother abhorrs the Division of the
Child; and the true Christian does prefer the Common interest of Christianity,
before the Interest of a faction, or an opinion, and would not have the whole
building endangered, rather then one peg, should not be driven in as he would
have it, he had rather a particular Truth (if we suppose it a truth) should
suffer, then the whole or the main.

And having given you this advice what to do with this kind of men in your
Conference on the occasion now in question, so I shall add a word or two of
advice how to carry your self toward them at other times; For the preservation
of the Unity and Peace of your Congregations does much depend on your right
dealing with such as these. For (alas for grief and shame) it is most commonly
men that profess more then ordinary Religiousness they are the dividers of
these.

1. I must premise, that the chief part of your work to preserve the Church
from such, does consist in the prevention of their fall, seeing when they are
once thoroughly infected; be the error what it will, they are but seldom
recovered; but if they be beaten out of the error, which they first fell into;
they go to another, and perhaps thence to another; but, through a just
excecation, they seldom return to the truth.

2. To which end, it is most desirable that the Minister should be of Parts
above the people so far, as to be able to teach them, and awe them, and
manifest their weaknesses to themselves, or to all. The truth is (for it cannot
be hid) it is much long of the Ministers, that our poor people are run into so
many factions! and particularly, the weakness of too many is not the least
cause, when a proud Seducer shall have a nimble tongue, and a Minister be dull
or ignorant, so that such a one can baffle him, or play upon him in the ears of
others, it brings him into contempt, and overthrows the weak: For they commonly
judge him to have the best cause, that has the most confident, plausible,
triumphant tongue. But when a Minister is able to open their shame to all, it
mightily preserves the Church from their infection.

3. It is necessary also to this end, that you frequently and thoroughly possess
your people, with the nature, necessity, and daily use of the great
unquestionable Principles of Religion, and of the great sin and danger of a
perverse zeal about the lower points before the greater are well laid, and let
them be made sensible how it is the Principles, and not their smaller
Controversies that life or death does depend upon.

4. Make them sensible of the mischiefs of Schism, and the great and certain
obligations that lie upon us, all to maintain the Churches Unity and Peace.

5. When a fire is kindled, resist it in the beginning, and make not light of
the smallest spark: and therefore go presently to the infected person, and
follow him by the means hereafter mentioned, till he be recovered.

6. Specially use a fit diversion: when a small Controversy begins to endanger
the Church, raise a greater your self, which you have better advantage to
manage, and which is not like to make a division. That is; let them know that
there are far greater difficulties then theirs to be first resolved (such as
some of the Questions before mentioned) and so give them a Catalogue of them,
and set them a work upon them, that they may be matter of avocation from that
fore, where the humors begin their conflux, and also that they may be humbled
in the sense of their ignorance, and their proud self-conceits may be somewhat
abated.

7. See that you preach to such auditors as these, some higher points, that
stall their understandings, and feed them not all with milk, but sometime with
stronger meat: For it exceedingly puffs them up with Pride, when they hear
nothing from Ministers but what they know already, or can say themselves: This
makes them think themselves as wise as you, and as fit to be Teachers; For they
think you know no more then you preach: And this has set so many of them on
preaching, because they hear nothing from others but what they can say
themselves; and Ministers do not set them such patterns as may humble them, and
deter them from that work. Not that I would have you neglect the great
fundamental verities, or wrong the weak and ignorant people, while you are
dealing with such as these; but only when the main part of your Sermon is as
plain as you can speak, let some one small part, be such as shall puzzle these
self-conceited men: Or else have one Sermon in four or five of purpose for
them: Not by heaping up citations of Fathers, nor repeating words of Latin or
Greek (unless when you are convincing them of the difficulty of a Text of
Scripture) For they will but deride all this: But take up some profound
questions (such as the Schools voluminously agitate) and let them see that it
is edifying that you intend, and therefore desire to make it as plain as you
can; that they may see that it is not your obscure manner of handling, but the
matter it self that is too hard for them, and so may see that they are yet but
children that have need of milk, and that you would be more upon such higher
points, if it were not that their incapacity does take you off.

8. See that you preach as little as may be against them in the Pulpit, in any
direct manner, opposing their sect by name, or by any reproachful titles: For
they are exceeding tender, proud, passionate and rash, ordinarily, that are
entangled in a Schism: and they will but hate you, and fly from you as an
enemy, and say you rail. The way therefore is, without naming them, to lay the
grounds clearly and soundly, which must subvert their errors; and then the
error will fall of it self. And when you are necessitated to deal with them
directly; do it not by short unsatisfactory applications, and loathed snatches,
or angring reproaches; but without naming them, take up the Controversy, and
handle it thoroughly, peaceably, and convincingly, and so let them alone in
public: yet be not too long upon it neither: but give them your fullest
evidence in a few Sermons; not saying all that may be said, but choosing out
that which they can have least pretense to quarrel with, and passing over that
which they may say more against, or will require more ado to clear and defend.

9. Be sure to keep up some private meetings, and draw them in among you, and
manage them prudently. By this means you may keep them from Dividing meetings
among themselves, where they may say what they will behind your back without
control, For most Professors are addicted to private meetings, (and well
ordered, they are of great use to their edification) and if they have not the
opportunity of such as they should have, they will gather to such as they
should not have. In the mannaging of them (as to the present purpose) observe
these things.

1. Be sure to be still with them your selves.

2. Let not the main exercises of the meeting be such as tend to contention, or
to private men's proud ostentation of their parts, but such as tend to the
edification of the people: Not for private men to preach or expound Scripture,
nor (as some do) to let every one of them speak to questions of their own
propounding; but to repeat the Sermons that you have preached, and to call upon
God, and sing his Praise.

3. Yet let there be some opportunity for them to speak, and appear in a
learning way. To which purpose, when you have done repeating, let all that are
present know, that if they doubt of any thing that was delivered, or would have
any thing made plainer to them, or would be resolved in any thing else that
concerns the subject in hand (or any other in case of need) you desire them
to propound their doubts. And so let them have the liberty of questioning as
learners, while you remain the Teacher, and resolve all the doubts your selves,
and do not set them on disputing, by leaving it to them to make the answer. And
if you have not competent abilities ex tempore, to resolve their doubts, you
were much better let pass this too: but if you have, it will be of very great
use, both for their edification, and the maintaining of order, and their
necessary dependence on you.

4. But if you perceive them so set upon the exercise of their own parts for
ostentation, that they are like to divide, if they have not opportunity to do
it; be not too stiff against them; but mildly let them know, that it is for
their good that you dislike it, both because it is an ill sign of a proud
heart, that had rather teach, then learn, especially where a Teacher by office
is in place, and where there is no necessity; and also because you fear it will
not tend to the best edification of the Flock, but to vain janglings, or to
excite others that are unable to an imitation. Desire also to know of them,
whether they have any truth of God to reveal to them, that you do not reveal?
If they have not, why should they desire needlessly to tell them what they are
daily told by you? If they have, it is necessary that you know it and consider
of it, before you consent that it should be taught to your Flock. But if this
mild resistance satisfy not, let them take their course a while, rather then
separate from you (unless they be already perverse and subtle Heretics:) and
when they have done their exercises, tell them that as you give liberty to
all, to propound their doubts about what you have delivered, so you must take
the like liberty that you give: And so propound, first, whether the
underderstandings of people are like to be more edifyed, by such obtusions of
variety, or by fastening well upon their memories the things that they have
lately heard? and so whether such exercises or repetitions be more necessary?
And then open the weaknesses of the discourse; the mis-expounding of
Scriptures, the errors in matter, in Method, and in words and that not in a
contemptuous or disgraceful way, but as the points wherein you remain
unsatisfied. And by such means as these you will quickly shame them out of
their way of ostentation, and make them give it over.

10. Make use of your Peoples parts to the utmost as your Helpers in their
places, in an orderly way, under your Guidance; or else they will make use of
them in a disorderly dividing way in opposition to you. It has been a great
cause of Schism, when Ministers would contemptuously cry down private men's
preaching, and withal desire not to make any use of the Gifts that God has
given them for their assistance; but thrust them too far from holy things, as
if they were a profane generation. The work is like to go poorly on, if there
be no hands employed in it, but the Ministers. God gives not any of his gifts
to be buried, but for common use. By a prudent improvement of the gifts of the
more able Christians, we may receive much help by them, and prevent their
abuse; even as lawful marriage preventeth fornication And the uses you must
specially put them to are these. 1 Urge them to be diligent in Teaching and
praying with their own families; specially Catechizing them, and teaching them
the meaning of what they learn, and whetting it on their affections: And there
if they have a mind to preach to their children and servants, (so they
undertake not more, then they are able to do) I know no reason, but they may.
2. Urge them to step out now and then to their poor Ignorant Neighbors, and
catechize and instruct them in meekness and patience from day to day, and that
will bring them more peace of Conscience, then contemning them. 3. Urge them to
go often to the Impenitent and scandalous sinners about them, and deal with them
with all possible skill and earnestness, yet also with love and patience, for
the Converting reforming and saving of their souls. 4. Acquaint them with their
duty of watching over each other in brotherly love; and admonishing and
exhorting one another daily and if any walk scandalously, to tell them their
fault before two or three, after the contempt of private reproof; and if that
prevail not, to tell the officers of the Church, that they may be further
proceeded with, as Christ has appointed. 5. At your private meetings and in
days of humiliation or thanksgiving in private, employ them in prayer, and in
such learning Questions as is aforesaid. 6. If there be any very ignorant or
scandalous sinner that you know of and you cannot possibly have time your
selves to speak to them at that season, send some of those that are able and
sober to do it in your stead, to instruct the ignorant, and admonish the
offenders, as far as a private man, on a message from a Minister, and in
discharge of his own duty may go. 7. Let some of them be chosen to Represent
the Church: or to see that they have no wrong, and to be their Agents to
prepare all Cases of Discipline for public audience, and to be present with
the Church officers at appointed meetings to hear the Evidences that are
brought in against any scandalous impenitent sinners, and to discern how far
they are valid and how far the persons are obliged to make satisfaction, and
give public testimony of Repentance or to be further proceeded against. 8 Let
such as are fit, be made subservient officers, I mean Deacons: and then they
may afford you help in a regular way, and will by their relation discern
themselves obliged to maintain the unity of the Church and authority of the
Ministry, as they have some participation of the Employment and honor, and so
by a complication of Interests you will make them firmer to the Church: But
then see that they be men Competently fit for the place.

I am persuaded, if Ministers had thus made use of the parts of their ablest
members, they might have prevented much of the Divisions and distractions and
apostacy that has befaln us: For they would have then found work enough upon
their hands for higher parts then theirs, without invading the Ministry, and
would rather have seen cause to bewail the impefection of their abilities to
that work which does belong to them. Experience would have convinced and
humbled them more, then our words will do. A man may think he can stir such
ablock, or pluck up a tree by the roots, that never tried; but when he sets his
hands to it, he will come off ashamed. And see that you drive them to diligence
in their own works, and let them know what a sin it is to neglect their
families, and their ignorant miserable neighbors etc and then they will be
kept humble, and have no such mind to be running upon more work, when they feel
you, spurring them on to their own, and rebuking them for the neglect; nor will
they have any leisure for schismatical Enterprises, because of the constancy
and greatness of their employment.

11. Still keep up Christian love and familiarity with them, even when they
begin to warp and make defection; and lose not your interest in them, while you
have any thoughts of attempting their recovery.

12. If they do withdraw into separated meetings, follow them, and be among
them, if it may be, continually, enter a mild dissent as to the lawfulness of
it; but yet tell them, that you are willing to hear what it is that they have
to say, and to be among them for their good, if they will give you leave, for
fear lest they run to further evil. And be not easily removed; but hold on,
unless they resolvedly exclude you. For 1. You may thereby have the opportunity
of a moderate gentle opposing their errors, and so in time may manifest the
vanity of their course: 2. And you will prevent much of that impudent reviling,
and grosser venting of further Error, which they will do more freely where
there is no Contradicter. They may say any thing when there is none to gainsay
them, and make it seem good in the eyes of the weak. 3. And by this means, if
any seducers from abroad come in to confirm them, you will be ready to oppose
them: And so at the least you will do much to prevent the increase of their
party. It has been a very great cause of the schisms in England, that
Ministers have only (too many) contemned them, and when they have withdrawn
into private separated meetings, have talked against them to others, or
reproved them in the Pulpit and in the mean time fled away from the faces of
them, or been strangers to them, while they have given Seducers opportunity to
come among them and be familiar with them without contradiction, and to have
the advantages of deceiving them, and even doing what their list. O that the
Ministry had been more guiltless of those Errors and Schisms that they talk
against! But its easier to chide a sectary in the Pulpit, and to subscribe a
Testimony against them, then to play the skilful Physician for their Cure, and
do the tenth part of the duty that lies upon us, to prevent and heal such
calamitous distempers. I am not finding fault with Prudent Reprehensions of
them in Public, or Testimonies against them: but I think too many of us have
cause to fear, lest we do but publicly proclaim our own shame in the guilt of
our negligence or imprudent weaknesses; and lest in Condemning them and
Testifying against them, we Testify against and Condemn our selves.

13. If you be not well able to deal with them, do as I before advised: Give
them the best book on that subject to peruse.

14. If all this will not do, get the fittest neighbor Minister that you know
to come over and help you: Not in Public, nor as a set Disputation, (without
necessity;) but let him come as occasionally, and ex improviso, come upon them
in one of their private meetings, as desirous to see and hear them, and so take
the opportunity to deal with them. And if after that there be any Disputations
appointed, be sure to observe the old rule, fight with them on their own
ground, and keep up the war in their quarters, and let it come as little as you
can into your own: and therefore go to their Assemblies, but let them not come
into yours. For with them, you can lose little, and may gain much: but at home,
you can gain little, but its two to one, will lose some, let the error be never
so gross. The Sectaries commonly observe this course themselves, and therefore
you will have much ado to get their consent to bring your disputations into
their own Assemblies.

15. Let not the authors of the Schism outdo you, or go beyond you in any
thing that is good: For, as truth should be more effectual for sanctification,
then error; so if you give them this advantage, you give them the day; and all
your disputation will do but little good: For the weaker people judge all by
the outward appearance, and by the effects, and be not so able to judge of the
Doctrine in it self: They think that he has the best cause, whom they take to
be the best man.

I extend this rule both to Doctrine and Life E. G. If a Libertine preach for
Free Grace, do you preach it up more effectually, then he: be much upon it, and
make it more glorious on right grounds, then he can do on his wrong. If on the
like pretenses, he magnify the Grace of Love, and (in order to cry down fear,
and humiliation) be all for living in pure Love to God: do not contradict him
in the assertive, but only in the negative and destructive part; but outgo him,
and preach up the Love of God, with its motives and effects, more fully and
effectually then he can do, on the corrupt grounds on which he does proceed: Or
else you will make all the silly people believe that this is the difference
between you, that he is for Free Grace and the Love of God, and you are against
it: For if you dwell not upon it in your preaching as well as he, they will not
take notice of a short concession of profession. So if an Enthusiast do talk
all of the Holy Ghost, and the light, and witness, and Law within us: Fall you
upon that subject too, and do that well which they did ill; and preach up the
office of the Holy Ghost, his indwelling and operations, and the light, and
testimony, and Law within us, better then they. This is the most effectual way
of settling your people against their seductions. So if you be assaulted by
Pelagians; if they make a long story to prove that God is not the Author of
sin; do you fall upon the proof of it too: If they plead for Free Will, do you
plead for that Free Will which we have (the natural liberty, which none deny,
consisting in a self-determining power, and supposing actual indetermination)
and deny only that Liberty which the will has not: (that is, 1. Either a
freedom from Gods Government. 2. Or from the necessary guidance of the
Intellect, and Moral force of the object. 3. Or that true Spiritual, Ethical
freedom from vicious inclinations, which consists in the Right Disposition of
the will: though the sanctified indeed have this in part; and that
predominantly.) So if any Pelagian or Semi-Pelagian, will go about
industriously to prove man's power (or rather impotency) to will or do evil; do
it as effectually as he: For this is indeed but to prove a man a sinner, under
pretense of proving him free, or at least to prove him defectible (if it be not
the ill inclination, but the possibility of sinning that they defend: in which
case, we can say more, then they. So if they go about laboriously to prove,
that Christ dyed for all: I would endeavor to do it as effectually, as they;
that it might appear to the people, that the difference between us is not in
this, that they would magnify the riches of grace above me, or that I would
leave sinners hopeless and remediless, and without an object for faith, any
more then they: nor that I abuse or reject express Scriptures, when they own
them in their proper sense: But I would let them know, that the Controversy
lies elsewhere; viz. Whether Christ in offering himself a sacrifice for sin,
had not a special Intention or Resolution (in compliance with his Fathers
predestinating will) infallibly and effectually to save his chosen, even such
and such by name, in making his blood applied, effectual to the pardon of all
their sins, and to give them his spirit to seal them unto glory: having no such
Will, Intention, Resolution, in dying (no more then his Father had in
predestinateing) as to the rest of the world. So if one that is for private
men's preaching come and inveigh against Ministers for inhibiting them to use
the gifts of God for the edification of the Church, I would not presently set
to thwart him: but I would rather fall a persuading private men to use their
gifts, in all the ways that I even now mentioned; and sharply chide them for
using them no more; and then among my Cautions, or reprehensions, meet with his
desired abuse in the end. And what I have said by way of instance in these few
points, I mean in all others: Preaching truth is the most successful way of
confuting error: and I would have no Seducer to have the glory of out-going us
in any good, and so not in befriending or defending any truth. Once more E. G.
If a Socinian should fall a pleading for the Churches Peace, and for Unity upon
the ancient simplicity of faith, I would labor to out-go him in it: and then
would show that the ancient simple faith condemned him. If he would plead
Reason for Scripture or the Christian Religion, I would endeavor to out-go him
in it, and he should not have opportunity to glory that he only had Reason for
what he held, and I had none. But I would show that as I have Reason to believe
the Scripture, so that Scripture condemns his errors. If a Separatist will
plead for the Necessity of Churchorder and Discipline, so would I as well as
he: and show him that it is only Disorder, and Confusion inconsistent with
right order and discipline that I dislike in him or those of his way. And so
would I do by others in this case.

And you should be as loath that they should outgo you in the Practice of a
Holy and Righteous life, any more, then in sounder diligent teaching. Do any of
them express a hatred of sin, and desire of Church Reformation? So must we do
more. Do any of them use to spend their time when they meet together in holy
discourse, and not in vain janglings? Let us do so much more: Are they
unwearied in propagating their opinions? Let us be more so in propagating the
Truth: Will they condescend to the meanest, and creep into houses to lead
captive the sillyest of the Flock? Let us stoop as low, and be as diligent to
do them good. Are any of them loving to their party, and contemners of the
world? Let us be lovers of all, and specially of all Saints; and do good to
all, as we have power; and specially to all the household of faith; and love an
enemy, as well as they can do a friend. Let us be more just then they; and more
merciful then they; and more humble, and meek, and patient then they: For this
is the will of God, that by well-doing we may put to silence the Ignorance of
foolish men. Let us excel them in a holy, harmless, righteous, merciful,
fruitful, heavenly life, as we do in soundness of Doctrine: that by our fruits
we may be known, and the weaker sort of our people may see the truth in this
reflection, that cannot see it in itself, and that our Light may so shine before
men, that they may see our conversation, and glorify our Father which is in
heaven, and even they that obey not the word, may without the word be won by
the conversation of their Teachers, 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2. O how happy had England
been; how happy had all the Church been, if the Ministers of the Gospel had
taken these courses! It would have done more against Errors and Schism, then
all our chiding at them has done, or then all the force can do which we desire
from the Magistrate.

THree sorts of persons that we may meet with in our conference, are now over,
viz. 1. The grossly ignorant and unconverted. 2. The doubting troubled believer.
3. The Cavilling Questionist, or seduced Schismatic. The fourth that I should
speak of in this Direction, is, Those that by a professed willingness to learn
and obey, and by other signs, do give us some probability, that they may have
true Repentance and faith, and yet by their ignorance, or lukewarmness (being
not noted for any special profession of Godliness), or by some uneven walking,
do make our fears to be as great or greater then our hopes: so that we are
between hope and fear of them, doubting the worst of their present safety,
though we have not ground to charge them to be unconverted, impenitent,
unsanctified persons. I think half that come to me are of this sort: and ten of
this sort (if not 40) for one that I dare flatly say are unregenerate. Now it
may be a great difficulty with some younger Ministers what they should do with
this sort of people where they have no sufficient ground to determine of them
as Godly or Ungodly, what ever their fears or hopes may be.

Of these I shall only briefly say this. 1. The first Directions may suffice in
the main, for dealing with these: and are as much fitted to these as to the
worst. As we may tell a Notorions, ungodly man, Your case is miserable, you are
a child of death: so may we tell these, I much fear your Case is sad; these are
ill signs: I wonder how you dare so hazard your salvation; And so abating of
the confidence of our Censures according to the several degrees of the hopeful
good, that appears in them, we may see in the first case, how to deal in this.

2. And I would advise you to be very cautelous how you pass too hasty or
absolute Censures on any that you have to do with; because it is not so easy a
matter to discern a man to be certainly graceless that professes himself a
Christian, as many do imagine it to be; And you may do the work in hand as well
without such an absolute conclusion as with it, as the former examples (which
will serve all with a little alteration do) show.

3. The general descriptions of the Ministerial work, may supply the rest. I
shall only add in a word. 1. Keep them close to the use of private and public
means. 2. Be often with the lukewarm to awaken them rouzingly; and with the
careless to admonish them. 3. Take the opportunity of sickness which will bow
their hearts and open their ears. 4. See that they spend the Lords day, and
order their families, aright. 5. Draw them from temptations and occasions of
sin. 6. Charge them to come and seek help in all great streights and open their
temptations and dangers before they are swallowed up 7. Strike at the great
Radical sins. Self-seeking, fleshly mindedness, sensuality, Pride, wordliness,
Infidelity, etc. 1. Keep them to the Reading of Scripture and good books, and
direct them to those that are likest to awake them. 8. Engage their godly
neighbors to have an eye upon them. 9. Keep up Discipline to awe them: 10.
Maintain the life of Grace in your selves that it may appear in all your
Sermons to them; that every one that comes cold to the Assembly may have
warming helps before he depart.

I have done my Advice, and leave you to the Practice. Though the proud may
receive it with scorn and the selfish and slothful with some distaste and
indignation; I doubt not, but God will use it, in despite of the oppositions
of sin and Satan, to the awakening of many of his servants to their duty, and
the promoting of the work of a Right Reformation: and that his much greater
blessing shall accompany the present undertaking, for the saving of many a
soul, the Peace of you that undertake and perform it, the exciting of his
servants through the nation to second you, and to increase Purity and the unity
of his Churches, Amen.

FINIS.
December. 25. 1655.
To the Reverend and faithful Ministers of Christ in the several Counties of
this Land, and the Gentlemen and other Natives of each County, now inhabiting
the City of London.
Reverend and Beloved Brethren,
THE whole design and business of this Discourse, being the Propagation of the
Gospel and the saving of men's souls, I have thought it not unmeet to acquaint
you with another work to that end, which we have set afoot in this County, and
to propound it to your Consideration, and humbly invite you to an universal
imitation. You know, I doubt not, the great inequality in Ministerial
abilities, and that many places have Ministers that are not qualified with
convincing lenity, awakening gifts: Some must be tolerated in the necessity of
the Church, that are not likely to do any great matters toward the conversion
of ignorant, sensual, worldly men: And some that are learned, able men, and
fitted for controversies, may yet be unfit to deal with those of the lower
sort. I suppose if you peruse the whole Ministry of a County, you will not find
so many, such lively convincing Preachers as we could wish. And I take it for
granted that you are sensible of the weight of eternal things, and of the worth
of souls; and that you will judge it a very desirable thing that every man
should be employed according to his Gifts, and the Gospel in its Light and
Power should be made as common as possibly we can: Upon these and many the like
Considerations, the Ministers in this County resolved to choose out four of the
most lively, yet sober, peaceable, Orthodox men, and to desire them once a
month to leave their own Congregations to the assistance of some other, and to
bestow their labor in the places where they thought there was most need; And
as we were resolving upon this work, the Natives of this County inhabiting the
City of London, having a custom of feasting together once a year, and having at
their feast collected some moneys by contribution, for the maintaining of a
weekly Lecture in this County, (besides other good works) did (by their
Stewards) desire us to set up the said Lecture, and to dispose of the said
moneys in order thereto; And their judgments upon consulation did correspond
with our design. So that the said money being sufficient to satisfy another
that shall in their absence, preach in their own places, we employ it
accordingly, and have prevailed with some Brethren to undertake this work.

I propound to your consideration, Reverend Brethren, and to you, the Natives
of each County in London, Whether the same work may not tend much to the
edification of the Church, and the welfare of souls, if you will be pleased
speedily and effectually to set it afoot through the Land? Whether it may not,
by Gods blessing be a likely means, to illuminate the ignorant and awaken the
secure, and countermine Seducers, and hinder the ill success of Satan's
Itinerants, and win over many souls to Christ, and stablish many weak ones in
the faith? And not doubting, but your judgments will approve of the design, I
humbly move, that you will please to contribute your faculties to the work;
viz That the Londoners of each County will be pleased to manifest their
benevolence to this end, and commit the moneys to the hands of the most
faithful, Orthodox Ministers, and that they will readily and self-denyingly
undertake the work.

I hope the Gentlemen, Natives of this County will be pleased to pardon my
publishing their example, seeing my end is only the promoting of men's
salvation, and the common good.

And that you may fullyer understand the scope of our design; I shall annex the
Letters directed to the several Ministers of the County, which the Lecturers
send to the Ministers of the place, and receive his answer, before they presume
to Preach in any Congregations.

To all the rest of the Ministers of the Gospel in this County, our Reverend
and beloved Brethren, Grace and Peace in our Lord Jesus Christ. Reverend
Brethren,
THE Communication of the heavenly Evangelical Light, for the Glory of our
Redeemer in the Conversion, Edification and Salvation of men's souls, is that
which we are bound to by many Obligations, as Christians, and as Ministers of
Christ for his Church, and therefore must needs be solicitous thereof: and it
is that which the spirit of Grace where it abides, does proportionably dispose
the heart to desire: By convictions of the excellency and necessity of this
work, and of our own duty in order thereto, and by the excitation of undeserved
Grace, our hearts are carried out, to long after a more general and effectual
illumination and saving Conversion of the inhabitants of this County in which
we live: Which while we were but entering upon a consultation to promote, it
pleased God (without our knowledge of it) to put the same thoughts into the
hearts of others. The Natives of this Country of Worcester who dwell in London,
meeting at a feast, (as is their yearly use) collected a sum of money for the
setting of 8. poor boys to trades and toward the maintaining of a weekly
Lecture, and have committed the execution of this last to our care: And upon
consultation with their Stewards, and among our selves, both they and we are
satisfied, that a moveable Lecture on the Lords Day, is the likelyest way for
the improvement of their Charity to the attainment of their ends. For 1. Many
people through poverty cannot, and many through negligence will not come to a
week day's Lecture: Experience tells us, that such are usually attended but
little by those that have the greatest need. 2. And thus the benefit may extend
to more, than if it were fixed in one Place.

We have therefore desired our Reverend and Dear Brethren, Mr. Andrew Tristram
Minister at Clent, Mr. Henry Oasland Minister at Bewdley, and Mr. Thomas
Baldwin Minister at Wolverley, and Mr. Joseph Treble Minister at Church-Lench,
to undertake this work, and that each of them will be pleased every fourth
Lords day to Preach twice in those places, where they shall judge their labors
to be most necessary: and as we doubt not but their own Congregations will so
far consent for the good of others: So do we hereby request of you our
Brethren, that when any of them shall offer their labors for your
Congregations, in preaching the said Lecture, you will receive them, and to
your power further them in the work. For as we have no thoughts of obtruding
their help upon you, without your consent; so we cannot but undoubtedly expect
that men fearing God, and desiring their peoples everlasting good, will
cheerfully and gratefully entertain such assistance. And we hope that none will
think it needless, or take it as an accusing the Ministry of insufficiency: For
the Lord does variously bestow his gifts: all that are upright are not equally
fitted for the work: and many that are learned, judicious, and more able to
teach the riper sort, are yet less able to condescend to the ignorant, and so
convincingly and fervently to rowze up the secure, as some that are below them
in other qualifications: and many that are able in both respects, have a barren
people; and the ablest have found by experience that God has sometime blessed
the labors of a stranger to do that which their own has not done. We beseech
you therefore interpret not this as an accusation of any, which proceeds from
the Charity of our worthy Contrymen in London, and from the earnest desires
of them and us to further the salvation of as many as we can. And that you may
have no jealousies of the persons deputed to this work; we assure you that they
are approved men, Orthodox, sober, peaceable, and of upright lives, happily
qualified for their Ministerial work, and zealous and industrious therein; and
so far from being likely to sow any errors or cause divisions, or to draw the
hearts of people from their own faithful Pastors, that they will be forward to
assist you against any such distempers in your Flocks. Not doubting therefore,
but as you serve the same Master, and are under the same oblations as we, so as
many as are heartily addicted to his service will readily promote so hopeful a
work, we commend you and your labors to the blessing of the Lord.

Your Brethren and Fellow Laborers in the work of the Gospel, Kederminster. In
the name and at the desire of the Ministers of this Association. Richard
Baxter. John Boraston. Jarvis Bryan.

Evesham. In the name of the Ministers of this Association. Giles Collier.
George Hopkins. John Dolphin.



