THE CHURCH TOLD OF Mr. ED. BAGSHAW's SCANDALS, AND Warned of the dangerous
snares of Satan, now laid for them, in his LOVE-KILLING PRINCIPLES: WITH A
farther proof that it is our common duty to keep up the interest of the
Christian Religion, and Protestant Cause, in the Parish Churches; and not to
imprison them, by a confinement to tolerated meetings alone. By RICHARD BAXTER,
A Militant Servant of Christ, for Faith, Hope, and Love, Unity, Concord, and
Peace, against their contraries on both extremes.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDC LXX II.

ERRATA.
PAge 13. l. 32. for Amareduci. r. Amazedness. p. 25. l. 6. for Care. r. Cure.
and l. 13. for impertinently. r. impenitently p. 31. l. 12. for Perry. r.
Peury. p. 33. l. 2. r. up by some. and l. 3. dele the. and l. 13. r. live. and
l. 38. for unmeasurably. r. unanswerably.

THE CHURCH TOLD OF Mr. BAGSHAW's SCANDALS, And warned of his Dangerous Snares.
THE SVMME.
1 Cor. 5. 6. Your glorying is not good: Know ye not that a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump? Romans 3. 8. Let not us do evil that good may come:
whose Damnation is just. Jam. 1. 20. For the wrath of man works not the
Righteousness of God. Jam. 3. 6, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16. The tongue is a fire; a
world of iniquity: So is the tongue among our members, that it defiles the
whole body: and sets on fire the course of nature, and it is set on fire of
hell -- The tongue can no man tame: it is an unruly evil: full of deadly
poison: Out of the same mouth proceeds blessing and cursing -- Who is a wise
man and endued with knowledge among you? Let him show out of a good
conversation his works, with meckness of wisdom. But if ye have bitter (zeal)
envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth.
This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish. For
where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work. Romans 16.
17, 18. Now, I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them ( But
not the Churches, or the innocent for their sake) For they that are such serve
not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good words and fair
speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple. Act. 20. 30. Also of your own
selves shall men arise, speaking perv^rse things, to draw away disciples after
them. 1 Cor. 11. 19. For there must be also heresies (or sects) among you, that
they which are approved, may be made manifest among you. Matthew. 22. 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21. Then went the Pharisees and took counsel, how they might
entangle him in his talk -- Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar or not? But
Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites?
show me the Tribute-money -- Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and
to God the things that are Gods. Matthew. 17. 26, 27. Then are the Children free.
Notwithstanding lest we should offend them. Rev. 22. 15. For without are dogs
-- and whosoever loves and makes a lie. Psalm. 15. 2, 3. Lord, who shall abide
in thy Tabernacles, who shall dwell in thy holy hill? He that walks
uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the truth in his heart, that
backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor takes up a
reproach against his neighbor. Christ's own Doctrine and Practice.
Luke 4. 16. As his custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day,
and stood up for to read -- John 18. 20. I spoke openly to the world; I ever
taught in the Synogogue, and in the Temple, whither the Jews always resort,
and in secret have I said nothing. Mark 1. 44. Show thy self to the Priest, and
offer for thy cleansing... Matthew. 23. 2. 3. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in
Moses seat: All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, observe and do: but
do not ye after their works; for they say and do not. (what they were, see in
the rest of the Chapt.) Mat. 7. 1, 2, 3, 4. Judge not, that ye be not judged:
For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged, and with what measure ye
measure, it shall be measured to you again: And why beholdest thou the mote
that is in thy brothers eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own
eye? -- Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thy own eye. -- TO THE
CHURCH AND TO POSTERITY.
CHAP. I.
HAd I seen, as I have done, the spring, multiplication, growth, and fruits of
Dividing. Principles, Dispositions, and Practices in these Kingdoms, not being
totally innocent therein my self, in my unexperienced youth; Had I seen so much
blood shed, so many Governments overturned, and so many Ministers openly
reviled, abused, ejected, silenced, and so many damnable heresies risen up; and
all this done in the Name of God; Had I my self been one of them that have been
cast out of my public Ministry and maintenance, with about 1800 more at once,
and seen the pitiful case of too many Congregations in the land; and all this
as the fruit of former Church-Divisions, obstinately continued twenty years,
(to look no farther) and the new effect of the same spirit still working in
both extremes; I say, Had I seen and felt all this, and yet taken the spirit,
the principles and practices of Division, in one side or other, for a virtue,
or a little sin, I had been guilty of such horrid, wilful blindness, as every
Christian's soul should hate: And had I seen what strong temptations are lately
given to propagate these evils; and what advantage Satan has got by the
malignity of some, to increase the bitter censoriousness of others, and to pull
down the good old principles of Concord, on pretense that now the case is
changed? Had I seen the fruits of Gods indignation against a self-destroying
people, in Londons plague, and dreadful flames, and in our present
Church-convulsions? Had I seen what visible dangers are over us, of a condition
yet worser than all this? Had I seen how many thousand honest Christians are in
danger of being sinners or sufferers by this evil; I say, had I stood by, and
seen all this, and held my tongue, and let men sight like Dog and Bear, and not
interposed a word of counsel or controulment to the wasting fire? I had been
guilty of an obduratious self-saving, and perfidious silence, unbeseeming the
Ministry, or the Christian name.

Having therefore begun long ago to publish my Testimony and Council against
the Dividing-evils; in 1660 foreseeing the critical day and danger, I took the
liberty of the season once more, to discharge my Conscience, though with
slender hopes, and to reason, and even beg for Peace; that had it been possible
as much as in us lay, we might have lived peaceably with all. When those
opportunities and hopes were gone, (and some glimmering once and again since
vanished,) one side having discharged me from speaking to them any more, and
God I think discharged me at present, I saw nothing more to be attempted but
with the other; whose duty for Concord and Christian Love (after many years
silence) I opened in a Treatise called The Cure of Church-Divisions: But yet
would not publish it without an Addition of the Duty of those Pastors that most
complain against separation, lest I should exasperate their minds against those
that I instructed, and should tempt them to overlook their own miscarriages.
But more of this then I there adjoined, it could not be expected that the
Licenser should pass.

The only man that rose up against this Writing with furious indignation, was
Mr. Edw. Bagshaw, a man that had before written against Bishop Morley's Letter
published against me, and lain in prison many years. And gave the world a
notable proof of one of the chief passages displeasing to them in my Book; viz.
That there is a mavelous affinity between the spirit of Persecution, and of
sinful SEPARATION, though several opinions or capacities cause them to operate
several ways.

By this time I discerned the guilty from the innocent, by the Cry which
signified their smart. I had seen so much of the workings of that spirit, that
I expected not to escape their sharpest censure. And verily, I expected neither
preferment, nor so much as Liberty to preach, as a reward from the other side,
instead of the favor of those that I knew I was to lose. Nor yet had I such a
contempt of them, or a desire to be bitterly censured and reviled, as to invite
men to it (as the Circumcellians importuned men to kill them.) I foresaw that
some interessed men would be angry, as supposing that I would hinder their
alienating work, though they could not deny but that I spoke the truth: I
foresaw that many that look but to the present day and place, would say, It was
unseasonable, and served the Prelates design, not considering that their design
is not to bad, but that some things which seem their design, do also seem the
design of Christ, and his Churches good, and men's salvation. I foreknew those
that make uncharitable Divisions their very Religion, would make it a part of
their religious dutys to call me as bad as their distempers do incline them.
These things I prognosticated in my Preface. As Tertullian says of the
Christians martyrdom, It is more the choice of our own will, than the effect
of your power. i. e. We dye because we will dye, rather than not do our duty,
by the omission of which we could escape: so I say, I could easily have kept as
large an interest in the favor and applause of all the parties that ever
railed at me, as most men of my profession, as their own words have told me.
What did it gain me in the world, to do what I have done, to lose the favor of
the Papists, the Ithacian Prelatists, the Anabaptists, the Separatists, the
Quakers, the seekers, etc. But I saw whither the temptations of this age did
tend. And this was a work that some body must do, (or else woe to the Ministry
that in their very sufferings would be so unfaithful.) And I thought my
reputation with the Uncurable as fit to be cast away, and my self as fit to
bear their slanders, as most of my brethrens, who had more use for an interest
in them than I had. And I remembered that ill-gotten goods must be restored; and
without restitution, no remission: Though I can truly say, that I disliked and
decryed this spirit from my beginnings, yet when I preached first, the favor
and loud applause of some good people, tainted a little with this disease, did
tempt me to please them too often, by exclaiming too smartly against the
corruptions of the Church: Though I said nothing but what I was confident was
true, yet I think I did not well to cherish their inor^inate censoriousness in
such matters. And having gotten sometime a great stock of estimation with such
angry persons, by means which I dare not wholly justify, (though it made me
the more capable to do them good) I did voluntarily surrender it to them again,
before they took it from me; and I did yield to serve God at the rate of so
small a part of self-denial, rather than be silent at such a time as this. I
have long ago preached to Drunkards and other ungodly people, till they openly
rose against me in tumults in the streets, and sought my life. And shall I
forbear to speak that truth to Ignorant-proud Dividers, which is necessary to
heal the Church and them, and all for fear lest their passion and partiality
should show their guilt, by their calling me what they are themselves. They
call out for Valiantness in suffering themselves: And shall I be so cowardly as
to fear their false reports? They cry out against the fear of man: And shall I
fear their impotent revilings? They will be my witnesses, that it is a duty to
deny our selves, and to forsake all for the Cause of Christ: And I am as
certain that Love and Unity are his Cause, as I am that he is the Christ: And
shall I think the good thoughts and words of some of his froward Children, too
great a matter to forsake and lose: They themselves think that we should rather
suffer a prison or death, then join with the holiest Minister and people in the
use of the Common Prayer: And should I that know the difference think, that
LOVE and CONCORD are not matters more worthy to be suffered for? When first the
City and Country had sounded with abundance of untruths about my Book, while
it was yet but in the Press, at last the man that openly assaulted it when it
came forth, did use the same instruments which himself decryed, and filled his
Libel with as many untruths as ever I saw heaped up in so small a room (except
once in such another piece, that was about eight years elder.) And the Cause it
self he shamefully slipped over; as if his spirit and interest had directed him
to no other means, but only to attempt to asperse the person that was against
him: I wondered that no soberer a man rose up to defend Dividing-Principles. And
I was glad, that in an age of such Temptations, he had no more approvers among
the Ministers. When I had answered that Libel, he sent forth another, which
instead of professing repentance, did double the number of his Untruths, and
cast out more of his bilious excrements, but pretended also to say somewhat for
his Separating. Principles and Cause. When I had replied to that, and
Admonished him to repent of his false Doctrines and Crimes, and above fourscore
visible Untruths, he has vented a third Libel, of which I am now to give you a
more particular account.

CHAP. II.
I Must needs again remember the Readers, 1. That the design of my Book was not
particular, to reconcile men only to the Parish Churches; but universal,
against those Principles in men's minds, which cause Divisions in all other
Churches, as well as that, and will never suffer Christians to Unite and Agree
where they prevail.

2. That I was so far from persuading any Minister to the present Conformity,
that I persuaded not the Readers, 1. Either to use the Ceremonies; 2. or to
communicate with any Persecutors; 3. or to own Diocesans; 4. nor to communicate
with, or own a Diocesan Church; 5. nor to communicate with, or own any Parish
Minister, that is intolerable, through Insufficiency, Heresy, or Wickedness;
6. nor to speak one false word, nor to do one sinful action, to obtain
Communion with the best Church in the world; 7. nor to prefer Communion with a
worse Church and Minister, before Communion with a better, where it may be had,
without greater loss than benefit; 8. nor to forbear any lawful endeavors in
private for each others good; 9. nor to forsake a lawful faithful Pastor,
merely because he is cast out of the Tithes and Temple; 10. nor to take a man
for your Pastor, merely because he has possession of the Tithes and Temple;
11. nor that a lawful faithful Minister should give over his Ministerial work,
or not perform it to the best Edificacation of the Church, whoever is
displeased by it, or whatever it cost him; which I take to be downright
Perfidiousness against his Ordination, and Sacrilege, as being the alienation
of a devoted consecrated person; (yea, greater Sacrilege than alienating Church
Lands.) 12. Nor did I persuade any Minister, that instead of flying to another
City (as Christ once commanded) he must needs fly from all Cities: (For the
Diocesans that think Cities only were the seats of Churches and Bishops, might
infer, that if it be lawful to desert the souls of all in Cities and
Corporations, it is but a little step farther to d^sert the Villages also.) 13.
Nor did I ever persuade any Minister to go to a Parish Church in City or
Corporation, who is by Law forbidden to come within five miles of it; and who
by appearing there, does put himself into prison for six months in the common
Jayl. 14. Nor did I ever persuade any to hear the common Prayer, or go to the
Parish Churches, merely for fear of punishment, and to save themselves. None of
all these were the matters I that meddled with.

3. But the things that I persuaded men to, were these; 1. To disclaim the
foresaid Love-killing and Church-dividing Principles. 2. Particularly to join
with a Parish Church, that has a good Minister, and that ordinarily, in case
you can enjoy no better, without more loss than the benefit is like to be. 3.
And extraordinarily to join sometimes with such a Parish, even when you have a
better, to show by what Principles you walk; unless when some apparent hurt
forbid it, which for that time is like to be greater than the good.

Pardon this Repetition of the state of my Case; for without it I cannot be
understood, and his repeated untruths require it. And now to his third Libel,
called the Review.

Sect. 1. The Title Page speaks of [All my immodest calumnies confuted] when 1.
He neither proves one Calumny in my Book; nor confuteth one detection of his
Untruths.

Sect. 2. He cunningly tells you, in an Advertisement, that ten or eleven have
read his present, citations of my words; As if that justified fourscore
falsehoods before written.

Sect. 3. Page 1. He confesses it is [ foolish and wicked] to publish
fourscore Untruths in five or six sheets of Paper; And yet thinks not himself
obliged (it seems) any farther to vindicate himself, by one considerable word,
but as it were by hoping his Readers will not believe that he was [so foolish
and wicked.] Does Church Discipline require no better defense? nor no more
repentance for above fourscore published Untruths than this?

Sect. 4. Instead of Repentance, he inviteth his Readers to usurp Gods
prerogative, as he does, and to judge my Heart, that it was never truly
humbled, and that my Repentance is hypocritical.

Sect. 5. Thus lying down impenitently under all the crimes, false doctrines,
and untruths which he published, he now puts them off as Bye-matters, and
takes on him to return to the Question, which he says was first designedly
handled between us, which he says is, [Whether Conformity at this day upon
conscientious grounds, can be defended by any, or at least with any kind of
honesty, be contended for by you] Thus he will play small game no more, nor
write Untruths by parcels, but let you know, that it is not one untruth shall
be the substance of his discourse. If telling the Church be a duty, it is not
Railing to name the sin. I therefore desire the Church to consider whether it
be easy among the parties that he separateth from, or worse than they to meet
with so great Impudency in forgeries. I know by equivocation almost any words
may be verified; But when there is no explication adjoined, the rule of humane
speech is, that Analogum per se positum stat prosignificato famosiore: that is,
Analogous, (or equivocal) words put alone without an ex exposition, are to be
taken in the most common or famous sense. Now the word [ Conformity] in its old
and usual sense does signify, that Conformity by Subscriptions, Oaths, and
Ceremonies, which distinguish the people called Non-conformists from the
Conformists, who yet were notoriously distinguished from the Separatists. It Is
true, that it may be called Conformity, if we are baptized, if we profess
Christianity, if we read the Scriptures, if we use the common Translation, if
we go to hear a Sermon in public, if we use the Lords Prayer, etc. in all this
we do as the Church of England does. But this is not it that is notified by the
common use of this name. Now do but note the front of the man. 1. The world
knows that I never Conformed, as the Law obliges Ministers to do; that I
lose my whole Ministerial maintenance, (much more than ever he did, all things
considered) and which is a thousand times more, the liberty of my Ministry in
public, because I do not conform. 2. He knows that I have professed in all
the three Books, which he writes against, that I neither am for Conformity,
nor ever wrote for it. He knows how distinctly I excluded that from the
Question, and stated the Question far otherwise, which I meddle with. Yet dare
this man make this false profession of our difference. 3. Yea, when it is [
separation] in plain words, and not mere Nonconformity, which he undertakes to
defend on his very Title Page. 4. And that I have often professed to plead for
the same cause that Dod, Hildersham, Cartwright, Paget, Bradshaw, Brightman,
Ball, Gifford, and the other Nonconformists defended, against the Separatists
of those times. ^^d will you believe him if he say that they pleaded for [
Conf^rmity.]

Sect. 6. He again repeateth his most palpable untruth, in comparing me in the
wars with [ any one whomsoever] passing over my answers, [ adding, that
Generals or Parliament would have signified little, had they not had such
Chaplains] when I had told him, (and he durst not deny it) that the Armies were
raised, before I ever spoke to Parliament man or Officer, or ever preached to
them; yea, two years before I was in the Army, whither I went with an open
profession to dissuade them from the changes which they made: my judgment
forsaking their Cause in 1644. when their Commission at the New-modelling left
out [ For the King] which before had run [ For the defense of the Kings person,
etc.] and the rest of their intentions evidently to me appearing. Till then, in
Coventry Garrison, I did speak all that which in the Book cited by him I
expressed. Nor did I ever say, I did but little, as he vainly intimates.

Sect. 7. Page 3. By a false representation of my Repentance, (whether
ignorantly or maliciously) he would insinuate, that I Repent of Good as well as
of Evil; or else that such as he, and his adherents the Separatists, have none
of that sort of culpability to repent of; or else that they disclaim so
inglorious a thing as Repentance is, and will stand to their sins at Death and
Judgment, let God say against them what he will. The first is an intimation
which makes no small part of his Book to be one continued Untruth. When one
part is spent in making the ignorant and suspicious believe that I wrote for
Conformity; the next is constituted of another Untruth, in the false
description of my Repentance. But I know the design of his railing, is to draw
me to talk of those matters over rashly, (about Wars and Governments) (which I
repent of talking of so much already) that he may catch somewhat for his Malice
to make use of to a farther end: Fain he would make the world believe that I
must speak Treason, or be a Coward or a Turn coat: Not with the simplicity as
children dare one another into the dirt; but with the kindness that traps and
snares are set for birds, to catch and kill them. And if Murderous Malice, and
Lying be made by Christ the Devils sins, and the marks of his children, Ioh. 8.
48. 1 Ioh. 3. 8. I think those that are notoriously thus selfstigmatized, are
fitter to be separated from, than to separate from others, as unworthy of their
good company. I must profess, that as in my Answers to diverse such men as this,
I have as near as I could, imitated my great example, so I cannot see but this
man, and others that have led him this same way, have exactly imitated the
malicious Pharisees; And let him be also their imitator, who thinks them
wiser and more stout and valiant men than Christ; Matthew. 22. 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21. Then went the Pharisees and took counsel how they might entangle
him in his talk, (that they might either accuse him of Treason, as after they
did, or else make the people hate him, as a favourer of the Roman Tyranny, as
they accounted it) Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of
God in truth (and wilt not hide thy judgment by dark speeches, nor bauk plain
truth:) neither carest thou for any man; for thou regardest not the persons of
men: (O malicious commendations!) Tell us therefore what think thou: Is it
lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not? But Jesus perceived their
wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites? show me the Tribute
money: And they showed him a penny. And he says unto them, Whose is this Image
and Superscription? They say unto him Caesar's. Then says he unto them, Render
therefore unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that
are Gods. I hope Mr. Bagshaw will neither say, that Christ here plainly decided
the controversy intended by the questioners; nor yet deny but he seems to do
it, so far as silenced his adversaries then, and as puts Expositors hard to
it now, to understand his meaning: (See Dr. Hammond on the words.) And I am in
some hope yet, that as foul-mouthed as he is, he will not call Christ a Liar,
or dissembler, or a favourer of Tyranny, or a Coward; that would say any thing
to escape sufferings; But rather of the two think that he is not deceived, who
thinks his own way somewhat like to the Murderous-Tempting-Hypocrites in the
Text.

As for my Repenting, which he ignorantly and maliciously talks of, I shall
now say no more to the Reader, but this: 1. That I expect that the enemies of
Repentance be enemies to me. 2. That I little regard such censures as this man,
who either cannot through ignorance, or will not through malice or passion,
understand plain English when he reads it; nor know the difference between
the disowning of Evil, and of Good.

Sect. 8. page 4. He intimates by a Question this visible falsehood, that I
said, [ I thought nothing of Divinity in the cause,] so hard is it for
Ignorance and rashness to speak truth. This is because I said that [ I knew of
no controversy in Divinity about it, but in Politics and Law.] And can one
that has ever learned to read English, and ever exercised his thoughts of such
matters, be possibly so ignorant, as to think this is all one as to say, that
there was nothing of Divinity in the cause? Their Controversies were, whether
the Parliament had Authority to raise their Arms against the Kings will,
prohibition, and opposition? And, whether the King had Authority to raise his
Arms against theirs? And is this a Controversy in Divinity? Poor souls! Will
you be seduced to think that Christ or Paul must decide all controversies of
forms and degrees of power in Republics? Which Text is it that tells you,
that the Militia belonged to the Parliament, or what degree of power the Courts
of Justice have? Did Paul, Romans 13. tell you, whether Nero or the Senate were
the higher power? Did Christ tell the tempting hypocrites, whether Caesar
justly coined money in, or for Iudaea? But what? Has Divinity therefore
nothing to do in Law controversies? Yes surely, both about the efficient, end,
and motives. Politics and Law tell us which is the highest power; And Divinity
tells us, that we must obey it, and that for conscience sake, as being of
God. Divinity tells you, that Religious interest may be the just end and
motive of a War: but withal, that it must be made by those only that have just
power to do it: But who has just power, the Laws must tell us. Thus, Reader,
the man's ignorance and false speaking have lengthened thy trouble.

Sect. 9. Ib. [That my Love of ease and fear of suffering] cause strange
changes in my corrupt and carnal understanding, is at least a single untruth,
and may be a double one, for ought he knows, that knows not the heart: I am
sure it is a fault, even in Mr. Bagshaw, to make himself a Heart-searching-God,
while he makes the Prayers of his betters to be Idolatry.

Sect. 10. Ib. But he professes, that he deals thus [in Zeal to the Glory of
God, Love to the Cause of Christ and Nonconformity, which I have deserted.]
Where, 1. It is a repeated falsehood that I have deserted the Cause of
Nonconformity: I challenge him openly to name even one point of it, in which I
have changed my judgment these 31 years: (which I speak not as my praise, who
in those things have grown no wiser, except in knowing the same things better)
to this day. 2. What sin will you call it to father all these falsehoods on [
the Glory of God, and the Cause of Christ? Does his Cause and Glory need men's
Lies? How many hundreds thus in a few more Libels may you publish, if Satan
bless them, as hitherto he has done, with an Increase and Multiply.]

Sect. 11. page 5. He recites many words of my Disputations of Church
Government, and labors (whether by gross Ignorance or malice, I know not) to
persuade the Reader that I retract or contradict them; and says [ We stand
amazed you should so soon and so much forget all that you have said.]

This is not a single falsehood, but makes up no small part of his Book.
Reader, do but hear, and judge whether any thing except his Amareduci can
excuse such horrid deliberate untruths? 1. I never retracted any of that book,
setting aside the Dedication. 2. I do still profess that I am of the same
judgment which that book expresses. 3. I have in the greatest audience told
the Bishops, that I stand to it, and provoked them to answer it. 4. There is
not a word of contradiction to that Book, in my Cure of Church-Divisions, which
he writes against: And am I not as like to understand my own writings as this
man is? 5. That very Book pleads as much, and much more for a moderate
Episcopacy, the lawfulness of a Liturgy, and those circumstances or ceremonies
which I judge lawful, (as kneeling at the Sacrament) than my later Books have
done. 6. It was to me a considerable Providence which drew me, when the
Sectaries were at the very highest, to write that Book, which had I written
since the King returned, they would have imputed to temporizing, or a change.
7. The very same men that now rail so loud against me, said nothing that ever I
could hear of, against that book, that contained more than Now I have written
for; But then it passed uncontradicted by them that now rail at half as much.
So, Is it not a strange fate which that poor Book incurreth, that the men of
both sides plead it as for them, and commend it, whilst they condemn the
Author, as if he were himself against it. The Reverend Bishop whom Mr. Bagshaw
wrote against, alleged it in the greatest audience (before his Majesty, Dukes,
Lords, and Bishops) with no less commendation than these words, [ No man has
spoken better of this than Mr. Baxter.] And now Mr. Bagshaw cites it with
applause: Reader, who is in such a case as I? The Bishop is for my Book: Mr.
Bagshaw is for it: And I am the man that am against my self, whilst I openly
tell them both that I still stand to it as my judgment (only not owning any
words that any party shall justly find to be too sharp.) Surely, they labor to
bring me to that reputation among these contenders, as Plato was among the
Philosophers, whom every Sect took to be the second, or next the best.

Sect. 12. But page 6. he thinks that he talks like a man of brains, when he
infers, that [ if they be such kind of persons as I have represented them,
they ought immediately to be forsaken, and forborne, as to any acts of
Church-communion] Answ. But, 1. I never said of them, that they printed,
besides false Doctrines, fourscore untruths in two small Libels, as you have
done, and give the world neither vindication nor repentance: And yet you, or
your disciples, will not infer thus against your self. 2. Deceitful man! Did I
ever lay the charge you mention, against all the honest conformable Pastors of
the Parish Churches in the Land, who have no hand in any thing that you can
call an imposition, or a persecution? Nay, that own not (as they think) the
Diocesan Prelacy as such, but only Episcopacy in general, and Diocesans, as the
Kings Officers? Did I ever lay that charge against all the Christians in the
Parish Churches? No, nor against all the Bishops neither. 3. And must all the
Churches in a Kingdom be excommunicated or forsaken, for the cause of a few
men, whom few of them ever knew or saw. This is like the Popes interdicting
Kingdoms. 4. And if you separated but from the individual offenders, should it
not be done in a regular way? Why go you about to blind the ignorant with such
palpable fallacies as these. Is it truth, that men must be thus cheated into
with errors?

Sect. 13. page 6. From what I said [the Episcopal Churches would then have
been, if they had but had a mere toleration in the times that openly
discountenanced them, when the countenanced parties should set up by
themselves:] he infers, as if I had called them such now, when no other are
tolerated, and that in all those Parishes where are good Ministers, and no
other Churches. Thus palpable falsehood is the very life of all his Libel.

Sect. 14. Ib. The self-contradicting man professes, to follow the Light which
I once had in this, and yet that my present Light is nothing else but confusion
of darkness; when I said the same then in that very Book that now I do, and now
own that book which I wrote then; And all to carry on a cheating falsehood, as
if in this I had changed my judgment.

Sect. 15. I had almost passed over a shameless falsehood, page 4. And that you
may know I do not speak at random, particularly, when at Gloucester you
preached upon [Curse ye Meroz,] and now you say you do repent: do you expect
ever to be believed again?] which is a mere composition of Untruths. 1. I never
preached on [ Curse ye Meroz] in my life, if he mean that text, or those words:
I never was at Gloucester but about one month before the Wars: in which I
preached thrice or four times: of which one on a Fast, had respect to the
times: which was on Ezekiel. 37. 3. Son of man, Can these bones live? And my
business was to show the Difficulty of the reparation and reformation of a
sinful lapsed Church: In which I mentioned many things, and sorts of people
that would hinder it, but neither my Notes, (which I yet have by me) or memory,
have any thing at all that tended unto War, or resistance of Authority. Yet if
any other Sermon there, did touch the times, which I remember not, I am sure it
was not on that Text which I never preached on. 2. And he as falsely insinuates
that I [ say I repent] of what I preached at Gloucester; so hard is it to him
to speak that which is not utterly false.

Sect. 16. page 7. In a parenthesis, he says [ If there be any (difference
between you and us.)] The Libeller filling three Pamphlets with heinous
charges, and after (and before also) questioning, Whether indeed there be any
difference between him and me?

Sect. 17. page 8, With as insolent ignorance does he feign me to make that
which he calls [ Devised Worship] viz. the Liturgy to be Idolatry in my
foresaid Book, and now to repent of, and oppose what I held: And all because
Disp. p. 378. I say to such as they would suspend, silence, excommunicate,
punish, all such as will not pray to God in the words that they impose on them;
that if Reasons will not allay their impious distemper, but will domineer over
men's consciences, and the Church of God, we must leave them to him, that being
the Lord and Lawgiver of the Church, is jealous of his prerogative, and
abhors Idols. Remember that I spoke of none but the Clergy. And is there any
man that excels not in ignorance and rashness, that would have thought here,
that it is a Form of Prayer, or Liturgy, that I call [ Idols]? or that could
not see at the first reading, that I call the persons only the Idols, that
usurp the prerogative of God. And will this pitiful man still falsely insinuate
or suppose, that all the honest Christians or Ministers of all the Parish
Churches in England are such usurping imperious Idols? yea, or all the Bishops
either? Even Martyn himself as well as Ithacius? Thus are poor souls abused by
deceivers. Yea, note that in the same disputation cited by him, I largely prove
the lawfulness of Liturgies and Forms, and the necessity of them in some cases.

Sect. 18. Ib. Yet does he again most falsely say, that [ I have unworthily
receded from what I wrote, and yet adds, that I have not, that he knows of,
repented of it. Receded from it, and yet not repented of: What a forgetful
self-contradicter is this man? And so he thanketh God that I was heretofore
stirred up to write so much, which now condemns me, even for the same that I
there and then did write, and never repented of.

Sect. 19. His next subject, where he says that [ I argue against the Divine
and self-evidencing authority of the holy Scripture] is one of the visiblest
lies that ever I saw written by a man: When I had not only said the contrary,
but told where I had voluminously proved it, to give me not a word of sense in
answer, but write as if he had never read my reply. Being to Tell the Church, I
must desire them to consider, Whether a more Impudent studied Lie, impenitently
insisted in, after a double detection, without an answer, was ever presented to
their view? And, whether they can name me a Christian Writer in the world more
infamously self-stigmatized with this vice? The rest that he writes of it, I
cannot persuade my self to tire the Reader with an answer to. Only I note that
he cites Mr. Hildersham's words, with the false intimation that I contradict
them, while the same worthy man is both applauded by him, and suppositively
taken for a Patron of Idolatry, as one that persuades men not only to come to
Church and Common Prayer, but to come to the beginning. False speakers do thus
ordinarily contradict themselves.

Sect. 20. When page 11. he says, that a Papist is worse than of no Religion,
I say no more to him, but that Overdoing is the Devils last way of undoing, and
that such men be they that multiply and confirm the Papists.

Sect. 21. Ibid. p. 11. he would have you know what Religion he is of, and how
he means to save his Disciples from Idolatry, saying, Had not I learned the
truth of Christian Religion, from better arguments, and a more certain way of
reasoning than any your books afford, I had still been plunged in the depths of
Atheism.] Now, 1. Note that Reasoning in a certain way, preserves him from
Atheism. 2. That he seems to say, that he was an Atheist, by saying [ I had
still continued so.] But you must not expect such base mutability from him, as
when he has denied the Living God, to confess it plainly, and profess
repentance. 3. Note that he will be an Atheist still, and it seems persuade the
Separatists to be such, till he has better Reasons than my Books afford. Now
the Reasons that my Books afford are these (note them Reader.) First, from the
witness of God the Creator in the frame of Nature. Secondly, From the witness
of God our Redeemer, in his supernatural Revelations. 3. From the witness of
God the Holy Ghost, on the Scriptures, and in the Soul. First, Printing on the
Scripture the Image of Gods Power, Wisdom, and Goodness (which is its
self-evidence.) And next by the Scripture printing the said Image of Gods
Power, Wisdom, and Goodness on every holy soul, (which none but God is able to
do.) These three Testimonies of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is the sum of
my evidence enlarged. Now Mr. Bagshaw will be an Atheist still, and it seems
persuade the Separatists to be such, till he has better reasons for his faith,
than the witness of the Creator, the Redeemer, and the Sanctisier; God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. This is his zeal for the Glory of God, and the
Cause of Christ, and the good of souls.

Sect. 22. Yet page 13. with much railing, he insinuates this abominable
falsehood and calumny against Christ's excellent Servants, that Calvin, Preston,
Hildersham, Perkins, etc. would have no more done in asserting a Deity and
Christianity, than to tell men, [ that all is true that God speaks in his
Word, and that propria luce, it is evident that the Scripture is his word, and
that to all Gods elect he will give his spirit to discern it, and thus much
alone is better than all these disputes and reasonings.] Whereas, 1. These same
men have all of them said much more themselves in their writings. 2. And Paul
preached otherwise to the Athenians, Acts 17. and to others. 3. And what kind
of preaching would this man make among Turks and Heathens that deny the
Scriptures? You see, 1. He will leave out all the Natural evidences of a Deiy,
and of man's immortal state, and so all the Principles in which we are agreed
with them. 2. He will leave out all the Historical proofs that these Books were
written by Christ's Apostles and Evangelists, and are not altered since. And 3.
That he will leave out the use of man's Ministry, in Translating or Preaching;
And will let the illiterate Reader look on a Hebrew and Greek Bible, till
propria luce, they know it is of God; or at least, that the Minister, when they
say, How shall I know that this is Gods Word? shall only bid them read it,
(whether they can or not) and if they be elect, the spirit will cause them to
discern that propria luce it will show it self to be Gods Word; but if they be
not elect, they have no remedy. And what need Preachers to tell men this?
Bibles may be sent by other hands; and will be Bibles whether we preach or not.
And the elect are elect before we preach to them. And if the man know that
Light here is but a Metaphor, what can he mean by it but [Objective Evidence.]
And must we only tell Heathens, that the Scriptures have their proper evidence,
and not tell them what that evidence is? Is this his preaching? Yet, that you
may see what such men would bring the Church and world to, he adds, p. 13. [ If
understand anything of the true nature of Religion, etc. and warns all
persons most earnestly that they go his way; And most falsely adds, that I lay
my foundation in the corrupt will of man, and build my superstructure in the
carnal understanding, and leave no room for true holiness and mortification,
but the root of sin within remains untouched. And is not this, like the Pope,
the most uncharitable man of Infallibility, who has better reasonings against
Atheism, and for a holy state of souls, and (unless to forbid all Reasoning be
it) will not vouchsafe to open them to the Church, or bless mankind by a noble
communication of them.

Sect. 23. page 14. Having ended, he begins again with his Witticismes: And
1. I speak absurdly and insignificantly, for saying of his Rash, and carelessly
uttered untruth, that it is privatively voluntary, that is, when the Will omits
its office. Where (says this Learned man) I am much to seek what can be meant
by privatively voluntary; or how any action can be done where the will omits
its office.

Ans. And I have no mind to take such a person for my Scholar; And therefore
let me be excused, if I leave him (and such proud ignorant persons) in his
beloved ignorance. Let him believe that a man is a beast, and that his Rational
faculties were not made to rule the sensitive, or that the Will either never
omits its ruling office, or if it do, the sensitive cannot act; or that the
Will is not the principle quoad exercitium, of humane acts, as the Intellect is
quoad specificationem; or that if the Will omit this imperate act, ad
exercitium, and the sense lead men never so far, that yet the Act is not
Reputatively Voluntary; that is, that man's Will not guilty of any privation or
omission of loving God, of feeding our children, of giving to the poor, of
praying, meditating, etc. or that such omissions are not imputable to the Will
as sins: when all say that all sin is Voluntary. I do not wonder that this man
is against Bishops tooth and nail; even as they are ordainers: For, as loose as
they are said to be in their ordinations, I doubt whether they would not reject
him for utter Ignorance and insu^^icience, who has no more knowledge of the
nature of sin, and no more reason to cure his Atheism.

Sect. 24. His next high witticisme is, that I mention [ Areceiving obediential
power in a carnal Will; which receiving you call (says he) a passive power;
where the Comment is harder than the Text.

Answ. Reader, Do thou not blush, that among men that have been at an
University, there should be found a man so ignorant, (and so proud of it) as
not to know what Potentia obedientialis is, in common use of Philosophers and
Divines; or not to know that every creature is passive in receiving the Divine
influx, or operation; or that Recipere est pati, unless when we take the word
Recipere analogically and morally. If these things were but Hard to the man,
why is he so proud as to disdain them?

Sect. 25. The next and last is, when he had said that [ It is not corruption
barely, nor imposition barely, that is a sufficient ground for any to separate;
I had no rag to cover his [ barely] with, but charitably to interpret him, as
meaning by barely [the Quatenus, or the Act formally as such, without taking in
the greatness of the matter of that corruption or imposition: that is, That it
is not Corruption formally, as Corruption, but the greatness of the matter
corrupted; Nor Imposition formally, as an Act of Imposition, but as an
imposition of some ill or unsufferable thing: I could not have put sense on his
words by any other interpretation: Yet does he so disdain my kindness, and to
have so much sense imputed to him, that he pronounces the sentence that [ I
and the Schools may call these distinctions, but indeed they are nothing but
Learned Nonsense. And if the Reader be not yet convinced that PRIDE is the
Father, and IGNORANCE the mother of our errors, contentions, divisions,
scandals and confusions, he shuts his eyes here against a most convincing
instance.

Sect. 26. p. 15. For saying upon the invitation of his Sophistry, that I am
persuaded if Christ came personally and visibly to demand it, the King would
yield up his Crown to him; Instead of defending his error, which this reason
did detect, he only sentenceth me to be like the Mockers that deride the
promise of his coming.

Sect. 27. Ib. He next compares me to Boys and Children, as pretending to
know no difference in point of Imposition, between one that uses a form of his
own, and he that is imposed on to use only the form of another, P. 119. 120.
Thus the man and his ten or eleven friends, whom he charge in his premonition
with attesting his Veracity, are all made falsities by him. There is not a word
of my pretending to know no difference: Nor was my comparison at all [ between
one that uses a form of his own, and he (he means him) that is imposed on,
to use only the form of another, as he is himself imposed on by that other, but
only as both impose upon the people. No doubt there is a difference in the
Passive part, between the Minister that is imposed on, and him that is not. But
I still provoke him to tell me any difference in their several impositions on
the people, which at all concerns our present controversy.

Yes, he adds [In the one case the hearer is always at perfect liberty how
far and how often he will join: In the other he is always tied up, and must
either join in such a prescript form of words, or none at all; and this he
knows before hand, etc.]

Answ. Here are two differences pretended. 1. Reader, Is there in the first any
shadow of the truth at all? Yet are there some men that such words will take
with, contrary to the common sense of mankind; As if it were not the Papists
only that can believe against all common sense. What reason can he give why one
that is present is not as free to join, or not to join in heart, with any
passage in the Common Prayer, as in a free prayer of the Minister? I do
seriously wonder what made the man speak these words. When the Minister prays
freely, I may in heart either join with him, neglect him, or dissent: And what
hinders me from doing so at Common Prayer? He says, I must join in that form,
or none at all. True; And so must I when the Minister either prays freely, or
in a stinted form of his own. You must join in that or none at all for that
time. I told him of old Mr. Fen, (a zealous Nonconformist at Coventry) that
would say Amen loud to every Prayer of the Liturgy, save that for the Bishops:
Did he not use as much liberty here as he could have done at free prayer?

2. And for fore knowledge, he passes by all the answer I often gave to that
objection, and sings over the same song again. Fore-knowing what will be
said, does more enable me to know what clause to forbear my consent to, than in
sudden Prayer not foreknown. And what if by his constant custom I foreknow,
that John Simpson, Randal, John Goodwin, Saltmarsh, Dr. Crisp, Can, Johnson,
Blackwood, or any other tolerable Opinionist, will put his opinion into his
Prayers? Does not that make them in this all one with an imposed prayer, as to
foreknowledge? And when I foreknow that the Matter of the Liturgy (used on
the Lords days by the Minister and people) is sound, this foreknowledge
makes it not evil in the use.

Sect. 28. When I gave him no less than twenty Queries containing plain
evictions of the falseness of his Doctrine about the Scriptures, his answer is,
that he will answer them, when I have satisfied him that I sinned not greatly
in raising such mists and doubts: and when I give him security that I will not
ask him as many more. Reader, Is not this man an easy disputant; Did you ever
know any that answered all with less ado, than so silly a reason, Why he should
not answer it?

Sect. 29. He concludes, by telling us, that he [ is (to say no more) your
best, your equal] I know what he means, though not what he says: And really
it was but need that he should tell the world how good or worthy a man he is,
or else a sober person that had but read one of his three Libels, would hardly
have believed it.

Sect. 30. Having ended the second time, he begins again with a Postscript, to
tell us his reasons for his refusing the Oath of Allegiance, which he is
imprisoned for. But I have no mind to meddle with him where I have no call. And
shall only say, that had it been more, even the Oath of Supremacy it self, if
he will regard either Nonconformist, Independents or Anabaptist, Mr. Bradshaw,
Mr. Nie and Mr. Tombs have each written enough to teach him better to
understand that English.

CHAP. IV.
An Admonition to that part of the Church which is inclined to Mr. Bagshaw's
Errors.
Sect. 1. Were it not my present Duty to Tell the Church, I should take it to
be as inconvenient as unpleasing, to open Mr. Bagshaw's sins. But as Christ did
it by the Pharisees, yea, and Peter himself; and as Paul in his Epistles, did
it by many; so I think it is now become my duty, though he and his believers be
displeased by it. I shall but desire the impartial sober Readers, that have
perused his Writings and mine to judge.

1. Whether so great Ignorance as he discovers in himself, be not scandalous
in a Preacher of the Gospel.

2. Whether such dangerous errors in Doctrine, against the very foundations of
our faith, with many other proved against him, make him not an unsafe Guide for
souls? And give not incomparably greater occasion for renouncing him as an
Heretic, to such as are apt to take such occasion, than most called Heretics
in the ancient Churches gave.

3. Whether it be not rare among the worst of men, to meet with so many
evidences of Insolent Pride, above the common measure of Proud men, as his
three Libels do contain.

4. Whether it be not a hard matter to find among the worst of men on earth,
two Libels so small, containing above fourscore visible Untruths in matter of
fact; And a third to follow them, substantially constituted of the like
Untruths; scarce now to be numbered, any more than drops that are aggregate in a
Pond.

5. Whether it be not rare to meet with more malicious contrived snares, to
make up his ends upon the person, instead of defending of his Cause.

6. Whether ever you saw a controversy so managed by any sort of men, of what
heresy soever, that said so little for their Cause as he has done for his
Love-killing Principles. I confess I remember not one, no not excepting the
very Quakers. Read over several debates, and see whether ever a cause so hotly
contended for, had so little said for it?

7. Whether ever you saw Books so answered as mine are by him? In all his three
Libels, not meddling at all with any considerable part of my Books, as to any
answer; But silently passing them over, as if he had never read them. And yet
going on to repeat the same things, which I had confuted?

8. Whether his Calumny, or false accusations of me, and of Calvin, Perkins,
Hildersham, Preston, etc. be not an unchristian act?

9. Whether it be not rare among the worst to find such footsteps of great
Impenitence, as he gives in so silent a passing over his guilt of the
forementioned fourscore Untruths, without any considerable Vindication: and
after Admonition, adding so many worse?

10. Whether it be not rare to meet with so much audacious impudence in sinning?

11. Whether the slandring of so many millions, yea, almost all Christ's
Churches on Earth, as differ from him in point of Forms, etc. as guilty of
Idolatry, be not a most heinous sin against Christ and them, as representing
them as odious in the world?

12. And is it not a sin to draw so many poor souls as will beieve him, so far
toward the hatred of Christ's Churches, and ^om Communion with them, and to
confine all their Communion (...) so narrow a compass?

13. Whether Fathering all this on God and Religion, make ^^t the sin to be yet
greater?

14. Whether, according to his power, he show not as Cru^^ and bloody, and
silencing a disposition, as any of those that (...) he accused of it.

15. Whether he do not injuriously, to labor by his insi^tions, to bring many
honest well-meaning Christians, (...) into the same guilt with himself, or into
the shame^^ reputation of it? Insomuch that ^lready the common (...)
dishonors many of the Semi-separatists, saying, that they (...) rejoice at
his Writings, and so hate my Treatise against Church-dividing Principles, as
that for the sake of it, they will read no other of my Books: (And if that hurt
them no more than me, the matter is but small.)

Sect. 2. And when you have well considered of these things, I shall next
desire you to consider, Whether this man has not brought you as great a Care
or Caution against unlawful Separations and Divisions, as most men ever did in
the world? For 1. Here you see how much you must bear with, unless you will
separate from your own leaders: Deal but impartially: Is there one Parish
Minister, yea, or one Parish Church Member of many, that was ever convict of so
much sin, as Mr. Bagshaw has published, and silently, but impertinently lies
down under? Is there many of them that ever defended half so much sin so
obstinately, without confession, and yet so impotently without sense? Separate
from no Ministers or people that are not proved as guilty as this man, and I
will never more write against your Separation. 2. And now the world and
posterity shall see in this man's writings, how the cause of unlawful Separation
was defended in this age. I openly profess, that this is a great reason that
drew me to Defend my Cure of Church Divisions, by three following Defenses;
that Posterity may see what interest and passion will not now suffer some to
see. I look to the times to come. And if there be any wiser men among them,
that can say more for the Separating-cause, they are best set to it; For if
they leave it on such hands as Mr. Bagshaws, it is easy to foresee that it
will be shamed for ever.

Yet do I solemnly profess that to my utmost remembrance, I never in my life
did venture upon, or manage one dispute by word or writing, through a
confidence in my own ability to make good what I undertook, but in a confidence
of the goodness of my Cause, and of the great advantage which the evidence of
plain truth does give to any man of good reason to defend it, even against the
cunningest Sophister that shall oppose it.

Sect. 3. And now I shall add my Admonition to you, as not being quite ignorant
of Satan's Wiles, to tell you what a snare is laid for you all in Mr. Bagshaw's
Writings; and as one that has no interest, but Christ's and the Churches to
move him to it, to tell you how great the danger is, if you swallow the bait.

1. If he prevail with you, he will draw you into the guilt of all those sins
of his own forementioned, by your approbation and consent. And how great an
addition will that be to your load?

2. It would draw you to the entertainment of all those Love-killing,
Malignant, and Dividing Principles, which I cast down, and he sets up. And you
little know what an evil it is, to have an understanding so blinded, and a
heart so defiled.

3. By this means that true universal Love to Godly men and Christians as such
will be destroyed: And when you should bear Gods Image, who is Love it self;
you will be made like Satan, the enemy of God and Love: And instead of loving
your neighbor as your self, you will take your neighbors, yea, Christ's
members, for your enemies.

4. And as Love is the fulfilling of the Law, so your death of Love will be the
death of all your true obedience, and lead you to the breach of every Law. You
will deny all the acts of Love in word or deed to others that you owe them to;
you will censure, you will backbite freely, you will receive false reports, and
vend them again to others. And Christ may say to you, Inasmuch as you did it
not to one of the least (mark the least) of these my brethren, you did it not
to me.

5. You will be tempted into Treason against Christ, under pretense of piety,
denying his interest in almost all his Churches in the world; Even as if you
should say, that the King is King of one or two Towns only in all his Kingdoms,
on pretense that all the rest are not good enough to be his Subjects. I profess
openly, that nothing in the world more moves me to do what I do, than this;
That there is much within me that will not suffer me without abhorrence, to
think of either unchurching all Churches in the world, that use a set Liturgy
(yea that use one worse than ours) or yet to hold that they should all be
separated from. And had I ever Vowed and Covenanted to do this (as I did not)
it had been a sinful Vow.

6. And moreover, it will possess you with a degenerate and false kind of
Religion, consisting in sidings, and partial opinions, and obeying your selves
instead of God.

7. And it will make you Satan's instruments to disturb all Churches that you
join with, if you do not want occasion and temptation. For the Principles which
I wrote against will let no Church be quiet where they prevail: And a Kingdom
or house divided cannot stand.

8. You will be drawn from true spiritual worshipping of God; and your worship
and Church Communion will be corrupted: Instead of holy and heavenly Sermons,
Prayers, praises, etc. you will be infected with a contending and envying
passion, and puffed up with the conceit of your own judgments, and grow zealous
for your personal opinions, and your parties, and turn your preaching and
praying into a strain that savoureth of this disease, and defile them with
unsounder passages for your errors or divided interests, than any can be found
in the Common Prayers which you shun.

9. And if you be thus overcome, it will heinously aggravate your sin, that you
will do all this as a part of your Religion, and so will father it all on God,
as if such doing pleased him, and proceeded from his spirit, and were commanded
by his word. And as Matthew. 12. it is made the unpardonable sin to blaspheme the
Holy Ghost, by ascribing his Miracles to Satan, so though it be pardonable, you
should easily see that it cannot be small, to say that those things which are
pleasing to the Devil, and proceed from his will, and malicious suggestions,
are pleasing to God, and proceed from his spirit and word.

10. By these means Satan would make your Churches to do his work against the
Lord whom they profess to worship, and and to be the very Nests where PRIDE and
IGNORANCE shall breed their like, and shall cherish sinful Love killing
principles and passions, and animosities against your brethren: And so your
Assemblies will be acted too much by his suggestions, and become his
Workhouses, while you think that they are serving God; and men's wisdom will be
earthly* sensual, and diabolical, when they verily think it is from above, Iam.
3, 15, 16.

11. Thus he would fain bring an odium upon your selves, and cause you to go
under such a character as the Munster Anabaptists, and the Familists, Quakers,
and such others do: That men may say of you, that while you take on you to be
stricter than others, it is but in abhorring other men's Prayers, and extolling
your own; And that sin is no sin when you find it in your own party, or your
selves. And that Liars, and most impudent Calumniators and proud Revilers, etc.
go among your selves for Godly persons, while the uprightest men that use the
Common Prayer, do go for Idolaters and Ungodly. And if Satan can but get such
an odious Character fastened on you, what mischievous advantage will he make of
it?

12. For then next he will hope to bring all the Non-conformists (or the
greater part while a few only are excepted) under the same Character for your
sakes: That they may be all thought to be men of irrational, uncharitable, and
unpeaceable principles and spirits; whose Religion consists but in
Fanaticisme, and self-conceit, and foolish condemning the things which they
understand not, because their party has done so before them. And if Satan can
thus far obtain his ends, he has laid the eggs of a world of farther sin and
sufferings.

13. Then all that are against them will be exceedingly confirmed in all those
things and ways, which I need not name unto you, and for which it is that you
separate from them: And will think that your condemnation of them is but a
commendation.

14. Yea, Ministers of loose and vicious lives will be hardened by you against
repentance, and will think that they are better than you, and that though they
sometimes are drunk, or idle, yet they are pardoned, because you that own such
greater sins, do pass for godly, and because chiefly such as you condemn them.

15. Yea, (which will be a doleful mischief) you will afford matter for every
carnal Preacher to make a Sermon of, against those that go for strict and
godly, and to persuade the people that all that profess much strictness, are
but such as you, and that hypocrisy is the cover for their sins, which are
worse than other men's. Thus, while the word Puritan (as Fanatic now) was first
taken up to signify an error (a conceit of self-perfection, etc.) at last it
grew that which Mr. Robert Bolton has so often told the world, a word of scorn
in wicked men's mouths, against all that truly feared God. And thus while you
fly from all the Parish Assemblies, as desiled, you will be the men that will
make them far worse, when some Pulpits will be made Stages, on which the Actors
may set forth all those Religious men, that in any thing dissent from them in a
ridiculous and odious dress, to the derision and loathing of the auditors.

16. By which means thousands of ignorant people will be tempted into a
contempt of piety it self, and their conversion wonderfully hindered: And
prejudice will make them turn from that way with scorn and obloquy, which
should save them. O how many thousands have in England f^^merly been hindered
from true repentance, by hearing strict Religious people both talked and
preached against, as hypocrites, and a sort of proud self-opinioned men!

17. And the common people will learn quickly to overgo the Preachers, and will
make the Godly in streets and Alehouse; their common scorn: And Satan will
have almost as many Preachers to make Piety odious, and hinder men's repentance,
as there be wicked men. As when the Preacher by a Puritan heretofore meant a
Nonconformist, the ignorant rabble expounded and applied it, of all that were
not such as they.

18. And by this means the Devil hops to disaffect and exasperate many
Learned men that differ from you, to turn the strength and reputation of their
parts and learning, to make you contemptible and vile. Bishop Overall,
Whitgift, Mountague, etc. were very learned men: but exasperation set their
parts and pens in that military strain, as was not pleasing to their
Antagonists: As it did Mr. Hooker's and many more, who by Love and meekness,
and a peaceable familiarity (without sin) might have been disarmed. I need not
go beyond Sea, to tell you how the Learned Ios. Scaliger was exasperated to
revile the Puritans by Mr. Lidiates opposition ( vid. Praef. ad Came. Isagog.)
nor to mention Salmatius, Grotius, or any others there; nor to look back as far
as Erasmus, much less to many, (too many) of the ancient Bishops and Doctors of
the Church.

19. Yea, while you fear Persecution, you will take the readiest way in the
world to bring it on your selves, and others for your sakes: For the
consciences of Rulers will (perhaps) little scruple the hurting of such men as
are taken to be so bad: They being Gods Ministers to use the sword for a
terror to evil doers, and if you once pass for notorious evil doers, you will
hardly escape. And it will be but a foolish fruitless course to do the evil your
selves, and then lay the blame of all your sufferings on them that tell you of
it, and that take it to be evil, and will not commend your sins as so many acts
of piety: As if the assumed name of Virtue would hide the odiousness of Vice:
For nature and Scripture will help men to see your nakedness through so thin a
vail, and God himself will not suffer sin to keep up its credit by usurped
names. It is not silencing the Reprovers that will do the work of any sinners.
It must be the avoiding of the sin it self.

20. And if you take this sinful dividing course, you will make more Papists,
and such others as you your selves, most fly from and disclaim, than almost any
other way could do. Nothing that I know of in the world, does so strongly tempt
some sober conscientious men, to think Poperty necessary for the Concord of the
Churches, and a violent Church Government necessary to our Peace, as the woeful
experience of the errors and schisms, the mad and manifold Sects that arise
among those that are most against them. Thousands have been made Papists in
England, Scotland, and Ireland, within these twenty years, that have been
driven from us by our shameful Sects; yea, many of the Sectaries themselves,
when they have run themselves through as many Sects as they could try. I am
persuaded that Mr. Bagshaws Libels are as powerful writings to cross his own
desires, and turn many from Nonconformity, and others unto Popery, as most
that have been published in this age. Multitudes that read them will say, Here
you see the spirit of Non conformity (though I have proved it a calumny:)
Others will say, You see how mad men grow when they unite not with the
Cathalick Church, and live not under a strict Church Government.

21. And by all this Satan hops to turn the Non-conformists Sufferings to
their shame: And to make the world believe that as this man suffers for
refusing the Oath of Allegiance, so do the rest for some self-conceits, and
unwarrantable fancies of their own.

22. And he will put hard to bring Church diseipline it self into disgrace and
scorn, by you that most desire and plead for it. For men will say, These are
they that cry out for Discipline, and separate from our Church because it
wants or corrupts it. When in their own Churches and Leaders, such crimes
(as Bagshaws Books contain) are tolerable, as consistent with religious zeal,
and perhaps is all ascribed unto godliness? what more effectual way could be
devised, to make Church Discipline contemptible to the world?

23. And all this will tend to disable the Ministers of Christ, both
conformable and non-conformable, from doing any good, and winning any souls to
true repentance. When the Conformable Preachers should do good, the people will
be taught by you to shun them, or despise them as Idolaters: When the
Non-conformists should do any good, they will be taught by your practice and
other men's calumny, to turn away from them, as such as before described. And
then how much has Satan gained? I know another sort of men are at least as
deeply guilty of all these consequents, as you: But that is no excuse of yours.
And though it must be that offense come, yet woe to them by whom it comes.

24. And indeed it would be a heinous aggravation of your sin, if you should
defy Gods Providence, and the large and lamentable experience of the mischiefs
of Love-killing dividing-principles and ways. This spirit and way was of old
blasted in England and Holland; It troubled New England; It injured the Non
conformists, and put them to write many books against it (more than the
Conformists did.) The books of Mr. Perry (Martin Mar-Prelate) full of jears and
scorn, were unsavory to all sober men; and his death the more dishonorable.
Scotland kept them out thence by Discipline. In our late Wars,
Martin-Mar-priest (Overton, as was thought, with Prince, Lilburn, etc.) quite
exceeded Martin-Mar-Prelate, and the Ministers were more scorned than ever were
the Bishops: Seekers, Quakers, and Ranters, have all been generated (for the
most part) by the foresaid Separating Principles and Spirit. I will tell you no
more now, what effects it then had on the Churches and Kingdom, nor what it
has brought on themselves and us. But reason should tell it you; and I will
tell you, that now, even now, to run violently further into the same fire which
first burnt up so much of our Concord, peace, and glory, and turned us into
ashes, and then burnt up the men that kindled it, and is not quenched to this
day, nor like to be in haste; I say to blow this fire still, and run into it,
and back-bite even Non-conformable Ministers themselves, that would but
dissuade you, and desire you to quench it, will be an obdurateness so like to
Pharaoh's, as may be a doleful prognostic to the guilty, if not to all the
Land.

25. You little know what a pernicious design the Devil has upon you, in
persuading you to desire and endeavor to pull down the Interest of Christ and
Religion, which is upheld in the Parish Churches of the Land; and to think that
it is best to bring them as low in reality or reputation as you can, and to
contract the Religious Interest all into private meetings: By which means, 1.
The privacy shall keep it under obloquy, suspicion, and contempt: 2. And shall
level the sound with all the rotten Sects in their reputation: 3. And shall
leave them no security in Law for their continuance an hour: 4. And shall keep
them still under the censures, discountenance and dangers of the Law. 5. And
young rash intemperate spirits among your selves, will be continual endangerers
of your liberties. 6. Or a malicious enemy may at any time put on the vizor of
a friend, and come among you and act a furious part, to make you odious and
overthrow you: 7. And few of the young, the ignorant or licentious sorts will
be your Auditors; And how will the work of Repentance then be carried on by
you? The most will go to the public Churches, when you have done the most
against it you can. 8. And when the present generation of Non-conformists are
dead, do you think it likely that so many will survive them of their mind, as
are sufficient without the public assemblies to keep up the Christian and
Protestant Religion in the Land? You are ignorant if you think it probable. I
know that God can do what he will; But his Promise is the measuring object of
our faith: And I think he has promised no such thing. And I have long feared
lest twenty years wilful contentions, wantonness, etc. will not be punished
with a short rebuke. If you know how great a number was silenced in King James
his time, and yet that in 1640 there were not found near half so many Non
conformable Ministers as are Counties in England, you may think it is possible
it may be so again. And would you have but one Minister in a County or two, to
keep up all the Interest of Religion? I am not without hope that God will make
men so wise as to unite us, before such a day: But of that we have no
certainty. 9. Yea, could you wish at this day that the Christian and Protestant
Religion were kept up by none but the unconformable Ministers in private? No
honest man can wish it, who considers how many of the 1800 are dead already,
and how few are left in most Counties of the Land, in comparison of the
Congregations that need instruction? I know that it is commonly said, that God
blesses not their Ministry to the conversion of any souls, and therefore it is
as good be without the Conformists. But this is foolishly spoken. For, 1. Many
of them are as wise and as good men as you. 2. You have no satisfactory account
what hearts are secretly wrought on by their Ministry. They come not all to you
to be confessed. 3. And the worser sort of them are not worse than Judas, whom
Christ sent forth. 4. And there is much done to keep up the Christian and
Protestant Doctrine in soundness, against Infidelity and Popery, where few are
brought to sound Conversion. And so Gods public worship, and the hopes of our
Posterity are kept up. If any of you had rather that all turned open Infidels
or Mah^metans, my soul shall not enter into your Counsels. 10. And the public
Churches will be kept up some or other. If you would have the Protestant
Interest in them fall, the Popery will find them as a house ready swept and
garnished, and will make our latter end worse than our beginning: 11. And I am
persuaded few can be so sottish as to be ignorant, that it greatly pleases the
Papists that you are forced into corners, and hold your exercises of Religion
by connivance, against Law; and much more you will gratify and rejoice them,
if you could help them to get down all the Protestant interest in the Parish
Churches. And do your Leaders yet think that the Papists are pleased with that
which will promote the Protestant cause? 12. Many a man as wise and good as
you, whose Judgment is Non-conformable, who lives where there are no other
Churches, would take it for an unspeakable loss to be deprived of the benefit
of the Parish Churches. For all these reasons, though I desire Reformation, and
will never swear not to endeavor it in my place and Calling; yet I will do the
best I can to get the best Pastors into the Parish Churches, and to promote
their reputation, and the labors of the Ministers there, and bless God for
what is yet there left us; and yet will be one that shall mourn for the
reproach of the solemn assemblies.

26. Moreover, it is one of Satan's plots upon you, to prepare for the reproach
of the Non conformists, when greater necessity shall drive them to the Parish
assemblies and Communion. Do not you make any doubt of it, but that if the
wrath or rigor of superiors should bring them to the same condition, as the
old Non-conformists were, the most of the present Non-conformists would come to
the Parish Churches, even in Common Prayer and Sacraments as they did. And you
are preparing reproach for them, that they may then be called Changelings, who
forsake their former principles and cause.

27. And verily you will keep up the Papists hope, that by an universal
Toleration they may at last come in on equal terms with you, or by connivance
be endured as much as you. And if they be equal in England with you, their
transmarine advantages will make them more than equal, notwithstanding their
disadvantages in their Cause, and in their contrariety to Kingly interest
(which Henry Fowlis has in folio most fully and unanswerably laid open.)

28. And though God in mercy has at present given us a King that owneth the
Protestant Cause, so resolvedly, as to make a Law against any that shall report
him inclined to Popery, England has no promise that it shall be so for ever:
And if we should ever have a King more indifferent in his Religion, do you know
what a temptation it would be to him, to pull down the Protestant Religion, if
he found it but in corners, under a connivance, and found it under the reproach
of such crimes as B^gshaw's books contain? It were the next way to procure the
fatal word, Down with them even to the ground; Though I know we have the
greater security against this, because Popery is so much against Princes
interest, and is the del^vering up the Kingdom in part to a foreign power.

29. In a word, Satan is playing by Mr. Bagshaw no lower a game, than by
turning all the people from the Parish assemblies, (while there are not in
England (had they liberty (...) Ministers enough to supply the tenth part of the
Church^^) to (...) the generality of them to live like open Atheists, that give
God no public worship at all; and so to extinguish knowledge, Christianity,
and all Religion, in most of the Land. These things I see, and because I see
them I do as I have done.

30. There is another reason that sticks much with me, as knowing what silly
peevish souls are employed in against themselves, but I will add no more.

Brethren, I have discharged my conscience; Some will hear: I will bear the
censures and obloquy of the rest. Your sins are no more lovely to me, than the
sins of other men; nor no more merciful to England: We all suffer by and for
such sins as I have reproved. I am one of the sufferers, and therefore should
have leave to speak. I am long ago engaged in the cause of Concord, Love, and
Peace, and will not betray it for the shadow of Purity, nor for the pleasing of
any party whatsoever; Though no duty when such is to be omitted, nor any sin
committed for Peace.

And to prevent the Calumny of Papists, and the misinformation of Posterity, I
add, that besides one hotheaded, honest young man (Mr. Brown) I hear of no
Non-conformable Minister in England that openly owneth Mr. Bagshaw's (...), or
secondeth him in his defense of the Love killing Principles of unlawful
Separation; Which, with the other evidences of quietness and patience in the
private assemblies of these times, I take to be a mavelous thing, considering
men's great and manifold temptations, which in time I hope God will abate.

FINIS.

