OF THE NATURE OF SPIRITS; ESPECIALLY MAN'S SOUL.

In a placid Collation with the Learned Dr. Henry More, In a Reply to his
Answer to a private Letter, Printed in his second Edition of Mr. Glanviles
Sadduceismus Triumphatus.

By Richard Baxter.

LONDON, Printed for B. Simmons, at the Three Golden Cocks at the West End of
St. Paul's. 1682.

A Letter to the Reverend Dr. Henry More at Christs-Colledge in Cambridge.
Reverend Sir,
I Had answered your desire sooner, but having lent out the Sadduc. Triumph. I
staid till now to have ^ad it returned (being loath to buy another, it costing
me 6s.) But I was fain to get another at last, and ^n the review I find that I
have ex^resly given you my thoughts already ^f your notion of a Spirit in my
Methodus, having noted it in your Book of Atheism, and your Ench. Metaphys. In
short. 1. I think you and I are agreed that we cannot conceive of a Spirit
unico conceptu, but must have two inadequate conceptions of it: of which one is
that which Dr. Glisson De Vita naturae, calls conceptus fundamentalis, and is
that which we call Substantia: for we can scarce think of a Virtus formalis,
which is not substantiae alicujus virtus, but qua virtus simpliciter existeth
of itself; (unless we must so think with some of God.) And though this makes
not an actual composition, as Matter and Form in mixtis, yet intellectually we
must take it as a distinct inadequate conceptus.

The other inadequate conceptus i^ Formal; and I think you and I ar^ agreed
that this is Virtus Una-trina^ as described by me, viz. Virtus V^^talis,
vitaliter activa, perceptiva^ appetitiva, as Dr. Glisson speaks (of which I
make three species a^ described.) And I am my self fa^ better acquainted with
the nature ^ a Spirit by the essential Virtus formalis, known to us by its
acts; (for nothing does that which it cannot do) than from the notion of
substantiality. And yet I dare not say that a self-moving principle is proper
to a Spirit. Nor do I consent to Campanella de sensu rerum, and Dr Glisson that
would make all things alive by an essentiating form in the very Elements.

I distinguish Natures into Active and Passive; and Passivity is a word that
serves me as well as materiality: But whence the Descensus gravium is, I
despair of knowing; and if it be of an innate principle, I call it not
therefore a Spirit, because it is but passivorum motus aggregativus ad unionem
in quiet, when Spirits motion is vital and so essential to them, that they
tend not to union in quiescence, but in everlasting activity; quiescence in
inactivity, being as much against their nature as motion against a Stones. So
that I think we are agreed of the formal notice of a Spirit in general, and of
an intellective, sensitive, and vegetative in specie.

But truly I am at a loss about the conceptus fundamentalis, wherein the true
difference lies between Substantia and Materia. Do we by -- Substantia mean a
conceptus realis, or only Relative. To say it does substare accidentibus,
speaks but a Relation directly, and leaves the question unanswered, Quid est
quod substat accidentibus. To say it is not an Accident, tells us not what it
is, but what it is not. To say it does subsist per se, either says no more
than that it is Ens reale, or else tells us not what it is that does subsist.
Quoad notationem nominis distinct from use* does not materia and substantia
signify the same fundamental conceptus? And is not the form the notifying
difference? You difference Substance and Matter antecedently to the formal
difference by Penetrability and Impenetrability, Indivisibility and
Divisibility. But 1. I despair knowing in this life, how far Spiritual
Substances are penetrable and indivisible. I grant you such an extension as
shall free them from being nothing substantial, and from being Infinite as God
is. 2. We grant Spirits a quantitas discreta; they are numerous, individuate;
and formae se multiplicant. Generation is the work of Spirits, and not of
Bodies. And how can I tell that God that can make many out of one, cannot make
many into one, and unite and divide them as well as Matter? But if he should,
that would be no destruction of their Species, as the mixtorum dissolutio is;
but as every drop of divided Water is Water, and one Candle lighting many, and
many joined in one, are all the same fire; so much more would it be with
Spirits, were they united or divided; and their locality and penetrability are
past our conceit. 3. But were we sure of what we say therein; these two
(Penetrability and Indivisibility) speak but Accidents, though proper; and
therefore are no satisfying notice of the notion of Substance Spiritual as
distinct from Matter. I am hitherto therefore constrained to contain many
thoughts in the following compass.

1. I know Spirits best by the Virtus vitalis formalis una trina.

2. I hold that of Created Spirits substantia as notisying a Basis realis, must
be the Conceptus Fundamentalis.

3. The word Immaterial signifying nothing (but a negation) and Materia being
by many Ancients used in the same sense as we do Substantia, I usually lay by
the words.

4. I hold to the distinction of Natures, or Substances Passive and Active.

5. I distinguish Spiritual Substances as such by the Purity of the Substance,
besides the Formal Difference.

6. Yet I doubt not but all Created Spirits are somewhat Passive, quia influxum
causae primae recipient: And you grant them a Spissitude and Extension, which
signify as much as many mean that call them Material. But Custom having made
Materia, but specially Corpus, to signify only such grosser Substance as the
three Passive Elements have, I yield so to say, that Spirits are not Corporeal
or Material.

7. Though I run not into the excess of Ludov. Le Grand de Igne (nor of
Telesius or Patricius) I would Ignis were better studied: But this Room will
not serve me to say what I think of it. But in brief, He that knows that
Ignis is a Substance, whose Form is the Potentia Activa movendi, illuminandi,
calesaciendi, these as received in a gross Passive Body, being but their
Accidents often, but the Igneous Substance in act operating on them, and
conceives of Spirits, but as Ignis eminenter, that is, of a purer substance
than Ignis is, which we best conceive of (next the Formal Virtue) by its
similitude, I think knows as much as I can reach of the Substance of Created
Spirits. And the Greek Fathers that called Spirits Fire, and distinguished
Ignem per formas into Intellective, Sensitive, and Vegetative or Visible Fire,
(as it is in Aere Ignito,) allowing an Incomprehensible ^urity of Substance in
the higher above the lower (as in Passives Air has above Water, etc.) I think
did speak tolerably, and as informingly as are the notions of Penetrability and
Indivisibility; though perhaps th^se also may be useful.

Sir, I crave your pardon of these curt expressions of the thoughts which you
desired concerning the description of a Spirit. If God make us truly holy, we
shall quickly know more to our satisfaction. I rest

Nov. 17. 1681. Your obliged Servant, Rich. Baxter.

You make [a Spirit to be Ens, ideoque, Unum, Verum, and that True denotes the
answerableness of the thing to its proper Idea, and implies right matter and
form duly conjoined.] Q. Do you not here make Spirits material? But no doubt
whether to be called Material or Substantial, the form is not an Adjoined
thing, but the form of a simple essence is but an inadequate conceptus, making
no composition.

OF THE NATURE OF SPIRITS:
A Placid Collation with the Learned Dr Henry More; upon his Answer to a
private Letter, published in the second Edition of Mr. Glanviles Sadduceismus
Triumphatus.
Reverend Sir,
1. THat my hasty Letter should occasion you to benefit the World with more of
your Information, in so considerable a point, as is the nature of a Spirit, was
more than I thought of, or could hope for: Had I imagined that you would have
so far honored it, I should have so written it, as might have drawn out more
of your Instruction, and made your Animadversions yet more edifying.

2. I desired you to have forborne the title of Psychopyrist, for these Reasons:
1. Because it tends plainly to misinform the Reader, as if I held that Souls
(or Spirits) are Fire; whereas in my Books and Letters, I still say otherwise.
And that they may be so called not formaliter, or univoce, but only eminenter
and analogice. And when a name on the Title page, and through the whole, and a
supposition in much of your arguing, implies that I hold what I renounce, it
may wrong your Reader's understanding, though I am below the capacity of being
wronged.

2. And the fastening of Nicknames on one another in Controversies of Religion,
has so much caused Schisms, and other mischiefs, that I confess I the less
like it about Philosophy. But I must submit.

3. My understanding is grown so suspicious of ambiguity in almost all words,
that I must confess that what you say also against those whom you call
Holenmerians and Nullibists satisfies me not, unless many terms used in the
controversies, were farther explained than I find them here, or in your
Metaphysics (your Books against Judge Hale I have not seen.) But I may take it
for granted that you know that they who use the saying of [Tota in toto, and
tota in qualibet parte] ordinarily tell us; 1. That they use the word Tota
relatively, and improperly; seeing that which has no parts is improperly
called Tota. 2. That they mean it but negatively, viz. That the Soul is not in
the parts of the body, per parts, part in one part, and part in another, but
indivisibly. And one would think this should suit with your own hypothesis.

And when I better know in what sense Locus is used, I shall be fitter to
enquire whether Spirits be in loco. When some take it for a circumscribing
body, and some for a subjective body (on which it operateth) and some for a
mere room possessed in vacuo, and some for God himself in whom are all things,
the name of a Nullibist is as ambiguous to me.

4. You tell your Reader that [All created Spirits are Souls in all
probability, and actuate some Matter or other.]

Sir, Philosophers freedom is usually taken easilyer than Divines; I will
therefore presume that our mutual freedom shall not be in the least distastful
to either of us: And so I must tell you that I have long taken it for a matter
of very great use to distinguish unknown things from known, and to bridle my
understanding from presuming to enquire into unrevealed things: And I take that
holdness of Philosophers to have had a great hand in corrupting Divinity.
Secret things are for God, and things revealed for us and our Children, says
Moses. And when I presume most, I do but most lose my self, and misuse my
understanding: nothing is good for that which it was not made for: Our
understandings as our Eyes are made only for things revealed. In many of your
Books I take this to be an excess; And I have often wondered at your Friend, and
(sometime) mine, Mr. Glanvile, that after his Scepsis scientifica, he could
talk* and write of doubtful things with that strange degree of confidence, and
censuring of Dissenters as he did. I am accused of overdoing, and curiosity my
self: But I endeavor to confine my enquiries to things revealed.

This premised I say, undoubtedly it is utterly unrevealed, either as to any
certainty or probability, that all Spirits are Souls, and actuate Matter. Alas
how should we come to know it. Neither Nature nor Scripture tells it us.

But 1. If this be so, the difference between you and the Psychopyrists must be
opened as it is (much like that of Mammertus and Faustus,) whether the Soul (or
a Spirit) have Matter by composition, or simply uncompounded: for a body you
suppose it still to have. Is it separable from a Body or not? If it be, why
should you think that it is never separated? If it can subsist without a Body,
who can say that it does not? If it cannot but be inseparable, it is a strange
composition that God cannot dissolve. And if it perish upon the dissolution,
then it was but an Accident of the body, and not a compounding Substance. Dr.
Glissons and Campanella's way is as probable as this; And I marvel that when
you have dealt with so many sorts of Dessenters you meddle not with so subtle
a piece as that old Doctor's de Vita Naturae: I have talked with diverse high
pretenders to Philosophy here of the new strain, and asked them their judgment
of Dr. Glissons Book, and I found that none of them understood it, but
neglected it as too hard for them, and yet contemned it. He supposes all
Matter to be animated without composition, the Matter and Form being but
conceptus inadequati, of an uncompounded being, however that Matter as such be
divisible, into atoms, every atome still being uncompounded living Matter. You
suppose all Spirit to be in Matter. but by way of composition as distinct
substances. I go the middle way, and suppose that substance (simple) is Active
or Passive: that the three Passive Elements, Earth, Water and Air are animated
only by composition, or operation of the active; But that the active substances
have no composition, (but intellectual) but Substance and Form are conceptus
ejusdem inadequati. So that what Dr. Glisson says of every clod and stone, I
say only of Spirits, (of fire I shall speak after.)

2. And do you think that the Soul carries a body out of the body inseparable
with it, or only that it receives a new body when it passes out of the old.
If the latter, is there any instant of time between the dispossession of the
old, and the possession of the new. If any, then the Soul is sometime without a
body: And how can you tell how long. If not what body is it that you can
imagine so ready to receive it without any interposition? I have not been
without temptations to over inquisitive thoughts about these matters: And I
never had so much ado to overcome any such temptation, as that to the opinion
of Averrhoes, that as extinguished Candles go all into one illuminated air, so
separated Souls go all into one common Anima Mundi, and lose their
individuation, and that Materia receptiva individuat. And then indeed your
notion would be probable; for the Anima mundi mundum semper animat, and so my
separated Soul should be still imbodyed in the world, and should have its part
in the worlds animation; But both Scripture and Apparitions assure us of the
individuation of Spirits, and separate Souls.

And I confess to you that I have often told the Sadduces and Infidels, that urge
seeming impossibilities against the Resurrection, and the activity of separate
Souls for want of Organs, that they are not sure that the Soul takes not with
it, at its departure hence, some seminal material Spirits (ethereal and airy;)
and so that this spirituous or igneous body, which it carries hence, is a
semen to the body, which it shall have at the Resurrection, no man knows the
contrary, and no man knows that it is so.

The Soul is many months here in organizing its own body in generation, and
more in nourishing it to a useful state: That particular organical bodies are
made ready to receive them just at death, is hard to be believed: That the
matter of the Universe is still ready is past doubt. But how organized, or how
the Soul works without Organs, we shall better know hereafter. Your opinion
much favors the Pythagoreans; If the Soul be never out of a body, is it not
as like to come into one new forming in the womb, as into we know not what or
where?

5. I could wish you had printed my Letter wholly by it self before you had
annexed your answer, that the Reader might have understood it; which I can
hardly do my self as you have parcel'd it. But we must not have what we would
have from wiser men.

I take it for an odd method, when I never asserted Spirits to be fire, but
denied it, first to be in your Epistle feigned to have said it, and yet in the
end of it for you to say that [I mean not ordinary fire, but that my meaning is
more subtle and refined] and never tell the Reader what it is before you
dispute it, and then through the whole answer to dispute* on a wrong
supposition, and in the end of the Book to confess again that I say not that
Spirits are fire or material.

6. Had I been to choose an edifying method, we would first have stated our
question, and agreed on the meaning of our terms; But I must follow your steps;
though I had rather have done otherwise.

Ad SECT. I.
1. THat my Notions are like those of Judge Hale, is no wonder; we were no
strangers to each others thoughts about these matters; and though he and you
have had some peaceable Velitations, I take it for no dishonor to be of his
mind.

1. De Nomine: There is no such agreement among Philosophers of the name Matter
as you suppose. I refer you for brevity, but to a very small Book of a very
Learned Author (advanced by the Preface of one eminent for subtilty) the
Metaphysics of Dr. Rich. Crakenthorp, who tells you at large, that Matter is
taken either properly (as you and I do Substance) and so Spirits are material,
or improperly and narrowly for that only which has the three dimensions; and
so Spirits are not material. It Is unprofitable to cite many more to to the same
purpose: And I suppose you know, that not only Tertullian, but many other of
the Fathers (many of whom you may find cited by Faustus Reg. whom Mammertus
answers) so used both Matter and Corpus also.

2. The word [Form] is as ambiguous; You and I are not the only persons that
use it not in the same sense. Matter in its first Conceptus called Primus, has
no Form; that is, is conceived of abstracted from all Form. Matter in its next
Conceptus is conceived of as diversified by accidents, as quantity, figure,
etc. And so the 3 passive Elements, Earth, Air and Water, are diversified by
many accidents, making up that Consistence, which is called their several
forms, known only by sensse, and capable of no perfect definition. Many such
passive Materials conjunct have their Relative Form, which is that Contexture
in which consists their aptitude for their use: as a House, a Ship, a Gun, a
Watch. In Compositions where the Active natures are added, and operate unitedly
on the passive, there the Active is the Form of the Compound, quite in another
sense than any of the former, viz. as it is principium motus.

You and I are enquiring of the different Forms of Matter and Spirit: You say
that Impenetrability, and Divisibility are the Form of Matter, and the contrary
of Spirit: I say, that 1. Substance as Substance, (and Matter taken for
Substance, which Dr. Crakenthorpe thinks is the properest sense) as such has
no Form, that is, in conceptu primo. 2. That substance distinguished by
subtilty and crassitude, visibility and invisibility, quantity, shape, motion,
etc. does herein differ Modally: And this Mode may well enough be called the
Form, before it have another Form: And as the diverse foresaid Elements thus
differ, so the substance of Spirits no doubt has some Modal Excellency above
all Bodies or Matter strictly or narrowly so called: And if you will call this
a Form, I contend not about the word, but it is but equivocally so called,
Spirits having another nobler sort of Form. 3. Nothing has two Forms
univocally so called: But Spirits have all that Virtus formalis, which I often
described* which is their very form: There is no Spirit without it: It Is not a
Compounding part, but the form of a simple substance. Vital Virtue, Vis,
Potentia activa, signifies not the same thing with Penetrability, and
Indiscerpibility; Therefore both cannot be the Form univocally so called: And
how you could put both these your self into one definition, as a kind of
Compounded Form I wonder. Yea, your two words themselves signify not the same
thing: Penetrable and Indiscerpible are not words of one signification. And
surely you will grant that these two, Penetrable and Indiscerpible can be no
otherwise a Form to Spirits, than Impenetrable and Discerpible are a Form to
Matter. And it is apparent that the first is but a modal conceptus, and the
latter a relative notion of Matter, and neither one nor both are contrary to
Virtus Vitalis in a Spirit (or Virtus activa:) Mere passive potentiality is
rather the contrary difference here.

And I know not why you might not as well have named diverse other Accidents or
Modes, especially Quantity, and the trina dimensio, and called them all the
Form of Matter, as well as your two.

Indeed when we have from sense a true notion of Matter, we must know that it
has Quantity, and is somewhere, and therefore that one part of it, and another
part cannot possess just the same place; and so we grant you the
Impenetrability: And how far you prove Spirits to be such substances as are
extended, and have Amplitude (as you say page 105.) and spissitude, and be in
loco, and in more or less space variously, and yet that they have no dimensions
which the Divine Intellect or Power itself can measure; and whether all the
Spirits in the universe can be in eodem puncto, and all that are finite,
contracted into that one point, I leave this to Wits more subtle than mine to
judge of.

For to tell you the truth, I know nothing at all without the mediation of
sense, except the immediate sensation it self, and the acts of Intellection and
Volition or Nolition, and what the Intellect infers of the like, by the
perception of these. I have seen and felt how Water differs from Earth, and
from that sensation my Intellect has that Idea of the difference which it
has: But without that seeing and feeling it, all the definitions in the world,
and all the names of hard and soft, and dry and moist, would have given me no
true notice of the formal difference. Now hence I infer, that I have no sense
at all of the difference of a Spirits Substantiality in such modes and
accidents from that of Matter; and therefore how can I know it? I know by
knowing what knowing is, and by willing what willing is: And I know that these
Acts prove a power (for nothing does that which it cannot do,) and that Act and
Power prove a Substance, (for nothing has nothing, and can do nothing:) ab est
tertii* adjecti ad est secundi valet argumentum: And I know, that unless Light
might be called Spirit, Spirits are to me invisible: And so I can knowingly
say, 1. What they do, 2. What they can do, 3. What they are in the genus of
Substantiality, 4. And what they are not as to many Attributes proper to
Visible Substances or Bodies; 5. And I have elsewhere fully proved in a special
Dispute (in Methodo Theol.) that the Power of Vital Action, Intellection and
Volition, is not a mere Accident of them, but their very essential form. But as
to that Modification of their Substance which is contrary to Impenetrability
and Divisibility, I may grope, but I cannot know it positively, for want of
sensation.

2. Is an Atom Matter? or is it not? If one Atom be no matter, then two is
none, and then there is none. If an Atom be matter, is it Discerpible or not?
If not, how is this the Form of Matter? If it be divisible, it is not an Atom;
that is a contradiction. And if every Atom be divisible in infinitum, it is as
great, or greater than the world, and then there are as many Infinites as
Atoms. That three Atoms united cannot be divided just in the middle, etiam per
Divinam Potentiam, is because it implies a contradiction, viz. that an Atom is
divisible; so that by you an Atom is a Spirit.

Do you take the word [Penetrable] actively, or passively, or both? If actively
according to you Matter is penetrable; for it can penetrate a Spirit, that is,
possess the same place. But I perceive you mean that Spirits can penetrate
Bodies, and also that they can penetrate one another.

And I suppose that by Penetration you mean not that which separateth parts, of
the Matter, and comes in between these parts, but you mean possessing the same
place, as is said: And if so, do you put no limitation? or what? I ask before,
can all the Created Spirits in Heaven and Earth be in the same Atom of matter?
If so, are they then absent from all other place? or is every Spirit
ubiquitary? You confute the Nullibists by the operation of the Soul on the
Body: Ibi operatur, ergo ibi est: And do you think that all the Angels in
Heaven, and all Created Souls may be in one Body by Penetration? If so, Are
they one Soul there, or innumerable in one man? And if they may be all in one
point, and so be all one, may they not be divided again? I confess my ignorance
of the Consistence of spiritual Substance is so great, that I am not able to
say, that God who has given Souls quantitatem discretam, and made them
innumerable, is not able to make one of two, or many, and to turn that one into
two, or many again: I am not sure that it is a contradiction; especially if it
be true that Sennertus, and many more say of the multiplication of Forms by
Generation.

But if you take Penetrability passively, then you mean that Spirits may be
penetrated by Bodies, or by one another, or both. No doubt you mean both, and
so, as I said, Bodies also are penetrable, both actively and passively; that
is, Bodies can penetrate Spirits, and be penetrated by Spirits. Whether any
Bodies penetrate each other, viz. whether Light or its vehicle at least be a
Body, and whether it penetrate the body of Glass or Crystal, with more about
these matters, I have heretofore spoken in my Reasons of the Christian Religion
Append. Obj. 2. p. 525. and forward.

3. To conclude this; as in natural mixed Bodies, there are three principles,
Materia, Materiae Dispositio (for that I think is a fitter expression than
Privatio) and Forma; so in simple Beings there are three (not parts, but)
conceptus inadaequati answerable hereto; viz.

I. In the three passive Elements, Earth, Water and Air, there is in each, 1.
The Matter, 2. The Disposition of that matter by contexture, and various modes,
of which Impenetrability and Divisibility are parts; 3. The passive Form
resulting from all these, which consists in their various aptitude to their
uses; especially their Receptivity of the Influx of the Active Natures. Here
you put two Attributes together, which are both but parts of the Materiae
Dispositio, and call them two the Form.

II. In the Active Natures, there is, 1. The Substantiality, 2. The Substantiae
Dispositio, 3. The Form.

Of the first (not part, but) inadequate Conceptus, Substantiality, we agree,
of the second Conceptus we differ: That such Substances have an
incomprehensible Purity, of which we can have no distinct Idea for want of
Sensation, but a General Conception only; and that this Purity (whatever it be)
is not the Form of Spirits, but the Substantiae Dispositio, is that which I
say: And you say that Penetrability and Indivisibility are the Form, which (at
most) are but the Dispositio Substantiae; and yet you join the Vital Virtue as
part of the formal Conception too, which is quite of another conception. And so
we differ of the third Conceptus, viz. the Form also; which I affirm of all
simple active natures to be the Virtus Activa: And if they are Vital, the
Virtus Vitalis.

Of the name Vita, there is a Controversy, which must be distinguished from
that de re. If it be true that Dr. Glisson says, that every Atom of matter
has in it a Motive Principle without Composition, then the Motive Virtue is
the Form of all Matter as well as of Spirit. If all be to be called Living or
Spirit, which has a Virtus Motiva for its Essential Form, then Ignis (or
Ether) is Vital and Spirit; for it has an Essential Motive Principle as its
Form. Therefore the Question whether Ignis or Ether) be Life or Spirit, is but
a question de nomine (such as too many usually in Disputes manage, as if it
were de re.) It is no Life or Spirit, if by those names you mean only Sensitive
and Intellectual Natures: But it is Life and Spirit, if by that name you mean
only an Essential Formal Motive Principle.

I have often professed that I am ignorant whether Ignis and Vegetative Spirit be
all one (to which I most incline) or whether Ignis be an Active Nature, made to
be the Instrument by which the three Spiritual Natures, Vegetative, Sensitive
and Mental work on the three Passive Natures: And though I was wont to think,
that what I knew not my self, all men of great Learning knew, specially such as
you, in the points which you have with singular industry studied; yet now
experience has banished that modest Error, and convinced me that other men
must be content with an humble Ignoramus as well as I.

4. And here I must note, that 18. p. 127. where you purposely define a Spirit,
you agree with me: Your definition is [A Spirit is an Immaterial Substance
intrinsecally endued with Life, and the Faculty of Motion.] Forgive me for
thinking that you are not strict enough in your terms for a definition; but
plainly you seem to mean the same as I do. You should, I think, have mentioned
a Spirit as a simple Substance differing from a mixed; and have said, not only
[intrinsecally] endued, for so is every Animal who is Body as well as Spirit,
but also endued with it as its simple Formal Essence: And whether all Faculty
of Motion (e. g. Gravitation) be Life, I am in doubt. But here 1. You agree
with me in the first Conceptus [Substance;] And 2. As to that mode of Substance
which I call the Dispositio Substantiae ad Formam, you call it but [Immaterial]
which is a negative, and speaks nothing positively; which is such an honest
Confession as we poor Ignorants apertly make, that what the excellent Purity or
modal Consistence of Spiritual Substance is as compared to Material (or
Corporeal) because we never saw or felt it as we do Corporeal; we do not
formally know, and therefore only tell men de genere, that it is most pure and
excellent; but in special, that we have no true Idea of it, and therefore only
tell men what it is not [not material] and not what it is. 3. But you name no
Formal Difference but Life: When you add [the Faculty of Motion] it is a
defective Explication of the Virtus Vitalis, which is ever Vnica-triplex, viz.
Activa-Pe^ceptiva-Appetitiva, when it operateth to generation or augmentation.
And do you think that Life and Immateriality are Synonyma's? Or that Life and
Penetrable and Indiscerpible, are Synonyma's? Or that the Form of a Spirit is a
Compound of such and so many Heterogeneals? Had you held to this definition, I
think you had done best.

5. Page 129. You seem to explain Immaterial so as to make Indiscerpibility an
immediate Attribute, and expound it, It is indiscerpible into real Physical
parts: (so is an Atom.) But as Physical signifies corporeal, some will say, it
may yet be per potentiam divinam divided into Spiritual parts. And you expound
Penetrability actively, that it can penetrate the matter and things of its own
kind, that is, pass through Spiritual Substances: And such any gross Body can
pass through.

6. When Answ. p. 3. you say of a Spirit, that it is [so subtle as to be in
such sort penetrable.] And in Sect. 31. to which you refer us, you make the
difference of Spirit penetrating, and Body impenetrable to be subtilty and
crassitude.] Could any of us have said more whom you contradict? Is Subtilty
and Crassitude the difference between Spiritual Substance and Material in their
Consistency? I have not said so much as this.

7. As to your oft-mentioned per se and non per aliud, as proper to Spirits, I
am past doubt, that Spirits more depend on God for Being and Motion, than
Matter does on Spirits (Created.) But it is difference enough that God gives
them an Essential Formal Virtue self-moving receptive of his moving Influx,
when Passives move only as moved by selfmovers: (unless the aggregative Motion
must be excepted, of which afterward.)

Ad SECT. II.
1. THree Faults, of which one is a Mischief, you find with my Conceptus
formalis. 1. That it leaves out what is contained in the Conceptus formalis of
a Spirit in General, Penetrability and Indiscerpibility.

Ans. 1. It is but the dispositio Substantiae at most, and not a proper
Conceptus formalis. 2. You leave out other modifications as essential. 3. It
leaves none out that is known, while I say that it is Substantia purissima,
which contains your Modes and Attributes with more if they be true, if not,
it avoideth the errors.

2. 2. You say, [It puts in Perception, and we have no assurance that a
plastic Spirit has Perception, but as such has none: Else the Soul would
perceive the Organization of its own Body.

Ans. Dr. Glisson, de Vita Naturae and Campanella, have said so much against
you of this, that supposing the Reader to have perused them, I will not repeat
it.

Did you think that there is no Perception but sensitive or Intellectual? Such
indeed the vegetative Spirit has not; but it has a vegetative Perception. A
Plant grows in a Soil of various qualities: It attracteth to itself that part
of Nutriment which is congruous to it, and digesteth that so Attracted: And
therefore it has an answerable Perception, which sort is congruous to it, and
which not, when it neglects one sort, and draws another. It does not see or
feel it, nor understand it, but insensibly perceives it.

3. You say, you [do not easily assent to that conceit of a Trinity in this
Conceptus formalis which I make to consist in Virtute una-trina, vitali,
perceptiva, appetitiva.]

Ans. Nor did I easily assent to it; nor did Dr. Glisson after 80 Years of age,
easily procure men to assent to it, nor Campanella take so marvellously with
others as he did with our Commenius and some such. And far be it from me to
expect you should easily assent to it, when I come not to you as a Teacher. But
whereas you say, that these make three no more than Animal, Homo, and Brutum,
or Cupiditas, Desiderium, and Fuga, you silence me; for it beseems me not to
speak to you in a Teaching Language, and there is no other to convince you. And
if all that I have said in Method. Theol. will not do it, I confess it will not
easily be done, Animal, Homo, and Brutum, are three words containing only a
Generical, and specific nature in two distinct species of Subjects: If you
think that in the Sun Virtus-motiva, illuminativa, and calefactiva, or in man's
Soul a vegetative, sensitive, and Intellective power, or in the latter,
mentally-active, Intellective, and Volitive Virtue, are no other, I will not
persuade you to change your mind, much less give you any Answer to your simile
of cupiditas, desiderium, fuga, save that you might almost as well have named
any three Words.

3. But you say [The Omission of Immaterial in your Conceptus formalis, or
which is all one of Penetrability and Indiscerpibility is not only a mistake
but a mischief; it implying that the Virtus Appetitiva and perceptiva may be in
a Substance though material, which betrays much of the succors which
Philosophy affords to Religion, etc.

Ans. Melancholy may cause fears by seeming Apparitions. I hope no body will be
damned for using or not using the Word Material or Immaterial: It Is easy to
use either to prevent such danger. And I am not willing again to examine the
sense of these words every time you use them. You know I said not that Spirits
are Material: And you say they are Substances of Extension, Amplitude,
Spissitude, Locality, and Subtilty, as opposite to Crassitude. And what if
another think just so of them, (or not so grossly) and yet call them Matter,
will the word undo him? But you say I omit Immaterial. Ans. See my Append. to
Reas. of Christ. Rel. whether I omit it: But is a bare Negative Essential to a
just definition here? Why then not many Negatives more, (as invisible,
insensible, etc.) To say that Air is not Water, or Water is not Earth, was
never taken for defining, nor any mischief to omit it.

But that the positive term Purissima does not include Immaterial, and is not
as good, you have not as yet proved. Is Substantia purissima material? Do not
you by that intimation do more to assert the Materiality of Spirits than ever I
did? Have you read what I have answered to 20 Objections of the Somatists in
the aforesaid Append.

But you say, It implies that Virtus perceptiva, etc. may be in a substance
material. Ans. Negatur. If I leave out 20 Negatives in my Definition, it
follows not that the form may be with their positives. But can you excuse
your self from what you call a Mischief, when you intimate that Substantia
purissima may be material? Because I only called it purissima, you say I imply
it may be material.

But I confess I am too dull to be sure that God cannot endue matter itself
with the formal Virtue of Perception: That you say the Cartesians hold the
contrary, and that your Writings prove it, certifieth me not. O the mavelous
difference of men's Conceptions! Such great Wits as Campanella, Dr. Glisson,
etc. were confident that no Matter in the world was without the una-trina
Virtus, viz. Perceptive, Appetitive, and Motive; I agree not with them: But you
on the contrary say, that Materia qualitercunque modificata is incapable of
Perception. I doubt not, materia qua materia, or yet qua mere modificata has
no LIfe: But that it is incapable of it; and that Almighty God cannot make
perceptive living Matter, and that by informing it without mixture, I cannot
prove, nor I think you: Where is the Contradiction that makes it impossible?
Nor do I believe that it gives a man any more cause to doubt (as you add) of
the Existence of God, or the Immortality of the Soul, than your Opinion that
says, God cannot do this.

To pass by many other I will but recite the words of Micraelius Ethnophron,
li. 1. c. 13. p. 23, 24. instancing in many that held the Soul to be Pure
Matter. [Eam Sententiam inter veteres, probavit apud Macrobium, Heraclitus
Physicus, cui anima est Essentiae Stellaris scintilla; Et Hipparchus apud
Plinium, cui est coeli pars: Et Africanus apud Ciceronem qui detrahit animum ex
illis sempiternis ignibus quae Sidera vocamus; quaeque globosae and rotundae
divinis animatae mentibus circules suos orbesque conficiunt celeritate
mirabili: Et Seneca qui descendisse eam ex illo coelesti Spiritu ait; Et Plato
ipse qui alicubi animam vocat (...), radians and splendidum vehiculum: Et
Epictetus qui Astra vocat nobis (...), amica and cognata elementa: Ipseque cum
Peripateticis Aristoteles qui eam quinta essentia constare, and (...) in
animabus inesse dicit: Inter nostrates quoque Scaliger vocat animam Naturam
coelestem and quintam essentiam, alia quidem a quatuor Elementis natura
praeditam, sed non sine omni materia: Eadem Opinio arridet Roherto de
Fluctibus, etc. And what many Fathers say I have elsewhere showed.

And yet on condition you will not make the name Substance to signify no real
Being, but a mere Relation, or Quality, I think you and I shall scarce differ
in sense.

4. But you magnify our difference, saying [In this you and I fundamentally
differ, in that you omit, but I include, Penetrability and Indiscerpibility in
the Conceptus formalis of a Spirit. Ans. I think you mean better than you
speak, and err not fundamentally. 1. I do not think that your two hard words
are fundamentals, nor that one or both are Synonyma to Immaterial. 2. I do not
think but Purissima includes all that is true in them, and so leaves them not
out. 3. I do not leave them out of the Dispositio vel modus Substantiae, though
I leave them out of the Conceptus formalis. 4. Your self affirm the vital
Virtue to be the Conceptus formalis. And has a Spirit more forms than one! You
know of no existent Spirit in the World that has not its proper specific
form: And if your two words had been a Generical Form, that is no form to the
species, but a Substantiae dispositio. Does he fundamentally err that says
Corpus humanum organicum is not forma hominis? Or that the puritas vel
subtilitas materiae is not forma ^gnis vel solis, but only the materiae
dispositio? If our little self made words were so dangerous on either side, I
should fear more hurt by making the form of a Spirit 1. To be but the
Consistence or mode of the Substance, 2. And that to consist in diverse
accidents conjunct, 3. And those uncertain in part, or unintelligible, 4. And
Spirits to have two Forms, or one made up of diverse things, 5. And to place the
form in a Negation of Matter. What a jumble is here, when the true definition
of a Spirit is obvious?

5. You say, [Penetrability makes it pliant and subtle, and to a Substance of
such Oneness and Subtility is rationally attributed, whatever Activity,
Sympathy, Synenergy, Appetite and Perception is found in the world.

Ans. There is Oneness in Matter (in Atoms at least) and does Penetrability
make Subtilty? And is Subtilty the difference? sure, if you make any sense of
this, it must favor the conceit of Materiality more than my term Purissima.

But do you verily believe that Penetrability or Subtilty is a sufficient,
efficient, or Formal Cause of Vitality, Perception, Appetite? and so of
Intellection and Volition? I hope you do not: It is the Essential Virtus
Formalis (including Potentiam activam, Vim and Inclinationem) which must
immediately cause the Acts; Subtilty and Penetrability else will not do it: No
man will grant you that the Proposition is good, ex vi Causalitatis,
[Quodcunque penetrabile vel subtle est, ideo necessario vivit, percipit,
appetit] unless it proceed a necessitate concomitantiae and existentiae. Yet
where you are most out of the way, you are at it again, that This Mistake is a
mischief.

Ad SECT. III. and IV.
1. YOur Third Section I am not concerned in: I tell you still I deny not your
Penetrability and Indiscerpibility, though I lay not the stress on them as to
Certainty or Importance, as you do, and am past doubt that they do but
defectively speak the Substantiality sub conceptu modali and dispositivo, and
are unskilfully called the Forma Spiritus.

2. Your 4th Section I had rather not have seen. 1. You dislike that I say,
that [a self-moving Principle I dare not say is proper to a Spirit.] I hope
Ignorance is never the worse for being confessed: All are not so wise as you. I
deny it not; but I am not certain that Stones, Earth, and other heavy things,
move not to the Earth by a self-moving Principle. I am not sure that if a Stone
in the Air fall down, it is by a Spirits motion, and that God has not made
Gravitation, and other aggravative motion of Passives, to be an Essential
self-moving Principle. Few men I think have thought otherwise. And yet I am not
sure that all Stones and Clods are alive. If you are, bear with our Ignorance;
for that is no Error.

3. When I say [I consent not to Campanella de sensu rerum, or Dr. Glisson,
that would make all things alive by an Essentiating Form in the very Elements.]
Here you talk of foul play, to make one part fish, and the other flesh; one
part of Matter self-moved, and other not.]

Ans. But, worthy Sir, the foul play is yours, that seem to tell your Reader
that I do so, which I never do: That is scant fair play. I said not that
Spirits are Matter, and I do but say I am ignorant whether Gravitation be from
the Motion of a Spirit thrusting down the Stone, etc. or from an Essential
Principle in the Matter. May not one be ignorant where he cannot choose? I
cannot but much difference the motus aggregativus, such as Gravitation causes,
which is only the tendency of the parts to the whole, that they may there rest
from motion, from the natural motion of known Life, which abhors cessation:
I take Motus to be no Entity, but a mode of Substance; to be in motion or
quiescence, are several modes of it; and that mode which is most stated, most
shows nature. I see no contradiction in it, that a Stone should fall without
Life: I dare not say, that God cannot make a Rock or Clod to fall by an
intrinsic Principle of Gravitation, without vital motion. And yet I am most
inclined to your Opinion: But the stream of Dissenters obliges such a one as I
am to more modesty than must be expected from one of your degree.

4. Next you complain of [horrible Confusion.] What Is the matter? why, to
include Life in the Conceptus Formalis of a Spirit (of which Self-motion is
certainly an Effect) and yet say It is not proper to a Spirit. Ans. It Is worse
than confusion to intimate that I said what I did not. Your saying [It's
certain] is no conviction of me, that there is no Self-motion but by Life. You
think not that Fire lives; and I am not sure that a Stone is a self-mover: I
only say, I know not. I never yet saw your proof, that God is able to make no
self-mover but vital! And if he can, how know I that he does not? The World
suffers so much by men's taking on them to know more than they do, that I fear
it in my self, as one of the worst Diseases of Mankind.

5. You conclude [We are to deny Self-motion in the matter it self every where
as not belonging thereto, but to Spirit]

Ans. No doubt but Materia qua talis est mere passiva: But that God can put no
motive inclination in it, or that he cannot give a Spiritual Vitality to any
matter, are conclusions fitter for you than for me.

6. To show why I often neglect the name [Material] (some taking it for the same
with Substance, and some only for Corporeit) I said, that the distinction of
Natures into Active and Passive, serves as well.] To this you say [Materiality
is a Notion more strict, distinct and steady.] Ans. The contrary is commonly
known, and before and elsewhere proved; when Materia is not only a very hard
ambiguous word (and you have not yet enabled me by all your words, to know what
you mean by it) but even such great men as before named make the more general
sense (equal to Substance) to be the more proper: Had all used it, as you do,
and you made us understand what you mean by it, I would hold to it accordingly.

You say, Passivity belongs to things Immaterial. Ans. 1. Passivity as
exclusive of Activity, or as predominant, does not. 2. No Passivity belongs
to that which is not Matter in the foresaid large sense of Matter, of which
more anon.

Ad SECT. V, VI.
1. I Confessed my Ignorance of the Cause of the descensus gravium; whether it be
from a Principle made by God essential to the matter that descends, or from
an intrinsic compounding Active nature, or only from an extrinsick Mover. You
here bid me not despair, for it is demonstrable that the descensus gravium is
not from any principle springing from their own Matter, but from an Immaterial
principle distinct therefrom.

Ans. 1. All does not demonstrate to me, which some call demonstration; I
perceive you note not at all what is my doubt, and how can you then solve it? I
do not think that the Gravitation is from a principle springing from the
Matter. How can a Principle of Motion spring from Matter? But the doubt is of
the several ways forenamed: 1. Whether it be from a principle in the Matter,
as Dr. Glisson thought, as a Conceptus inadaequatus of its Essence, or at least
an inseparable Quality or Accident. 2. Or whether it be by an Essential
Compounding Principle, as Anima in homine: 3. Or by an extrinsick Agent only;
Did you think that you had answered these?

You say, [which Principle to be the Mover of the Matter of the Universe, I
have over and over again demonstrated in Ench. Metaph.]

Ans. I would have had it plainer, but must take it as it is. It seems then
that you think that it is only the Anima Mundi, without any subordinate moving
Principle: But you should have spoken out. I will not wrong you so much as to
suppose that you think any Indiscerpible Spirit proper to a Stone, or a Fox, or
an Ass, moves all the World: Therefore I must judge that to the Motion of all
the Stones, Clods, etc. in the world, there is none but an Universal Mover. I
confess I think (as Dr. Gilbert de Magn.) and many others, that the whole
Tellus has one Active Principle (which I plainly think is Fire;) and if he
call it Anima Telluris, I leave him to his liberty. But I think there are
subordinate particular Moving Principles besides the Universal?

Do you think that only the Anima Mundi animateth all Animals? I think you do
not; else all Apparitions should be but by one Soul. Besides an Anima
Vniversalis, there must be a particular (or singular) Soul in every Man, Beast,
Bird, etc. There must be more than the Universal Soul, to make you write,
speak, do better than others: And if so, how am I sure that nothing under the
Universal Spirit moves descendentia gravia? In motu projectorum (another
instance of my Ignorance) there is sure some causality in Anima singulari
projicientis. The Universal Cause is ever one, but excludes not subordinate
Moving Causes. My old Friend Mr. Sam. Got (on Mosis Philos.) supposes each
Element to have its special Spirit: I am not so well skilled in such things, as
to come to that certainty which others pretend to: I think to an equal common
Motion an Universal Cause may suffice; but when Motions differ, I know not the
different Causes so well as some think they do. How you answered Judge Hale of
the Rundle in the Water, I know not: But you that think Fire in the Sun to be
no Spirit but Matter, I am confident will never make me believe, that Fire and
Sun are moved only by the Universal Mover, without any motive principle in
themselves. Your Metaphys. c. 13. I have perused, and am past doubt of a
Spiritual Moving Power: But two things I see not proved; 1. That there are not
particular Moving Principles subordinate to the more Universal. 2. That the God
of Nature has not put into the passive Elements, a strong inclination of the
parts to union with the whole, and to aggregative Motion when forcibly
separated; which Inclination Dr. Glisson calls their Essential Life; but I
think is somewhat that deserves not that name. I have not read your Vol.
Philos. nor Adnot am. nor Answer to Judge Hale.

2. Sect. 6. You say, This is to join the property of a Spirit to Matter. Answ.
That Is it that I doubt of, whether all Self-motion (under the Universal Mover)
be proper to a Spirit, or only Vital Self-motion.

3. Your Assurance of the Earth's Motion, assures not me: I have seen a M. S.
of your Antagonist's Judge Hale, that inclines me to deny it; and nothing more
than the Igneous nature of the Sun, to which Motion is natural, and the torpid
nature of Earth; God making every thing fit for its use. But of this, as my
judgment is of little value, so I profess Ignorance.

4. That there is Activity in fixed Thoughts, I grant; for Thinking is Acting.
But that there is as much Activity in the not-acting of a Rock, e.g. I deny.

5. Again, you are at the Mischief of Leaving out your Penetrability, and
Indiscerpibility, and Immateriality; to which I have often answered. And I now
add, you make it an absurdity to name that as a Form, which is not proper to
the thing: But Immateriality, Penetrability, or Indiscerpibility in your own
Judgment (I think) are none of them proper to Spirit. For they are common to
diverse Accidents in your account, viz. Light, Heat, Cold, etc. are all these.

Ad SECT. VII, VIII.
1. YOU come to the main thing which I importuned you to bless the world with
your explication of, viz. The true difference of Substance and Matter. And you
say, It Is obvious to any observing Eye. They differ as Genus and Species. Ans.
I would I had an observing Eye. If by Matter you mean sensible Matter, such as
Man can see, feel, or measure, etc. the difference indeed is obvious: My doubt
is here; seeing you confess that substare accidentibus is but a relative
notion; (and it is commonly said that God has no Accidents, and yet is a
Substance: How true I say not,) and all your notice of it, besides Negatives
is, that [Substance is a Being subsisting by it self] and call this [a complete
Definition;] 1. How you can call that a complete Definition of that which
indeed is not definable, for want of a Genus: For you say Metaph. c. 2. that
Ens quatenus Ens non posse esse objectum Metaphysicae cum tam generale sit ut
and Ordine and Naturae and Doctrinae res Physicas antecedat, etc. But this I
stick not at: Things not definable may be partly known. But 2. whereas it is
granted by you, that Substantia and Vita (or Virtus Activa) are two inadequate
Conceptus of a Spirit, do you hold that the Conceptus of Substantiality has
any more in it of Real Entity, than the bare Conceptus of Virtus Activa (or
Vitalis) alone? Or whether the meaning be, that as it is Res the Virtus Activa
is its total Conceptus, and Substantia is but added to signify that Res illa
quae dicitur Vita vel Virtus Vitalis subsistit per se, and non in alio, id est,
non est Accidens. If this be the meaning that the word Vis, or Virtus, speak
all that is Res, and Substance speak only its state, as being no Accident, but
a Self-Being; this is intelligible, and it agrees with some men's thoughts of
God himself. But this seems neither to be true (at least of Creatures) nor to
be your sense. Not true; for a Created Virtus (vel Vita) quae non est alicujus
Substantiae Virtus, vel ut Forma vel ut Accidens, seems above our reach to
conceive. Though I know many call God Purus Actus, and the Schools mostly agree
that Substantia is not univocally spoken of God and us, and deny it to be
properly said of God; and I can easily grant that God is utterly above all
formal knowledge of ours; yet that Created Spirits should be a mere Virtus (or
Potentia Activa, or Actus) seems hard to believe.

And many words intimate that it is not your Judgment, but that Substantiality
signifies not only the Modus of the Existence of the Actus Entitativus, or
Virtus, but is the first half and fundamental Conceptus of a Spirit as Res,
speaking halfly its Entity. In this I think we agree.

And now if this be so, this very Conceptus of Fundamental Reality, is but that
same which Schibler, and abundance others call Materia Metaphysica, as
different from Materia Physica; and which Dr. Crakenthorpe, and many others,
take the general and most proper sense of Materia to contain. and therefore I
say but, that you should not take an equivocal word for univocal, and lay so
great a stress on an ambiguous name. And I confess still all your names of
Indiscerpibility, Penetrability and Immateriality, give me no scientifical
notion of the true difference between the lowest Substantiality of a Spirit,
and the highest of Fire or Ether, or Aristotelis quinta Essentia (which you
call Matter.) But I am fully satisfied of an Incomprehensible Purity of
Substance; 2. And of the true Form of a Soul; and I find my self to need no
more.

2. The Thomists take the Faculties of the Soul to be but Accidents (as Mr.
Pemble de Orig. Formar. does the Souls of Brutes to be but Qualities of Matter)
which I have elsewhere confuted: And these must needs think that the Notion of
(...) is almost all of the Soul.

3. You add out of your Ethics, nulliu^^ (...) in^^mam nudamque essentiam
cognosci posse, sed Attributa tantum essentialia, essentialesque habitudines.
We are not any way able to discover the very bare Essence or Substance of any
thing.] Ans. Yet you say before, [What can be more plain?] and [It's obvious to
every observing Eye.] I contess I understand you not: I know no essentia that
is not intima: And if by nudam you mean accidentibus nudatam, we know no
Substance so, because there is none such created: but we can abstract the
Essence from the Accidents. And if we know not the nudam essentiam of any
accident we know nothing. Essential Attributes, and Habitudes are hard words:
If by the Attributes you mean the names or second signal notions, we know the
Essence of Letters, Names, Sentences; but by them ut per signa we know the
things themselves, but scientia abstractiva non intuitiva. But this is true
knowledge of the Essence signified. If by the Attributes you mean any Accidents
signified by those Names, those are not essential Attributes. But if you mean
the Essence signified you say and unsay. I am past doubt that we know the
Essences of the immediate Objects of Sense, and also of our own Intellectual
Acts. But how? There is scientia adaequata and inadaequata: I am past doubt
that nihil scitur scientia adaequata, (but only inadaequata: And so stricte,
Res ipsa non scitur quia tot a ejus Essentia non scitur; but aliquid rerum
scitur; and this is true of the Essence itself. All our knowledge is partial
and imperfect, a half Science, but it reaches Essences.

Ad SECT. VIII.
1. WHereas I think that only Usage must expound the difference between the
sense of Substance and Matter, you deny it not, but still missuppose that use
takes Matter but in one sense, and never applies it to spiritual Substance.
All this de nomine is to little purpose, but I will recite some words of your
own: Ench. Metaph. c. 2. p. 8, 9, 10. Essentia quae nihil aliud est quam
materia and forma simul sumptae -- Duo principia illa Entis interna and
incomplexa quatenus ens est, esse Materiam and formam Logicam -- Et
uniuscujusque rei quatenus ens est Essentia consistit ex Amplitudine and
Differentia quae amplitudinem ab amplitudine discriminat. Nam quod res
quaelibet aliquatenus Ampla sit, ex eo patet, tum quod id voci materiae valde
consonum sit quae tanquam principium Entis quatenus Ens est consideratur; tum
etiam quod nullam aliam ideam menti nostrae ea afferre potest praeter hanc
amplitudinem; Nec revera quicquam ab animis nostris concipi omni amplitudine
destitutum -- p. 10. Ex quibus omnibus tandem profluit praeclarum hoc
consectarium quod omne Ens quatenus Ens est -- Quantum, Quale -- Ens dicitut
respectu formae, legitimaeque conditionis materiae. -- Quod omne Ens sit
Quantum, ex illius Materia intelligitur -- Then you blame them qui imaginantur
quaedam Entia omni Materia carentia, etiam hac Logica, omnique ad materiam
relatione. -- p. 12. Omnis substantia ex eo quod Ens sit, Materiam quandam vel
Amplitudinem in se includat.

You see here how much more now you write against your self than me: I never
said that Spirits are material, nor that every Substance has some matter, as
you do.

2. But this is but Materia Logica. Ans. And those that I excuse do but call it
Materia metaphysica: And what is the meaning of Materia Logica? If Logic or
Grammar use second Notions, Names, and Signs, if they be not rebus aptata they
are false. What is it now but the aptitude of the Name that we speak of?

Yea, you that make Spatium to be God, calling it Locus internus, really
distinct from Bodies, yet say that you prove by Apodectical Arguments, that it
is tribus dimensionibus praeditum: And no doubt God is a Spirit, so that you
your self make a Spirit, even the Father of Spirits, to be Matter that has
Amplitude, Quantity, and the three dimensions; And yet write a Book against one
as asserting Spirits to be matter, who never asserted it, unless the word
Matter signify but Substance: For I ascribe no more to it than your Amplitude,
if so much. And yet I take the word Amplitude to signify no form at all, no
more than Quantity or Dimensions, or Indivisibility, or Penetrability, but to
be the Consistent Dispositio Substantiae*

And you once hit on that true notion of the Conditio materiae as a necessary
Conceptus Entis praeter ipsam materiam and formam, Metaphys. c. 2. p. 10.
[Verum Ens dicitur respectu formae, Legitimaeque Conditionis materiae: Neque
enim Galea ex tenui Papyro fabricata and concinnata vera galea est, sed potius
ludicrum illius imitamentum. And so elsewhere. Yet now you make the (...) to be
the Form.

(...) you make all Spirits to (...) some matter, You (...) to be but Anima
Mund^^ (...) it either as a (...) Substance, as we say (...) the Body, or else
as the forma (...) which is but Conceptus inadaequatu^. (...) Vitality is forma
animae. If in the first (...), you that say that operation of the Soul proves
locality, and ascribe Amplitude and Quantity to God, and the three dimensions,
do seem to make him Intellectually though not actually Divisible: That is, the
Intellect may conceive of God as partly in the Sun, and partly on Earth, etc.
or else you must ask pardon of your opposed Holenmerians as you name them, and
say as they, that God is totus in toto and totus in qualibet part.

If in the 2d sense, then you make the matter only to be Substance, and God to
be but the Form of that Substance (or as some dreams a Quality.) And then I
confess your Notions of Indiscerpible and Penetrable are very easily
intelligible, as agreeing to the mere Form, (Vitality, Active-power, Wisdom,
and Love.)

But how either of these notions will stand, either with Gods Existence ut
spatium infinitum, beyond all Matter, (which you sometime hint) or the
Infiniteness of Matter, but with intermixed Vacuities, which (page 44. Metaph.)
you seem to suppose to be communi naturae voce confirmatum) I know not: For
then the vacuum is Deus extra materiam, and so all Spirit is not in matter. I
think that all matter and Spirit is in God; and that he is much more than Anima
Mundi and omnium animarum.

Ad SECT. IX.
1. TO your Indiscerpibility I further say, I distinguish, 1. Between Actual
and Intellectual dividing; 2. Between what God can do, and what a Creature can
do, and 3. Between the Father of Spirits and created Spirits: And so I say, 1.
That if you had spoken of the mere Virtus Vitalis of a Spirit, I think it is a
contradiction to say that it is Discerpible or impenetrable; But seeing you
ascribe Amplitude, Quantity, and Dimensions, and Logical Materiality to the
Substantiality of Spirits, I see not but that you make them Intellectually
divisible; that is, that one may think of one part as here and another there.
2. And if so, though man cannot separate or divide them, if it be no
contradiction God can. Various Elements vary in divisibility: Earth is most
divisible: Water more hardly, the parts more inclining to the closest contact:
Air yet more hardly: And if as you think the Substance of Fire be material, no
doubt the Discerpibility is yet harder. And if God have made a Creture so
strongly inclined to the Unity of all the parts, that no other Creture can
separate them but God only, as if a Soul were such; it is plain that such a
Being need not fear a Dissolution by separation of parts: For its own Nature
has no tendency to it, but to the contrary, and no fellow Creature has power
to do it, and God will not do it. God makes all things apt for their use, and
uses things as he has made them, He made not Marble and Sand alike, nor uses
them alike. And if he should make a Spirit (e. g. an Anima hujus Vorticis,
Solis, Stellae, etc.) Such as he only can divide, but has no natural tendency
to division, but so much Indiscerpibility as no Creature can overcome, this
(besides Scripture) intimates Gods purpose about it.

3. But doubtless God and Creatures are both called Spirits equivocally or
analogically and not univocally: And it is the vilest Contradiction to say that
God is capable of Division: But whether it be so with created Spirits I know
not: They have passivity and God has none. It Is no great Wisdom to confess
ones Ignorance; But not to confess it is very great folly.

I am scarce of your mind, that a man may be in the like puzzle in another
World as he was in this, if he methodize not his Thoughts aright. But if it be
so, you are best think again.

2. For Penetrability you say, that one Spirit may have a greater Amplitude
than another, and that the parts, as I may so call them, of the same Spirit,
may in the Contraction of it self penetrate one another, so that there may be a
Reduplication of Essence through the whole Spirit. Ans. You tempt me to doubt
lest you talk so much against materiality of Spirits to hide the name of your
own Opinion, for that which others call materiality. If Spirits have parts
which may be extended and contracted, you will hardly so easily prove as say, that
God cannot divide them. And when in your Writings shall I find satisfaction,
into how much space one Spirit may be extended, and into how little it may be
contracted? And whether the whole Spirit of the World may be contracted into a
Nut-shell, or a Box, and the Spirit of a Flea may be extended to the Convexe of
all the World.

Ad SECT. X.
1. I Said, [We grant that Spirits have a Quantitas discreta; they are
numerous, individuate, and Formae se multiplicant: Generation is the work of
Spirits, and not of Bodies. And how can I tell, that that God that can make
many out of one, cannot make many into one, and unite and divide them as well
as Matter.] You say, [This passage is worth our attentive consideration. And 1.
You hence infer Amplitude and Dimension of Spirits. Answ. I meddle not for you,
nor against you: What Is this to me?

2. You ask what are the Formae quae se multiplicant? Ans. Sensitive and
Rational as well as Vegetative Spirits: You say, That must be Creation, or
Self-division. Ans. No; it is but Generation. And in Append. to the Reas. of
Christian Religion, I have partly showed that Generation is from God as the
Prime Cause, and yet the Parents Souls as a Second Cause, so that somewhat of a
sort of Creation and Traduction concur: which having further opened in Method.
Theol. I here pretermit.

3. But to my Question, Why God cannot make two of one, or one of two, you put
me off with this lean Answer, that we be not bound to puzzle our selves about
it. Ans. I think that Answer might serve to much of your Philosophical
Disputes. But if you will puzzle us with a naked Assertion of Indiscerpibility,
we must ask your proof of it, why God cannot divide and unite extended ample
quantitative Spirits? and if he can, how you know that he does not? or that
Indivisibility is the Form of a Spirit; when as if Water be divided into drops,
every drop is Water still.

Ad SECT. XI.
1. IN your further thoughts of this Sect. 11. you do first mis-suppose that my
Question intimates such a Divisibility of Souls, as of terrene Bodies into
Atoms, or a contrary Union. Terrene Atoms have the most imperfect Union. All
the Sands on the shore are not only divisible, but partly divided: I cannot
say, that all the parts of the Air are so; much less of the Fire. There is a
far closer Union of all the Substance of that Lucid Calefactive Element, than
of Earth, Water, or Air.

2. And here I must insert, that after long thoughts, I doubt not but all
things Created are truly one, and truly many: No one particle of the Universe
is independent on the rest: Parts they are; as every part of a Clock or Watch:
Every Leaf, and Grape, and Apple on the Tree has a certain individuate or
numerical Being, and yet every one is a part of the Tree: And every Herb and
Tree is a part of the Garden or Orchard, and that a part of England, etc. and
all a part of the Earth in which they grow; and no doubt the Earth is as
dependant on other parts of the Universe; and all on God. We dream of no total
separation of any Creature from the rest, much less Spirits.

But all the Illuminated Air, is more one flamma tenuis (though compound of Air
and Fire, and called by us Light) than the Sands are one Earth: And I doubt not
but that Fire, which is the Motive, Illuminative, and Calefactive Substance, in
all the Air, and elsewhere, is yet much less divisible than the Air, and Souls
than it: So that should God make many into one, they would be many Individuals
no more, but one again Divisible by God himself.

3. And you mis-suppose me to suppose that the whole Substance of all Humane
Souls, are but the same which once in Adam was but one, and from him divided.
Writing is a tedious work, because it so hardly causes men to understand us. I
suppose that a continued Creative Emanation from the Father of Spirits, gives
out all that Spiritual Substantiality which becomes new Souls; but that God
has ordained that the Generating Souls shall first receive this Divine
Emanation, and be organical in communicating it to the Semen* and so to new
organical Bodies; not that the Parents Souls only dispose the seminal recipient
Matter, but are themselves partly receptive, and then active in the
communication: It will be a defective similitude if I say, as a Burning-glass
by a receptive contraction of the Sun Beams, is instrumental in kindling
combustible matter: Rather as one Candle kindles a thousand, and yet the
substance of the Lucid and Calid Being, is communicated from the Ignite Air by
the means of that one Candle. (For that it is only Motus a Motu, I believe not.)

That you have drawn me thus effutire quae circa generationem, opinor, must
help you to be patient with my tediousness. And the rather, because to avoid
offending you, I will now pass by any further Answer to your Queries, Whether
Adam 's Soul was a Legion? which else was Adam 's Soul? How come they to be
Male and Female? was that number of Souls expanded or contracted? what a change
by Venery? what becomes of the many Souls in the Chaste? and the rest. I would
not by a particular Answer disgrace your Questions, or the jocular urgent
amplifications. No doubt Lights are too low Illustrations; but the highest
within the reach of sense. There was not a Legion of Candles in that which
lighted a Legion: nor need I tell you which of the lighted Candles was that
which lighted it; nor why lighting more consumed not the first; nor why it
kindled a Wax-Candle, and a Tallow-Candle, etc. I knew not till now that you
thought Souls differed in Sex, because the Persons do. But I will not strive
against your Conceit. The Soul of a Male and Female I better understand, than a
Male and Female Soul.

4. But you tell me, I must consider the Nature of Light thoroughly, and I shall
find it nothing, but a certain motion of a Medium, whose particles are so or so
qualified, some such way as Cartesianism drives at: But here is not Substances
but Motion communicated, etc.

Ans. I had as willingly have heard Cartesius tell me any Dream else that ever
came into his Brain: For this I greatly despise: And wonder not that any man is
ignorant of the nature of Spirits, who is so grossly ignorant of the igneous
analogical Nature as he was. I have said so much in diverse Books against it,
that I will not here in transitu any further touch so noble a Subject, than to
tell you that if you have studied the old Stoics, Platonists, etc. and
Patricius, Telesius, Campanella, Lud. le Grand, etc. as much as Cartesius, I
pity you for believing him. I doubt not the Substance of Fire has a Virtus
motiva, as well as illuminativa and catefactiva: And consequently that Light
and Heat are neither of them without Motion: But that they are a tripple
operation of the Vna-trina forma ignea, I am past doubt, (after as hard study
as you can advise me to.) But your terms [certain motion] and an (unnamed)
Medium, and particles so and so qualified, and some way, etc. are not notifying
terms to me.

That Lumen is ipse motus methinks a man of half Cartesius's Age should never
dream: That it is an effect of Motion many say, and think it so, as much as
Intellection is an effect of mental-Vitality, and Volition of Intellection. But
(to lay no stress on Sir Ken. Digby's Arguments) I make no doubt Ignis lucens
is as truly a Substance as a Spirit is. If Light be an Act or Quality it has
some immediate Agent or Subject: It does not exist separated from them. It is
in the Air but as the Recipient, as it is in the Oil of the Candle. The Air
shines not of itself (as the Night informs us.) It is therefore a Substance
that moves and illuminateth the Air: And if Carts will call that Substance
Gl^buli aetherei, or mat eria subtilis, I need not a game at such toyish words:
As Motus causes Sensation, and Intellection, which yet by mere motion would
never have been caused, without the conjunct Acts of the Sensitive and
Intellective Faculties as such; so is it of Light. Really when I read how far
you have escaped the delusions of Cartesianism, I am sorry that you yet stick
in so gross a part of it as this is; when he that knows no more than motion
in the Nature of Fire, which is the active Principle by which mental and
sensitive Nature operateth on Man, and Bruits, and Vegetables, and all the
passive Elements, (if it be not ipsa forma telluris) and all the visible
actions in this lower World are performed, what can that man's Philosophy be
worth? I therefore return your Counsel, study more thoroughly the Nature of
Ethereal Fire.

I find cause to imagine (by your Writings) that you are (as Mr. Glanvile) for
the pre-existence of Souls before Generation. And when do you think they were
all made? And what Bodies did all the Souls that have ever since been in the
World animate, when there was no human Body but Adam's and Eve's? Can you
conjecture what Animal's they were before they were men's? If you on the one
extreme (thinking that God made as many Souls, yea Animals the first week, as
ever are in Being to the end of the World) and the Averrhoists on the other
extreme (who think all Souls are but one individuated by receptive Matter, as
one Sun lights many Candles by a Burning-Glass, and all return as Candles put
out, into one again) were to dispute it out by mere Philosophy (without the
Experience of apparitions,) I know not which would get the better.

Ad SECT. XII, XIII.
THe 12. Section being all mere fiction needs no further Answer.

1. It seems you call that the [excited Spirit of Nature,] lighting every
Candle which other men call Fire: And so you will number Fire with Spirits.

2. Your 13. Section is strange. 1. You say Penetrability and indivisibility
are not accidents at all, no more than Rationale of a man. Ans. Anima
rationalis is forma hominis in the strict proper sense of Forma as an Active
Principle. Indivisible is a Negative, and it and Penetrable are the consistency
or mode of the Substance (or, as you call it, Matter:) As Amplitude, Quantity,
Spissitude, Dimensions, Locality are by you said to be, which are called Forms
in another sense, as the passive Elements differ from each other. But the
Principium Activum being the true and only Form of a Spirit, these modalities
and Consistencies are but conditio materiae, as you call it, or Substantiae as
I call it, as to the Form. Yet that Dispositio materiae is Essential I have
asserted.

3. And yet though all along I deny not your two words to be the conditio omnis
Substantiae spiritualis (joined with more) I still tell you that difficulties
make me not lay so much on them as you do. To add one more, As I told you
Quality is penetrable; as well as Spirit, e. g. heat, so yet though we commonly
say, it is indivisible, I wish you would solve this Objection: You prove the
locality of Spirits by their operation on this or that Body, (And doubtless you
may well prove that the Recipient body is in loco, and consequently the Agent
relatively.) But how shall we avoid the division of Qualities or Spirits ex
divisione materiae subjectivae. E. g. If a red hot Iron be penetrated by the
heat, yet if this Iron be cut in two, while hot, and each part set (per
potentiam superiorem) at 20 Miles distance. is not the heat divided with the
Iron? So if a man's Head be struck off, and (by such a quick mover as you think
moves the Earth) the Head in a moment were carried far off, while both parts
of the Body are yet alive, is not the Soul in each part? And if the Parts were
20 or 100 Miles a sunder, is it still one undivided Soul?

I can say somewhat to satisfy my self of this; but hardly without crossing
somewhat that you say.

4. Again when my chief dissent from you is more against your Confidence than
your Verity, yet you again tell us, that we know not bare Essences, but
Essential Attributes. I tell you I take not these to be notifying Expressions:
We know some Essences either intuitively (as Ockam says) or without signs,
immediately, e. g. what it is to see, taste, hear, smell, etc. and what to
understand and will. And we know other Essences Scientia abstractiva per signa.
And what good would the knowledge of Attributes else do us. Attributes in
notione prima are the thing itself: And to know an Essential Attribute, and to
know ipsam Essentiam Scientia inadaequata is all one. But an Essential
Attribute as notio secunda, is but signum per quod res significata cognoscenda
est: And this is knowing the Essence too, but scientia abstractiva: And all is
scientia valde imperfecta.

5. You say, that Neither the faculty nor Operation of Reasoning is the
Essence, and consequently not rationale.

Ans. Things of so great Moment should not not be obtruded on the World with a
bare ipse dico. The Act of Intellection or Reasoning is but the Essence in hoc
modo: but the Faculty is the Essential Form of the Soul. When you have confuted
the Scotists, and my peculiar Disput. in Meth. Theol. where I think I fully
disprove what you say, I may hear you further.

Ad SECT. XIV, XV, XVI.
1 HEre you would first know, How I know that the Vitalitas formalis belongs
not to Matter, unless I have an Antecedent notion of Spirit distinct from
Matter. Ans. 1. I consent not to Dr. Glisson, who thought all. Matter had a
Vital Form. But I undertake not to prove that God cannot endow any Matter with
a Vital Form. And forma denominat; where I find the Form of a Spirit I Will call
it Spirit.

2. Dr. Henry Moore in his Metaph. would ask me, how I know that a Helmet may
not be made of Paper; and he and I would agree that Paper is not materia
disposita, and yet we would not call it Galeae formam.

2. Your denial of Substantiality to be ex traduce, I answered before; telling
you that I think it is both ex emanatione creativa, and ex traduce, but not by
either alone; nor all Souls that ever will be, created in Indisce^pible
Individuality at once, and transmuted from Body to Body.

3. When I say, the Negative Immaterial notifieth not the form, you say that
Immaterial implies Positiveness. Ans. Therefore give us the positive notion,
or you give us no definition, nor any notifying word.

4. When you say, [You believe it is not easy to give an Example that materia
is put in lieu of substantia in that adequate sense.] What abundance of Authors
could I name you, yea, have I often named, besides Dr. Crakenthorp?

5. When you say, [All created Substance is both Active and Passive in some
sense or other.] It Is but to say, all words are ambiguous. So all created
Substance is matter in some sense or other. But one would have thought by your
often repeated denial of the self-moving Power of Matter, that you had thought
only Spirits have a self-moving power. And if so, will you yet say, that [this
is a distinction which distinguishes nothing?] I think thus, Natura activa as
meet a name as Spiritus. And that yet it has some Passivity, Damascene, yea,
and Augustine, de Spir. and Anim. c. 8. say that is because the Soul [respectu
incorporei Dei corporea est.] though in respect to our Bodies it is
Incorporeal: Other Fathers say much more, but I justify not their words.

6. Ad 15. Sect. I pretend not to have such an Idaea of Spiritual Substance, as
to denominate its consistence more fitly than by Purity, a word which you also
use, yet not denying your several Attributes.

7. As to your Doctrine of Atoms, I think no wise man dare say that God made
matter first in divided Atoms, and after set them together. But that God is
able to divide all matter into Atoms or indivisible parts I doubt not. The
Virtus Formalis of Spirits (and so some qualities) consist not of Atoms: But
how far God can divide the ample Substance of them, I only tell you, that I
know not; and to pretend to know it would be none of my Wisdom. Your Attributes
of amplitude, quantity, dimensions, imply that God made some Spirits bigger in
amplitude than others, as well as Virtutis sortioris. You think I suppose that
which you call the Spirit of the World, or Nature, bigger in amplitude than the
Spirit of a Wren.

8. Ad Sect. 16. You that say, Spirits have Extension and Spissitude, say that
spissitude signifies more substance in less compass. And these Phrases sound
liker to Corporeity than any that I have used: More substance and less
substance, spissitude by Contraction signify much change, and signify that
which the Intellect may distinguish into parts extra parts, though undivided
which would increase a man's doubt, whether God be not able to make a bigger
Spirit less, and a less bigger, and to separate the parts that are so
distinguishable in amplitude, and to make one into two, or two into one.

9. Whether Ether or Fire be material, methinks you should be as uncertain at
least as I. For you say Light is but motus, of somewhat exciting the Spirit of
the World. If it be the Spirit of the world that is the nearest cause of
Illumination by way of Natural activity, than that which you call the Spirit of
the World, I call Fire; and so we differ but de nomine. But I have often professed
my Ignorance whether Fire, and the Vegetative Nature be all one, (which I
incline to think) or whether Fire be a middle active Nature between the
Spiritual and the mere passive, by which Spirits work on Bodies. I think I
shall quickly know all this better than you do.

Ad SECT. XVII, XVIII, XIX.
1. OF your Doctrine of Atoms I spoke before: I have no mind to examine the
weight of your Reasons publicly.

2. I thought you that so extol the Atomists Doctrine, would have deigned to
read at least some of the Leaders of the various Sects: And my undervaluing
them is no excuse to you: for as you knew not my judgment, so I suppose you do
not much esteem it. That which I blame them for, is, that Lud. le Grand
over-magnifieth Fire, Telesius and Campanella over-magnifie Heat, Patricius
over-magnifieth Light, as Cartesius does Motion: But if the one Principle of
Motion, Light, and Heat, had been better handled as one, (as it is) it had been
sounder.

3. I need not your hydrostatical experiment of the rising Rundle to convince
me of the Motion of the matter of the World by a spiritual power: I doubt as
little of Spirits as of Bodies: But I understand not what greater wonder there
is in the rising of your Rundle, than in the rising of a piece of Timber from
the bottom of the Sea; or that the heaviest body should sink lowest if it have
way. Whether Water consist of oblong flexible Bodies, I am not much regardful
to know: Each of those oblong ones are divisible into Atoms.

4. But as to what hence you infer of Fire, I make no doubt but the Flames and
the red hot Iron are compouud things; and that the oily or sulphurous matter
moved and heated, is the Substance which we see. But I believe not that bare
motion as motion, were it never so swift, would cause this: But that these
effects are caused in the capable matter by the special action of a permeant
Substance in itself invisible as Substance, whose form is the Active Virtue of
moving, illuminating, and heating, and so is sensible only in this triple
Effect. And if you call this a Spirit I leave you to your Liberty.

Ad SECT. XX. XXI.
1. THE seven Propositions which you find in my words I own, save that the
fourth should be thus formed [That the Substantiae dispositio in fire distinct
from the form, bears some such Analogy to a Spirit (if it be not one, viz.
Vegetative) that may somewhat serve us to conceive of it thereby, and they that
from this Analogy, call it Ignis non formaliter sed eminenter, are excusable;
though it can be no strict proper name that comes not a forma.

. 2. Ad sect. 21. But you ask [Whether by Active power I mean a power always
exerting itself into act, so that this fire is always moving, enlightening, and
hot formaliter, else why should it be called Ignis?]

Ans. Answer your self, when you speak of a power of Sensation, and
Intellection and Volition in a Soul, do you mean a power always exerting
itself into sensation, Intellection and Volition, else why is it called a
Soul.] Ans. 2. I mean a power which has always an inclination to Act; and
has its own secret immanent act, and always acts ad extra, when it has fit
recipient objects. As to your often mentioned Confutation of Judge Hale, having
not read it, I am no Judge of your performance.

You Question what is this new igneous substance never heard of before] while
in all Ages it has been so famous a controversy; when not only the Stoics but
most old Philosophers gave to it so much more than meet; when Lud. Le Grand,
would make us believe that it was almost the only God of all the Heathen World,
under various names, and while so many new Sects have written so many volumes
of it, who would have believed that even Dr. Henry More had never heard of it
before?

To your question, Is it material or immaterial?] I still answer, material is a
word of larger or narrower sense, ambiguous: I know that it has the aforesaid
Actions: And by them I know that it has the Power so to act: and by both I
know it is a substance capable of such power and Acts: And I know that the
substance is invisible in se, but seen in its Effects. And my brain is too dark
to be confident of more: Let him that knows more boast of it.

3. You say [A material Fire distinct from the flame of a Candle, or
Fire-stick, or red hot Iron, there is no more ground for, than material Water
distinct from Wells, Rivers, Seas, etc.]

Ans. Do you not take Cartesius materia subtilis, if not globuli aetherei, to
be invisible, and not always appearing in Candles or Fire-sticks? If a Soul
may be a sensitive and intellective Substance, and yet not be always feeling
or understanding, why may there not be Fire where it shines not. It seems
you take not the illuminated Air to be Ignite, because it is not a Candle or
Fire-stick: I doubt not but Fire is a Substance permeant and existent in all
mixed Bodies on Earth; and in ipsa tellure; in Minerals; in your Blood it is the
prime part of that called the Spirits, which are nothing but the Igneous
Principle in a pure aerial Vehicle, and is the Organ of the Sensitive Faculties
of the Soul: And if the Soul carry away any Vehicle with it, it is like to be
some of this. I doubt you take the same thing to be the Spirit of the world,
while you seem to vilify it.

4. It Is strange when I tell you that I conceive of a Spirit but as Ignis
eminenter, and not formaliter, that you should still ask whether I take it not
for Ignis formaliter? I have often said, that I think Substances differ so
gradually, that the lower ^ath still some Analogy to the higher: And I still
say that Natura Mentalis, and sensitiva are not Ignis formaliter; But whether
the Natura Vegetativa be any other than ipse ignis I know not; but think it is
no other. Do you that better know its consistence call it Spirit or not as you
please.

Ad Sect. 22. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
1. YOU puzzle me more and more: Before you said, Fire is nothing but motion of
sulphurous particles, and only in Candles, Fire-sticks, hot Irons, etc. And
yet now [The vehicles of Angels are Igneous or ethereal.] Is an Angel only in
a Candle or hot Iron, etc. Is motion, yea motion of sulphurous particles their
vehicle? If they are Animals, and have bodies, as you think, they are such as
deserve a nobler Character.

2. I tell you still, the Greek Fathers I think, as well as I, called mental
and sensitive Spirits, Ignis, but Analogically, which you call Symbolically: If
that satisfy you what have you all this while disputed against? And if Fire be
the vehicle of Angels it is a substance. And when you se^ the Motion, Light,
and feel the heat, d^ you think, what ever is the Recipient moved Matter, that
the invisible Mover is not present and contiguous? It is that immediate mover
which I call Fire, and am fully satisfied does it not by Motion only, but the
exerting of its triple Virtue.

3. You confess, Sect. 24. the common use of the name of Fire applied to Souls
by the old Philosophers: and still you say it was but Symbolically: and did
they find no Reason to make Fire a Symbol rather than Earth or Water. When I
still tell you that it is only analogically that Souls may be called Fire, did
you fairly to pretend the contrary?

4. Yea Sect. 25. You are at it again, saying that [I seem to conceive the
Fathers to speak not symbolically, but properly.] Ans. where and when did I say
any such thing? will you tell the world that a Man holds that which he never
said, and has often written against, and write a Book against him on such a
supposition, and at last have nothing to say but Putarem? I use not the words
Symbolical and Proper; they are not precise enough for this subject: I said
more when I said that Souls and Angels are called fire, only eminenter and
analogice, but not formaliter: and forma dat nomen.

But you are offended that I say those Greek Fathers spoke tolerably and
informingly, and you say, It was mischievously, inducing men to believe the
Soul mortal. For Light may be blown out, and hot Iron cooled. Ans. Alas! What
dry Philosophy is this of Fire? Is any thing annihilated when the Candle goes
out? Was there not an invisible active principle moving your supposed
sulphurous particles, which was as immediate an Agent as your Soul is of
Sensation or Intellection: which remains the same? But indeed it is Air and
not Sulphur which is the first and nearest Recipient of the illuminating Act,
and is Conjux Ignis, I suppose you will say, The Spirit of the World does this.
Ans. Call it by what name you will, It is a pure active Substance, whose form
is the Virtus motiva, illuminativa and calefactiva; I think the same which when
it operateth on due seminal matter is Vegetative. But the World has Spiritual
Natures more noble than this; viz. sensitive and intellective.

5. Ad Sect. 26. You say against the Fathers, [When we enquire into the
distinct Nature of things we must bid adieu to Metaphors.] Ans. When I am
ignorant of my own Ignorance, I will hear you, I am far from dreaming that I
have one formal Conception of God, but only Analogical: Only that of Ens is
disputed between the Thomists and Scotists, whether it be Univocal de Deo and
Creaturis. And here Analogical is but Metaphorical: And yet it is not nothing
to see as in a Glass and enigmatically. And when I can perceive that your two
hard words do not only signify more than negatively and modally, or
qualitatively, but also give us an Idea of a Spirit which has nothing
Metaphorical, but all formal, I shall magnify them more than I do.

6. You say we must search out the adequate defi^ition.] Ans. That [adequate]
is a word too big for me: I dare say that you have not an adequate knowledge of
any thing in the World; not of one Fly or Flea or Pile of Grass: And can you
make adequate Definitions of Angels and all Spirits? Even who before twice told
us that we know not the intimate essence of things, but the Attributes? Indeed
I perceive your Attributes are such as will not notify Essences. I ask my own
experience whether Indiscerpible is a word that gives any Idea of the Essence,
save negative (that it cannot be torn into pieces) and modal? and I find no
other that it makes on my Mind.

The common note of Matter is, that it has parts extra parts: and I think
you thus make Spirits material. You make them parts of the compound Animal: and
you deny them to be toti in toto; and you give them locality, and amplitude,
and quantity. And if so, though they be indiscerpible, they have continued
parts intelligible; and that part of the Soul is not in one hand which is in
the other: and as parts Animalis they are actually separable from the matter.
The Spiritus Mundi you suppose to be a great continued amplitude or extended
Substance. And Atoms are in some Elements a closely continued Substance. You
seem to make all Substance to be Atoms, spiritual atoms and material atoms.
And I am not sure that God cannot make material atoms so continued a matter as
that no Creature can discerp them: is it any contradiction? and I doubt not but
Souls and Angels are so indivisible, as that their Nature tends to continued,
undivided Unity, and no Creature can divide them. But that God cannot do it I
cannot say.

Even of the Souls Mortality not only Arnobius, but many other Christian
Writers maintain, that it is mortal natura, but immortal ex dono; which is
unfitly spoken but well meant: that is, God has made their Natures such as
have no tendency in themselves to a Dissolution or Destruction, but not such as
he cannot dissolve or destroy; Yea I doubt not but without a continued Divine
Sustentation, all the World would in a moment be annihilated; Preservation
being a continued sort of Creation. Your owning nothing in Fire but what is
visible, I have spoke to.

Ad SECT. XXVIII.
1. THat Spirits are each Ens unum per se, so as to have no divided parts, or
such as tend to dissolution I doubt not: that they are each one by the
continued uniting Influx of that God who continues their Being, and so far per
aliud, is past doubt. You here make Metaphysical Monades absurd and ridiculous.
But is not that a Monad and Atome which is one and indivisible? though it be
not minimum: and if your Penetrability imply not that all the singular Spirits
can contract themselves* into a punctum; yea, that all the Spirit of the World
may be so contracted, I find it not yet sufficiently explained: For you never
tell us into how little parts only it may be contracted: And if you put any
limits I will suppose that one Spirit has contracted itself into the least
compass possible; and then I ask, cannot another and another Spirit be in the
same compass by their Penetration; If not, Spirits may have a contracted
Spissitude which is not penetrable, and Spirits cannot penetrate contracted
Spirits, but only dilated ones. If yea, then quaero whether all created Spirits
may not be so contracted.

And I should hope that your Definition of Spirit excludes not God; and yet
that you do not think that his Essence may be contracted and dilated. O that we
knew how little we know!

And as to your rejection of Metaphors I say, the very name Spiritus which you
use is a Metaphor: the first sense being our Breath a spirando, or the Air or
Wind: Martinius names no fewer than Fifteen senses of it, and Wisdom itself
said, 1 Cor. 15. There is a natural Body, and there is a spiritual Body.

2. You add, [If you will say, that if he should create such a Spirit with
metaphysical Amplitude, which though so large himself cannot divide, and sever
into parts, he would thereby puzzle his own Omnipotency, at this rate he shall
be allowed to create nothing, no not so much as matter, nor himself indeed to
be.

Ans. I had rather tremble at this than boldly answer it. Whatever is a
contradiction cannot be; and it is not for want of power that God cannot do it:
It is no work of power: Had you proved it a Contradiction for God, to make two
Spirits of one, or one of two, you had done that part in an easier way, which I
should not gainsay. But this Speech of yours is as if you said, [He denies God
to be the Creator, or to be God, who says that God is able to divide an Ample
spiritual Substance; that is, who says, that this is no contradiction, and
that God is Almighty: when our Creed says, that God is the Father Almighty
maker of Heaven and Earth. Cannot he alter or annihilate his own works: Before
he made the World, he could have made the ample Substance of the Spirit of the
World into many Spirits: And is he less able so to change it? If Spirits be
unified as the Bodies which they animate, cannot God make many Bodies into one?
Cannot he make many Stars into one? And then would that one have many unifying
Spirits, or but one? It Is a thing so high as required some show of proof, to
intimate that God cannot be God, if he be Almighty, and cannot conquer his own
Omnipotency.

3. Your words like an intended Reason are [For that cannot be God, from whom
all other things are not produced and created.] Ans. 1. Relatively (as a God to
us) it is true; though quoad existentiam Essentiae he was God before the
Creation. 2. But did you take this for any show of a proof? The sense implied
is this, [All things are not produced and created by God, if a spiritual ample
Substance be divisible by his Omnipotency that made it: Yea, then he is not
God. Negatur Consequentia.

Ad SECT. XXIX, XXX, XXXI.
1. YOU say your definition is more informing than defining a Spirit by Fire,
viz. [a Spirit is an immaterial substance endued with Life, and the faculty of
Motion] and virtually containing in it Penetrability, and Indiscerpibility]
Ans. 1. Your definition is common, good and true, allowing for its little
imperfections, and the common imperfection of man's knowledge of Spirits. The
same things need not be so very often repeated in answer to you: but briefly I
say; if by Immaterial you mean not [without substance] it signifies truth: but
a negation speaks not a formal essence. 2. Spirit is itself but a Metaphor.
3. Intrinsecal, endued with Life, tells us not that it is the form: Qualities
and proper accidents are intrinsecal. 4. The [faculty of motion] is either a
tautology included in life, or else if explicatory of life, it is defective; or
if it distribute Spirits into two sorts, vital and motive, it should not be in
the common definition. 5. No Man can understand that the negative [Immaterial]
by the terms, includes Penetrability and Indiscerpibility. 6 You do not say
here that they are the form, but elsewhere you do: and the form should be
expressed, and not only virtually contained as you speak. 7. They are not the
form, but the Dispositio vel conditio ad formam. 8. If such modalities or
consistence were the form, more such should be added which are left out. 9.
Penetrability and Indiscerpibility are two notions, and you should not give us
a compound form. 10. Yea you compound them with a quite different notion, [Life
and the faculty of motion:] which is truly the form, and is one thing, and not
compounded of notions so different, as Consistence and Virtue or Power.] 11.
You say Life intrinsecally issues from this immaterial substance: But the form
is concreated with it, and issues not from it.

You mean well: It is informing truth which you intend, and offer to the world.
And we are all greatly beholden to you for so industrious calling foolish
sensualists to the study and notion of invisible beings, without which what a
Carcass or nothing were the world. But all our conceptions here must have their
allowances, and we must confess their weakness.

And you might have informed us of all that you know, without fathering
opinions on others, which they never owned, and then nicknaming them from your
own fiction: As if we said that Souls are fire, and also took fire as you do
for Candles, and hot Irons, etc. only.

2. Now I that pretend not to a perfect definition repeat that which is the
nearest to it that I understand.

And first I am for agreeing on the sense of words before we use them in
definitions.

1. I take not the word [Spirit] to be of univocal signification here, but so
analogical as to be equivocal. God and Creatures are not univocally called
[Spirits.] 2. I know not (and I think no other) that all Created Spirits in the
universe are so far of one substantial consistence as that the word [Spirit]
univocally fits them all, as a Genus among the 15 senses of the word before
said mentioned by Martinius; when we confine it to one, men are apt to boggle
at the ambiguity: yet when we have defined it, the name is to be used.

3. Materia is as ambiguous as Spiritus; and is often used for Res or Substantia,
which is fundamental to modes and qualities and active forms: and often for
substance of such a consistence as is sensible (to the highest senses) and as a
mind in the flesh can have an Idea of in its consistence; and if you will, such
as you call Impenetrable and Discerpible.

4. The word [substance] itself, if used only to signify, either Quoddity and
not Quiddity; (as Ens for Quod est, and not Quid est, and subsistit for aliquid
subsistit; not telling what) or relatively only for Quod substat accidentibus;
or negatively for Quod non est accidens; sed aliquid subsistens in se, and
include not the notion of Res fundamentalis, is not fit here to be used as a
Genus; but in this sense it is.

5. Forma being often taken for substantiae figura, and often for the contexture of
corporeal parts making it receptive of Motion, and often for the union of the
moving and the moved parts, and often for the moving principle in a compound, and
often for the Motive or Active Virtue in a simple substance, but ever strictly
for the specific constitutive cause, per quam res est id quod est; I take it
to be but improperly and equivocally applied to the mere Receptive consistence
presupposed to the form.

These things supposed. I presume not to give a definition of God, but such a
description as we can reach.

Supposing the word [Nature] to signify in general [Quoddity and Quiddity] I
first distinguish [Nature] into Active and Passive: By Active I mean that
Nature which has a formal Power, Virtue, and Inclination to Activity. By
Passive I mean that Nature which having no such Active form, is formed to
receive the Influx of the Active.

I refuse not to call the first Spirit: but because they so greatly differ, I
choose rather the common name of Active Nature; being not metaphorical.

2. I suppose there is no such thing as Spirit (or Active Nature) which is not
some species of Spirit: Therefore I give no definition of [Spirit] or Active
NaNature in general, for where there is no form and no species there is no
proper definition. And all Spirit being actually Mental, Sensitive or
Vegetative, and every thing having but one univocal form, I name no form but of
each species, but as in compounds, so in simples we mentally distinguish the
materia (vel substantia) Dispositio and forma.

Therefore defining only the species, I define, Naturam Mentalem to be
[substantia Purissima Virtuosissima, Virtute scilicet Formali Vitaliter-Activa,
Intellectiva, Volitiva (una-trina:) I define Naturam Animalem seu sensitivam,
to be [substantia Purior Virtuosior, scilicet, virtute Vitali-Activa sensitiva,
Perceptiva-sensitiva, Appetitiva-sensitiva.

I have told you often enough why I say Purissima, including as much of your
[Immaterial, Penetrable, Indiscerpible] and more, as is really the substantiae
dispositio; and if you will call it as some do forma dispositiva, I quarrel
not: But I use [Purissima] 1. to avoid many words, and 2. To avoid pretending
to more distinct conceptions of spiritual consistencies than I find any idea of
in my mind.

I use but the Comparative degree of [Purior and Virtuosior] to sensitives, not
being sure that there is not a gradual difference in both consistency and
virtue in these species of Spirits.

I define the Vegetative Nature, supposing it to be ipse Ignis, to be
[substantia Pura, Virtu^sa, scilicet Virtute formali Activa, Illuminativa,
Calefactiva; by which prime operations it causes Vegetation, and thereby in
plants, Discretionem, Attractionem, Digestionem, etc. by an Analagous
perception, appetite and motion. But these actions belong to compounds; And I
still profess my self in this also uncertain, whether Natura Vegetativa and
Ignea be all one: or whether Ignis be Natura organica by which the three
superior operate on the Passive. But I incline most to think that they are all
one; when I see what a Glorious Fire the Sun is, and what operation it has on
Earth, and how unlikely it is that so glorious a substance, should not have as
noble a formal Nature as a plant. And I take all the superior Virtues to be the
inferior, eminenter, and the inferior to have analogy to the superior.

Your frequent repetitions draw me to this repetition. If we agree in the
definitions, I will not contend about any name.

And I confess if you could prove that Indivisibility is proper to any species,
then it would be a contradiction for it to be that species, and yet to be
divisible, and so it would be no act of Omnipotency to do it. But as in
Materials, so as far as I can conceive in Spirituals, to make two into one is
no change of the Nature of the things, nor to make one into two. This belongs
to Individuation, and not to specification.

Who can doubt but God being all in all things, he is as intimate to us as our
Souls to our bodies, and more: And tho the Schools commonly say, that God has
no Accidents, pardon my dissent who doubt not he has the accidents of
Relations, and dare not say that all the world is not Dei Accidens, while in
him we live, and move, and have our being: for I will not, and I do not think
that it is Pars Dei, as if he were but Anima mundi, and yet I will not say that
the world has no entity or substance; nor yet that the entity of God and the
world, is more than the entity (or substance) of God alone; for to be Minor or
Pars is below God. But Accidents though no parts are substantiae accidentia.
And though I think the Friar (Benedictus de Benedictis) in Regula Perfectionis
speaks fanatically when he takes it to be perfection to suppose we see and
know no being but God; yet we must know nothing quite separate from God, and
that has not some dependent union with him. And yet while all things are in
God, and so inseparable from him that nothing but annihilation can totally
separate them, yet they are multitudes in themselves, and wicked Men and Devils
are separated from the influx of his Grace and Glory. And the human nature of
Christ has some nearer union with God than other Creatures have. And so I
doubt not but every Creature is so united to the universe, that nothing but
annihilation can totally separate it from the rest; and yet this is consistent
with individuation. I remember when I told him whom you so often mention of
Augustines words de Anima, in which he seems to favor the saying that [All
Souls are one, and yet many] rather than that [All Souls are one and not many]
or [many and not one] he seemed much taken with it: all which I mention to
infer that there is a separability (from God and the universe) which is no way
possible but by annihilation; and in compounds some separation of parts will
change the species; and if it were proveable which Aquinas holds, that no two
Angels are not of distinct Species, then every alteration of the individual
might alter the Species; but yet it would be a Spirit.

And I have long thought that so much selfishness as is our sin or
imperfection, is a potent cause of making all men more regardful of
Individuation and fearful of losing it by Union of Spirits than they ought; and
that holy Souls will be nearlier one with Christ and one another than we can
here desire or conceive; and yet Individuation secundum quid at least, shall be
continued. But yet I say, while there is numerus animarum, and it is uncertain
whether also each Orb has not one, and you plead for Amplitude, and Minority,
(Quantity) and the Bodies animated may as vastly differ as a Flea, or a Wren,
or a Pigmy, and the Sun, it is quite above my reach to know that a change of
Individuals, by making one many, or many one, is a contradiction, and so
impossible.

And as to Penetrability I repeat, that seeing by Penetration I suppose you
mean not piercing inter parts, but possessing the same place with other
things, and contraction of itself, into less amplitude, as I know not how a
thing that has no parts (and that extra parts) can contract itself into less
space, (which is to contract parts that are no parts) so I cannot see but such
Contraction and Colocality must needs be limited, so as that all the World
cannot be deserted and mortified by all Spirits Contraction to one narrow
space; nor yet that at once every Spirit is every where; and when the
Contraction and Colocality is come to the narrowest possible, in that state
Spirits must needs be further impenetrable, that is, no more can be in that
space.

So that while I am past doubt, that God has made Spirits of no kind of parts
but what do naturally abhor separation, and so are inseparable, unless God will
separate them, and so there is no fear of altering the Individuation much less
the species of Souls; I there stop and will put no more into my definitions of
Souls or Spirits than I know, at least as strongly probable, much less by
laying the formal Essence on a Composition of hard and doubtful words, tempt
all to believe tkat the very Being of Spirits is as doubtful as those words are.

Ad SECT. XXIII.
1. YOu said, [That a Spirit is Ens, ideoque verum, and that True implies a
right matter and form duly conjoined.] To which I said, [Do you not here make
Spirits material?] You answered, [I do not make Spirits material in any sense
derogatory to their Nature and Perfections.]

Reply. Nor do those that I excused: so then after all these Sections, you make
Spirits consist of Matter and form, in a sense agreeable to their nature and
perfection: And so de nomine, you come nearer those that you accuse than I do.

2. But you say, [That Matter and Form I there speak of, is a Matter and Form
that belongs to Ens quatenus Ens -- in a most general notion prescinded from
all kinds of Being whatever, and therefore belongs to Beings Immaterial.]

Ans. If you may say Quidvis de quovis, lay not too great stress on words. Ens
quatenus Ens has no Form, nor proper Matter. Ens is that terminus incomplexus,
to whose Conception all other are resolved. Therefore every other conception
incomplex or complex, must add somewhat to it. It can be no Genu^, or Species:
If it have any kind of Matter and Form it is more than Ens quatenus Ens: And
sure that which is [prescinded from all particular kinds of Being, is
prescinded from Material and Immaterial, unless the word [particular] be a
Cothurnus. To say that Ens has Matter and Form, is to say more than Ens, a
most general notion, as you call it.

But if Ens as the most general notion, have Matter and Form, then so has
Spirits, and every subordinate; for the general is in them all.

3. But you say, [It's only materia and forma logica.] To which I answered
before. That Is but to say, It is notio secunda, which if it be not fitted ad
primam, or ut signum ad rem significandam, it is false. And we suppose you to
mean to speak truly and aptly. If you should mean neither materia ex qua, nor
in qua, but circa quam, so Form may be Matter.

4. You say, [Nor is the Form adjoined in a Physical Sense to the Matter,
unless where the Form and Matter are Substances really distinct.

Ans. 1. I believe not this to be true: If it be, then only Compounds have Form
and Matter; but I think Simples have Matter and Form, that are not two
Substances but one. As I have often said, Dr. Glisson after others most subtly
labors to prove it of every simple Substance, that its Matter and Form are
not compounding parts, but Conceptus inadaequati: If the Intellect compound and
divide its own Conceptions that makes not a real Composition of two Substances
in the objects, but as the Scotists call it, of two Formalities, or Conceptus
objectivi: which if you will call a Logical Composition or Intellectual, if you
explain it, the matter is small. But besides that Earth, Water and Air have
their Matter and differencing Forms, which are not two Substances, so has Fire
in a more noble sense if it be material: And by your Application of the word
[Physical] you seem to extend it to Spirits: And if so, I am past doubt that
the Substance and Form of Spirits are not two distinct conjoined Substances.

Too many Logicians have hitherto taken the Potentia naturalis, or Faculties of
the Soul to be accidents in the Predicament of Quality: Let them call them
Qualities if they please, but the Scotists have fully proved them to be no
Accidents, but the formal Essence of the Soul, (and I have answered all
Zabarell's Arguments ubi sup.) And this Virtus formalis, (vel facultas, vel
potentia activa) is not a Substance joined to a Substance, but the form of a
simple Substance. But I perceive by your next words that you approve all this,
and speak only of mental Composition as to Spirits. And I say that the Mind
should conceive, and the Tongue speak of things as they are, and not at once
deny Materiality to Spirits, and call them Logically material; or at least bear
with others that say but the same. If Logical Matter speak not Substantiality
at least, it is delusive.

Your Interminata amplitudo sounds so like Infinita, that I am not willing to
say that no Spirit has any Terminos Substantiae.

Ad SECT. XXXIII, XXXIV.
The Conclusion.
1. YOu say that I wrote not so curtly, but that I have sufficiently conveyed
my mind to you.] ans. I would have done so, had I dreamed of your Printing it.
But that I did not, appears by your grand Mistake, as if I (...) asserted
that materiality of Spirits which is proper to Bodies.

. 2. As in all, our difference lies in a much smaller matter than you thought.
so in your great design of convincing the blinded Sadduces of this Age, and in
the truly pious Conclusion in your 34. Sect. I not only agree with you, but in
my own name, and many others, humbly tender you unfeigned Thanks.

3. And because I would not seem more distant from you than I am, I shall first
tell you, that on these Subjects your thoughts and mine have been so long
working to the same ends and much in the same way, that, 1655. your Book
against Atheism and my popular discourses of the unreasonableness of Infidelity
coming out together, we both used many of the same Histories of Apparitions,
Witches, etc. for Confirmation; and in that Book of yours, you have these
following words, which if they are not (as I think they are not) mischievous,
it is like mine of the same importance are not so, nor are more so proved by you
than your own.

Antid. Li. 1. p. 17. [The parts of a Spirit can be no more separated though
they be dilated, than you can cut off the Rays of the Sun by a pair of Scissars
made of pellucide Crystal.]

Appen. p. 304. [Suppose a point of Light, from which rays out a luminous Orb
according to the known Principles of Optiques: This Orb of Light does very much
resemble the Nature of a Spirit, which is diffused and extended, and yet
indivisible: For we will suppose in this Spirit the Center of Life to be
indivisible, and yet to diffuse itself by a kind of circumscribed Omnipotency,
as the point of Light is discernible in every point of the luminous Sphere. And
yet supposing that central lucid point indivisible, there is nothing divisible
in all that Sphere of Light. For it is ridiculous to think of any Engine or Art
whatsoever to separate the luminous Rays from the shining Center, and keep
them apart by themselves, as any man will acknowledge that does but consider
the thing we speak of. Now there is no difficulty to imagine such an Orb as
this, as Substance as well as a Quality. And indeed this Sphere of Light
itself, it not inhering in any Subject in the place it occupies, looks far
more like a Substance than any Accident. And what we fanry unadvisedly to befall
Light and Colors, that any point of them will thus ray orbicularly, is more
rationally to be admitted in spiritual Substances, whose central Essence
spreads out into a secondary Substance, as the luminous Rays are conceived to
shoot out from a lucid point. From whence we are enabled to return an Answer to
the greatest difficulty in the foregoing Objection, viz. That the conceived
parts in a Spirit have an inseparable dependence on the central Essence, from
which they flow, and in which they are radically contained; and therefore
though there be an extension of this whole substantial power, yet one part is
not separable or discerpible from another, but the entire Substance, as well
secondary as primary, or central, is indivisible. But let us again cast our
Eyes on this lucid point and radiant Orb we have made use of: It is manifest
that those Rays that are hindered from shooting out so far as they would, need
not lose their Virtue or Being, but only be reflected back toward their shining
Center; and the Obstacle being removed they may shoot out to their full length
again: so that there is no Generation of a new Ray. --

And p. 357. [When I speak of Indivisibility that imagination create not new
troubles to her self, I mean not such an Indivisibility as is fancied in a
Mathematical point, but as we conceive in a Sphere of Light made from one lucid
point or radiant Center. For that Sphere or Orb of Light, though it be in some
sense extended, yet it is truly indivisible, supposing the Center such. For
there is no means imaginable to discerpe or separate any one Ray of this Orb,
and keep it apart by itself disjoined from the Center.

Now a little to invert the Property of this luminous Orb, when we would apply
it to a Soul or Spirit: As there can be no alteration in the radiant Center,
but therewith it is necessarily in every part of the Orb, so there is also that
Unity and Indivisibility of the exterior parts, if I may so call them, of a
Spirit or Soul, with their inmost Center, that if any of them be affected, the
Center of Life is thereby also necessarily affected, and these exterior parts
of the Soul being affected by the parts of the Object with such Circumstances
as they are in, the inward Center receives all so circumstantiated, that it
has necessarily the entire and unconfused Images of things without, though
they be contrived into so small a compass, and are in the very Center of this
spiritual substance. This Symbolical Representation I used before, and I cannot
excogitate any thing that will better set off the nature of a Spirit, etc.]

Here is the same and more than I have said, unless you think Light here to be
no Fire; but take Light for a Substance, and Fire but for Motion: which if you
say, I am willing to believe you will recall.

And that a Spirit is in its Contraction impenetrable, let your words testify,
p. 312.

(...) I define thus: A Power in a Spirit of offering so near to a corporeal
Emanation from the Center of Life, that it will so perfectly fill the
Receptivity of Matter into which it has penetrated, that it is very difficult
or impossible for any other Spirit to possess the same, and of hereby becoming
so firmly and closely united to a Body, as both to actuate and be acted upon,
to affect and be affected thereby.

So here is a Spirit when it has filled a Body, that can no more be penetrated
by another Spirit or Body; and so in this contracted state is impenetrable. So
that this is but bringing diffused parts closer together, and then no other can
be in the same place. And is this the necessary Form of a Spirit?

But may not this extension and Indivisibili^y also be omitted as too hard,
without all the mischief mentioned by you, and a truer notifying Form found out?

Let us hear your self, p. 359. [To prevent all such Cavils we shall omit the
Spinosities of the Extension or Indivisibility of a Soul or Spirit, and
conclude briefly thus: That the manifold Contradictions and Repugnancies we
find in the nature of matter, to be able to either think or spontaneously to
move itself, do well assure us that these operations belong not to it, but to
some other substance: Wherefore we finding those operations in us, it is
manifest that we have in us an immaterial Being really distinct from the Body,
which we ordinarily call a Soul: The speculation of whose bare Essence, though
it may well puzzle us, yet those properties that we find incompetible to a
Body, do sufficiently inform us of the different Nature thereof: for it is
plain she is a Substance endued with the power of Cogitation, that is, of
perceiving and thinking of Objects, as also of penetrating and spontaneously
moving of a Body; which properties are as immediate to her as impenetrability
and separability of parts to the matter, and we are not to demand the cause of
the one any more than of the other.]

So here we have the true Form as sufficient notice.

And if voluntary Motion be proper to a Spirit, I think mere Fire (Solar or
Ethereal) is no Spirit; But if all self-moving Power be proper to a Spirit,
Fire is a Spirit. And from the Form will I denominate, while you often tell us,
that the Essence of Substance is unknown. (By Essence meaning somewhat else than
that which I can fully prove to be the Form.

To conclude, there are these different Opinions before us.

I. That the whole Entity or Conceptus realis of a Spirit is Virtus vitalis,
and is mera sorma, or rather simplex actus Entitativus; and that substantia is
added not as a partial real Conceptus, but as respective, to notify that this
Virtus vitalis is no Accident, but a thing that may subsist of itself. Some
hold this true only of God, and some of all Spirits: If this be true, your
notions of Penetrability and Indivisibility are most easily defended.

II. That Spirits have two inadequate, real Conceptus, and that Substantia is
the fundamental as truly as materia is in mere Bodies, and an incomprehensible
purity of Substance (or that it is Immaterial, not having parts extra parts
with the trine dimension) is Substantiae dispositio; (yet that this has
degrees as the Forms have, all Spirits not being of equal Purity;) And that
Virtus vitalis is the partial Conceptus, viz. Formalis. And this I incline to,
as to created Spirits.

III. That the Conceptus formalis of Spirit is this Virtus vitalis, vel motiva,
perceptiva, appetitiva, but that all Matter is essentially informed by that
Vitality, and so Matter and Vitality are the inadequate Conceptus of every
Substance, and that not by Composition, but as of one simple thing. And this is
Dr. Glisson's and some others.

IV. That a Spirit is both a real Substance, (as the fundamental Conceptus) and
informed both by Immateriality, Penetrability, and Indiscerpibility, and also
by a vital and moving Power: But that it existeth only in Bodies or Matter, and
so always makes up a Compound of two Substances, (saving that God is infinite,
beyond all Matter.) And that all such Spirits were at first made together
indivisible Individuals, both that of the least Creature and of the greatest,
but changed from Body to Body, and so are parts of Animals. This I suppose is
your Opinion.

Our chief difference is, that I profess to be ignorant of the Consistency and
Incorporation which you talk of, and must be so: Though I am assured of the
Substantiality and Form, which satisfies me; for Christ knows all the rest
for me.

FINIS.
OF THE IMMORTALITY OF Man's Soul, And the Nature of it, and other Spirits.

Two Discourses:

One in a Letter to an unknown Doubter; The other in a Reply to Dr* Henry
Moore's Animadversions on a private Letter to him; which he published in his
Second Edition of Mr Joseph Glanvil's Sadducismus Triumphatus, or History of
Apparitions

By RICHARD BAXTER.

LONDON: Printed for B. Simons, at the Three Golden Cocks at the West End of
St. Paul's. 1682.

The PREFACE.
. 1. THE Author of the Letter which I answer, being wholly unknown to me, and
making me no return of his sense of my Answer, I suppose it can be no wrong to
him that I publish it. I have formerly thought, that it is safer to keep such
Objections, and false reasonings, from men's notice, than publicly to confute
them. But now in London they are so commonly known, and published in open
Discourse and Writing, that whether silencing them be desirable or not, it is
become impossible. And tho I have said so much more, especially in two Books
(The Reasons of the Christian Religion, and the Unreasonableness of Infidelity)
as may make this needless to them that read those; yet most Infidels and
Sadduces being so self conceited, and fastidious, as to disdain, or cast by all
that will cost them long reading and consideration, it may be this short Letter
may so far prevail against their sloth, as to invite them to read more. I would
true Christianity were as common as the profession of it: There would then be
fewer that need such Discourses. But alas! how numerous are th^se Christians
that are no Christians, no more than a Carcass or a Picture is a man; yea,
worse Christians, who hate Christianity, whose Godfathers and Godmothers (not
Parents, but Neighbors) did promise and vow three things in their Names. 1.
That they should renounce the Devil. and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities
of this wicked World, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh. 2. That they
should believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith. 3. That they should
keep Gods holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of
their lives. Yea, before they could speak, the mouth of these Godfathers
speaking for them, did not only promise, that they should believe, but profess
in the Infants name, That even then they did steadfastly believe the Articles of
the Christian Faith. The Infant is said to make both the Promise and Profession
by these Godfathers; who also undertake to provide, that they shall [learn all
things which a Christian ought to know and believe to his Souls health, and
shall be virtuously brought up, to lead a godly and a Christian life]. Whether
these Godfathers ever intend to perform this, or the Parents use to expect it
of them, I need not tell you: But how little most of the baptized perform of
it, is too notorious. And what wonder is it, if we have Christians that in
Satan's Image fight against Christ, even PERJURED, MALIGNANT, PERSECUTING
Christians, haters of those that seriously practice the baptismal Vow, when
they are PERJURED and Perfidious Violaters of it themselves, as to the
prevalent bent of heart and life.

These Hypocrite nominal Ceremony Christians, become the great hinderance of
the cure of Infidelity in the world. It is the SPIRIT by its supernatural
Works, which is the great Witness of Christ, and the infallible proof of
supernatural Revelation. These witnessing works of the Spirit, are these five:
1. His Antecedent Prophecies. 2. His inherent Divine impress on the Person,
Works, and Gospel of Christ. 3. His concomitant Testimony in Christ's
uncontrolled numerous Miracles, Resurrection and Ascension. 4. His subsequent
Testimony in the numerous uncontrolled Miracles of the Apostles, and
supernatural gifts to the Christians of that Age. But tho the History of these
be as infallibly delivered to us, as any in the world; (...) the distance
hinders the belief of some, who have not this history well opened to them. 5.
Therefore God has continued to the end of the world a more excellent Testimony
than miracles (thought not so apt to work on sense) even the special
regenerating sanctifying work of the Spirit of Christ, on the souls of all
sincere Believers: The raising of Souls to a Divine and Heavenly Disposition,
and Conversation, to live to God and the common good, in the comfortable hopes
of an everlasting heavenly glory, as purchased and given by our Redeemer,
conquering the allurements of the world and flesh, the temptations of Satan,
and all the flatteries and frowns of the ungodly; This is a work that none but
God can do and will do, which bears his Image and superscription.

But now these Hypocrites, obscure it to themselves and other unbelievers, and
tempt men to say, Are not Christans as bad as Heathens? and Mahometans. Are
they not as fleshly, and worldly, and false, and perjured, and malicious, and
hurtful, and pernicious to others and themselves? But I answer, No, They are
not: These are no more Christians, than Images are men: They are the Enemies of
Christians, that under Christ's banner, and in his livery and name, do the most
perfideously hate him and fight against him: Who will tell them, Inasmuch as
you did it to the least of these, you did it to me. They betray him for money,
as Judas, by Hail-master and a Kiss. I challenge any Infidel to find me One
that seriously believes the Gospel of Christ, as perceiving the certain
Evidence of its truth, who is not a person of a holy and obedient heavenly
life: How can a man sincerely believe that God sent his Son from Heaven in
flesh, to Redeem man, and to bring us to Glory, and that he sealed his Doctrine
by all his miracles, resurrection and ascensi^n, and the Holy Ghost, and that
he is our Head in Heaven, with whom we shall live in joy for ever; and is the
Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, I say: How can a man
believe this seriously, and not esteem, and choose and seek it, before all the
shadows and vanity to this world. It is not Christians, but false hypocrites,
whose lives represent Christianity, blasphemously as no better than Heathenism
or Mahometanism; It is but for worldly Interest, and Reputation, or because it
is the Religion of the King, Country, or Ancestors, that they take up so much
as the name and badg of Christianity. And will you judge of our Religion by its
enemies? Do you not see in their drunkenness, sensuality, covetousness,
ungodliness, how unlike their lives are to the baptismal Vow; and that they
hate, and seek to destroy them that are serious in keeping that Vow, and living
as Christians?

2. And as I publish this for the use of unbelievers, so I must let the Reader
know, that it is become one of the usual tricks of the Popish deceivers, to put
on the Vizor of an Infidel, and to dispute about the immortality of the Soul,
and the greatest difficulties of Religion: And it is to puzzle men, and
convince them, that by Reasoning they can never attain to satisfaction in these
matters; And then to infer, [You have no way left, but to believe the Church;
and we are that Church. If you leave that easy quiet way, you will never come
to any certainty]. Why do they not try the same triek about all the
difficulties in Philosophy, Astronomy, Physic, History, etc? For every
S^^ence, and Art, has its difficulties. But are not all these as gaeat
difficulties to the Pope and his Prelates, as they are to us? But God has
given us a more clear and satisfactory way of the solution of such Doubts.

. 3. I must further give notice to the Reader, That it was the publishing of
Dr. H. More's answer to a Letter of mine, which occasioned the publishing of
this. When I was put on the one, I thought it not unprofitable to premise the
other, as being of much greater use. It seemed good to the worthy Dr. to desire
my thoughts of his Description of a Spirit, which he laid down in the first
Edition of Mr. Glanvile of Apparitions: which I gave him in a hasty Letter,
which he thought meet* without my knowledge, to publish an answer to, in his
second Edition of Mr. Glanvile. Our difference is scarce worth the Readers
notice. And our velitation is only friendly, and Philosophical. But yet it may
possibly be useful to some at least to excite them to a more profitable search
than I have made. And it explaineth some passages in my Methodus Theologiae.

But I much more commend to the reading of the Sadduces and Infidels, the
Histories themselves of Apparitiins, and Watchcrafts, which Mr. Glanvile and
Dr. More have there delivered; many of them, at least, with undeniable evidence
and proof. To which, if he will but add the Devil of Mascon and Bodin, and
Remigius of Witches; he will scarce be able to deny belief to the existence and
Individuation of Spirits, and the future life of separated Souls.

SIR,
I Have Reason to judge you no Stranger to such Addresses as these: and
therefore have adventured more boldly to apply my self to you. Others would, it
may be, rigedly censure this Attempt; but your more Christian Temper will
induce you, I hope, to judge more charitably, did you but understand with what
reluctance I undertook this task.

I have had many Disputes with my self, whether or no I should stifle these
Doubts, or seek Satisfaction. Shame to own such Principles bid me do the first;
but the weight of the Concern obliged me to the last. For I could not with any
cheerfulness, or with that vigor I thought did become me, pursue those unseen
Substances, those Objects of Faith Religion holds forth, except I did really
believe their existence, and my own capacity of enjoining them.

I thought at first to satisfy my self in the certainty of the things I did
believe; to confirm and establish my Faith by these Studies, that I might be
able to render a Reason of the hope that is in me: but instead of building up,
I am shaken; and instead of a clearer evidence, I am environed with
uncertainties.

Unhappy that I am! I had better have taken all upon Trust, could I so have
satisfied my Reason, than thus to have involved my self in an endless Study.
For such I am afraid it will prove without help: for that I may not in this
Concern rest without satisfaction; and yet the more I consider, and weigh
things, the more are my doubts multiplied. I call them only doubts, not to
palliate any opinions; for I have not yet espoused any; but because they have
not yet attained so much maturity or strength, as to take me off those things,
my doubts being satisfied, I should conclude of indispensable necessity; they
are but yet in the Womb: assist to make them Abortives.

I have not been wanting to my self, but in the use of all means to me known,
have sought satisfaction, both by Prayer, Reading, and Meditation. I have
weighed and consulted things according to my Capacity. I have been as faithful
to my self in all my reasonings, as I could, and void of prejudice, have passed
impartial Censures on the things in debate, so far as that light I have would
enable me; and what to do more, I know not, except this course I now take,
prove effectual, you inclining to assist me, that I know have studied these
things.

My request to you therefore is, If your more public Studies will permit you,
That you would condescend to satisfy me in the Particulars I shall mention. I
assure you, I have no other design, but to know the Truth: which in things of
such moment, certainly cannot be difficult, tho to my unfurnished Head they
have proved so: I hope my shaking may prove my establishment.

That I may therefore put you to as little trouble as I can, I will first tell
you what I do believe, and then what I stick at.

First, therefore, I do really believe, and am very well satisfied, That there
is a God, or a first Cause that has created all things, and given to every
thing its Being. For I am not acquainted with any independent Being. I know not
any thing that is able to subsist without the Contribution of its
Fellow Creatures. I am conscio^s to my self, when sickness invades me, and
death summons my Compound to a dissolution, I can do nothing to the
preservation of the Being I enjoy. And if I cannot preserve my self as I am,
much less could I make my self what I am: For when I was nothing, I could do
nothing. And Experience and Sense tells me, As it is with me, so it is with
others; as there is none can preserve their Beings, so there is none could
acquire to themselves the Being they have; and if none, then not the first man.
And indeed that was it I enquired after, from whence every species had at first
their Beings; the way, how, and means by which they are continued. I know not
any Cause of the Being of any thing, of which again I may not enquire the
Cause: and so from Cause to Cause, till through a multitude of Causes, I
necessarily arrive at the first Cause of all Causes, a Being wholly uncaused,
and without Cause, except what it was unto it self.

My next Enquiry was into my self; and my next business, to find what Concern I
have with my Creator: which I knew no better way to attain, than by searching
the bounds of humane Capacity. For I concluded it reasonable to judge those
seize I was capable of in my Creation, I was designed for. Now if man is
nothing more than what is visible, or may be made so by Anatomy or Pharmacy, he
is no Subject capable of enjoying, or loving God, nor consequently of a life of
Retrobution.

In this Enquiry I found Man consisted of something visible and invisible; the
Body which is visible, and something else that invisibly actuates the same. For
I have seen the Body, the visible part of man; when the invisible, either
through indisposition of its Orgains, or its self, or being expelled its
Mansion, has ceased to act (I speak as one in doubt): the Body has been left
to outward appearance the same; it was yet really void of Sense, and wholly
debilitated of all power to act: But then what this invisible is, what to
conclude of it, I know not: Here I am at a stand, and in a Labyrinth, without a
Clue: For I find no help any where. Many have, I acknowledge, defended the Souls
Immortality; but none have proved the existence of such a Being, and a life of
Retrobution, Here (...) wha^ wan^ (...) the (...) Cop^
and that copiously enough; but none have proved a Subject capable of it. I
know all our Superior Faculties and Actings, are usually attributed to the
Soul; but what it is in man they call so, they tell us not. To say it is that
by which I reason, or that now dictates to me what I write, is not
satisfactory: For I look for a definition, and such an one, as may not to ought
else be appropriated. Is it therefore a real Being, really different from the
Body, and able to be without it? or is it not? If not, whatever it be, I matter
not. If it be, is it a pure Spirit, or merely material? If merely material, and
different only from the Body gradually, and in some few degrees of subtilty, it
is then a question, whether or not that we call Death, and suppose a separation
of the Compound, be not rather a Concentration of this active Principle in its
own Body, which through some indisposition of the whole, or stoppage in its
Orgains, through gross Corporeity, has suffocated its actings. If it be a pure
Spirit, I would then know, what is meant by Spirit? and whether or no all
things invisible, and imperceptable to Sense, are accounted such? If so, it is
then only a term to distinguish between things evident to Sense, and things
not. If otherwise, how shall I distinguish between the highest degree of
material, and the lowest degree of spiritual Beings, or know how they are
diversified, or be certain the Being of the Soul is rightly appropriated. For
to me, an immaterial and spiritual Being, seems but a kind of Hocus, and a
Substance stripped of all materiality, a substantial nothing. For all things at
first had their Origin from the deep dark Waters: witness Moses Philosophy, in
the 1st of Genesis, on which the Spirit of God is said to move. I am far from
believing those Waters such as that Element we daily make use of; but that they
were material, appears by those multitudes of material Productions they brought
forth. And if those Waters were material, such were all things they d^d
produce, among which was Man, of whom the Text asserts nothing more plain; for
it says, God created man of the dust of the earth; the most gross part and
sedement of those Waters, after all things else were created. Now the Body only
is not Man; for Man is a living Creature: it is that therefore by which the
Body lives and acts, that constitutes the Man. Now the Apostle mentions Man
to consist of Body, Soul and Spirit. My Argument then is this, God created man
of the dust of the earth.

But Man consists of a Body Soul and Spirit:

Therefore Body, Soul and Spirit are made of the dust, etc. and are material.

The major and minor are undeniable; and therefore the conclusion. Yet do I not
therefore conclude its annihilation: for I know all matter is eternal; but am
rather persuaded of its concentration (as before) in its own body.

But of its real Being, purely spiritual, and stripped of all materiality, really
distinct from its body, I doubt.

Because that by several accidents happening to the body, the man is
incapacited from acting rationally, as before; as in those we call Idiots,
there is not in some of them so much a sign of a reasonable Soul, as to
distinguish them from Bruits: Whereas were the Soul such as represented, it
would rather cease to act, than act at a rate below it self. Did it know its
Excellencies, such as we make them, it would as soon desert its being, as
degrade its self by such brutish acts: It is not any defect in its Organs
could rob the Soul of its Reason, its Essential Faculty. Tho the Workman breaks
his Tools, his hands do not lose their skill, but cease to act, rather than
to do ought irregularly: so likewise would the Soul then act contrary to its
own nature.

Secondly, Because all the species both of the Mineral, Vegitable, and Animal
Kingdoms, appear to me, but as the more eminent Works of a most excellent
Operator, as Engines of the most accurate Engineer; they all live, and have a
Principle of Life manifest in their growth and augmentation, and so far as they
are living weights, as I can perceive from the same source. But then comes in
those Natures and Faculties whereby each is distinguished from other, even like
several pieces of Clock, or Watch-work: the one shows the hour of the day, and
no more; the next shows the hour and minutes, another shows both the former,
and likewise the Age of the Moon; another has not only the three former
motions, but an addition of the rise and fall of Tides; yet all this, and many
more that in that way are performed, are several distinct motions, arising all
from the same Cause, the Spring or Weight, the Principle of motion in them. So
among living Weights, the first do only grow and augment their bulk, and have
no possibility in nature to augment their kind; the next, to wit, Vegitables,
do not only grow and increase their bulk, but likewise have a power of
propagating their like: the third Family, I mean the Animal Kingdom, do not
only live and increase their kind, but likewise are made sensative. And lastly,
we our selves that are not only possessed of all the former, but of something, I
know not what, we think more excellent, and call Reason, and all this from the
same source; namely, that we live; which if we did not, we could not perform
any of these acts. For life in us is the same as the Spring or Weight in the
Watch or Clock, which ceasing, all other motion cease, as in a Watch or
Clock, the Spring or Weight being down.

As Life therefore is the Cause of all Motion, and all natural Operation and
Faculties; yet those multifarious Operations and Faculties, manifest in, and
proper to the particular species of the Three Kingdoms, requires not diverse
Principles of Life, no more than diverse motions specified in a Watch or Clock,
requires diverse Weights or Springs. And as the diversity of motion in Watch or
Clock, arises not from diversity of Weights or Springs, but rather from other
means: so those diversities of Natures and Faculties, manifest throughout the
Three Kingdoms, arise not from diverse Principles of Life, but from one
Principle of Life, manifesting its power in Bodies diversely organized. So that
a Tree or Herb that only vegitates and propagates its kind, has no other
Principle of Life than an Animal that has Sense, and more eminent Faculties.
The difference only, as I conceive, is, this Principle of Life in the
vegitable, is bound up in a Body organized to no other eud, by which Life is
hindered exerting any other power: but in the Animal it is kindled in a purer
matter, by which it is capacitated to frame more excellent Orgains, in order to
the exerting more eminent Acts. For the Principle of Life can no more act
rationally in matter capable of naught but vegitation (for it acts in matter
according to the nature thereof, advancing it to its utmost excellency), than a
man can saw with a Coult-Staff, or file with an Hatcher, or make a Watch with a
Betle and Wedges.

I am apt to believe those rare Endowments, and eminent Faculties, wherewith
men seem to excel mere Sensatives, are only the improvement of Speech, wherein
we have the advantage of them, and the result of reiterated Acts, until they
become habits. For by the first we are able to communicate our Conceptions and
Experiments each to other; and by the other we do gradually ascend to the
knowledge of things. For is all the knowledge either in the acts, Liberal or
Mechanical, any more than this acts reiterated, until they become habits; which
when they are, we are said to know them? And what is all our reasoning, but an
Argument in Discourse tossed from one to another, till the Truth be found, like
a Ball between two Rackets, till at last a lucky blow puts an end to the sport?
We come into the World hardly men; and many whose natures want cultivation,
live, having nothing to distinguish them from Brutes, but the outward form,
speech, and some little dexterity, such as in Apes or Monkeys, in the things
they have been taught, and the Affairs they have been bred to. And could we
imagine any man to have lived Twenty or Thirty years in the World, without the
benefit of Humane Converse, What would appear then, think you, of a rational
Soul? which the wise man well saw when he asserted the Condition of Men and
Beasts to be the same what a mere Ignorant has; Moses himself made of Adam,
that in his supposed best state, knew not that he was naked: but I believe the
Nine Hundred and Thirty years Experience of his own, and the continual
Experiments of Posterity, in that time communicated to him, might quicken his
Intellect. So that he died with more Reason than he was created, and humane
nature in his posterity. The next Generation was imbellished with his
seize, to which their own Experiences still made a new addition. The next
Generation built on their Foundation, and the next on their; and so on: and we
are got on the shoulders of them all. So that it is rather a wonder, that we
know no more, than that we know so much. So that what we have, seems rather
times product, through the means aforesaid, than what our Natures were at first
enricht with.

The which appears likewise in those whose memory fails, and in whom the
vestigia of things is wore out; the habits they had contracted, and manner of
working in their several acts being forgotten, what silly Animals are they?
Whereas were the Soul such as represented, who could rob it of its Endowments?
It Is true the debilitating of a hand, may impead a manual labor; but raze what
has formerly been done out of the Memory, and you render Man a perfect Bruit,
or worse: for he knows not how to give a signification of his own mind.

And indeed, I know not any thing wherein Man excels the Beasts, but may be
referred to the benefit of Speech and Hands, capable of effecting its
Conceptions; nor find any better way to attain a right knowledge of our selves,
but by beholding our selves in Adam, and enquiring, what Nature had endued him
with, which will fall far short of what we now admire in our selves.

But now supposing all this answered, what will it avail us to a Life of
Retrobution, if all return to one Element, and be there immerged as Brooks and
Rivers in the Sea? If we lose our Individuation; and all the Souls that have
existed, be swallowed up of one, where are the Rewards and Punishments of each
individual. And we have reason to judge it will be thus, rather than otherwise,
because we see every thing tends to its own Center, the Water to the Sea, and
all that was of the Earth to the Earth, from whence they were taken. And
Solomon says, The spirit returns to God that gave it. Every thing then
returning to its own Element, Ioseth its Individuation. For we see all bodies
returning to the earth, are no more individual bodies, but earth: Have we not
reason then to judge the same of Spirits returning to their own Element? And
what happiness then can we hope for, more than a deliverance from the present
calamity? or what misery are we eapable of, more than what is common to all?

The same is more evident in the body with which we converse, and are more
sensibly acquainted with, seems wholly incapable of either, etc. For all bodies
are material, and matter it self is not capable of multiplication, but of being
changed. Therefore Nature cannot multiply bodies, but changes them; as some
bodies arise, others perish. Natures expense in continual Productions being
constantly supplied by the dissolution of other Compounds: were it otherwise,
her Storehouse would be exhausted; for its by continual Circulations, Heaven
and Earth is maintained; and by her even Circular motion, she keeps her self
employed on the same stock of matter, and maintains every species. There is no
body the same to day it was yesterday, matter being in a continual flux;
neither immediately on the dissolution of a Compound, and Corruption of the
body, does the earth thereof retain any specific difference of that body it
once was, but is immediately bestowed by Nature, and ordered to the new
production of other things. That part of matter therefore which constituteth a
humane body, in a short time is putrified, and made earth, which again
produces either other inferior Animals, or Grass, or Corn, for the nourishment
of Beasts and Fowl, which again are the nourishment of men. Thus circularly
innumerable times round, Nature continually impressing new forms of the same
matter. So that that matter that now constitutes my body, it may be a thousand
years ago was the matter of some other man's, or it may be of diverse men's, then
putrified; which in this time has suffered infinite changes, as it may be
sometime Grass, or Corn, or an Herb, or Bird, or Beast, or diverse of them, or
all, and that diverse times over, before my body was framed; who then can say,
why this matter so changeable, should at last be restored, my body rather than
his, whose formerly it was, or the body of a Bird, or other Animal? For by the
same Reasons that the body of man is proved to arise again, may, I think, be
proved the Restoration of all other bodies, which is equally incredible to me
(if understood at one time). For Natures stock of matter being all at first
exhausted, she could not employ her self in new Productions, without destroying
some of the old; much less can she at once fabricate out of the same quantity
of matter, all the bodies that ever were, are, or shall be; which yet,
notwithstanding could she, they could not be said to be the same bodies,
because all bodies suffer such alteration daily, that they cannot be said to be
the same to day they were yesterday; how then can they be capable of Reward or
Punishment?

These are now my doubts; but are they the fruits of Diligence? and am I thus
rewarded for not believing at a common rate? A great deal cheaper could I have
sat down, and believed as the Church believes; without a why, or a wherefore,
have been ignorant of these Disputes, and never have emerged my self in this
gulf, than thus by Reflection to create my own disturbance. Had I been made a
mere Animal, I had had none of these Doubts nor Fears that thus torment my
mind; for doubting, happy Bruits happy, far more happy than my self! With you
is none of this; with you only is serenity of mind, and you only void of
Anxieties; you only enjoy what this world is able to accommodate with, and it
may be too have those Caresses we know not of, while we, your poor purveyors,
go drooping and disponding, doubting, fearing, and caring about, and our whole
lives only a preying on one another, and tormenting our selves. You have the
carnal content and satisfaction; we nothing but the shell, a vain glorious
boast of our Lordship over you, with which we seek to satisfy our selves, as
Prodigals, with husks, while the truth is, we are afraid to confront our
Vassals, except we first by craft and treachery beguile them from whom likewise
we flee, if once enraged: and what a poor comfort is this? Is this a Privilege
to boast of? Is this all Reason advances to, only a Purveyor to Beasts, and to
make my life more miserable, by how much more sensible of misery! Well might
Solomon prefer the dead before the living; and those that had not been, before
both; intimating thereby, that being best, least capable of misery; that is, of
Trees, of Herbs, of Stones, and all inanimates, which wanting sense, are
insensible of misery. Better any thing than man therefore, since that every
brute and inanimate stock or stone, are more happy in that measure: they are
less capable of misery. What the advantage then, what the benefit that occurs
to us from them, or what pre-eminence have we above them, seeing as dies the
one, so dies the other, and that they have all one breath?

Pardon this Degression; the real sense and apprehension I have of things,
extort it from me. For I, as Job, cannot refrain my mouth, but speak in the
bitterness of my Spirit, and complain in the anguish of my Soul, Why died I not
from the womb? why did I not give up the ghost when I came out of the belly?
Why did the knees prevent me? or why the breasts, that I should suck? I had
then been among Solomon 's happy ones: I should now have lain still and been
quiet; I should have slept, and been at rest: whereas now I am weary of life.
For tho I speak, my grief is not assuaged; and tho I forbear, I am not eased;
but now he has made me weary, and made desolate all my company: he has filled
me with wrinkles, which is a witness against me; and my leanness rising up in
me, bears witness to my face, God has delivered me to the ungodly, and
turned me over into the hand of the wicked, and my familiar friends have
forgotten me. I said, I shall die in my nest, and shall multiply my days as the
sand, when my root was spread out by the waters, and the dew lay all night on
my branch; when my glory was fresh, and my bow was renewed in my hand: but I
find while my flesh is upon me, I shall have pain, and while my soul is in me,
it shall mourn. Have pity upon me, O my friend! for the hand of God has
touched me. The wicked live, and become old; yea, they are mighty in power,
their seed is established in their sight with them, and their offspring before
their eyes; their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon
them, etc. they are planted, and take root, they grew; yea, they bring forth
fruit, yet God is never in their mouth, and far from their reins. In vain then
do I wash my hands in innocence, seeing all things come alike to all. There is
one event to the righteous and to the wicked, to the good, to the clean, and to
the unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: as is
the good, so is the sinner; and he that swears, as he that fears an oath.

I have now done (tho I hardly know how), lest I too far trouble you; and only
beg your perusal of these lines, and two or three in answer of them by this
Bearer, who shall at your appointment wait on you for the same. Let me farther
^eg these two things of you: first, That you would consider you have not to do
with a Sophistick Wrangler, or with one that would willingly err, but with one
that desires to know the Truth. Let therefore your Answer be, as much as you
can, void of Scholastic Terms, or Notions that may lead me more into the dark.
And then, as Job did beg, That God would withdraw his hand far from him, and
that his dread might not make him afraid; so I. And further, That you would not
awe me with his greatness, nor suppress my Arguments with his Omnipotence. Then
call thou, and I will answer; or let me speak, and answer thou me. Thus begging
the Divine Influence to direct you, and enlighten me, I subscribe my self,

SIR,
. 1. IT is your wisdom in Cases of so great moment, to use all just endeavors
for satisfaction; and I think you did but your duty, to study this as hard as
you say you have done. But 1. I wish you had studied it better; for then you
would not have been a stranger to many Books which afford a just solution of
your Doubts, as I must suppose you are, by your taking no notice of what they
have said. 2. And I wish you had known, that between the solving of all your
Objections, and taking all on Trust from men, or believing as the Church
believes, there are Two other ways to satisfaction (which must be conjunct):
1. Discerning the unanswerable evidences in Nature and Providence, of the Souls
future Life. 2. And taking it on trust from Divine Revelation; which is
otherwise to be proved, than by believing as the Church by Authority requires
you.

I have written on this Subject so much ^^ready, that I had rather you had told
me, why you think it unsatisfactory, than desire me to transcribe it, while
Print is as legible as Manuscript. If you have not read it, I humbly offer it
to your consideration. It is most in two Books: The first which I entreat you
to read, is called, The Reasons of the Christian Religion: the other is called,
The Unreasonableness of Infidelity. If you think this too much labor, you are
not so hard or faithful a Student of this weighty Case, as it deserves, and
you pretend to be. If you will read them (or the first at least), and after
come to me, that we may fairly debate your remaining Doubts, it will be a
likelier way for us to be useful to each other, than my going over all the
mistakes of your Paper will be. And I suppose you know, that we have full
assurance of a multitude of Verities, against which many Objections may be
raised, which no mortal man can fully solve, especially from Modes and
Accidents. Nay, perhaps there is nothing in the World which is not liable to
some such Objections. And yet I will not neglect, your writing.

. 2. When you were convinced, That there is a first Cause, it would have been
an orderly progress to think what that Cause is; and whether his Works do not
prove his Infinite Perfection, having all that eminently which he gives
formally to the whole World, as far as it belongs to perfection to have it.
For none can give more than he has. And then you should have thought what this
God is to man, as manifest in his Works: and you should have considered what of
man is past doubt, and thence in what relation he stands to God, and to his
fellow creatures: And this would have led you to know man's certain duty: and
that would have assured you of a future life of Retribution. Is not this a just
progress?

. 3. But you would know a Definition of the Soul. But do you know nothing but
by Definitions? Are all men that cannot define, therefore void of all knowledge?
You know not at all what seeing is, or what light is, or what feeling,
smelling, tasting, hearing is, what sound or odor is, what sweet or bitter, nor
what thinking, or knowing, or willing, or loving is, if you know it not before
defining tell you, and better than bare defining can ever tell you. Every vital
faculty has a self-perception in its acting; which is an eminent sense:
Intuition also of outward sensible Objects, or immediate perception of them, as
sensata and imaginata, is before all Argument and Definition, or reasoning
action. By seeing, we perceive that we see; and by understanding, we perceive
that we understand. I dare say, That you know the Acts of your own Soul by
acting, tho when you come to reasoning or defining, you say you know not what
they are. You can give no definition what substance is, or Ens at least, much
less what God is. And yet what is more certain than that there is Substance,
Entity, and God?

. 4. But I Will tell you what the Soul of m^n is: It is a Vital, Intellectual,
Volitive Spirit, animating a humane organized Body. When it is separated, it is
not formally a Soul, but a Spirit still.

. 5. Qu. But what is such a mental Spirit? It is a most pure Substance, whose
form is a Power or Virtue of Vital Action, Intellection, and Volition (three in
one).

. 6. I. Are you not certain of all these Acts, viz. That you Act vital,
understand and will? If not, you are not sure that you see, that you doubt,
that you wrote to me, or that you are any thing.

II. If you act these, it is certain that you have the power of so acting. For
nothing does that which it cannot do.

III. It is certain, that it is a Substance which has this power: For nothing
can do nothing.

IV. It is evident, that it is not the visible Body, as composed of Earth,
Water and Air, which is this mental Substance. Neither any one of them, nor all
together have Life, Understanding, or Will. They are passive Beings, and act
not at all of themselves, but as acted by invisible Powers. They have an
aggregative inclination to U^ion, and no other. Were it not for the Igneous
Nature which is active, or for Spirits, they would be cessant. Therefore you
are thus far past the dark, That there is in man an Invisible Substance, which
has, yea, which is a Power or Virtue of Vital Action, Intellection, and
Volition.

V. And that this Active Power is a distinct thing from mere Passive Power, or
mobilitie per aliud, Experience puts past doubt. There is in every living thing
a Power, or Virtue of self-moving, else Life were not Life.

VI. And that this is not a mere accident of the Soul, but its essential form,
I have proved so fully in my Methodus Theologiae, in a peculiar Disputation,
that I will not here repeat it. It Is evident, That even in the igneous
Substance, the Vis Motiva, Illuminativa, Calefactiva, is more than an accident,
even its essential form: But were it otherwise, it would but follow, That if
the very accidental Acts or qualities of a Soul be so noble, its essential must
be greater.

VII. But it is certain, That neither Souls, nor any thing, have either Being,
Power, or Action, but in constant receptive dependence on the continued
emanation of the prime Cause; and so no Inviduation is a total separation from
him, or an Independence, or a self-sufficiency. Thus far natural light tells
you what Souls are.

. 7. You add you self, That those seize which you were made capable of,
you were designed to. Very right. God makes not such noble Faculties or
Capacities in vain; much less to engage all men to a life of duty, which shall
prove deceit and misery. But you have Faculties capable of thinking of God, as
your Beginning, Guide, and End, as your Maker, Ruler, and Benefactor; and of
studying your duty to him, in hope of Reward, and of thinking what will become
of you after Death, and of hoping for future Blessedness, and fearing future
Misery: all which no Bruit was ever capable of. Therefore God designed you to
such ends which you are thus capable of.

. 8. You say (p. 3.) Many have defended the Souls Immortality; but none have
proved a Subject capable of a life of Retribution. It Is a Contradiction to be
immortal, or rewarded, and not to be a Subject capable. For nothing has no
accidents. Nothing has that which it is not capable of haing.

. 9. You say, None tell us what it is. How many Score Volumes have told it us?
I have now briefly told you what it is. You say, [To say it is that by which I
reason, is not satisfactory. I look for a Definition]. But on Condition you
look not to see or feel it, as you do Trees or Stones, you may be satisfied. I
have given you a Definition. The Genus is Substantia purissima; the Differentia
is Virtus Vitalis, Activa, Intellectiva, Volitiva (trinum a Imago Creatoris).
What Is here wanting to a Definition?

I have told you, That there is an antecedent more certain Perception, than by
Definition; by which I know that I see, hear, taste, am, and by which the Soul,
in act, is conscious of it self.

. 10. You ask, 1. Is it a real Being? Answ. I told you, Nothing can do nothing.

2. Is it really different from the Body? Answ. A Substance which has in it
self an Essential Principle of Life, Intellection, and Volition, and that which
has not, are really different. Try whether you can make a Body feel, or
understand without a Soul. 2. Those that are seperable, are really different.

3. You ask, Is it able to be without it? Answ. What should hinder it? The Body
made not the Soul: A viler Substance gives not being to a nobler. 2. Nothing
at all can be without continued Divine sustentation. But we see, Juxta naturam,
God annihilateth no Substance: Changes are but by composition, and separation,
and action, but not by annihilation. An Atome of Earth or Water, is not
annihilated; and why should we suspect, that a Spiritual Substance is? Yea, the
contrary is fully evident, tho God is able to annihilate all things.

. 11. You say, If it be merely material, and differ from the Body but
gradually, Death may be but its concentration of this active Principle in its
own Body.

Answ. If you understand your own words, it is well. 1. Do you know what
material signifies? See Crakenthorp's Metaphysics, and he will tell you in
part, it is an ambiguous word. Sometime it signifies the same as substantia;
and so Souls are material. Sometime it signifies only that sort of Substance
which is called corporeal. Dr. More tells you, That Penetrability, and
Indivisibility, difference them.

But what if fire should differ from air materially, but in degree of subtilty
and purity, or sensitive Souls from igneous, and mental from sensitive, but in
higher degrees of purity of matter; Is it not the form that makes the
specific difference? Air has not the igneous Virtue of Motion, ^^umination,
and Calefaction; nor ig^^s, the sensitive Virtues, nor mere sensi^^ves the
rational Virtues aforesaid. For^^ dat esse and nomen. This makes not ^meer
gradual difference, but a speci^^.

There is in Compounds matter, and materiae dispositio receptiva, and forma.
There is somewhat answerable (...) spiritual uncompounded Beings. There is
substantia, and substantiae dispositio, and forma. These are but intellectually
distinct, and not (...), and are but inadequate conceptions of one thing. That
substantia is conceptus fundamentalis, is confessed. Some make penetr^^bility and
indivisibility, substantiae concep^^^ dispositi^^. But the Virtus vitalis
activa, intol^ (...), volitiva, in one, is the conceptus formatis.

2. But what mean you by [the active Principles concentration in its own body]?
It is a strange Fxpression. 1. If you mean, that it is annihilated, then it
remains not. (...) If you mean, that it remains an active Principle, you
mean a substance, or acci^^^t. If (...) substance, it seems you acknow^^^g it a
self-subsisting being, only not separate from its carcass. And if they be two,
why are they not separable? If separable, why not separated? When the dust of
the Carcass is scattered, is the Soul concentred in every atome, or but in one?
And is it many, or one concentred Soul? If you mean, That it is but an accident,
that is disproved before; what accident is it? If con^^ntred in the body, the
body, and every dust of it, is vital and intellectual. And if so, every clod
and stone is so; which I will not so much wrong you, as to imagine that you
think.

. 12. But you would know what is meant by a spirit, whether all that is not
evident to sense? Ans. It is a pure substance (says Dr. More, penetrable and
indivisible) essentially vital, perceptive and appetitive.

. 13. You add, [How shall I know the difference between the highest degree of
materials, and lowest of immaterials? To me an immaterial, and spiritual being,
seems a kind of Hccus, a substantial nothing.

Ans. If you take matter for the same with substance, it is material. But not
if you take matter, as it is usually taken, for corporeal; or gross, and
impenetrable, and divisible substance, incapable of essential, vital,
selfmoving perception and appetite. If this seems nothing to you, God seems
nothing to you, and true Nature, which is Principium motus, seems nothing to
you: And all that performs all the action which you see in the world; seems
nothing to you. It Is pity that you have converst so little with God and your
self, as to think both to be nothing.

. 14. What you say out of Genesis 1. is little else but mistake, when you say [all
was made out of the deep waters by the spirit of God]. The Text names what was
made of them. It says nothing of the Creation of Angels, or Spirits, out of
them (no, nor of the Light, or Earth, or Firmament).

And whereas you say, [God made man of the dust of the ground; but the body
only is not man, ergo. Ans. You use your self too unkindly, to leave out half
the words, Genesis 2. 7. And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground,
and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living
soul; when the Text tells us the two works by which God made man, will you
leave out one, and then argue exclusively against it? What if I said, [The
Chandler made a Candle of Tallow, and then by another kindled it]? or [a man
made an house of Bricks, and cemented them with Mortar, etc.]? will you thence
prove, That he made a Candle burning without fire, or the House without Mortar?
Words are useless to such Expositors.

. 15. Page 4. you say; You know all matter is eternal.

But you know no such thing. If it be Eternal, it has one Divine perfection:
and if so, it must have the rest, and so should be God. But what is your proof?

You again (believe the Souls concentration in its body]* Ans. Words
insignificant. It Is Idem or Aliud. If Idem, then dust is Essentially Vital and
Intellectual. Deny not spiritual forms, if every clod or stone have them. If
Aliud, how prove you it to be there, rather than elsewhere? And if you
considered well, you would not believe essential, substantial life and mind, to
lie dead and unactive, so long as the dust is so.

. 16. You come to the hardest Objecti- [The Souls defective acting in infants,
idiots, the sick, etc. and say, [It would rather not act, if it were as
represented.]

Ans. 1. It cannot be denied, but the Operations of the Soul here, are much of
them upon the organized body; and tho not organical, as if they acted by an
Organ, yet organical, as acting on an Organ; which is the material Spirit*
primarily. And so there go various Causes to some Effects, called Acts.

2. And the Soul does nothing independently, but as dependent on God, in Being
and Operation: and therefore does what God knows, and uses it too, as his
Instrument, in the forming of the body; and in what it knows not it self. And
as God, as fons naturae necessitateth the natural agency of the Soul, as he
does the Soul of Bruits. But as the wise and free Governor of the world, he
has to moral acts, given man's Soul free will, and therefore conducting Reason;
which it needs not to necessitated acts, as digestion, motion of the blood,
formation of the body, etc.

And as it is not made to do all its acts freely and rationally, so neither at
all times, as in Apoplexies, Infancy, Sleep, etc. It is essential to the Soul,
to have the active power or virtue of Intellection and Free Will, but not
always to use it. As it is essential to the substance of fire, tho latent in a
flint, to have the power of motion, lighe and heat.

And its considerable, that as a traveller in his journey, thinking and talking
only of other things, retains still a secret act of intending his end, (else
he would not go on) when he perceives and observes it not at all. He that
plays on the Lute or Harpsical, cease when his Instrument is, out of tune;
because he acts by free will.

But the Soul of an Idiot or madman acts only per modum naturae, not by
free-acts, but necessitated by God by the order of nature. Only moral acts are
free; and that some other are but brutish, and some but vegitative, is no-more
a wonder, than that it should understand in the head, and be sensible only in
the most of the body, and vegitative only in the hairs and nails. It operateth
in all the body by the Spirits, as calid; but about the eyes, and open
sensoria, by Spirits also as lucid, for that use.

. 14. But never forget this, That nothing at any time does what it cannot do:
but many can do that which they do not. Tho the Soul in the Womb, or Sleep,
remember not, or reason not; if ever it do it, that proves it had the power of
doiug it. And that power is not a novel accident, tho the act may be so.

. 18. To your Explications p. 4. I say, 1. None doubts, but all the world is
the work of one prime operating Cause; Whom I hope you see in them, is of
perfect power, wisdom and goodness, the chief efficient dirigent and final
cause of all.

2. I doubt not, but the created universe is all one thing or frame; and no one
atome or part totally separated from, and independent on the rest.

3. But yet the parts are multitudes, and heterogeneous, and have their
Individuation, and are at once many and one in several respects. And the unity
of the Universe, or of inferior universal Causes (as the Sun, or an anima
telluris, etc.) are certainly consistent with the specific and individual
differences of the parts.

E. g. Many individual Apples grow on the same Tree; yea, Crabs and Apples by
diverse grafts, nourished on the same stock: One may rot, or be sower, and not
another. Millions of Trees, as also of Herbs and Flowers, good and poisonous,
all grow in the same earth. Here is Unity, and great Diversity. And tho
self-moving Animals be not fixed on the earth, no doubr they have a contiguity,
or continuity, as parts with the Universe. But for all that, a Toad is not a
Man, nor a man in torment, undifferenced from another at ease, nor a bad man
all one with a good.

. 19. And if any should have a conce^^, That there is nothing but God and
matter. I have fully confuted it in the Appendix to Reas. of Christian
Religion. Matter is no such omnipotent sapiential thing in it self, as to need
no cause or maker, any more than Compounds. And to think, that the infinite God
would make no nobler Creature than dead matter, no liker himself, to glorify
him, is antecedently absurd, but consequently notoriously false. For tho
nothing be acted without him, it is evident that he has made active Natures
with a principle of self-moving in themselves. The Sun differs from a clod, by
more than being matter variously moved by God, even by a self-moving power
also. Else there were no living creature, but bodies in themselves dead,
animated by God. But it would be too tedious to say all against this that is to
be said.

. 20. When you tell us of [One life in all, differenced only by diversity of
Organs], you mean God, or a common created Soul. If God, I tell you where I
have confuted it. It Is pity to torment or punish God in a murderer, or call him
wicked in a wicked man: or that one man should be hanged, and another praised,
because the Engines of their bodies are diverse. But the best Anatomists say,
That nothing is to be seen in the brain of other Animals, why they might not be
as rational as Men. And if it be an Anim^ creata communis that you mean, either
(...) think it is a universal Soul to the univers^^ world, or only to this
Earth or Vortex. If to all the World, you feign it to have (...) Prerogative.
If to part of the world, (...) each Vortex, Sun, Star, etc. have a dist^^^
individuate superior Soul, why not (...) so inferiors? And why may not millions
of individual Spirits consist with more common or universal Spirits, as well as
the life (...) Worms in your belly with yours. That which has no Soul or
Spirit of its own, (...) not fit for such reception and communion with superior
Spirits, as that which has. Communion requires some similitude. We see God
uses not all things alike, because he makes them not like.

. 21. But if the difference between Beasts, Trees, Stones, and Men, be only the
organical contexture of the body; then 1. Either all these have but one Soul,
and (...) are but one, save corporeally. 2. Or (...) very Stone, Tree and Beast
has an Intellectual Soul: for it is evident that man has by its Operations.

I. Had you made but Virtue and Vice to be only the effects of the bodies
contexture, sure you would only blame the maker ^f your body, and not your
self, for any of your Crimes: For yon did not make your own body, if you were
nothing.

Is the common light and sense of Nature no Evidence? Does not all the world
difference Virtue and Vice, moral good and evil? Is it only the difference of
an Instrument in Tune, and out of Tune? Either then all called sin is good; or
God, or the universal Soul, only is to be blamed. Then to call you a Knave, or
a Liar, or Perjured, etc. is no more disgrace, than to say, that you are sick,
or blind. Then all Laws are made only to bind God, or the Amima mundi; and all
punishment is threatened to God, or this common Soul. And it is God, or the
common Soul only in a body, which sorroweth, fears, feels pain or pleasure.

II. And if you equal the Souls of Beasts, Trees, Stones and Men, you must make
them all to have an Intellectual Soul. If man had not, he could never
understand. And if they have so also, frustra fit potentia quae nunquam
producitur in actum. It is certain that it is not the body (Earth, Air or
Water) that feels, much less that understands or wills. If therefore all
men have but one Soul, why is it not you that are in pain or joy, when any, or
all others are so? Tour suffering and joys are as much theirs. You hurt your
self when you hurt a Malefactor. Why are you not answerable for the Crimes of
every Thief, if all be one?

. 22. You vainly liken several Natures and Faculties to several pieces of
Clock-work, For Natures and Faculties are self-acting Principles under the
prime Agent: but a Clock is only passive, moved by another: Whether the motus
gravitationis in the poise, be by an intrinslck Principle, or by another (...)
active Nature, is all that is controvertible there. All that your similitude
will infer, is this, That as the gravitation of one poise, moves every wheel
according to its receptive aptitude; so God, the universal Spirit, moves all
that is moved, according to their several aptitudes, passives as passive,
actives as active, vitals as self-movers, intellectuals as
intellectual-free-self-movers under him. No Art can make a Clock feel, see or
understand.

But if the world have but one soul, what mean you by its concentring in the
Carcass? Is the universal Soul there fallen asleep, or imprisoned in a Grave,
or what is it?

. 23. Add page 5. You well say, That Life is the cause of all motion: Yea,
infinite Life, Wisdom and Love, is the cause of all: but there be second Causes
under it: Plurima ex uno. And it makes things various, which it moves
variously; and makes them vital, sensitive or mental, which he will move to
vital, sensitive and mental acts. Operari sequitur esse.

. 24. You are apt to believe, That those eminent Faculties wherewith men seem
mere Sensitives, are only the improvement of Speech, and reiterated Acts, till
they become Habits.

Ans. 1. I had a Parrot that spoke so very plainly, that no Man could discern
but he could have spoke as well as a Man, if he had but had the Intellect of a
Man; and quickly would learn new words, but showed no understanding of them.

2. Many men born deaf and dumb, are of a strong understanding (enquire of a
Brother of Sir Richard Dyett's, a Son of Mr. Peter Whalley of Northampton, a
Son in Law of the Lord Wharton's, etc.

3. The Faculty and the Habit are Two things. The Faculty is the Essential form
of the Substance. The Habit, or Act, is but an Accident. The Faculty is nothing
but the active Power. And the Power goes before the Act. Does acting, without
Power to act, cause the Power? What need you the Power, if you can act without
it? And what is a Contradiction, if this be not, to say, I do that which I
cannot do, or I can do that which I have no power to do? You are not a man
without the Faculty, but you are without the Act; or else you are no man in
your sleep. The act then is but the Faculties act; and Habits are nothing but
the Faculties promptitude to act. And this indeed is caused sometime by very
strong acts, and sometime, and usually, by frequent acts; and sometime
suddenly, by a special Divine Operation. No doubt, but Oratory, and all Arts
and Sciences, are caused by frequent acts, and their Objects: But those acts
are caused by humane Faculties, under God, the first Cause. You can never cause
a Carcass, or a Parrot, or any Bruit, to think of God, and the glory to come,
nor to do any proper humane act.

Credible History assures us, That Devils, or separate Souls, have acted
Carcasses, and discoursed in them, and seemed to commit Fornication in them,
and left them dead behind them; and they were known to be the same that were
lately executed, or dead, and were re-buried. Here the dead Organ was capable,
when a Spirit did but use it.

You too much confound Intellection and Ratiocination. The prime acts of
intellective Perception are before Ratiocination. And there are a multitude of
Complex Verities, which all sound men know without Syllogisms. The disposition
to know them, is so strong, that some call it Actual Knowledge.

. 25. Add page 6. It Is well known, That the Natives in New England, the most
barbarous Abassines, Gallanes, etc. in Ethicpia, have as good natural
Capacities as the Europeans. So far are they from being but like Apes and
Monkeys; if they be not Idiots, or mad, they sometime shame learned men in
their words and deeds. I have known those that have been so coursly clad, and
so clownishly bred, even as to Speech, Looks and Carriages, that Gentlemen and
Scholars, at the first congress, have esteemed them much according to your
description, when in Discourse they have proved more ingenious than they. And
if improvement can bring them to Arts, the Faculty was there before. When will
you show us an Ape or a Monkey, that was ever brought to the Acts or Habits
before mentioned of Men? Yea, of those that were born deaf and dumb?

. 26. Your mistake of Adam's cas^^ and Solomon's words, is so gross, that I
will not confute it, lest the description of it offend you.

. 17. The case of failing memories is answered before, in the case of Infancy
and Apop^exies, etc. Our memory fails in our sleep: and yet when we awake, we
find that there remains the same knowledge of Arts and Sciences. They did not
end at night, and were not all new made tne next morning. The Acts ceased,
because the receptivity of the passive Organ ceased: but the Habit and Faculty
continued. And when memory in old men fails about names, and words, and
little matters, their judgments about great things are usually stronger (by
better Habits) than young men's.

. 28. You say, You know nothing wherein Man excels Beasts, but may be referred
to the benefit of speech and hands, capable of effecting its Conceptions.

Ans. This is answered before. Those Conceptions are the cause of words and
actions: and is there no cause of those Conceptions? And if man's Conceptions
differ from the beasts, the causes differed. And if the first Conceptions did
not differ, the Subsequent would not differ neither, without a difference in
the causal Faculties. Why do not Beasts speak as well as Men? Parrots show,
That it is not in all for want of a speaking Organ. If one be born dumb, and
not deaf, he will know but little the less for his dumbness. If he be born deaf
and dumb, and not blind, he will still be rational, as Dr. Wallis can tell you,
who has taught such to talk and converse intelligibly by their fingers, and
other signs, without words. I confess, if all the outward Senses were stopped
from the Birth, I see not how the Soul could know outward sensible things, as
being no Objects to it. And how it would work on it self alone, we know not;
but understand, and will, we are sure it does: and therefore can do it. And
it is one thing to prove Beasts to be men, or rational, and another thing to
prove Men to be Beasts, or irrational. If you could prove the former, viz. That
Beasts have Souls that can think of God, and the Life to come, if they could
but speak, this would rather prove them immortal, than prove man unreasonable,
or of a mortal Soul. Your whole speech makes more to advance bruits, than to
deny the reason of man.

. 29. You say, You know no better way to attain a right knowledge of our selves,
than by beholding our selves in Adam, and enquiring what Nature had endued him
with, which will fall far short of what we now admire in our selves.

Answ. 1. As a multitude of Objects, and Experiences, more tend to Wisdom than
one alone; so to know both what Adam was, and what all men are, and do, does
evidence more to our information, than to know Adam's first Case alone.

2. Adam's first Powers are to be known by his acts; and his acts were not to
be done at once, in a minute, or a day: And we have not the History of his Life
much after his Fall. But we may be sure, that Adam's Nature in Innocence, was
no baser than ours corrupted. And therefore Adam had the Powers of doing
whatever other men since have done.

3. But let us come to your Test: 1. Adam was made a living Soul by the breath
of God, after the making of his body of the earth.

2. Adam and Eve were blessed with a generative multiplying Faculty: but they
did not generate God; nor did every bruit that had also that Faculty. Therefore
there is a Soul which is not God, in every Animal, (nor yet an Universal Soul).

3. Adam, no doubt, could not know external sensible Objects, till they were
brought within the reach of his sense: no more can we.

4. Adam knew the Creatures as soon as he saw them; and gave them Names
suitable. This is more than we could so soon do.

5. Adam had a Law given him; and therefore knew that God was his Ruler. He
knew that God was to be obeyed; he knew what was his Law: else it had been no
sin to break it. He knew that he ought to love, and believe, and trust God, and
cleave to him: else it bad been no sin to forsake him, and to believe the
Tempter, and to love the forbidden Fruit better than God. He knew that Death
was the threatened Wages of Sin. In a word, He was made in the Image of God: And
Paul tells us, it is that Image into which we are renewed by Christ: And he
describes it to consist in wisdom, righteousness, and true holiness.

6. And we have great reason to think, that it was Adam that taught Abel to
offer Sacrifice in Faith, and delivered to his Posterity the Traditions which
he had from God. Tho Adam did not do all this at once, he did not receive a new
Soul or Faculty for every new act. Can Apes and Monkeys do all this? Does God
give them Laws to know and keep as moral free-agents?

But you say, Adam knew not that he was naked. Ans. What! and yet knew God and
his Law, and how to name the Creatures, and how to dress and keep the Garden?
He knew not that nakedness was shameful; for he had newly made it shameful.

Perhaps you think of Adam's forbidden desire of knowledge, and his miserable
attainment of it. But that did not make him a new Soul, that had no such
Faculty before. Adam was the Son of God by Creation, Luke 3. and it was his
duty and interest to live as a Son, in absolute trust on his Fathers care and
love: and instead of this, he was tempted to self-dependance, and must needs
know more than his duty, and his fathers love and reward: He must know good and
evil for himself: like a Child that must know what Food, and Raiment, and Work
is fittest for him, which he should know only by trusting his Fa^thers choice;
or as a Patient that must needs know every Ingredient in his Physic, and the
Nature and Reason of it, before he will take it, when he should implicitly
trust his Physician. Man should have waited on God for all his Notices, and
sought to know no more than he revealed. But a distrustful, and a selfish
knowledge, and busy enquiring into unrevealed things, is become our sin and
misery.

. 36. You say, Suppose all this answered: what will it avail, as to a life of
Retribution, if all return to one element, and be there immerged as Brooks and
Rivers in the Sea, and we lose our individuation.

Ans. I answered this in the Appendix to the Reas. of the Christian Religion. I
add 1. Do you believe, that each one has now one individual Soul, or not? If
not, how can we lose that which we never had? If we have but all one universal
mover, which moves us as Engines, as the Wind and Water move Mills, how come
some motions to be so swift (as a Swallow), and others so slow, or none at all;
in as mobile a body)? Yea, how comes motion to be so much in our Power, that
we can sit still when we will, and rise, and go, and run, and speak when we
will, and cease, or change it when we will? A stone that falls, or an arrow
that is shot, cannot do so. Sure it is some inward formal Principle; and not a
material Mechanical mobility of the matter, which can cause this difference.

Indeed if we have all but one Soul, it is easy to love our Neighbors as our
selves, because our Neighbors are our selves. But it is as easy to hate our
selves as our Enemies, and the good as the bad, if all be one (for forma dat
nomen and esse). But it is strange, that either God, or the Soul of the World,
shall hate it self, and put it self to pain, and fight against it self, as in
Wars, etc.

But if you think still, That there is nothing but God and dead matter actuated
by him, I would beg your Answer to these few Questions.

1. Do you really believe, that there is a God? that is, an eternal infinite
self-being, who has all that power, knowledge, and goodness of will, in
transcendent Eminency, which any Creature has formally, and is the efficient
Governor of all else that is. If not, all the world condemns you: for it is
not an uncaused Being, and can have nothing but from its Cause, who can give
nothing greater than it self.

2. Do you think this God can make a Creature that has a subordinate Soul, or
Spirit, to be the Principle of its own Vital Action, Intellection, and
Volition, or not? Cannot God make a Spirit? If not, it is either because it is
a Contradiction (which none can pretend), or because God is not Omnipotent;
that is, is not God; and so there is no God; and so you deny what you granted.
But if God can make a Spirit,

3. Why should you think he would not? Some of your mind say, That he does all
the good that he can; or else he were not perfectly good. Certainly his
goodness is equal to his greatness, and is commmunicative.

4. Has he not imprinted his Perfections in some measure, in his Works? Do
they not show his glory? Judge of his Greatness by the Sun, Stars, and Heavens;
and of his Wisdom, by the wonderful Order, Contexture, and Goverument of all
things. Even the Fabric of a Fly, or any Animal, poseth us. And do you think,
that his love and goodness has no answerable effect?

5. Do you think, that passive matter does as much manifest Gods Perfection,
and honor the Efficient, as vital and Intellectual Spirits? If it be a far
nobler Work for God to make a free, vital, mental Spirit, to act under him
freely, mentally, and vitally, than to make mere atoms, why should you think
that God will not do it?

6. And do you not dishonor, or blaspheme the prime Cause, by such
dishonouring of his Work, as to say, he never made any thing more noble than
Atoms, and Compositions of them.

7. Is there not in the Creature a communicative disposition to cause their
like? Animals generate their like: Fire kindles fire: Wise men would make
others wise: God is essential infinite Life, Wisdom and Love: and can he, or
would he make nothing liker to himself than dead Atoms? Yea, you feign him to
make nothing but by Composition, while you say, That matter it self is eternal.

8. But when the matter of Fact is evident, and we see by the actions, that
there is a difference between things moved by God, some having a created Life
and mind, and some none, what needs then any further proof?

. 31. But if you hold, That we have now distinct Spirits, which are individual
Substances, why should you fear the loss of our individuation, any more than
our annihilation, or specific alteration? If God made as many substantial
individual Souls, as men, is there any thing in Nature or Scripture, which
thteatneth the loss of Individuation? I have showed you, and shall further show
you enough against it.

. 32. You say, page 7. Every thing returns to its element, and loses its
individuation: Earth to Earth, Water to the Sea, the Spirit to God that gave
it. What happiness then can we hope for more than deliverance from the present
calamity; or what misery are we capable of, more than is common to all?

Ans. 1. Bodies lose but their Composition, and Spiritual forms. Do you think,
that any Atome loses its individuation? If it be still divisible in parts
infinitas, it is infinite. And if every Atome be infinite, it is as much, or
more than all the world; and so is no part of the world; and so there would be
as many Worlds, or Infinites, as Atoms. It is but an aggregative motion which
you mention. Birds of a Feather will flock together, and yet are Individuals
still. Do you think any dust, or drop, any Atome of Earth or Water, loses any
thing of it self, by its union with the rest? Is any Substance lost? Is the
simple Nature changed? Is it not Earth and Water still? Is not the Haecceity,
as they call it, continued? Does not God know every dust, and every drop from
the rest? Can he not separate them when he will? And if Nature in all things
tend to aggregation, or union, it is then the Perfection of every thing. And
why should we fear Perfection?

2. But Earth, and Water, and Air, are partible matter. Earth is easily
separable: The parts of Water more hardly, by the means of some terrene
Separaror: The parts of Air yet more hardly: and the Sunbeams, or substance of
fire, yet harder than that (tho it is contraction and effects are very
different): And Spirits either yet harder, or not at all. Some make it
essential to them to be indiscerptible; and all must say, That there is nothing
in the Nature of them, tending to division, or separation. And therefore tho
God, who can annihilate them, can divide them into parts, if it be no
Contradiction; yet it will never be, because he uses every thing according to
its nature, till he comes to miracles. Therefore their dissilution of parts is
no more to be feared, than their annihilation.

3. But if you take Souls to be partible and unible, then you must suppose
every part to have still its own existence in the whole. And do you think, that
this does not more advance Souls than abase them? Yea, you seem to Deifie them;
while you make them all to return into God, as drops into the Sea. And if you
feign God to be partible, is it not more honor and joy to be a part of God,
who is joy it self, than to be a created Soul? If a thousand Candles were put
out, and their light turned into one Luminary, as great as they all, every part
would have its share in the enlightening of the place about it. Is it any loss
to a single Soldier, to become part of a victorious Army.

4. But indeed this is too high a Glory for the Soul of man to desire, or hope
for. It is enough to have a blessed union with Christ, and the holy Society,
consistent with our Individuation. Like will to like, and yet be it self.
Rivers go to the Sea, and not to the Earth. Earth turns to Earth, and not to
the Sun, or Fire. And the holy and blessed, go to the holy and blessed: And I
believe, that their union will be nearer than we can now well conceive, or than
this selfish state of man desires: But as every drop in the Sea, is the same
Water it was, so every Soul will be the same Soul.

2. And as to the incapacity of misery which you talk of, why should you think
it more hereafter than here? If you think all Souls now to be but one, does not
an aching Tooth, or a gouty Foot, or a calculous Bladder, suffer pain, tho it be
not the body that feels; but the same sensitive Soul is pained in one part,
and pleased in another. And if all Souls be now but God in diverse Bodies, or
the Anima mundi, try if you can comfort a man under the torment of the Stone,
or other Malady, or on the Rack, or in terror of Conscience, by telling him,
That his Soul is a part of God. Will this make a Captive bear his Captivity, or
a Malefactor his Death? If not here, why should you think that their misery
hereafter will be ever the less, or more tolerable for your conceit, that they
are parts of God? They will be no more parts of him then, than they were here.
But it is like, that they also will have an uniting inclination, even to such as
themselves; or that God, will separate them from all true unity, and say, Go
you cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, etc.

. 33. No doubt it is true, that you say, page 7, and 8. That matter is still the
same, and liable to all the changes which you mention. But it is an unchanged
God, who does all this by Spirits, as second Causes, who are not of such a
changeable, dissoluble, partible nature, as Bodies are: It is Spirits that do
all that is done in the world. And I conjecture, as well as you, That universal
Spirits are universal Causes. I suppose, That this Earth has a vegitative
form, which makes it as a matrix to receive the Seeds, and the more active
influx of the Sun. But Earth and Sun are but general Causes. Only God, and the
seminal Virtue, cause the species, as such. The Sun causes every Plant to
grow; but it causes not the difference between the Rose, and the Nettle* and
the Oak. The wonderful unsearchable Virtue of the Seed causes that. And if you
would know that Virtue, you must know it by the effects. You cannot tell by the
Seed only of a Rose, a Vine, an Oak, what is in it. But when you see the Plants
in ripeness, you may see that the Seeds had a specifying Virtue, by the influx
of the general Cause, to bring forth those Plants, Flowers, etc. Neither can
you know what is in the Egg, but by the ripe Bird; nor what the Soul of an
Infant is, but by Manhood and its Acts.

. 34. You here page 7. divert from the point of the Immortality or Nature of
the Soul, to that of the Resurrection of the Body: of which I will now say but
this; Christ rose, and has promised us a Resurrection, and nothing is
difficult to God. (...) often signifies our living another life after this. The
Body has more parts than Earth and Water. The Spirits as we call them, which
are the igneous parts, lodged in the purest aereal in the blood, etc. are that
body in and by which the Soul does operate on the rest. How much of these
material Spirits the Soul may retain with it after Death, we know not: and if
it have such a body* it has partly the same; and God can make what Addition he
please, which shall not contradict identity: Paul says of Corn, God gives it
a body as pleases him, in some respect the same, etc. in some not the same
that was sown. We do not hold, That all the flesh that ever a man had, shall be
raised as that man's. If one man that was fat, grow lean in his sickness, we do
not say, that all the flesh that sickness wasted, shall rise: It shall rise a
spiritual body. God knows that which you and I know not.

. 35. You add, how easy it would have been to you to believe as the Church
believes, and not to have immerged your self in these difficulties?

Ans. 1. The Church is nothing but all individual Christians; and it is their
Belief which makes them capable of being of the Church: As we must be men in
order of Nature, before we are a Kingdom of men; so we are Believers before we
are a Church of Believers. A Kingdom or Policy makes us not men, but is made
of men; and Church-society or Policy makes us not Believers, but is made up of
Believers. Therefore Belief is first, and is not caused by that which follows
it? And why does the Church believe? Is it because they believe?

And whom do they believe? Is it themselves? I doubt you have fallen into
acquaintance with those whose Interest has made it their Trade to puzzle and
confound men about things as hard to themselves as others, that they may bring
them to trust the Church, and then tell them that it is they that are that
Church, as a necessary means to the quieting their minds. And they tell them,
You are never able by reason to comprehend the mysteries of Faith; the more you
search, the more you are confounded. But if you believe as the Church
believes, you shall speed as the Church speedeth., But it is one thing to
believe the same thing which the Church believes; and another to believe it
with the same faith, and upon the same Authority. If a man believe all the
Articles of the Creed only because men tell him that they are true, it is but a
human Faith, as resting only on man's Authority; but the true Members of the
Church believe all the same things, because God reveals and attesteth them;
and this is a Divine Faith: And so must you.

If you love light more than darkness and deceit, distinguish, 1. Believing men
for Authority. 2. Believing men for their Honesty, 3. Believing men* for the
natural impossibility of their deceiving.

And the foundation of this difference is here: Man's Soul has two sorts of
acts, Necessary and Contingent, or mutably free.

To love our selves, to be unwilling to be miserable, and willing to be happy;
to love God as good, if known, etc. are acts of the Soul as necessary, as for
fire to burn combustible contiguous matter; or for a Bruit to eat; so that all
the Testimonies which is produced by these necessary acts by knowing men, has
a Physical certainty, the contrary being impossible. And this is infallible
historical knowledge of matter of fact. Thus we know there is such a City as
Rome, Paris, Venice, etc. and that there was such a man as K. James, Ed. 6.
Hen. 8. William the Conqueror, etc. And that the Statutes now ascribed to Ed.
3. and other Kings and their Parliaments are genuine. For Judges judge by them;
Lawyers plead them, Kings own them, all men hold their Estates and Lives by
them. Contrary men's Interest by Lawyers are daily pleaded by them against each
other; and if any one would deny, forge or corrupt a Statute* Interest would
engage the rest against him to detect his fraud.

1. The certain effect of natural necessary Causes has natural necessary
evidence of Truth.

But when all knowing men of contrary Dispositions and Interests. acknowledge a
thing true, this is the effect of nataral necessary Causes.

Ergo it has natural necessary evidence of Truth.

2. It is impossible there should be an Effect without a sufficient Cause.

But that a thing should be false which all knowing men of contrary
Dispositions and Interests acknowledge to be true, would be an Effect without a
Cause; for there is no Cause in nature to effect it. It is impossible in nature
that all men in England should agree to say, There was a King James, K. Edward,
Q. Mary, or that these Statutes were made by them, if it were false. This is
infallible Historical Testimony. It were not so strong if it were only by one
Party, and not by Enemies also, or men of contrary Minds and Interests. And
thus we know the History of the Gospel; and this Tradition is naturally
infallible.

II. But all the Testimony which depends on humane Acts, not necessary, but
free, have but an uncertain moral humane Credibility. For so all men are Liars;
i.e. fallible, and not fully to be trusted.

And I. Those Testimonies which depend on men's Honesty, are no farther
credible, than we know the Honesty of the men: which in some is great, in some
is (...), in most is mixed, and lubricous, and doubtful, Alas! what abundance of
false History is in the world! Who can trust the Honesty of such men, as
multitudes of Popes, Prelates, and Priests have been? Will they stick at a Lie,
that stick not at Blood, or any wickedness? Besides, the ignorance which
invalidates their Testimony.

II. And to pretend Authority to rule our Faith, is the most unsatisfactory way
of all. For before you can believe that Jesus is the Christ, and his Word true,
how many impossibilities have you to believe? 1. You must believe that Christ
has a Church. 2. And has authorized them to determine what is to be believed,
before you believe that he is Christ. 3. You must know who they be whom you
must believe; whether all, or some, or a major vote. Whether out of all the
world, or a party. 4. And how far their Authority extends? Whether to judge
whether there be a God, or no God; a Christ, or no Christ; a Heaven, or none; a
Gospel, or none: or what. 5. And how their determinations out of all the world
may come with certainty to us: and where to find them. 6. And when Countries
and Councils contradict and condemn each other, which is to be believed. Many
such impossibilities in the Roman way, must be believed, before a m^n can
believe that Jesus is the Christ. In a word, you must not puzzle your head to
know what a man is, or whether he have an immortal soul; but you must, 1.
believe the Church of Believers, before you are a Believer in Christ. 2. And
you must believe, that Christ was God and Man, and came to save man, before you
believe that there is such a creature as man, or what he is, and whether he
have a soul capable of salvation. But I have often elsewhere opened these
Absurdities and Contradictions; where you may see them confuted, if you are
willing.

. 36. Your question about the souls nature, existence, and Individuation, may
be resolved by a surer and easier way: as follows:

I. By your own certain experience.

1. You perceive that you see, feel, understand, will and execute. 2. You may
know, as is often said, that therefore you have an active power to do these. 3.
You may thence know, that it is a substance which has that power. Nothing can
do nothing. 4. You may perceive, that it is not the terrene substance, but an
invisible substance, actuating the body. 5. You may know, that there is no
probability, that so noble a substance should be annihilated. 6. Or that a pure
and simple substance should be dissolved by the separation of parts (or if that
were, every part would be a spirit still). 7. You have no cause to suspect,
that this substance should lose those powers or faculties which are its
essential form, and be turned into some other species, or thing. 8. And you
have as little cause to suspect, that an essential vital intellective power,
will not be active, when active inclination is its Essence. 9. You have no
cause to suspect, that it will want Objects to action in a World of such
variety of Objects. 10. And you have as little cause to suspect, that it will
be unactive, for want of Organs, when God has made its Essence active; and
either can make new Organs; or that which can act on matter, can act without,
or on other matter. He that can play on a Lute, can do somewhat as good, if
that be broken. 11. And experience might satisfy you, that several men have
several souls, by the several and contrary Operations. 12. And you have no
reason to suspect, that God will turn many, from being many* into one; or that
unity should be any of their loss. All this, Reason tells you, beginning at
your own experience, as I have (and elsewhere more fully) opened.

. 37. II. And you have at hand sensible proof of the individuation of spirits,
by Witches, Contracts, and Apparitions: of which the world has unquestionable
proof, tho there be very many Cheats. Read Mr. Glanvill's new Book, published
by Dr. Moore, Lavater de Spectris, Zanchy de Angilii, Manlii Collect. Bodin's
Daemonolog. Remigius of Witches, besides all the Mallei Malificorum, and doubt
if you can. If you do, I can give you yet more, with full proof.

. 38. III. But all that I have said to you, is but the least part, in
comparison of the assurance which you may have by the full revelats on of Jesus
Christ, who has brought life and immortality to light in the Gospel* where the
state, the doom, the rewards and punishment of souls is asserted.

And without dark and long Ambages, or Roman Juggles, we prove the truth of
this Gospel, briefly and infallibly thus:

I. The History of Christ's Life, Miracles, Doctrine, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, the Apostles Miracles, etc. is proved by such forementioned
evidence, as has physical certainty: Not such as depends only on men's
honesty, or moral argument, much less on a pretended determining authority; but
such as depends on necessary acts of man, even the consent of all sorts of
contrary minds and interests, as we know the Statutes of the Land, or other
certain History. But we are so far from needing to ask, which part of
Christians it is that is this Church, that is to be believed, that it tends
to the assertaining of us, that all the Christian World, Papists, Protestants,
Greeks, Moscovites, Armenians, Jacobites, Nestorians, etc. herein agree, even
while they oppose each other. To know whether there was a Julius, or Augustus
Caesar, a Virgil, Ovid Cicero, and which are their Works; yea, which are the
Acts of Councils* no man goes to an authorized determining Judge for the matter
of Fact, but to historical proof. And this we have most full.

II. And if the History be true, the Doctrine must needs be true, seeing it is
fully proved by the matters of Fact. Christ being proved to be Christ, all his
words must needs be true.

. 39. The Gospel of Christ, has these four parts of its infallible evidence.

I. The antecedent and inhererent Prophecies fulfilled.

II. The inherent impress of Divinity on the Gospel it self, unimitable by man.
It has Gods Image and Superscription; and its Excellency, propria luce, is
discernible.

III. All the Miracles, and Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ, the Gift of
his Spirit, and extraordinary Miracles of the Apostles, and first Churches.

IV. The sanctifying work of the Spirit by this Gospel, on all Believers in all
Ages of the World, by which they have the Witness in themselves. A full
constant unimitable Testimony.

. 40. And now how highly soever you think of Bruits, think not too basely of
Men, for whom Christ became a Savior: And yet think not so highly of Men,
Bruits and Stones, as to think that they are God. And think not that your true
diligence has confounded you, but either your negligence, or seducers, or the
unhappy stifling of obvious truth, by the ill ordering of your thoughts. And I
beseech you remember, that Gods Revelationt are suited to man's use, and our
true knowledge to his Revtlations. He has not told us all that man would know,
but what we must know. Nothing is more known to us than that of God which is
necessary for us: Yet nothing so incomprehensible as God. There is much of the
Nature of Spirits, and the world to come, unsearchable to us, which will pose
all our Wits: yet we have sufficient certainty of so much as tells us our duty
and our hopes. God has given us Souls to use, and to know only so far as is
useful. He that made your Watch, taught not you how it is made; but how to use
it. Instead therefore of your concluding complaints of your condition, thank
God, who has made man capable to seek him, serve him, love him, prai^e him,
and rejoice in hope of promised Perfection. Live not as a willful stranger to
your Soul and God. Use faithfully the Faculties which he has given you: sin
not wilfully against the truth revealed, and leave things secret to God, till
you come into the clearer light: and you shall have no cause to complain, that
God* whose goodness is equal to his greatness, has dealt hardly with mankind.
Instead of trusting fallible man, trust Christ, who has fully proved his
trustiness; and his Spirit will advance you to higher things than bruits are
capable of. God be merciful to us dark unthankful sinners*

Mar. 14. 1681. Ri. Baxter.

ERRATA.
IN the Second Part, p* 12. l. 9. for primus r. Primae p. 16. l. 21. for is r.
are.

I have not leisure to gather the rest, if there be any.


