Universal Redemption OF Mankind, BY THE Lord Jesus Christ:

Stated and Cleared by the late Learned Mr. Richard Baxter.

Whereunto is added a short Account of Special Redemption, by the same Author.

2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. For the love of Christ constrains us because we thus
judge, that if one dyed for all, then were all dead, and that he dyed for all,
that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him
which dyed for them, and ^ose again.

Mors Christi in Sacra Scripture proponitur ut Universale remedium omnibus and
singulis hominibus exordinatione Dei and natura rei ad salutem applicabile.
Davenant de morte Christi.

LONDON. Printed for John Salusbury at the Rising-Sun in Cornhill, 1694.

THE Epistle Dedicatory. To the Honored Thomas Foley, Paul Foley, Phillip
Foley, and William Jolliff, Esquires.
Worthy Sirs,
MY particular Relation to your Honored Father, my Worthy Patron and
Benefactor, as also to Mr. Baxter, the Author of these ensuing Disputations,
(whom I cannot but own as a Spiritual Father to me, and the best Friend I had
in the World) gives me occasion to prefix your Names to this Book: Not to
flatter you (though I truly honor you for your Faithfulness, Courage, and
Constancy in asserting the Rights of Religion and Property in opposition to the
profane and mercenary designs of such as appeared against them) but that by
their Example I may invite you to go on in filling up the measure of your
Fathers Virtues, and in following the Counsels of such a Minister of Christ,
whose gifts and graces gave him the preeminence amongst his Suffering Brethren,
and made him more than a Bishop even of the first Magnitude to the Inferior
Clergy. Your Father is dead long since, and Mr. Baxter is dead also; But the
Memory of the Just is blessed, whereas the name of the Wicked shall rot. The
Righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. We cannot easily forget such
Persons whose good works and great labors for public good, have left them a
Name better than of Sons and Daughters. A numerous Posterity is a great
Blessing, a Holy Seed much greater, that the Blessing upon both accounts may be
entailed upon you and yours to many Generations, is the hearty desire of

Yours in the Service of Christ JOSEPH READ.

READER. June 27. 1694.
HAving been assured from Mr. Baxter himself, both by word and writeing, that
he had given this his Treatise in Manuscript of Universal Redemption, etc. to
Mr. Joseph Read the now Publisher thereof; and having seen some of the
Manuscript it self whilst it was printing off, and knowing it to be Mr.
Baxter's own hand writing; I do (at Mr. Read's request) assure thee that this
is the Treatise upon that Subject, which has been so long desired and expected
by the World from the Author thereof, Mr. R. B. And I cannot doubt but that an
Impartial and observant Reading thereof will quickly discover that acumen of
judgment which will evince it to be his. Thine in the best of Bonds and
Services,

MAT. SYLVESTER

To the READER.
IT is necessary that I give some Account how these Disputations (with many
others) came to my hands, and of their Publication. Being sent to Cambridge by
Mr. Baxter, be was pleased at my return from thence, to receive me into his
Family, and to make use of me as his Assistant at my first entrance into the
Ministry, Anno, 1657. in Kidderminster the place of my Birth: Some of the first
work he put me upon was to transcribe these Papers of Redemption, which he
designed for the Press. The Ministers of Worcestershire and Neighborhood
thereabouts who usually attended on his Thursday Lecture, and heard these
Disputations at their Monthly Meeting, were generally desirous to have them
Printed. Mr. B. had long since raised their expectation thereof, by declaring
his intention of it in Print. At last (though long first) viz. July 17. 1691.
he gave them to me, signifying his willingness to have them Printed.

If any Person question whether he wrote and fitted these Sheets for the Press,
I shall readily satisfy him by producing the Original of his own hand writing,
as well as the Copy thereof wrote by me at least 38 years since. If these
Disputations of Redemption find acceptance (which I see no cause to doubt of) I
shall be thereby encouraged to Print the rest, or such of them as may be
thought most useful.

It was a great word of Bishop Wilkins, that Mr. Baxter had cultivated every
Subject he handled, (read this Subject of Redemption, and judge whether there
be not cause to say so of it) if he had lived in the Primitive times, he had
been one of the Fathers of the Church. And again. It was enough, says he, for
one Age to produce such a Person as Mr. Baxter: But his works praise him much
more than the Tongues or Pens of the greatest Doctors or best of Men can do.
There is therefore no need of Letters of Recommendation to set forth the
excellence of this Work* or the Praises of the Author thereof. Let it suffice
to assure the Reader that this Disputation of Universal Redemption was composed
by him in the strength of his day, about the 40th year of his Age, when the
opposition of the Learned of differing Opinions had sharpened his Pen, and made
him critically exact in considering what he intended for the Press. That which
I earnestly desire is, that young Ministers, and especially all Candidates for
the Ministry would put on humbleness of mind, and set themselves at the feet of
this Great Man as Learners, and then through the Divine Blessing, I doubt not
but their profiting will appear unto all men: And let those of different
Judgment from him, but remember, that Mr. Baxter now dead is as much above
their clamorous censures, as while living he was their Superior in his Gifts
and Graces: Had the one or the other but known Mr. Baxter, as well as others of
his familiar Friends, his Works would be highly valued by them; or at least his
unspotted Holiness, and great Charity would so far have conciliated their
minds, and engaged their affections as to love and honor his memory, and
imitate his Life, which we impatiently wait for an account of from another
band, being now ready for the Press. May every Minister but have that Book when
Printed, and lay aside prejudice so far, at least as calmly to read it, and
then I may with confidence expect, not only, that humble Learners, but the
greatest Scholars will be as desirous of acquaintance with his Works as ever
Usher, Gataker, Vines, and many others of the best of men were admirers of his
Personal worth, and desirous of his Converse and Company.

If any shall be so far dissatisfied with the Title and Subject of the Book as
to throw it aside, I only desire they would seriously think of those words, p.
286. [When God says so expressly that Christ dyed for all, and tasted death for
every man, and is the Ransom for all, and the propitiation for the sins of the
whole World, it beseems every Christian rather to explain in what sense Christ
dyed for all men, than flatly to deny it.] And let me add those words of Bishop
Usher; Distinguish between the satisfaction of Christ absolutely considered,
and the application of the same unto every one in particular: The former was
once done for all, the other is still in doing; the one brings with it
sufficiency abundant to discharge the whole debt, the other adds unto it
efficacy. The Universality of the satisfaction derogates nothing from the
special grace; neither the speciality of the one, abateth the generality of the
other.

The Lord give us a right understanding of his mind and will, and bless this
work of the Author, both to Ministers and their People, that the common
Salvation may not be narrowed or lessened, that Coming Souls may not be
discouraged, and that the Gospel of Salvation which we Preach may be Tidings of
Joy to all People, and then I shall not repent my part in the Publication
thereof.



June 18. 1694. JOSEPH READ.

OF Universal Redemption.
Chap. 1. The General Question, Whether Christ Died for All Men, and not only
for the Elect? Aff.
THough, according to the Order of our Disputations, I must directly Affirm or
Deny; and indeed may safely Affirm as the Question is thus generally put, yet
that it may be understood in what sense I affirm it, it is necessary that those
ambiguities be removed, which, in some of the terms do cloud the sense, and
that the nature of the Subject be somewhat opened. And indeed, it is a clear
Explication that is most necessary in this Controversy; that we may not (as is
here usual) fight in the dark, and trouble our selves with unuseful
Argumentations, on an ill stated question, and in dubious terms; not knowing
each others mind, if well our own.

Who is meant by [ Christ] we are all agreed: and who by [ Men:] and that
therefore we extend not the Question to Angels; though that with some be a
great dispute, whether Christ dyed not in some sort for them. By his [ Dying]
we mean, His whole Humiliation, of which his Death is so principal a part; that
as the Scripture takes most notice of it, so must we. Amesius thinks that the
Assumption of the Human Nature, is no part of this Humiliation; his reason is,
because it was an Act of the Sole Deity: And the Godhead cannot suffer. But I
think we need not be of that Opinion; For, 1. The Holy Ghost seems to me to
contradict it, making it part of Christ's Humiliation, To make himself of no
Reputation and take upon him the form of a Servant, and be made in the likeness
of Men, when he was in the form of God, and equal with God, Phil. 2. 6, 7. 2.
And though the Godhead cannot suffer the Loss of any Real Good, or suffer any
Pain, yet in a Relative Sense he may be said to suffer while he is disesteemed
and dishonored. Man's Obedience adds nothing to him, nor can it properly be
said to do Good to God; yet is it in Bonum Dei Reputavite as Aquin. speaks: It
is Good and due to God from us; and when we deny it him, we deprive him of his
due: Gods Glory is dear to him, or else Divines would not so use to affirm it
his Sole End: (which saying yet needs Caution:) And as Relative and Reputative
he enjoys and delights in his Honor and our Praises as good, so Relative
and Reputative he suffers when he is Dishonored. And so the Condescension
was so great (indeed to the astonishment of Angels and Men,) that it may well
be taken for part of Christ's Suffering; that ^^od should by assuming so mean a
Nature, become Man: It is the point that so surpasses Human Reason, and
seems so improbable to it, that it puts Faith harder to it, (and consequently
ennobleth it more) than any other in the World; which occasioned the whole
Moral work of Faith, containing diverse Physical Acts; to be all entitled or
denominated hence, by the name of Belief. So that I am readier to think that
the Eclipsing of the Glory of the Godhead in so strange a Condescension and
Humility, not only in his Assumption of the Human Nature, but in the Life and
Death of Christ, was the greatest part of his Sufferings: And am so far from
thinking that the Godhead did not Suffer, that I think its Sufferings were the
chiefest for merit; though in a Natural Sense it be incapable of suffering.

But a greater Ambiguity lies in the Word [ All.] [ All] is taken sometime
limitedly and improperly for the multitude or very many, as in Mat. 2. 3. and
3. 5. Mar. 1. 32, 33. Acts 5. 12. etc. 2. Sometime properly, according to the
different subjects. Sometime it is spoken of All kinds only, as of All Ages,
Sexes, Estates, Degrees, Nations, Conditions of Men: Sometime of All Persons,
and then if it be [ All] in proper speech we need not expect that [ Every one]
should be added; for All Persons and Every Person, are equivalent. And though
our Question be of [ All] in this last proper sense, yet principally as
contradistinguished from the Elect only: And I had rather far so take it here,
as referring only to those that have heard the Gospel. Not that I doubt at all
of Christ's Dying for every Man, so far as we shall anon explain. But 1. Because
the case is more clearly opened in Scripture: 2. And much more concerns us to
know, How God deals with those to whom Christ is revealed, than with those to
whom he is not revealed. God speaks both little and more darkly of the State of
those to whom he speaks not; seeing it concerns us not to know his Counsels
about others, so much as about our selves. Those therefore who in all disputes
on this Question, do still insist on the Case of Infants and Pagans to whom
Christ was never revealed, to prove that he Dyed not for All, do plainly show,
that they seek not the clearing of the point, and manifestation of the truth,
but the Obscuring of it. It being the usual trick of men that are at a loss,
and can carry on their Cause no farther, to argue presently a minus noto, and
ad obscurum ab obscuriore, that so they may carry the business into a mist,
which will not endure the light, and so may bring their Antagonists to grope;
the weakest having the most disadvantage in the dark. If it had much concerned
us to know on what terms the Indians are judged that never heard of Christ, the
Scripture would have said more of it; and not have fitted the description of
the Judicial process wholly, or almost wholly to the state of those that have
heard the Gospel, Mat. 25. 2. These. 1. 6, 7, 8, etc. So that I desire to handle
this Question now, as it concerns all those that have heard the Gospel,
knowing no great use (but some hurt) that may be in the extending it farther in
our dispute; yet with those that are contentious, and will needs insist on the
supposed advantage which the state of Indians and other Pagans and their
Infants do afford them, I shall though unwillingly, proceed further, rather
than prejudice the Truth.

But the greatest Ambiguity in our Question is in the term [For.] This
proposition here may admit of diverse Senses: Sometime Christ is said to Die
[For] our Sins: Sometimes To Die [For] us; When he is said to Die [For] our
Sins, it may be understood, 1. Either for our Sins as the pro Meritorious
procuring Cause of his Suffering through his own undertaking to bear what they
deserved: (Or if any think it fitter to call them the Occasion than the
Meritorious Cause, they may.) And so, to Die [For] our Sins. is to Die [through
the Desert] of our Sins. 2. Or else he may be said to Die [For] our Sins,
Finaliter* as Sin is part of the Evil which he intended through death to free
us from. And so, to Die [For] Sin, is To Die [against] Sin: As when we say,
This Medicine is good [For] such a Disease; we mean it is good [against it.]

When Christ is said to Die [For us] it may be meant either, 1. Subjective that
he Died Loco nosiro (of which more anon,) 2. Or Finaliter; And that two ways,
1. Either as we are to be his own in propriety; and so 1. To be a means to his
own glory, 2. Or his Propriety a means to our further good. And thus he dies
[For] Men by way of purchase, as a Man gives a Price [For] a Slave or Condemned
Malefactor, (for I will not say, as we buy a Beast in the Market, seeing that
is only for our selves; and not for the good of the Beast.) 2. Or else more
directly as we are the Finis Cui of those benefits which by his Death he
procures. And so Dying [For us] is either taken generally, respecting our
selves generally considered as the Objects of his love. As one Friend or Lover
is said to Die for the sake of another in several Cases; as in fighting for
him, or other way of signifying or testifying Love: So generally considered
Christ Died nostri gratia. 2. Or in reference to the special Benefits which by
his Death he procured [for us.] Which Benefits might be variously considered,
either, 1. As to be offered, or to be enjoyed: 2. Either quoad possibilitatem,
vel quoad futuritionem possessionis: 3. Quoad rem ipsam, vel quoad Jus ad rem:
with diverse other Considerations, which I will pass by; lest by needless
distinguishing I should rather obscure the point than clear it. Only, before I
can go any farther I must needs lay down a few Distinctions which are of great
moment and necessity for the right understanding of this matter. 1. And first
and above all, we must both distinguish between the diverse Effects or Ends of
Christ's Death; and rightly consider the Reason and the Order of each of them.
For to know only in general that Christ dyed for us, is so far from being a
sufficient knowledge for a Divine, that it is not sufficient to denominate a
man a Christian; seeing it says no more of Christ than may be said of Stephen,
Peter, Paul, or one another: For we must, if called to it, die for one another,
says John, 1 Epist. 3. 16. Yet I confess the right ordering of this whole work
in our Conceivings is a matter of great difficulty though of great moment. At
the present time will permit me only to give you this brief Account of my
thoughts herein.

I Consider, 1. What Christ did: 2. Why he did it.

1. That which he did was 1. In sensu Naturali, to Suffer and Die. 2. In sensu
Legali vel Morali, It was, 1. In General, to be Punished: 2. In Special, it was
A voluntary bearing in the person of a Mediator in the stead of fallen Mankind
that punishment in weight which for their Sin the Law of works Obliged them to
bear. Or to speak in the Scripture phrase (which it were well if men had been
contented with) it is the offering himself a Sacrifice for Sin, and so to take
them away as a Ransom for Atonement and Propitiation.

2. Why Christ did this, must be answered from the Efficient and Final Causes.
In general, Gods will is the Principal Efficient and Ultimate Final Cause of
this, and all things. More particularly, 1. God was the Author or first Cause
in committing this work to his Son, and sending him to do it. 2. Gods Mercy and
Compassion (speaking after the manner of Men) was the Impulsive Cause. 3. Man's
misery was the Occasion. 4. Man's sin was another occasion, as being loco Causae
Meritoriae; for properly there was no Meritorious Cause. 5. The Laws Curse or
Obligation was another occasion, as being Miseriae Causa removenda. 6. Christ's
Voluntary Sponsion or Consent was the Moral Obliging Cause, supplying the place
both of a Meritorious and of a Legal Obliging Cause. 7. Christ himself was the
Voluntary Patient. 8. God himself was the Principal moral Efficient, so far as
it had rationem boni: (For he cannot be a morally deficient Cause, nor an
Efficient of Punishment so far as it has in it rationem very mali.) 9. Satan
was the Principal Author of it, as it was Evil. 10. Wicked men were the
Instruments.

2. And for the Ends there is two ways of discerning and expressing them. The
1. is according to Gods order of Intention. The 2. accordding to His Order of
Attainment and Execution.

1. The former is less fit for our observation both because we are utterly
uncertain whether it be fully and wholly revealed; seeing God may have End^
which he judges not fit to communicate to us; and where it is not revealed
either 1. By Scripture; or 2. By Event, it is impossible we should know it.

2. And because when we do see Events, yet we are so vastly distant from God,
and exceeding strange to his unconceivable unexpressible Nature, that we know
not what has the place of an End and what of a means in the Divine Intention,
farther than He has told us: Nor know what Gods intention is, the term being
properly appliable only to Creatures, and no term of Human Language in strict
propriety appliable to the Nature of God.

But this much the Scripture Reveals to us, 1. That in the sense as God may
be said to have an end, Gods proper ultimate end is himself. He made all things
for himself, and can have no lower end than himself. But how himself is his end
is hard to open. If we say, his Being as such is his End, or that his Essential
Glory is his End; we do but darken the matter and lose our selves. For neither
Redemption nor any other work can either cause, conserve or add to that Being
and Glory. If we say, His Glory in the Esteem of the Creature is his utmost
End, we suppose him to have an End Infinitely below himself. If you say, that
the Communication of himself to his Creature is his End, either you speak of
the Acts of Communication as in God, and so it is himself; (as before
expressed) Efficiently and not Finally Considered: Or else you speak of the
form produced by it, or as received by the Creature; and so it is quid Creatum
and extra Naturam Divinam, and too low to be his End. I conclude therefore that
man is incapable of a clear and full conceiving of the Nature of Gods End or
Intending. But the conception and expression which I judge to be most favored
by Scripture and Reason is, That Gods will is the Beginning and End of all
things. Whatsoever pleased him, that did he, And when he has done it the
pleasing him is his End. And therefore he Rested after the work of Creation,
and expresses himself well pleased by and in his Son in the work of
Redemption, as seeing his work in both to be very good: and therefore
instituted a day of Rest in Commemoration of both. The term Rest expresses the
End; and his Well-pleasedness, Content, or Will, is his Rest, and so his End
(And in this sense God himself is his own End,) and indeed this Pleasing him
should be Man's End also.

2. But besides this Ultimate End, (though properly God can have no End but
himself;) yet there are some means so closely conjunct with this End, as being
the immediate matter of Gods Approbation and Delight, that they may not unfitly
be called Gods secondary or less principal ends themselves; especially we may
so say in regard of Christ's intentions who is Man as well as God. And these are,

1. The Glory, or Image, or Perfections of God, as appearing in all his works;
thus his own Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness there shining forth, is that Glory
in which he is well-pleased, and which he loves. And thus the Glory of God is
materially only or objectively his utmost End, as that in which his Will does
Rest.

2. The Glorifying of the Mediator in his Human Nature, and his full
satisfaction and content in the fruits of his Redemption.

3. The Glory and Happiness of his Elect who are his Body.

4. Their Everlasting perfect Praises of God, loving him, and rejoicing in him.

5. And even in this Life, the Just, Wise, Merciful Administrations of the
Mediator in his Kingdom, and the imperfect Deliverance and Holiness of the
Saints, and the glory that redounds to God hereby, may not unfitly be said to
be the Ends of the Redeemer.

But I will meddle with this Order of Intention no farther, as intending God
willing, to speak more fully and accurately of that Question de ordine
decretorum, de fine and de mediis in a fitter place.

2. But let us consider of the Order of these Ends as Executed, I mean of the
Effects of Christ's Death. And they are 1. Such as immediately follow it, as it
is the Discharge of the Sufferers undertaking, being indeed, 1. Part of his
Work in its Moral Consideration: 2. Or else the immediate results of that
Discharge These are, 1. That Christ's Death does demonstrate Gods justice and
hatred of Sin. 2. In it an Example is given for the deterring of Offenders. 3.
And for preserving the Lawgiver, and the Law from contempt. 4. And a
demonstration made of unspeakable Love to Men. 5. And in and by these, 1. The
Lawgiver satisfied. 2. And the chief Ends of the Law are attained: (though we
cannot strictly say that the Law it self is satisfied, because its sense and
nearest end is not fulfilled. Thus satisfaction of Justice is) the sum of these
most immediate Effects. And the whole work together may well be called A
Satisfactory Penalty.

2. Satisfaction being thus made, there are immediately hereupon, several
Relative Effects resulting from it. Whereof some are from the Nature of the
Work, (supposing that which is called The Covenant between the Father and the
Son, that is, Gods Acceptance.) And some are given as it were by way of
Retribution, or in Communication to Christ for his satisfaction.

Of the first sort are these,

1. Christ himself is now free from his Voluntary obligation to suffer. In the
same sense as he was before made Sin, he is now Justified; and upon his
Resurrection declared just. He owes no more, nor can any more be required of
him.

2. The Father therefore does give him an Acquittance, and acknowledges the
satisfaction, proclaiming himself well-pleased in his Son.

3. And hereby is Christ become Conqueror over Death, and Him who had the
Power of Death, even the Devil; (Supposing his Resurrection.)

2. Satisfaction is so pleasing to God, that upon the giving thereof, the work
becomes Meritorious of Reward to the satisfier.

1. Because it was not Due from Him, nor Compelled, but voluntary.

2. Because (though God be not capable of receiving good, yet) it was from his
own earnest desire which he was moved to by Compassion to Man, and so it was
reputative, in bonum Dei, as being pleasing to him.

The things given to the Satisfier by way of Retribution are, 1. Some directly
to himself, as necessary to the Ends of Redemption: 2. Some for the Sinners in
whose stead he suffered.

To himself is given. 1. Something to be received before the End and Delivering
up of the Kingdom, and something after. Before he Received, 1. Real, the
glorifying of his person. 2. Relative Fruits, Novum jus Dominii, a full
Propriety in the Creature as his own which he bought. And that is, 1. Over
Mankind whom he Redeemed. 2. And all the Creatures as they may be serviceable
to his Ends. By his Propriety in Man he has Power, 1. To use what means he
sees meet to persuade them to himself. Either 1. External, 1. As the Word, or
2. Works. 2. Or Internal, by his Spirit, and their Conscience. 2. And to
succeed the means. By his Propriety in other Creatures, he has Power to
dispose of, 1. Persons, both 1. Angels, and 2. Enemies, as Devils; and 2.
Things: As 1. Creatures, 2. Actions, and Thoughts, so as many serve his Ends of
Redemption.

2. Beside this Propriety, he has Novum Jus Imperii, and is become Rector of
the Rational Creature, whom he Redeemed. This is partly consequential to his
Jus Dominii: For every Man has Power to Rule his Own according to its
Capacity. By this Rectorship Christ has Power, 1. To Determine both 1. What
shall be Due from Man, 2. And What shall be Due to him: Which he does, 1. By
making Laws de novo. 2. And disposing of the Old at his pleasure. And as he
has this power of the Laws: So, 2. Of their Execution. 1. By Sentence. 2. And
by the Execution of the Sentence. Thus much of that which Christ himself was to
receive for his satisfaction in this time before the End.

2. After the End he was further to receive, 1. The continuation or
perpetuating of his Personal Glory and Blessedness. 2. A full Content in the
perfect accomplishment of his work, 1. In the just Destruction of his Enemies
that rebelled and rejected him. 2. And in the Blessedness and Glory of his
Saints, who are his Body: and in the pleasing of God in all. Thus much of what
Christ was to receive to himself.

2. That which Mankind was to receive for whom he satisfied, was 1.
Immediately, in the change of his Condition; where is Considerable,

1. The Terminus a quo, which was, A Legal necessity of Destruction or
Damnation; which consists in this, that now the Lawgiver (God-Creator) being
satisfied, he is no longer necessitated or obliged (as we may speak) to destroy
the Sinner; (though yet the Law is not wholly Abrogate, nor its Obligation of the
Sinner to Duty or Punishment dissolved:) but the Sinner is Delivered from that
Law as it stands alone without a Remedy, seeing a sufficient Remedy is
provided, and the Law it self is now at the pleasure and dispose of the
Redeemer, who will Judge no Man by this Law alone, or principally. So that the
Sinner who before was not pardonable, but in potentia remotiore nor at all
quoad Potentiam Dei ordinatam in his former state, without this change; is now
become pardonable in Potentia propriore, and quoad Potentiam Deiordinatam in
his present state.

2. The Terminus ad quem, or state to which he is Delivered; is,

1. To the Redeemer as Proprietary, he being his Own.

2. To the Redeemer as Rector, to be dealt with on terms of Grace, and in order
to Recovery from his Misery.

3. And in both these to the Redeemer as our grand Benefactor and Savior whose
Office is to lead us to God by the winning demonstration of his Love.

Man's state having this immediate change of Relation: 2. The Benefits
Consequential to these which he receives; are Either, 1. From Christ as
Rector: Or, 2. As Dominus absolutus, Proprietary. 3. And as a free Benefactor
doing as he list with his own benefits.

1. As Rector, Christ is (as is said) 1. Legislator: 2. And sees to the
Execution. As Legislator, 1. He takes down the old Law, both, 1. That of
works, as it is a proper covenant and means of Life, and so freeth man from the
necessity of perfect obeying for salvation (though yet he destroy not its being
or obligation to perfect obedience.) 2. And he freeth those that were under it,
from the Mosaical Law of Rites, and that by Abrogating it (But this was not
till the fullness of time, but the other was presently upon the beginning of
Restoration.) 2. He [1. Makes, 2. Promulgateth] a New Law of Grace,
containing, 1. Essentials: 2. Accidentals. By the Essentials of the Law, 1. He
prescribes to men a sweet and easy Course of Duty, and gives them commands
that are not grievious; which 1. In some respects he makes mere Duties and
Means: 2. And in other respects, Conditions of their receiving farther
benefits. 2. He determines of what shall be Due to man, (as by way of Penalty
if they Rebel; so, 1.) By conferring farther benefits on men: Which are
Considerable, 1. In themselves: 2. In the way of Collation. 1. The Benefits
given by the new Law or Covenant are, 1. Right to relative Benefits or new
Relations. 2. Or Right to real Benefits. The former are, 1. Principal and
Radical, that is, Membership of Christ or Union with him. 2. Or Consequential:
Which are, 1. The fruits of satisfaction, properly as satisfaction; that is,
The Restoring us from the misery we fell into, by freeing us from Guilt or
Obligation to punishment, by pardoning our Sin, and Justifying us, so far. 2.
Those that are Consequential to satisfaction, not merely as satisfaction, but
as a Price Purchasing or Meriting farther good, (and so are consequents of his
Meritorious Works also.) And that is his bringing us to a higher and better
state of Relation than that which was lost; which is in, 1. Adoption to
Sonship. 2. Membership of the Church of the Redeemed and Called.

2. The real Benefits which the Covenant gives us right to are, 1. Such as are
to be received in this Life: As 1. The Spirit to be, 1. Our further Sanctifier:
2. And Comforter. 2. And all other things to work for our good, and promote our
Recovery and Happiness. 2. Or such as are to be received in the Life to come;
Either at the Entrance, as, 1. Felicity of the Soul first, and then
Resurrection from the Dead. 2. And Justification by sentence and adjudication
of Eternal Glory: 2. Or in the state thereof, which is our Perfect Blessedness
in Enjoying God, and being perfectly acceptable to him in our Persons, and
Praises. We speak not now of these real benefits as Conferred in themselves;
but in the Right we have to them before hand: All which Right is given by the
New Law or Covenant, as Gods Instrument.

2. And as the benefits given, so the manner of the Laws giving must needs be
observed: Which is, 1. By imperfect Collation, not ipso facto, presently making
the thing our own, which is, 1. When the gift is conditional, suspended on some
Condition: And only thus does the Law or Covenant give Pardon, Justification,
Adoption, with all that Right to real Mercy before mentioned; to all men, Elect
or not Elect before they believe. 2. Or when the thing is given only in Diem.
And so Right to a Resurrection is given to all. 2. Or else the Law makes a
perfect Collation, and that is, 1. When it gives the Benefit absolutely and
presently: So that Christ freed men from the Law of Works and Ceremonies, so
far as is before expressed. 2. Or when it actually confers that Benefit after
the performance of the Condition, which before was but Conditionally Given. For
it was the will of the Legislator that the actual Gift should be suspended on
that Condition; and therefore though the Nature of the Law change not upon that
performance of the Condition, yet it then begins Moraliter Efficariter agere,
which it did not before. And thus the Law of Grace gives actual Pardon,
Adoption, and Right to glory, to men as soon as they sincerely believe. And
here begin the Effects of Christ's death in Law sense, to be peculiar to some;
when they perform the conditions which others do not (which condition Christ
gives not as Legislator.) All that we have spoke till now, was common to
Non-elect. Thus we have showed what the Law gives by its Essentials. 2. By the
Integrals or Accidentals (which you will call them) of this new Law; (for Laws
use to have Preambles, Narratives, etc. to inform men of the ground, occasion,
and end of them:) Christ does, 1. Give all men that hear it information or
objective discovery of whatsoever is necessary to be known for attaining the
foresaid benefits: As of God, Christ, his Nature, Office, Works, etc. 2. He
gives them potent Reasons, Motives, Persuasions, Exhortations, Threatenings,
etc. to work upon their Wills. And both these are Grace and sufficient in suo
genere. Having showed what Christ gives as Legislator, it follows, 2. That
we show what he gives in Execution of these Laws. And that is, 1. In this
Life, as was promised. 2. After, 1. At Death and by Resurrection, 2. By
Judgment, 1. By Sentence, where as Judge, 1. He Justifies all Believers, 2.
Adjudgeth to them Everlasting Glory; (as he Condemns their Enemies to
Everlasting Fire: Both Wickedmen as Rebels, and Devils as hosts open Foes.) 2.
In Execution of this Sentence he perfecteth them in Glory. So far of Christ's
Benefits which we receive from him as Rector.

2. Next we are to view those which Christ gives as free Benefactor, and
Dominus absolutus merely (though yet with respect to the Ends of Government.)
And so, 1. He disposes of the Means. 2. Of the Success. 1. He gives Means
differently as he please, to some more, to some less. And they are, 1. Outward
Means: 2. Inward. The outward are, 1. The Works of God. 2. The Ordinances or
Justified Means. The works which are means to teach and win men are, 1. The
Creatures themselves as discovering Gods Wisdom, Power, Goodness, and much
Mercy to man, so much as opened to all Nations that hope of pardon, which was
their Encouragement to all that Sacrificing, Prayers, and other Religiousness,
which they generally in some measure used, and would never have used it, had it
not been for this hope, which was grounded in a discovery of Gods Mercifulness
to them, though Sinners. 2. And Providential disposal of Events, much furthers
this: 1. In seasonable Afflicting and Punishing: 2. In giving the Mercies of
Prosperity. 2. The Ordinances or instituted means are, 1. His Ordinances
strictly so called, as, 1. His Laws, Covenants, Doctrine. 2. And his
Sacraments. 1. Baptism. 2. And the Lords Supper. 2. And the concomitant means.
1. For the divulging of his Word; by 1. Men appointed thereto, 1. Ordinary, as,
1. Ministers in their places; and 2. Other Christians in theirs. 2.
Extraordinary, as Apostles and Prophets. 2. And by Artificial means. 1. To the
Ear by Speaking, in Teaching and Persuading by the foresaid men: 2. To the Eye
by Writing, Printing. 2. And as he gives these means for the divulging his
word; so for the enforcing of it and the success that men may Understand,
Believe and Obey it, he gives means. 1. Extraordinary, as the Holy Ghost to
work Miracles.

2. Ordinary, 1. By fellowship with one another in ordinary community, whether.
1. With private Christians: 2. Or Ministers, either of which help us: 1. Either
by Example: 2. Or Instruction, either, 1. By Conference. 2. Or solemn Teaching,
1. By Voice, 2. Or Writing, being gifted, 1. Meanly, 2. Or Eminently, 1. By
Nature, 2. Art, Learning, Grace as God is pleased to dispose. 2. Or else these
Ordinary helps are from and in Association, and that, 1. In lesser bodies as
Families. 2. In greater as, 1. Ecclesiastical Churchches: Where we have the
benefit, 1. Of the Persons, 1. Officers, 2. Members Common. 2. Of the order and
ordinances, discipline, etc. 2. Or Civil Societies, where we have all civil
helps to further our Religious Ends.

So much for the Outward Means, Only observe, that I am not now speaking of
these as commanded and made due: for so they are not given by Christ as
Legislator; but as bestowed and disposed of eventually which is by Christ as a
free benefactor, proprietary or Dominus absolutus; so far as he does it without
pre-obligation and differently.

2. Next, the Inward Means which Christ gives thus are, 1. The disposal and
ordering of the temper of the Humors and parts of the Body, so as may be more
or less fit to receive or retain Impressions. 2. The advantitious helps are, 1.
The service of good Angels. 2. Above all the Holy Ghost, to work in that
season, manner and measure as to his Wisdom seems meet.

So much of the Benefits which Christ gives as free Benefactor and as Dominus
by way of Means. 2. Lastly, He also succeeds these means variously as he
please. 1. To some for the Endowing them only with Common Gifts, 1.
Extraordinary, as working Miracles. 2. Ordinary, as 1. Intellectual, in the
knowledge, 1. Of Arts and Sciences; 2. Or of more Divine Truth. 2. Or Moral,
either, 1. In Civility and common Honesty toward Men; with excellent
quallifications, as Meekness. Patience, etc. 2. Or Religiousness or Piety
toward God; which is of diverse degrees. some having less, and some more, even a
taste of Gods word and the powers of the World to come, with some real Faith,
Love, Joy, Cleansing from former filthiness, and Sanctification by the Blood of
the Covenant, which yet are not saying. 2. To others he gives his Spitit to
work in such seasons, manner and measure, (accompanied with congruous
providential occurrences and removal of temptations and hindrances) as shall
infallibly prevail, 1. For to bring them to Faith; and 2. To further
Sanctification and Perseverance. In a word he uses such means with all his
Elect as shall infallibly succeed, to bring them to Faith and Perseverance; and
so much with all the World, as shall leave them all without excuse. In all this
you may see that those benefits which Christ gives as free benefactor and as
Dominus absolutus are neither for all men alike, nor for all the Elect alike;
nor for ought we can know, for any two persons alike in degree; and therefore
if Christ may not be said to Die for any man except he give him all that he
gives to others without the accusation of being an imperfect Savior; then he
could not be said to Die for most of the Elect. Also you may see in this Scheme
how far Christ Died for all men, and how far not; and that the main inequality
is not in the Mercies which he gives as Legislator, (till their own Faith or
Unbelief make the difference) but in the Mercies which he gives as absolute
Lord, which flow from his secret Decree de rerum Eventu. And lest you should
think that all this Power and Operation ascribed to the Mediator is derogatory
to the Father; understand that as the Father and Son are one; so the Mediators
Power being but the Supreme Derived Power, and not the Supreme Primitive Power,
it still supposes the Primitive Power and Operation of the Godhead. And
therefore both the obtaining and conveying of these benefits to us is still
expressed to be as from Christ indeed, but in dependence on, and by derivation
from God. And so 1. As they are at first procured by Christ's satisfaction, they
are said to be by Purchase or Redemption. 2. And as they are continued, or
daily given out from the continued Moral Virtue of that satisfaction in Gods
acceptance, they are said to he procured by Christ's intercessions; which being
but the said continued force of his satisfaction and purchase in producing the
remote effects; I need not speak of it any further.

Thus I have given you a Scheme of the Nature, Order and Difference of the
Effects of Christ's Death, in the best manner that at present I can learn from
the Word. And though in this you may see my whole sense of the point in hand,
and all the distinctions are here couched which I intend to make use of (or at
least employed:) Yet because some of them need a fuller explication, I will next
proceed to that.

CHAP. II. Some further necessary Distinction.
1. IN the next place as I told you that it was Essential to Christ's Punishment
in Specie that he suffered nostro loco; so because here lies the first and
greatest point of the Controversy in hand, quorum loco, in whose stead Christ
suffered, and whose sin or guilt did lie upon him. And also because the right
or wrong understanding of this point has so great an influence into most of
the consequent points in the Body of Divinity, as either much to help us, or
quite to overturn all; I think it exceeding necessary, that we here carefully
distinguish of the Phrase Nostro loco, or in our stead. Understand therefore
that a thing may be said to be done or suffered [ In our stead] in these two
senses, 1. When he that does or suffers it, does therein Legally Personate
us, or Represent our Persons, or do it in our Name; so far that though
Naturally the Agent or Patient be another person: yet Legally Morally or
Civiliter he is not another. Thus a Deputy, Delegate* or Vicarius whom I send
in my Name to pay a Debt, is herein Legally my self: What he pays I pay
Civiliter or in Law sense. I shall show you when I come to my Propositions how
intolerable and desperate an Error it is, overthrowing the very frame of
Christianity, to affirm that Christ did thus Die or Satisfy Nostro loco in our
stead, or any Man's stead.

2. Or one is said to Do or Suffer Loco alterius in another stead, when it is
done to save another from doing it that was obliged to do it; or that suffered
that which another was obliged to suffer toward the freeing him from it, being
materially the same, but not formally from the same Obligation, but from the
Obligation of a voluntary Sponsion; and being not done or suffered in the Name
or in Representation of the Person of the other: But in a Third Person, viz. in
the Person of a Mediator, Redeemer or Friend. I say, when a Mediator or Sponsor
consents to bear the Punishment deserved by the Offender, and so far to have
his faults imputed to him; this is to suffer in his stead. And thus I shall
anon prove that Christ suffered in the stead of all Mankind, having that
Punishment on him which all men's sins deserved.

2. We must also distinguish between Christ's Dying Loco nostro in the foresaid
sense, and his Dying In nostrum Beneficium: Or between his Dying for us
Subrogative and Effective: The former being the presupposed ground of the
latter. Christ is considerable first as Dying for our Sins as the pro-causa
Meritoria, before he is considerable as Dying for our Benefit, In regard of the
order of Execution, as the Efficient Cause is before the end obtained. I shall
after show that he Dies Loco omnium aequaliter; all men's Sins, except the
after excepted, being equally the Cause of his Sufferings; but not In omnium
Bonum aequaliter, not to procure equal Benefits for all, or for ought we can
prove, for any two.

3. We must distinguish between the Sins whose Guilt Christ took upon him and
bore on the Cross; and those which he never took upon him or bore: That is, the
final nonperformance of the Conditions of the New Covenant.

4. And so we must distinguish between, 1. That Law whose Curse Christ took
upon him, and bore, that he might deliver men from it who were obnoxious to it,
and obliged to bear it; that is, the first Law of Works. And 2. That Law whose
Curse he never took upon him nor bore* nor ever freeth any man from who is once
properly, Actually and I eremptorily obliged to bear it, or whom it does
actually condemn as guilty of the threatened Penalty: That is, the Law of Grace,
which is his own New Law, condemning the finally Impenitent.

5. We must also distinguish betwixt the fulfilling of the Law, which is when
it attaineth its most immediate or nearest Ends: And the satisfaction to the
Lawmakers for not fulfilling it. It is fulfilled either, 1. In respect of the
Precept, and that is only by Perfect Obedience. 2. Or in respect of the
Th^eatning; which is fulfilled only per supplicium delinquentis, and not in
another suffering. For if it never threatened another: then the threatening is
not fulfilled in another suffering. You must distinguish also between
satisfaction to the Law, and Satisfaction to the Lawgiver. The fulfilling of
the threatening may be called satisfaction to the Law, for the not fulfilling of
the Precept. I shall show you that Christ did not this, but that he satisfied
only the Lawgiver, and not properly the Law; seeing the Law cannot relax it
self, and therefore cannot accept of satisfaction in stead of fulfilling: Yet
improperly it may be said to be satisfied, in that its pricipal ends are
obtained, though not its nearest. But we must not use improper speeches without
necessity,

6. We must distinguish between the satisfying of God as Rector per leges and
the satisfying him as Dominus absolutus. Christ did not satisfy God properly
as Dominus absolutus, but as Rector per Legem, yea as Rector per hanc Legem
^p^^^m; and so satisfied him by doing and suffering that by which the chief
ends of that Law may be attained. Much less did God require satisfaction
strictly and properly as a Creditor for a Debt: Though Metaphorically our Sins
and our Punishment are called Debt; and so we are called Debtors and God the
Creditor; And so satisfaction is the Redditio equivalentis vel Tantidem, non
Ejusdem. Yet without a metaphor, punishment may be called Debitum, Due: But it
is Due to us from God, and not properly to God from us; much less due to God as
a Debt to a Creditor, or Goods and Possessions to a Proprietary.

7, We must distinguish betwixt suffering ex obligatione Legis and merito
peccati, as we should have done if we had suffered our selves; and suffering ex
obligatione solius sponsionis propriae; as Christ did without any Merit or
Legal obligation; His own Sponsion being instead of both, and our Sin and
Obligation being but the Occasion, or Loco Causae meritoriae and Obligatoriae.
These Distinctions are chiefly to show what Christ did, which must be known
before we can clearly discern for whom: The use will be after manifest. More
Distinctions are necessary, especially about his Obedience or Fulfilling the
Preceptive part of the Law, (and not the commination) and that in his own
person, as obligatory to himself, (for the Precept obliged him, though the
threatening did not) and not in Persona nostra or as obliging us: But I will
proceed to those Distinctions which concern the Effects.

8. We must further distinguish between Christ's Death as satisfactory to
Justice, and as a Price meritorious to purchase further Benefits: For I shall
manifest that the former is the immediate next Effect; and that it could not be
Purchasing, meritorious, no nor accepted, but as it is first satisfactory; and
that Christ did not Merit or Purchase further Benefits Loco nostro, so far as
he did suffer Loco nostro.

9. We must distinguish between Gods acceptance of Christ's satisfaction* and
Acquittance and Justification of him thereupon, as having discharged all that
he undertook; and Gods Acquittance, Justification and Acceptance of Sinners
themselves. God proclaims himself well pleased in his Son, as having done all
his work perfectly; when yet he is not well pleased with and in men themselves
till Christ be formed in them: nor perfectly, till Christ be perfectly formed
in them, and till he have presented them perfectly sanctified* and justified to
his Father without spot or blemish, and fit for him to take full delight in.

10. We must distinguish between that Redemption of Mankind, which Christ
procured immediately by his satisfaction; [ viz. That all should be saved from
that legal necessity of perishing, and God should Remit his Right of Punishing,
and the advantage which his Justice had against man, into the Power and dispose
of the Redeemer; and that Mankind should be all delivered up to Christ as their
Lord and Ruler, to be dealt with hereafter upon terms of Mercy and not upon the
old terms of the Law of Works in mere rigor of Justice] And that full recovery
which Christ afterward makes by the giving out of his Grace and Benefits. And
so (as part of this) we must distinguish beween Mercy and Life Given to Christ
for men, and Mercy and Life Given by Christ to Men themselves directly. For as
Christ and not we did make the satisfaction to God* so the Actual benefits are
given first to Christ, and not directly to us; and so by Christ to us: Not that
Pardon or Justification formally is given to Christ; but Power to pardon and
justify; to be exercised on the terms which we shall afterward express: God
having not directly and fully forgiven the Sinners themselves but remitted his
Right of Punishing as he is Rector according to the old Rigorous condemning
Law; delivering the Obligation into the hands of the Redeemer (as we do the
Debtors Obligations into the of hands of the surety for his security;) to be
put in suit only in Case of rejecting of his conditions of Grace.

11. We must as is said before distinguish between Christ (and the Father in
him) as Rector per Leges or Legislator, and as Dominus Absolutus. And so we
must distinguish between those Benefits which Christ as Rector gives by his
Laws; and those which as mere Benefactor and Absolute Proprietary he gives,
though not contrary to his Laws or Covenant; yet over and above what by
Covenant or Law he gives. Also we must distinguish between the Event and
Nature of things as such; and the Right to, and Dueness of of things as such.
And consequently we must most carefully distinguish between Gods Will de Rerum
Eventu, and his Will de Debito, as such. The clear distinguishing of these two
is a singular Key to the opening of the sense of Scripture, and in particular
of this Controversy. For indeed, it is to distinguish between our Physics and
our Ethics. Gods will about Natural Beings as such stands at the top of
Physics, as the first Cause. Gods will de Debito as such, stands at the top of
our Ethics, as the first Cause. And you may easily conceive, how the
confounding of our Physics and Ethics must needs blind us and lose us in our
Divinity, as it would do in Philosophy. I join all these Distinctions together,
for in some they all come to one, or are of necessary consideration jointly
that any one of them may be understood. Our Divines usually with the Schoolmen
distinguish between voluntatem signi and Beneplaciti. But in the ordinary
School Sense, that is not the same distinction with that which I here intend.
Dr. Twisse often uses the distinction between voluntatem propositi and
praecepti, and means in effect the same that I do: But he often speaks of it as
being but Metonymically Gods will, and not properly; by which I must conclude
that he meant quoad Eventum, and not quoad Debitum; for God properly wills
that this shall be Man's Due or Duty.

I shall therefore a little further explain this Distinction, and then show you
the soundness of it, and then the exceeding usefulness and necessity of it;
both in this and many other Controversies. 1. For the Title, I choose rather to
denominate it from the Object than the Act; because the Diversity is in the
Object, but none in the Species of the Act naturally considered: Debitum and
Natural Being are two distinct things; but [ To Will] one, and [ to Will] the
other, is all one as to the Nature of Willing. God does as properly Will Duty,
as he wills Natural Beings: Yet if I must denominate it from the Acts, I would
distinguish between Gods Directive Will, and his Legislative. For to call it
volunt as Praecepti is too narrow a term; for the Precept is but one part of
Gods Law, and determines only of one sort of Right; that is, of the dueness of
obediential Actions, or forbearance of forbidden Actions. But there is also a
Debitum praemii, and Beneficii-pure vel absolute-dati, and Debitum Poenae,
which the rest of the Law, Testament or Covenant of God determines of; which
must all be here included as well as the former. In sum, the Law determines,
1. What Shall be due from us; 2. And what Shall be due to us, and on what
terms. I call it therefore, The Will of God de Eventu, and de Debito, as such.
I say. [as such] for else they are coincident: For Gods Will de rerum Natura,
vel existentia determines de Debito quatenus evenit esse Debitum, but not qua
Debitum. And his Will de Debito determines of the Dueness of some Events, not
as eventual but as due: Or to avoid all ambiguity call it Gods will de ente
mere naturali; and his will de debito Morali; or Legislative or Governing. 2.
And for the Nature of the distinction, understand further, that there are two
Acts which I call Gods will de Debito. The first is that immanent Act of his
Will by which he strictly and properly wills what shall be due. This also is
twofold; 1. Productive or Instituting dueness: 2. And approbative or taking
complacency in Duty. The former of these I principally intend, but exclude not
the latter. God does eternally will every Due, but it is not therefore
eternally or from Eternity Due: For he wills from Eternity (to speak
vulgarly) only that this shall be due at such a time, and by such a means. I
say by such means: For though Gods will produce all dueness, yet only by means
does he produce it. That means is, the Revelation of his will. 2. This
Revelation of Gods will de Debito, we call his Law. This therefore is the
second thing which I call Gods will de debito, or his Legislative will; that
is, the Law as it is signum voluntatis Divinae, that is, formally as a Law.
This I call Gods will de Debito, only Metonymically, as it is the sign of his
will before expressed. If the proper will of God were separated from this, it
would then be no producer of Dueness or Right at all; for it would be no Law no
signum; it would lose its Nature as Abrogated Laws do.

Also observe, that you must here carefully distinguish between Gods Act in
making a Law, and the Moral Act of that Law, or of his will by that Law when it
is made. I call not Legislation it self [ Gods will de Debito] or, [his
Legislative will.] His ordaining the sign it self, or making the Law which is
his instrument, is an Act of his will de rerum Eventu vel Naturae For it only
makes that instrument or sign by which Right shall be after produced; but does
not directly thereby produce that Right. But it is the signification and Moral
Act of that Law, which flows from its Nature which does produce Right, and
which we here intend. The Scribe that writes a Statute, and the Sovereign
himself, in composing the Matter, Order and Terms, does but make that Signum or
Instrument, which being made does therefore Institute Right, because it
signifies the Sovereigns will to institute it. So much for the explication of
my meaning in this Distinction.

2. Next I shall say somewhat to prove the soundness of it, which is therefore
necessary, because some ignorant persons laugh at it; as if we feigned two
wills in God, and one of them contrary to the other. Otherwise, to men of
understanding it is not very needful: And therefore I shall say but this
briefly* It is not two Wills in God, as two distinct Essences or Faculties that
I assert; but only two distinct Acts: Distinct, I say, in regard of their
distinct products or Effects, and so to man's apprehension, though in God, we
say there, is no diversity or distinction. Yet as we cannot hansomely conceive
of his will to save Peter, and his will to damn Judas, as one act, having such
different Effects; so it is here. Who knows not that Naturality and Morality.
Physics and Ethics, Event and Right are different things, and consequently we
may and must distinguish of Gods willing them accordingly. When a Man says, [
You shall do this,] preceptively, he does only say [ It shall be your duty to
do it] but says not that eventually you shall do it. Nor are his words false
if you never do it. He that says prophetically or by prognostication [ you
shall do this] means that it shall so come to pass; and if it do not his words
are false: But he does not say, [ It is or shall be your Duty.]

12. Accordingly we must distinguish between the antecedent and consequent Acts
and Will of Christ as Ruler of Mankind. For the understanding of which and
avoiding mistakes, observe, 1. That we speak not now of Eternal Decrees, but of
the will of Christ in this Relation as he is the Ruler of the World and Church,
and as he is the conveyer of his mercies according to and by his Covenant, and
as he judges the World according thereunto. 2. That by his Antecedent will,
and acts, we mean only that which in his Government is Antecedent to Man's
Obedience or Disobedience; which is principally Legislation, and and making his
new Covenant; and also the giving of Preachers, and other acts, which are the
first part of his Administration. And by his consequent Acts and Will, we mean
only that second part of Government, which finds Man Obedient or Disobedient,
and is commonly called Judgment and Execution. And when we say that by his
Antecedent Acts and Will Christ gives Pardon, Justification and Right to
Glory, equally to all; we mean that as Legislator and Promiser, he has
antecedently made an Universal Act of Oblivion or Deed of Gift Conditionally
Pardoning, etc. all, and no farther than Conditionally Pardoning any. And when
we say that he consequently justifies and saves none but true Christians, and
in that Sense dyed for no other according to his consequent will, we mean that
as Judge of Mankind he will give Justification and Salvation to Believers and
to no others; nor ever intended to do otherwise.

(Let the Reader know, that the foresaid Scheme of the Effects of Christ's
Death, is more accurately, and yet more briefly done in my Methodus Theologiae:
And therefore let him that disliketh the Number or Order of Distributions pass
it by: But I have not time to reform it here.

CHAP. III. Explicatory Conclusions.
Proposition I. CHRIST Died nullius loco, so as strictly, and properly, and
fully to represent Men's Persons as if in sensu Legali vel Civili they
themselves did suffer and satisfy.

Prop. II. Christ Died loco nostro, so as to bear that Suffering partly for
kind, and wholly for weight, which our sins deserved, and we should have born.

Prop. III. Christ's Dying [ in our stead] is in order of Nature, before his
procuring us Benefits by his Death; as the means necessary thereto.

Prop. IV. Christ dyed not for any Man's final nonperformance of the conditions
of the Law of Grace.

Prop. V. Christ did not bear for any the proper punishment threatened by the
New Law, as such; nor takes off its Actual proper obligation from any.

Prop. VI. Christ's Obedience was a perfect fulfilling of the preceptive part of
that Law, whose actual obligation he submitted himself to.

Prop. VII. Christ's sufferings were not a fulfilling of the Laws commination as
obliging us, nor was it fulfilled but relaxed to us by a pardon.

Prop. VIII. Christ's sufferings were a satisfaction, or Redditio aequivalentis,
non ejusdem) for our not fulfilling the Precept, and the Fathers not fulfilling
the Threatening upon us, (or our not bearing the penalty.)

Prop. IX. Christ's satisfaction was not made to the Law properly, but to the
Lawgiver for the transgression of the Law.

Prop. X. The Law as binding us, was the great Occasion of Christ's Death, and
Loco-causa Obligatoriae: But not the Obligatory Cause it self.

Prop. XI. Christ's own Sponsion and his Fathers will were the only proper
obligations.

Prop. XII. Christ satisfied God most properly as Legislator or Rector per
legem operum, and not without respect to his Law: His satisfaction was for the
obtaining the principal ends of the Law.

Prop. XIII. Christ suffered in our stead, that we might not suffer; but he did
not in proper sense obey in our stead that we might not obey, but for our sakes
and benefit and that we might obey.

Prop. XIV. All men's sins equally were the occasion or Loco causae meritoriae
of Christ's sufferings (except the fore excepted sins.)

Prop. XV. Christ in suffering bore the punishment antecedently due to all
Mankind, equally, and not the punishment due only to some; and so dyed Loco
omnium aequaliter in regard of his suffering, and their sin the cause.

Prop. XVI. The purchasing meritorious Virtue of Christ's Death, and all the
rest of the effects which follow thereupon, do presuppose the satisfactory
Virtue, as the very ground of all; and without which Christ's Death would have
been unacceptable to God, as having only Rationem mali, or at least would have
been but a pattern of Patience as suffered from men.

Prop. XVII. Christ did not purchase further benefits Loco nostro, though he
suffered Punishment Loco nostro.

Prop. XVIII. God was not well pleased with Man, no, not the Elect, nor did he
acquit or justify them, when he proclaims himself well-pleased in and with
his Son, as being a perfect accomplisher of his will, and when he did acquit
and justify him.

Prop. XIX. All Mankind immediately upon Christ's satisfaction, are redeemed and
Delivered from that Legal necessity of Perishing which, they were under, (not
by remitting Sin or Punishment directly to them, but by giving up Gods Ius
puniendi into the hands of the Redeemer; nor by giving any Right directly to
them, but per meram resultantiam this happy change is made for them in their
Relation; upon the said remitting of Gods Right and Advantage of Justice
against them,) and they are given up to the Redeemer as their owner and ruler,
to be dealt with upon terms of mercy which have a tendency to their recovery.

Prop. XX. In Law-sence, or in respect to the Legislative will of God, Christ
Dyed for all men. This will be explained in the following Propositions.

Prop. XXI. Neither the Law whose curse Christ bore, nor God as the Legislator
to be satisfied, did distinguish between men as Elect and Reprobate, or as
Believers and Unbelievers de presenti vel de futuro; and so impose on Christ,
or require from him satisfaction for the Sins of one sort more than of another;
but for Mankind in general.

Prop. XXII. Christ has made satisfaction to God as Legislator; and
accordingly his Legal Rigorous Justice is satisfied, for the Sins of all
mankind, as they are condemned, and were to be judged directly, primarily,
simply by that Law; and has not satisfied the Legislators Justice for some men
only as Elect, or for one more than another, but equally for all.

Prop. XXIII. Christ has by his Redemption of all obtained a Novum jus Imperii
over all, and is Rector derivative Supremus.

Prop. XXIV. As those those that know not God nor his Creation, are yet Gods
Subjects as Creator, and he their Lord: So those that know not Christ nor his
Redemption, are yet his Redeemed, and his Subjects as Redeemed, and he their
Lord-Reedeemer as to his Right and Law, and their Obligation.

Prop. XXV. God the Father, and Christ the Mediator now deals with no man
upon the mere rigorous terms of the first Law: [ Obey perfectly and Live, else
thou shall Die;] But gives to all much Mercy, which according to the tenor of
that violated Law they could not receive, and calls them to repentance in
order to their receiving further mercy offered them. And accordingly he will
not judge any at last according to the mere Law of works, but as they have
obeyed or not obeyed his conditions or terms of Grace.

Prop. XXVI. Though God has been pleased less clearly to acquaint us, on what
terms he deals with those that hear not of Christ, yet it being most clear
and certain that he deals with them on terms of Grace, and not on the terms
of the rigorous Law of works; this general may evince them to be the Mediators
Subjects and Redeemed.

Prop. XXVII. The Law of Nature since the fall, is part of the Mediators Law,
by which in part he governs: For it, with all things is deliverto him.

Prop. XXVIII. Man without Scripture may find that he is a Sinner, and that Sin
deserves Gods wrath, and his destruction; and in the Creatures and
Providence, providing for him, preserving, maintaining, delivering him, he may
find abundance of Mercy; which being given to one that deserves misery, must
needs evince that it comes from a most gracious disposer, and tends to
recovery, and to further mercy.

Prop. XXIX. Hence all Nations of the World have known themselves Sinners, and
all Nations have had a Hope of obtaining mercy in the pardon of their sins; and
thence it is that all (who acknowledge a God) have had some kind of Religion;
and expressed it in Sacrifices or Prayers for pardon and mercy; which could
never have been, without the said Hope.

Prop. XXX. Though it be very difficult and not very necessary to know what is
the condition prescribed to them that hear not of Christ, or on what terms
Christ will judge them; yet to me it seems to be the Covenant made with Adam,
Genesis 3. 15. which they are under; requiring, their taking God to be their only
God and Redeemer, and so expecting mercy from him, and loving him above all, as
their end and chief good; and repenting of Sin and Sincere Obedience according
to the Laws promulgate to them, to lead them further.

Prop. XXXI. As the rigorous Law of works is so far taken down to all men, that
they are no longer under its imposed necessity of perfect obedience to
salvation; so the Mosaical Ceremonial Law, is Abrogated totally, and so the
Obligation destroyed for all that were under it, without difference of Elect or
Non-Elect.

Prop. XXXII. God the Father and Christ the Mediator has freely without any
prerequisite condition on man's part enacted a Law of Grace, of Universal extent
in regard of its tenor, by which he gives, as by a Deed of Gift, Christ
himself with all his following benefits which he bestows (as Benefactor and
Legislator) and this to all alike, without excluding any; upon condition they
Believe and Accept the Offer.

Prop. XXXIII. By this Law, Testament or Covenant, All men are Conditionally
Pardoned, Justified and Reconciled to God already, and no man Absolutely; nor
does it make a difference, nor take notice of any, till men's performance or
non-peformance of the condition make a difference.

Prop. XXXIV. This Law or Covenant Christ ordains Heralds to Publish, and
commands them to Preach it to every Creature, and commands every man in his
place to publish it; without excepting or excluding any from the Privilege of
receiving it.

Prop. XXXV. As a Sovereign is not bound to cause every particular man
infallibly to hear of his Laws, so he makes a convenient public Declaration
of them; so Christ as Legislator is not bound to provide that every man hear of
his Law whom it does concern: Men that by Nature may be convinced that there is
a God, and how necessary it is to know him and their Duty concerning him, and
how little they do know of him are bound to make all possible enquiry after the
further Revelation of his will, though it were by traveling into other
Countries.

Prop. XXXVI. When we say God and the Mediator give pardon and Salvation to all
men conditionally; we do not mean that there is any condition of his Making the
Grant, but of his performing it, or of our receiving the thing promised. He
absolutely makes a conditional Deed of Gift. He makes the Deed, and we are
conditionally pardoned whether we believe or not. But we shall not be actually
pardoned till we belive.

Prop: XXXVII. The condition of this La Grant is nothing unreasonable nor of
Natural proper impossibility, (it is an Easy Yoke, and Commands that are not
grievous) it being not the least repensum, price or requital; but only [the
Hearty Acceptance of the offered Benefit according to its Nature and use:] It
is therefore proper enough to say (as Scripture does) that all men are
reconciled, the Worlds sins taken away, and they forgiven; though yet none of
this is Actually done, nor ever shall be to the final Rejecters; because in a
moral sense, that is said to be done: which being highly beneficial and
necessary, may be done if we will, all the other impediments being removed; and
nothing but the refusal can deprive Men of the benefit, the Law supposing that
he that is compos mentis will accept so great an offered benefit. Christ having
done all his part or quantum in se, as satisfier and Legislator and given
himself with his benefits to every man that will accept him; so that nothing
but their own wilful refusal can deprive them of them; in Law sense he may well
be said, not only to Die for them, but to have procured them Pardon,
Justification and Life. Whereas if the condition had either been a thing of
proper Natural Impossibility, or unreasonable, or unhonest, or if it were long
of Christ that it is not performed, than it were improper to say that Christ
and Life is given them, or that Christ Dyed for them to procure this gift.

Prop. XXXVIII. Christ has given Faith to none by his Law or Testament; though
he has revealed that to some he will as Benefactor and Dominus Absolutus give
that Grace which shall infallibly produce it. And God has given some to Christ
that he might prevail with them accordingly: Yet this is no giving it to the
Person, nor has he in himself ever the more Title to it; nor can any lay claim
to it as their due.

Prop. XXXIX. It belongs not to Christ as satisfier, nor yet as Legislator to
make wicked refusers to become willing and receive him and the benefits which
he offers; therefore he may do all for them that is fore-expressed though he
cure not their unbelief.

Prop. XL. Faith is a fruit of the Death of Christ, (and so is all the good
which we do enjoy): But not directly as it is satisfaction to justice; but only
Remotely, as it proceeds from that ^us Dominii which Christ has received, to
send the Spirit in what measure and to whom he will, and to succeed it
accordingly; and as it is necessary to the attainment of the further ends of
his Death, in the certain gathering and saving of the Elec^* So that most
directly it flows from the good pleasure of God and the Redeemer, which we
call Praedestination. So that it is an unmeet Speech (and such as Scripture
never uses) to say, that [ Christ dyed to purchase us Faith] though it be a
Fruit of his Purchase. As if a Prince should Ransom or Buy a condemned
Malefactor, agreeing and resolving that yet he shall not be saved, if he will
spit in his Redeemers Face and refuse him and his kindness. And if it be known
that this Malefactor is so desperately wicked, that he will thus reject and
abuse his Redeemer and refuse his kindness, except the Prince send a bosom
Friend to persuade him, who is the most powerful unresistable Orator in the
World: If the Prince because he is resolved neither to lose the Man, nor his
Price of Ransom, does send this Orator with a Charge that he shall take no
denial, nor cease till he have procured the Malefactors consent; is it a
convenient Speech to say, that he gave his Ransom Money to purchase the
Malefactors consent to be delivered? Or to cure his wicked nature? No: Yet it
is true that his Price was a groundwork and Preparative to this effect; so is
it in our present Case.

Prop. XLI. The Resurrection of the Bodies of all Men is a Benefit procured by
the death and Resurrection of Christ: (For though the Soul it self should
everlastingly have suffered, yet the Body should have remained in its state of
dissolution, if Christ had not restored it) which Resurrection in it self is a
mercy to all, (and it is a means to Gods further Glory by his Creature) though
the wicked turn it to be the entrance of unspeakable misery to themselves.

Prop. XLII. There is no mercy which any Man enjoys by Right of Law from God,
but it is from the Covenant or Law of Grace, and so from the Blood of that
Covenant: For from the old riolated rigorous Law it cannot be; therefore it
must be from the Law of Grace.

Prop. XLIII. Christ by his Law of Grace, has made it every Man's duty that
hears it, to believe in him, and accept him, as our Savior that has made
satisfaction for their Sins, and so dyed for them, and is their Redeemer: And
to be highly thankful to him for this his Mercy.

Prop. XLIV. Christ by his Law has made a far sorer punishment than before
belonged to them, to be due to all those that believe not in him as one that
has so satisfied, and are not thankful for it, and do not take him for their
Redeemer. And for refusing their Lord-Redeemer, shall they be condemned.

Prop. XLV. The consciences of the damned in Hell (which will be Gods
executioners) will everlastingly torment them for refusing that Pardon and
Salvation that was so dearly purchased for them, and that Redeemer that
expressed so much Love to them, and for not performing so reasonable and easy
a condition, as Faith. They shall not then have the discovery of an
impossibility in the condition, or that Christ never died for them, and never
was their Redeemer, and consequently that it was no Sin of theirs to refuse a
Redeemer, that was not their Redeemer, and satisfaction that was none for them,
I say, they shall not have such discoveries to ease their consciences, and
lessen their torments, and make Hell as no Hell to them.

Prop. XLVI. A Christ-Redeemer, that has satisfied justice, is the object of
Commanded Faith, and presupposed to it: Annd he that commands all Men to
believe in Christ a one that has redeemed them or satisfied for their Sins,
does hereby assert the truth of this supposition.

Prop. XLVII. The constitution of Christ's Kingdom contains many great
universal mercies, Antecedent to those that are given conditionally by his
Covenant or Law of Grace; Such as are the giving of the Covenant it self, and
the Institution of Sacraments, Ordinances, Officers, etc. Therefore as to be a
subject is Antecedent to the being of an Obedient or a Rewarded Subject; so
Christ's Antecedent mercies of Redemption, extend to more than his consequent
mercies do, which suppose the performance of the conditions of his Covenant.

Prop. XLVIII. The foundations of Christ's Kingdom being first laid in his
undertaking, Performances, Death, Resurrection, and Legislation or
Covenant-making; so there are three distinct states of his subjects: 1. The
Antecedent state (Antecedent to any act of their own) is to be subditi obligati
obliged subjects. 2. The mediate state is to be consenting obedient subjects,
or rebellious and disobedient. 3. The consequent state is to be justified
rewarded subjects, or Condemned Subjects. And it will not follow that Christ
never brought men into the first condition, because he never brought them into
the last.

Prop. XLIX. Accordingly the Kingdom of Christ the Mediator, in its largest
extent contains all Mankind as redeemed, and made his obliged Subjects,
though most prove Rebels. But in a limited sense it contains only the
faithful, obedient, and justified part of the universal Kingdom.

Prop. L. It is this second consenting Part of his subjects only who are his
Church, and are by Baptism engaged to him. So that the Kingdom of Christ as
Redeemer is larger than his Church; and they are not words of the same
signification, unless when the word Kingdom is taken in the narrow sense.

Prop. LI. God has not divided the World into two Parts, and put one Part only
under the Government of Christ, and Governs the other immediately himself
only as mere Creator: But Christ is Administrator General over all Mankind.

Prop. LII. They that say that God gives, all the mercies which the ungodly
have, according to the first Covenant of Innocence; must make that Covenant
another thing than indeed it was.

Prop. LIII. They that feign God to continue the Covenant of Innocence, as to
the Promissory Part, and to Covern those that are born in sin and misery, by
that Law which says [ Be Innocent and Live] do expose Gods Government falsely
to reproach.

Prop. LIVE. They that hold that Heathens and Hypocrites are under no Covenant
or Law that has conditional promises, do deny a great Part of Gods Government
of Mankind, and give them more excuse for their neglect of all means for their
Salvation, than is true, or than God will allow of.

Prop. LV. They that say that all the mercies bestowed on Heathens, or
Hypocrites are given them without the purchase of Christ, by the mere will of
God not respecting any reconciler or Propitiation, do Sin against the Scripture
reasons of Christ's Office, and undertaking, and do open a Gap for the
reasonings of them who plead against the necessity of Christ's death for the
Elect.

Prop. LVI. Though Christ's Dominion over inanimates and Bruits do not prove
that he dyed for them; Yet his dying for Mankind in general, procured his
Dominion over them; which is joined with his Empire over the same Persons,
which he exercises by such Laws as have a tendency to their repentance, Pardon
and Salvation.

Prop. LVII. All this considered, It is ( de nomine) a proper Speech much used
in Scripture, to say that Christ dyed for all Men, and is the Savior of the
World, and is the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World, and is a
propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, and tasted Death for every man,
and that if one Died for all then were all Dead, etc. Seeing all the foresaid
Benefits of his Death, are actually given them.

Some Expository Thesis about the Effects of the Death of Christ.
Proposition I. THE First and most Immediate Use and Effect of Christ's Death,
was the satisfaction* of Gods Justice for man's Violation of his Law.

Prop. II. It was not the Law it self that Christ satisfied (if we speak
properly) but the Lawgiver. Though improperly the Law it self may be said to
be satisfied when its Ends are attained; that is, the Ends of the Legislator in
giving the Law. The Law knows no proper satisfaction. To admit of satisfaction
instead of fulfilling and execution, is beyond the power of the Law, and is the
act of the Legislator as he is above the Law.

Prop. III. Christ did not suffer from the Obligation of the Law, but from the
Obligation of his own Sponsion; on occasion of the Laws obliging us to suffer.
The Law never obliged Christ to Suffer (though it did to obedience.)

Prop. IV. Christ's sufferings were not a fulfilling of the Laws Threatening
(though he bore its Curse Materially;) but a satisfaction for our not
fulfilling the Precept, and to prevent Gods fulfilling the Threatening on us.

Prop. V. Christ paid not therefore the Idem but the Tantundem or aequivalens,
not the very Debt which we owed and the Law required, but the Value.

(Else it were not strictly satisfaction, which is Redditio aequivalentis: And
(it being improperly called the Paying of a Debt, but properly A suffering for
the Guilty) the Idem is nothing but Supplicium Delinquentis. In Criminals, Dum
alius solvit simul aliud solvitur. The Law knows no Vicarius Poenae; though
the Lawmaker may admit it, as he is above Law. Else there were no place for
Pardon, if the proper Debt be Paid, and the Law not Relaxed but Fulfilled.

Prop. VI. The Meriting and Purchasing of further Benefits is consequential to
the satisfactoriness of Christ's Death. It would be so far from meriting (as it
is his mere hurt) were it not first necessary for satisfaction, that it would
be displeasing to God, who is merciful, and delights not in the Blood of the
Just.

Prop. VII. Though Christ's Death be first satisfactory and next Meritorious of
further good: Yet hic Obedience is first Meritorious and afterward
Satisfactory: For it could not Satisfy but by Meriting.

Prop. VIII. Because Punishment is not a Thing Commanded by the Law, Quod
percipitur and ita est Obedientiae materia proxima est [ Agere] vel [ Non
agere] and non, [ Pati] sid [ Pati] potest esse materia remota.
but Threatued; therefore all Obedience properly is active, (for suspensive is
by act of will,) and the distinction between Christ's Active and Passive
Obedience, must be carefully understood, or else it will tend to confound
Obedience and Punishment. His Passive Obedience is but his Obeying in
Submission to suffering; where the Consent or Submission is the direct matter
of Obedience, and not the suffering it self submitted to.

Prop. IX. Christ did Give his Satisfaction directly and strictly; not to Man
for whom he suffered, but to God. whom he satisfied.

Prop. X. Yet he may be said to Give it to men, (especially in their Union with
him and Justification) in that he gives them the fruits of it: As a Father is
said to give his Son a thousand pound, that lays it out in Lands for him:
Though properly the Seller has the Money, and the Son the Lands only.

Prop. XI. It was not the Sins of the Elect only, but of all Mankind fallen,
which lay upon Christ* satisfying. And to assert the contrary injuriously
diminishes the Honor of his Sufferings; and has other desperate ill
consequences.

Prop. XII. Christ's satisfaction was made to God as Legislator and Rector
Supremus, and not ^as Dominus absolutus or mere Proprietary.

Prop. XIII. Christ did neither Obey nor Suffer in any Man's stead by a strict
proper Representation of his Person in point of Law; so as that the Law should
take it as done or suffered by the party himself. But only as a third person,
as a Mediator he voluntarily bore what else the Sinner should have born.

To assert the contrary (specially as to particular persons considered in
actual Sin,) is to overthrow all Scripture Theology, and to introduce all
Antinomianism, to overthrow all possibility of pardon, and assert Justification
before we Sinned or were Born; and to make our selves to have satisfied God.

Therefore we must not say that Christ dyed nostro loco so as to personate us,
or Represent our Persons in Law Sense; but only to bear what else we must have
born.

Prop. XIV. Christ by his Death (and so satisfaction to Justice) has purchased
to himself a full Propriety in all the Creatures which were under the Curse,
and so is become Dominus Absolutus of all, on a new Title of Redemption, as God
was before on the Title of Creation.

Prop. XV. Christ has hereby purchased also a Supreme Rectorship (so far as a
Derived Power may be called Supreme; and God as he is Redeemer is properly
Supreme) grounded on his Absolute propriety; even as Gods Rectorship as Creator
was grounded on his Absolute Propriety as Creator. Every man may rule his own
according to its Nature and Capacity.

Prop. XVI. Hereupon by actual Rendition, all things are Delivered up to Christ
both as Proprietary and Rector.

Prop. XVII. As Proprietary or Dominus, Christ over-ruleth the World, and
disposes of all Events and Beings Naturally (as most conduces to his
Redemption Ends.)

Prop. XVIII. As Plenipotent Rector he now Rules all inferior Rational
Creatures by his Laws, as the Universal Lord-Redeemer.

Prop. XIX. Seeing both the Rational Creature, and the visible frame of the
Creation are delivered up to Christ the Redeemer, it must needs follow, that
the very Law of Nature (whether it be in Natura rerum, ut signum; or in mente
humana, ut principia Cognita) is Christ's Law: And so that those that are ruled
by the mere Law of Nature are ruled by Christ, so far as they do well.

Prop. XX. As God is the Ruler (as to Title and some Legislation and Judgment;)
of those very Pagans who know him not, but deny a Godhead; so Christ is so the
Ruler of those very Infidels who know him not, but deny the Mediator.

Prop. XXI. In giving up all Propriety and Rule to Christ, God has not divested
himself of any thing, save only a Right or (as it were,) an Obligation to
punish the pardoned. For as Christ is God himself; so the Father still
Possesses and Rules by the Redeemer. As he has still the Title of Creator,
so is he in the Son God-Redeemer.

Prop. XXII. Seeing no Man can fulfill the First Law, or Covenant, and no Man
can be saved by a Covenant not kept, and Christ Redeemed not Man into absolute
liberty, (to be from under Law and Rule, which were Misery to him and not
liberty) Therefore it has pleased the Father and Mediator to make to Man a New
Law and Covenant suited to his present State of Misery.

Prop. XXIII. The Tenor of this Law is that whosoever will Repent, Thankfully
and heartily accept Jesus Christ to be his Savior, Teacher, King and Head,
believing him to be the Redeemer, and will Love him (and God in him) above all,
and obey him sincerely, to the Death, shall upon his first acceptance be
Justified and Adopted, and upon his perseverance be justified at Judgment,
saved from Hell, and Glorified: And whosoever rejects him, shall bear the
Guilt and punishment of all his Sins against the Law, and for his refusal, be
far sorelier punished.

Prop. XXIV. By this New Law, or Covenant, Christ has brought all Men, where
it is Promulgate, under the Duty of receiving him, and Life in him: And under a
Promise of Life, if they do receive him, and a Threatening of Death if they
reject him.

Prep. XXV. The tenor of this New Law in all these Parts is Universal,
extending to all, (No Man is excepted out of Precept, Promise, or Threatening)
whether the Promulgation be Universal or not.

Prop. XXVI. It can hardly be proved that there is any great Part of the World,
that have not heard of Christ, or had some means to have come nearer to the
knowledge of him.

Prop. XXVII. All those that have not heard of Christ, have yet much Mercy
which they receive from him, and is the Fruit of his Death: According to the
well or ill using whereof, it seems probable that God will judge them.

Prop. XXVIII. But it is safest to leave the Case of those that never heard of
Christ and their Infants, as a thing unrevealed or so darkly revealed that God
would not have us know any more of it, than that our condition is far better
than theirs, that so we may be thankful.

Prop. XXIX. It is a course to blind and not to inform Men* to lay the main
stress in the Doctrine of Redemption, upon our uncertain conclusions of Gods
dealing with such as never heard of Christ: Seeing all proof is per notiora:
And we must reduce points uncertain to the certain, and not the certain to the
uncertain, in our Trial.

Prop. XXX. Christ may be Ruler de jure, and in Part de facto, where yet Satan
prevails, and the Sinner shall perish for Rebellion.

Prop. XXXI. In the New Law Christ has truly given himself with a Conditional
Pardon, Justification, and Conditional Right to Salvation, to all Men in the
World without Exception.

Prop. XXXII. This Law gives Christ to no Man in the World by name (now) nor
more then other, antecedently to their believing: But to all if they will
believe.

Prop. XXXIII. It is therefore a proper and true Speech to say that Christ dyed
for all (especially all that ever heard his Gospel): Seeing that in Law sense
he did Dye for them in all the forementioned respects. As the nature of the Law
is to constitute Debitum, Dueness; so it constitutes to all Men, 1. The Dueness
of Obedience, that they accept Christ offered them. 2. The Dueness of the
Benefit, if they accept him (a conditional due.) 3. And the Dueness of the
punishment if they reject him. So that in Law Sense Christ dyed for all.

Prop. XXXIV. If Christ were not their Redeemer, and his Satisfaction had been
no way for them, nor a Mercy to them, then the Damned should not perish for
rejecting their Redeemer, nor for refusing the mercy of Redemption; Nor their
consciences accuse them for it. But undoubtedly for this will be their
destruction, and for this their consciences will accuse them.

Prop. XXXV. It being not the satisfaction it self that is tendered to Sinners,
but the Fruit of it, It cannot by any Minister, nor will not by Christ, be
offered (in those Fruits) to Men, if it were not first given and accepted for
them as well as others (in Law Sense) by God, from the Redeemer. The Rector or
Creditor must first receive the satisfaction, before a discharge can be offered
to the offender or Debtor, on consideration of that satisfaction made and
accepted: Much more, before Men can be condemned justly for refusing it. If the
satisfaction were given and accepted for the Elect only, it could not in the
Benefits which wholly presuppose it, be so offered to the Non-Elect, and they
judged for refusing the benefit of a satisfaction never made for them.

Prop. XXXVI. Christ's dying for Men, is Antecedent to their believing in him:
Their believing presupposes his dying for them: His Death saves them because
they believe; but he did not die for them because they believe, but they must
believe because he dyed for them. The Act both as performed and commanded here
presupposes the Object. The Command therefore of believing presupposes that
Christdyed for Men.

Prop. XXXVII. No Man's name or Description (so as to difference him from
others) being in the offer and promise conditional, but it being made alike to
all, it will follow that no Man could have any true ground to believe or accept
Christ if he knew not that he is one of those, to whom he is universally
offered, and conditionally given; and consequently for whom he satisfied.

Prop. XXXVIII. If the condition on which Christ is given to all (and Life in
him) were something of natural proper impossibility, or unreasonable, or if it
were long of Christ that the condition is not performed by them, then it were
less proper to say, that Christ is given them, or that he dyed for them, in
respect to this conditional gift. But seeing the condition is nothing of
natural proper impossibility, nor unreasonable, being but their hearty
acceptance of Christ as he is offered them and not the least Repensum;
requital, price, or repayment; and nothing but their own wicked disposition,
and obstinacy can cause their nonperformance; so that they may have Christ and
Life if they will; therefore it is proper to say that Christ is given them, and
conditional Pardon and Life in him; and that Christ therefore dyed for them.

Prop. XXXIX. It is Gods Law or Covenants which constitute the Right or Dueness
of obedience, rewards, and punishments, and it is not Election or the mere
Decree of God that does any of these. We have no Right to Christ upon Election,
till the Covenant or Law give us Right.

Prop. XL. Elect and Non-Elect therefore have equal Right to Christ, till
believing difference them: That is, all have a conditional Right, and none an
actual and absolute.

Prop. XLI. The Covenant berween the Father and Mediator (commonly so called)
gave Christ a full Power to confer pardon and Life; but gave not to Men any
Right ot Title to the benefits.

Prop. XLII. Nor did that Covenant or promise which God made to fallen mankind
of sending a Savior to Redeem them, give this Right actually to these benefits.

Prop. XLIII. Nor does that promise or Covenant which God has made, of giving
a new and soft Heart to the Elect, give any Man an actual Right to Remission,
Justification or Glory: No nor to renewing Grace: it being but a prediction
what God resolves to do for the saving of some, known only to himself and so a
discovery of his purpose, and not a conferring of Right. Or if it were a
Promissum vel Donatio in diem, sine condition, as some would make it, yet it
would not give actual Title till the time come: Non da^^r actio ante diem in
talibus promissis inter homines. It is the nature of such gifts that upon (the
Donors will) the Right should be as it were in passing from the Donour to the
receiver till that day Et si cessit dies, saltem non venit. It is not ours in
Title till the Day. But indeed here is no prefixed day, nor proper Gift.

Prop. XLIV. We Must therefore carefully distinguish between these three
forementioned Covenants, and that universal Law or conditional Covenant of
Grace made to all mankind; which is it by which Christ rules, and will judge
us: And which is his Instrument of conferring Right, and so of pardoning,
Justifying, and Adopting us.

Prop. XLV. Christ has a threefold Kingdom: Of one all the World are Subjects,
these he over-ruleth, and partly rules to restraint at least, by the Law of
Nature. Of the other (the visible Church) all professed Christians are members:
These he rules by his Law of Grace, and Spirit, but differently. Of the third
(which is the Souls of believers) only true believers are members: These only
Christ rules to Salvation; but the rest also, as Redeemer.

Prop. XLVI. When the Schoolmen and our own Divines say, that Christ dyed for
all quoad sufficientiam pretii, but not quoad efficientiam; they cannot without
absurdity be interpreted to mean, that his Death is sufficient for all if it
had been a Price for them; and not a sufficient Price for them; For that were
to contradict themselves. And so Christ could not be said to dye for Men quoad
sufficientiam pretii. For it is neither for them, nor a Price, so considered.

Prop. XLVII. It seems an injurious feigning of Christ to suffer much in vain,
to say that he paid a Price sufficient for all the World, when yet it shall be
no way efficient: Unless they think that Christ's sufferings are no greater for
all Men, than if he had suffered but for one or few; and that minima guttula
sanguinis Christ i sufficit ad redimendum mill mundos, which our Divines
disclaim, as a dangerous Error. They therefore that think it, a making Christ
to suffer in vain, to say, He dyed for some that perish; do themselves make him
much more, to suffer in vain, in saying, he paid a Price for some, which was
sufficient for all, but shall be no way efficient for them.

Prop. XLVIII. Christ's Death is a sufficient Price and satisfaction to God for
the Sins of all Mankind: The Efficiency of satisfaction passive is it wherein
the sufficiency to further uses, does consist. But it effects actual
Remission, Justification Adoption, Salvation, only for Believers. This is the
plain truth, and the Sense of Divines in saying, that Christ dyed for all quoad
sufficientiam pretii, non quoad Efficientiam.

Prop. XLIX. It has not so much as a show of Injustice or wrong to any for God
to punish unbelievers for the same Sins that Christ died for, if we do but
understand, 1. The difference between suffering by our selves or our delegate,
substitute or Vicar, and a Mediator suffering for us, 2. And between solutio
ejusdem, and satisfactio which is Redditio equivalentis, and so 3. Between a
refusable suffering or payment, (as the last is) which does acquit but on what
terms the accepter pleases, and not ipso facto; and a not refusable payment,
(such as the first is) God accepted the satisfaction on those terms only, that
no final Rebel should partake of the saving benefit. If it be a wrong, it is
either against Christ, or the Sinner, Not to the Sinner, for he suffers but
once: And the former suffering of Christ, was not in personation or
representation of his person, nor as his substitute, nor appointed or procured
by him: But by a third Person, in the Person of a Mediator sent by God, and
voluntarily undertaking it. Nor to Christ is it any wrong: For 1. He is
willing: Volenti non fit injuria. 2. It was the agreement, it should be so: 3.
Yea it is he that does it. He as Judge condemns them for ingratitude and
Rebelling against himself and consequently leaves all the rest of their Sins
upon them.

Prop. L. Nor is it any more absurd that Christ should satisfy for those that
were in Hell, when he sufferd, then that he should do it for those that were in
Heaven at his suffering. He paid the Price which he had agreed to pay, which
became effectual upon the agreement and undertaking (before the payment:) And
was then offered to Mankind: Of whom some suffered for rejecting it as others
were saved upon the accepting it, even before his death.

Prop. LI. Nor was Christ's Satisfaction for those that perish Vain: Seeing it
is the ground of his New Title of Lord-redeemer, as to Dominion and Rectorship,
and so the ground of his New Legislation, Judgment, Administration and
Government of the World; and will be the occasion of his just destruction of
the Rejectors of him, even those Rebels that would not have him to Reign over
them, and of his glory therein. Even as Gods Creation and preservation of Men,
is not to be called Vain, or no mercy, because he gives not all Men Hearts to
repent, and so some perish. For as Creation laid the ground of the Creators
Dominion, Rectorship, Legislation and Rule* and Judgment (if the first Covenant
had stood in force as it was at first): So did Redemption by satisfaction do in
respect of the Redeemer, and Covenant of Grace:

Prop. LII. All that Christ (by the work of Redemption) did purchase a
propriety in and Dominion over, were not Redeemed by him: Bruits and Devils are
hereby under his Dominion, and Devils shall be judged by him: But not as
Subjects. For he procured (as Mediator a Dominion over these, but as utensils
in his House, or as Enemies to be restrained, ordered, and destroyed: Therefore
Christ's judging Devils will not prove that he redeemed them: When yet his
judging unbelieving Men will prove that he Redeemed them. Devils are judged as
Enemies, but not as Rebels against their Lord-Redeemer: But wicked Men are
condemned as Rebels against him, for ungrateful rejecting a benefit given them.
If a Country fall into Rebellion, and the King sentenceth all to Fire and
Sword, and the Prince by satisfaction purchase all to himself both Men and
Country: And send Heralds to proclaim mercy and pardon to all that will accept
him, and thankfully accknowledg his favor: Some accept and some reject him.
The same Prince destroys these Rebels for rebelling: And he destroys also
all the Bears, Lions, Wolves, and devouring Beasts that annoyed and killed his
subjects. Now will any say, that because he appoints the Wild Beasts to
death, and yet satisfied not for them, nor Redeemed them, that therefore he
redeemed not the Rebels neither? All sayings and writings have different Senses
in the same words sometimes, according to the difference of the Materia
Subjecta.

Prop. LIII. The Doctrine of Universal Redemption thus delivered, runs with the
whole Scope of Scripture, and has not the least inconveniences; when the
denial of it, contradicts a multitude of express Texts, and brings on more
desperate consequences than can easily be conceived.

Prop. LIVE. Though Christ dyed equally for all Men, in the foresaid Law-Sence,
as he satisfied the offended Legislator, and as giving himself to all alike in
the conditional Covenant; Yet he never properly intended or purposed the actual
justifying and saving of all; nor of any but those that come to be justified
and saved. He did not therefore dye for all, nor for any, that perish, with a
Decree or Resolution to save them much less did he dye for all alike, as to
this intent.

Prop. LV. All that conditional Pardon with the means of Grace, and common
Mercies which the Non-elect do actually receive in time, were purposed for them
before time, and intended to them as Fruits of Christ's Death; and so far even
in regard of his Purpose de eventu applicationis, Christ may be said to Die for
them, (besides the foresaid satisfaction:) For God being Rector per Leges deals
with men on Law terms, and gives Mercies, and Executes Justice only according
to his Laws. He would not so much as relax the Old Law for the pardon of any
Sin, but by a new Law, which is Lex Remedians. But the old Law being broken,
God can show no mercy now according to its tenor: It must be therefore
according to the Law of Grace and from it, that all men receive their Mercies;
and consequently from the Blood of that Covenant, which is the ground thereof,
and by which Apostates are said to have been sanctified, Heb. 10.

Prop. LVI. When we say that Christ did Die for men conditionally, as to his
Death it self, and the satisfaction to Justice immediately thence flowing; we
cannot intend it, or truly say so: Nor yet as to the granting of his Universal
Conditional pardon: For Christ absolutely procured all these. But we mean it
only in regard of Actual Remission, Justification and Salvation. The Covenant
or Promise is indeed Conditional; that is, there are conditions required on our
part to the fulfilling of it, that we may have right to the Benefit: But no
conditions for the granting of it; much less for Christ's Actual Dying and
Satisfying.

Prop. LVII. Though it be disputable whether God have any Decretive will de
eventu, properly Conditional, yet is it beyond all doubt that he has a
Conditional will de Debito, and Conditional Laws; and it being to God as
Legislator that Christ made Satisfaction, and it being by Law that the Dueness
of Justification and Salvation is conveyed to believers, and the Dueness of
Punishment to Unbelievers, therefore it is very proper to say, that Christ by
his Death has purchased Salvation for all Men Conditionally.

Prop. LVIII. Yea, it is undoubted that the very Decretive Will of God de
Eventu applicationis is Conditional in this sense; that Faith and Repentance
are Decreed by God to be Conditions of Justification and Salvation, but not
conditions of Gods act of Decreeing ( Twisse says that in this Sense no man
denies Gods will to be conditional, Vid. Consid. of Syn. Dort. and Arles, etc.
Page 61. And against Cotton Page 74.)

Prop. LIX. Those that dare say, that Christ is an imperfect Redeemer if he do
not procure Faith it self for every Man that he Dies for, (which is their
Master Argument) may as well say, that God is an imperfect Creator, because he
makes not Worms to be Men; or that he is an imperfect Conservator because he
preserved not man from Mortality, Damnation and Antecedent Calamities;
especially from Sin: Or that he is imperfectly Merciful, because he permits
Men to sin; and Condemns them: Or that Christ is an Imperfect Redeemer of the
Elect, because he suffers them after his Redemption to Sin, Suffer and Die:
Or, that the Holy Ghost is an imperfect Sanctifier and Caller, because many
wicked Men are Sanctified and Believe imperfectly (so as will not suffice to
Salvation) and because they resist and quench the Spirit, and fall from that
Faith and Sanctification which they had. Or that the Spirit is an imperfect
Comforter; because so many Saints Live and Die in such unconformitable sadness:
Or that Scripture is an imperfect means, because the Effect is so imperfect. In
a word, they may as well say, that where God does not overcome men's wicked
dispositions, he is an imperfect God to them in regard of his Mercies: All
which beseem not the Tongue of a Christian.

Prop. LX. That Argument commonly brought against Universal Redemption, [that
where Christ does the work of a Mediator for any man in one of his Offices, he
does it in all] is undeniably destructive to the cause it is brought for: For
it is undeniable that Christ as Prophet, and King, Teaches, Calls,
Illuminateth, many Non-elect; gives some Faith, some Taste of his word and the
powers of the World to come; sanctifyeth them by the Blood of the Covenant, and
washes them from their former pollutions, Mat. 13. Heb. 6. and 10. ^2. Pet. 2.
20. Therefore in his Priestly Office he must (at least) be as far their
Mediator.

CHAP. IV. The First Proposition Asserted.
Prop. I. CHRIST in Suf^ering did not strictly and properly bear and represent
the person of the Sinner, so as Civiliter, Moraliter, Legali^er, it might be
said that [we either satisfied or suffer^d in or by Christ.]

Explic. I am not willing to make the mere ^ords here, any matter of quarrel.
If any dislike any term of mine, or like his own; let him ap^ly himself to the
matter in Question, and let ^e words pass. 1. I deny not that Christ Suf^ered
nostro loco, in our place or stead; suffering ^at which we deserved, and should
else have un^voidably suffered. 2. I acknowledge and main^^in that our Sins
were the quasi Causa Meritoria, (...) loco causae meritoriae of his sufferings;
and that (...) became Sin for us, that is, a Curse for Sin; ^at is, he made
himself by his own Sponsion ob^^xious to the Curse and Punishment due to us for
(...) Sin: And so far Sin was imputed to him.

But Christ was neither really a Sinner, nor e^^eemed of God so to be, and in
that sense, sin ^as not imputed to him. 4. All know that (...) Physico Christ
did not bear our persons.

Some will needs extend the phrase, of [bear^^g or representing the person of
another] civiliter, so far, as if it were applicable to every sponser, surety,
or one that alterius vice and loco. does do or suffer any thing: And so they
say, [Christ bore our Person]: But as I think they abuse the phrase, by
extending it so far; so I am content they use their liberty to express
themselves as they please: only I entreat them that they misunderstand not me;
but know that my meaning is, that [the Law does not look on any Man, no not the
Elect as having either satisfied or suffered in or by Christ; nor does the
Lawgiver and judge so look on him: And so Christ did not strictly in Law-Sense
bear the person of any Man in suffering, so as that person might be said to
have in him suffered]. 6. Some think Christ in suffering the penalty, as
penalty, did strictly bear our persons as Sinners; but not as this suffering
was a satisfaction to Gods Justice which is the effect of it, much less as it
was meritorious of further Grace and Salvation. The Authors or owners of this
opinion (of whom Armini^^ himself seems one) discerned the inconveniences that
would follow the opinion of strict Representation; but while they discerned not
the right way of avoiding them and feared lest they should swarve by a full
denial of it, they seem to me to fall into the same place from which they
leaped. Though I confess that at the first view, I began to incline to this
opinion, as most moderate, which now I see to be unsafe.

The most of my Arguments are drawn from those intolerable consequences of the
Doctrine which I oppose, as being such as overthrow the very substance of the
Gospel. Though to the inconsiderate it may seem a small matter.

1. Argument That Doctrine which consequentially denies all Pardon of Sin, is
not of God: But such is the Doctrine which I here oppose: Therefore, etc.

The Minor only requires proof.

Where the proper debt is discharged, or penalty undergone, in Law-Sence by the
person himself who was obnoxious, there is no room for Pardon to such a Person:
But according to the Doctrine which I oppose, the proper debt is discharged, or
the penalty undergone, in Law-Sence by the Person himself who was obnoxious:
Therefore according to that Doctrine, there is no place for Pardon to such.

The Minor needs no proof, it being the express terms of the assertion which I
deny, that Christ so represented our Persons in suffering or ^atisfying, as
that Legaliter vel Civiliter we may properly be said to have suffered or
satisfied in ^im; so that though it was Christ's Person naturally, yet it was
ours Legally, Morally or Impu^^tively.

The major I prove thus. He that owes nothing, or to whom no penalty is due,
can have ^one forgiven him: But he that has paid all the ^ebt, or undergone
all the punishment that was ^^e, by himself or another that in Law-Sence is
himself, does owe nothing, or to him no penalty ^ due: Therefore he can have
none forgiven him. ^ob. Major, Remissio est Debiti Remissio: There^^re where
there is no due, there can be no re^^ssion Prob. Minor To have paid or suffered
all, (...) to owe some, are contradictory and inconstent. Therefore he that
has paid all, owes no^^ing.

The Antimonians Answer is this. It is true that no punishment is due to the
Elect, and none is properly forgiven them now since Christ's Death: But Christ's
assuming their Persons in satisfying, was a Remission to them: Or God did in
one instant remit it to them and transfer it on Christ. Reply. 1. Christ's
assuming our Persons, is not remission of Sin. 2. If God did remit it to us,
when he transferred it on Christ, and yet we Legaliter, suffered in Christ,
then God did both remit the whole debt to us, and receive satisfaction in
Law-Sence from us, at the same time: But that is a contradiction. Therefore,
etc.

From hence I may therefore further argue.

2. Arg. That Doctrine which denies consequentially, that we must believe for
remission o^ Sin, or that we are justified by Faith, any otherwise than in our
own consciences, is not of God* But such is the Doctrine I oppose: Therefore,
etc.

The Minor is proved already: For if either there be no such thing as pardon of
Sin (which follows the point opposed) or as they say none but at the death of
Christ, then the Minor is plain. The main scope of the Gospel confirms the
Major. It is the command to believe for remission of Sin^. It is the promise,
that if we believe we shall be forgiven. It is the threatening, that he that
believes not shall not be forgiven and is condemned already, and the wrath of
God abides on him. And that it is not only in foro conscientiae that Me^ are
justified, (or as Mr. Owen speaks, terminated in conscience) I have fully
proved by a multitude of Arguments in my Papers to Mr. Laws^^ which therefore I
will not now repeat.

3. Arg. That Doctrine which denies that great benefit of our Union with
Christ is not of God; but such is that which I oppose: Therefore, etc.

Pardon and Justification flow from our Union with Christ (which is by faith):
Therefore to deny them, is to deny a principal part of the benefit of that our
Union with him.

4. Arg. That Doctrine which destroys a main end of Baptism is not of God.
Put such is this opposed. Therefore, etc.

Prob. Min. We are Baptized for Remission of Sin (that is, by sealing more
fully to exhibit and confirm our Law Title to Remission): But this
overthrows Remission (at least as the end of Baptism).

5. Arg. That Doctrine which destroys Prayer for the Pardon of Sins, yea and
teaches Men not to be thankful for Pardon, nor to acknowledge themselves
beholden to God for it, nor to need it; is not of God. But such is this
opposed. Therefore, etc. For if it deny pardon, it must needs deny Prayer for
it, and thanks, etc.

6. Arg. That Doctrine which makes Men to be in Christ before they believe, or
are entered into his Covenant, is not of God: But such is this opposed:
Therefore, etc. The Major is plain from the Scope of the Gospel: And if it were
needful I might cite an hundred Texts; which show that unbelievers, are not in
Christ, that it is by Faith that we are his Members, and Children of God ^ and
not in him till then. The Minor is plain, that they make all the Elect to have
been in Law Sense in Christ dying and satisfying; and so make the Members of
Harlots and Satan Members o^ Christ.

7. Arg. That Doctrine is not of God, which makes wicked Unbelievers to be in
Gods special favor as reconciled, and from under his wrath, and quite out of
debt to him, as to any due punishment. But such is this opposed. Therefore, etc.

Prob. Major. The Scripture says that we are by nature Children of wrath; that
unbelievers are condemned already; and the wrath of God abides on them; that
God hates all the workers of iniquity; that he that justifies the unrighteous
is abomination to him; that Men must repent, believe, be Baptized and pray for
Pardon, that we are justified by Faith. Therefore the contrary Doctrine is not
of God.

The Minor's confessed.

8. Arg. That Doctrine is not of God, which consequentially denies the Justice
of his Judgments: But such is this opposed. Therefore, etc.

Prob. Min. That Doctrine which charge God with punishing those that have
made him full payment, does consequentially deny the justice of his Judgments.
But such is the Doctrine in question. Therefore, etc. 1. That it teaches that
we have fully paid the debt in Christ, is past question* ^^^ that God punishes
the Elect 1. Is put out of doubt by frequent express testimony of Scripture, 2.
And is confessed by themselves as many as are of competent understanding, and
moderation. For 1. that paternal Chastisements is a species of punishment, is
known to all that know what punishment is; viz. Malum Passionis propter malum
culpae: V^l privatio boni naturalis propter privationem boni moralis: Or
suffering inflicted for a fault. 2. However, I have met with few of an ordinary
understanding, that will deny that God punishes his Elect, before, Conversion,
while they are Children of wrath, and condemned already, and under the Curse of
the Law.

The Major is also plain. It is injustice to punish those to whom no punishment
is due: But no punishment is due to them that have fully suffered for all Sin:
Therefore to punish them that have so suffered is injustice. I know God is
absolute Lord of the Creature, and therefore may in that regard use them as he
please: And therefore I say, as Twisse, that he may without injustice torment
or afflict the most innocent Creature, (supposing him not to have promised the
contrary, and to be only Dominus, and non Rector): But (says Twisse) he cannot
punish the innocent: For that is a contradiction and so impossible. For all
punishment is for sin. Affliction is but the matter of punishment and not the
form. Besides; God being Rector of the reasonable Creature, and having
expressed in his Laws, that he will not punish Men that deserve it not, it is
not to be charged on him. If any say, God is not capable of injustice, if you
should suppose the breach of his promise? I say, 1. as Abraham Genesis 18. 25.
that be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the Righteous with the
wicked, and that the Righteous should be as the wicked; that be far from thee:
Shall not the judge of all the Earth do Right? 2. We cannot suppose God to
reconcile contradictions: Such it is to punish the Innocent.

And that those who have made full payment or suffered all that was due are not
guilty, i. e. obligati ad poenam is past dispute.

9. Arg. That Doctrine is not true which says of the wicked, He is Righteous:
But such is this opposed. Therefore, etc. Prob. Major. Prove. 24. 24. He that
says to the wicked thou art Righteous. Nations shall Curse him, People shall
abhor him. Prob. Minor. He that has fully satisfied for all Sin, is Righteous:
But according to this Doctrine, the wicked have fully satisfied for all their
Sin: Therefore, etc. Prob. Major. He that has satisfied for all, owes
nothing, as to punishment and therefore is Righteous. What Law can require more
then all? Or what justice can refuse to acquit him that has paid all that was
due? Or to justify him if he be accused as liable to punishment? If any on the
old grounds shall say, that besides the Righteousness Negative, (which is not
guilty of punishment) there is requisite a positive righteousness, to give
Right to the reward, and this they want. I reply 1. One righteousness, does
both, I think. 2. If it were not so yet Christ's satisfaction is meritorious of
the reward. 3. If that were not so, yet remember, that the same Men that object
this, do teach also, that Christ did as strictly represent us in obeying; and
that in him we fulfilled the Law 4. If that were not so, yet it crosses the
Scripture to call the wicked Righteous, in the first Sense, i. e. non reos
poenae Pprob Minor. They say, all the elect have satisfied in Christ. But
multitudes of the Elect are wicked. Therefore, etc. Prob. Minor. He he that
does wickedness is wicked, and is of the Devil, says the Apostle: But such are
many of the Elect before Conversion: Therefore, etc. This argument is in sense,
but the same with the 7th, but that the terms differ, John says, He that does
Righteousness is Righteous, and this Doctrine says consequentially, He that
never did Righteousness is Righteous. Paul says, His Servants ye are to whom
ye obey, whether of Sin unto death or of obedience unto Righteousness. But this
Doctrine says, consequently, His friends ye are whom you never obeyed; and
that the Elect before conversion, who obey the Devil, and so are his Servants,
and never had obedience unto Righteousness, are yet Righteous, as having paid
all their debt.

10 Arg. That Doctrine which denies Christ's Satisfaction for us in strict
Sense, is not of God: But such is this opposed. Therefore, etc. The Major is
plain. Prob. Minor. That Doctrine which affirms Christ's sufferings to have
been the Idem which was required by the Law, and not the Tantundem, does deny
satisfaction in strict Sense: But so does this opposed: Therefore, etc. The
Major is proved by the definition of satisfaction; which strictly taken, is
Redditio aequi valentis, as Scotus and other Schoolmen, and Amesius ( contra
Bellar) from them approving it) or it is, solutio tantidem, as Grotius and
others, and is distinct from solutio ejusdem, which is solutio stricte sic
dicta. Minor. Prob. They that affirm us to have suffered all that the Law
required, do affirm us consequently to have suffered the Idem, and not merely
the tantundem. But so do they that teach, that we suffered in Christ, etc.
Therefore, etc. More of this anon

11. Arg. Christ suffered and satisfied in the Person of Mediator; therefore
not in the Person of the Elect or Offender: Because a mediator is a middle
person, and Christ sustained not two persons as a sufferer.

12. Arg. The Scripture often speaks of Christ's taking on him our nature, and our
Sins, but not (in suffering) our person: Therefore it is not to be affirmed,
Isa. 53. etc.

13. Arg. That Doctrine is not tolerable which makes Man his own Redeemer, or
to have satisfied or suffered for his own Sins: But such this seems therefore,
etc. For if the Law say, that we satisfied in Christ, then in Law Sense, we
satisfied for own Sins, and consequently redeemed our selves.

As for their Objection, that no other way but representing our persons could
suffice to save us by the satisfaction of another; it is a gross mistake and
naked affirmation without proof.

And for them that say, Christ suffered in persona nostra, but not satisfied or
merited so: I answer. They speak inconsistencies: Satisfaction and Merit are
necessary results from the nature of the suffering considered with the Dignity
of the Person, and the Divine acceptance. Now if Christ suffered not in his own
person, whose dignity was to communicate a value to his sufferings, then his
sufferings are defective in their value. And if we did in Christ or by him
suffer all that was due, it is impossible but God should take that suffering
for satisfactory, in the larger Sense, it being solutio ipsius debiti, in
strict Sense. So that if the Law or Lawgiver say, the Elect suffered in
Christ; they must needs say, the elect satisfied in Christ, or rather paid the
debt of the due punishment. And this God could not but accept, ( consequenter
ad Leges) For who can refuse the proper debt? Or deny an acquittance to him
that discharges it? But from a sponsor he might have refused it.

I might add many more Arguments, were it needful. As from the dishonor that
this will cast on Gods Law, in threatening those that have satisfied it already;
in offering pardon and justification on conditions, to those that were
justified without pardon, 1600. years ago. For a condition suspendeth the
benefit till it be performed: But no justice can suspend his justification who
has discharged all the debt. What can be required more then all? Also that the
Covenant or Testament should be Gods Deed of Gift, or Instrument of conveying
Right, to that which is our own already, 1600. years ago. Also the Gospel
says, our Life is in the Son, and all is delivered, into his Hands; but this
puts our Rights in our own Hands, even when we have no being. Also according
to this Doctrine Men were justified before they were Men, and acquitted from
all Sin, before they were born or had committed Sin: And so Sinners that were
no Men and consequently no Sinners, were acquitted from Sin that was not, and
consequently was no Sin.

CHAP. V. Prop. 2. Christ's sufferings for Man's Sins, were not the Idem, the
same thing which the Law threatened to us: Or the fulfilling of the threatening;
and discharge of the debt it self in kind. But the Aequivalens, or Value,
freely paid by him (obliged only by his own sponsion,) and accepted by God, for
our not fulfilling the Law as to its Precept and Commination.
SOme think this Question whether Christ paid the Idem or Tantundem? To be not
Tantidem, not worth the disputing. Mr. O, (against me) seems stiffly to maintain
it to be the Idem, but yielding it to be not per eundem, and the Law to be
Relaxed so far, does yield as much as I need, and gives up the whole cause; and
made me think it a useless labor to reply to him. As small as this Question
seems, I think the main Body of Divinity stands or falls according to the
Resolution of it. For understanding the meaning of it, you must know, 1. That
it is not of the quality of the suffering that we enquire: Whether Christ
suffered the same kind of pain, or loss that we should have suffered? Nor of
the quantity of Torment, for intension or duration? For I am willing to believe
as much identity in these as I can see any ground but of probability to
encourage me: Though yet I know how hard it is, for them that say, by [Death]
in the threatening, was meant, Death, Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal, to prove
that the loss of Gnds Image was none of the penalty; (for I hope none will say,
that Christ lost Gods Image) or that Christ's temporary sufferings, were the
Idem with our Eternal, quoad quantitatem; and not the want of duration made up
by the intension, or dignity of the person, as being Aequivalent: (Which is our
ordinary Doctrine, and I think sound): Or yet that the Eternity of the
punishment was not in the threatening, but was accidental: Either, as some
Schoolmen think, for want of power to deliver or overcome; or as others (and
with them Parker and Sanford, I think, not soundly) because of the
everlastingness of Sinning. I think none of these much worth the disputing,
comparatively: Nor 2. is it de persona naturali, who he was naturally that paid
the debt, or made the satisfaction. It is not therefore de materia debiti, that
we enquire, but de forma: Whether it were the same formally which we owed, and
the obligation required? Or only the Value, and not the same full debt? Also
you must know that, though we may well use the word [debt] in this Case,
because the Scripture does, yet we must acknowledge it but a Metaphor, and the
proper terms are, whether Christ's sufferings were the same thing that the Law
in its threatening required, i. e. obliged unto, and made due? And so a
fulfilling of that threatening? And this with great averfeness I deny. The
question is determined on the determination of the former, having necessary
dependence on it, and being tantum non in Sense the same. And therefore all the
Arguments which I used for the former will serve to this; and therefore I need
not repeat any of them, but refer you to them, desiring you to peruse them and
apply them to this; for all the same absurdities (or near all) do follow upon
this as on the other. Indeed these two together (that Christ paid the Idem, the
debt it self and not the value, by personating us in his sufferings, so that in
Law Sense, we satisfied in him) are the very foundation of the whole frame of
that Religion commonly called Antinomian, but much more fitly Anti-evangelical.
To touch again on some few. It is evident that this Doctrine utterly destroys
all possibility of pardon of Sin, and consequently all repenting and believing,
praying for pardon, all thankfulness for it, all Testamental or Evangelical
Conveyance of it by the promise, all Gospel and Ministerial tenders of pardon;
all Sacramental exhibition and obsignation of pardon; and a Christians
enquiries, examination, and seekings after pardon, and his comforts living or
dying in assurance of pardon; and instead of all, asserteth us so righteous,
that we need no pardon. You will sure confess, that if this will follow, then
almost all Religion is overthrown at a blow. And that it follows, seems to me
past doubt. For what can any Law in the World require or any Lawgiver, in
exactest justice, but that the Law be perfectly fulfilled? What can any
creditor require, but the Idem, the very debt it self which the obligation did
contain? Can he have all his debt, and remit it too? Is the obligation
fulfilled, and remitted or relaxed too? Does the Judge execute all the penalty;
and yet forgive it? Is not he unjust that denies him an acquittance and the
cancelling of the obligation, who has fully paid him all his due? If any shall
conceive, with the Socinians, that the same inconveniences will follow, upon
the asserting of Christ's full satisfaction for us, I answer, Not one of them:
Nay there is no way, I think, but this that I now maintain to confute a
Socinian, and defend Christ's satisfaction. Were it well used, it is a Key into
a great part of the Body of Divinity, and helps to resolve solidly and
satisfactorily a multitude of difficult objections, which without this admit
not of solution (though Mr. O. call it my (...)) The Idem, or full debt or
suffering, is solutio non recusabilis the Value in another kind or way, is
solutio recusabilis, (stricte dicta satisfactio) more plainly, the proper
penalty, which is supplicum delinquentis, is all that can be required to
satisfy the Legislator or Law: But that an innocent person should suffer for
our Sins, is quid Recusabile; the Legislator may refuse it. If therefore we had
paid the Idem, the very debt we had been acquitted or to be acquitted ipso
facto, as presently righteous, without Remission; but when another pays it
(even the Son of the Lawgiver sent by his own Love and Mercy, who is nearer
him then us) these two things follow, 1. That the supreme Rector may accept it
on what terms he please, or not accept it: And that accordingly God did accept
it on terms most fitted to his blessed ends in governing the World: Among
others, that Man should have the special benefits of this satisfaction conveyed
to them only in a legal way, in time, on such and such terms or conditions as
he saw meet, and as is expressed in the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, etc.
Nay it was the desire of Christ the satisfier, that these Benefits should only
thus be conveyed to the Redeemer: That so though the Impetration were wholly by
him, and absolutely wrought, yet the Application might be in part by themselves
and conditional; and the mercy might not cross Gods ends by making them
independent and secure, but might further his ends, in drawing them to him, and
engaging them to repent, believe, seek, strive, fear, care, etc.

If the Idem, were paid, that is, the delinquent himself had suffered, there
had needed no New Covenant, to apply the Benefits, or convey them: But now
there does.

Object. But it may be the Idem, the full due, though not per eundum, by the
same person.

Ans. Distinguish (as before) between the Idem Materialiter and Formaliter,
also between the full debt and a Part. And so, if it were a debt of Money or
the like 1. It may be fully the same materially, and not formally: As a Man may
steal that same Money which you owe another, and pay it to that other as his
own debt: 2. Here you must distinguish between Personam Naturalem and Civilem
vel Legalem: If you pay all that was in the obligation, by your Servant, Friend
or any Delegate or Vicar, the Law will say, you have paid it your self. It was
your deligates person naturally, but yours Legally or rather your Instrument,
Because the obligation required but the thing to be paid in your Name, by what
hand soever; and so you are acquitted* without remission: For you have
discharged the proper debt, and the Creditor can demand no more.

But now in Criminals its otherwise: Because the very Person offending is in
the obligation as the subject of the penalty: Noxa Caput sequitur. So that
formaliter it is not the suffering which was due to you, which another suffers
for you. This I add as a main Argument for my proposition.

If the Law do require only supplicium ipsius delinquentis, then Christ's
sufferings were not the Idem, the same thing which the Law required: Nor is the
Law fulfilled thereby. But the Law does require only supplicium ipsius
delinquentis: Therefore, etc. For the Major, or its consequence it needs no
proof; for Christ was not ipse delinquens; He was made Sin, that is, one
punishable and punished for Sin; but not really, nor in Law a Sinner. The Law
never took any Man for a Sinner that did not Sin. Of this more anon. The Minor
is proved from the words of the Law [ In the Day thou ea^est thou shall dye]
[Cursed is he that continues not in all things] It says, [Thou shall dye] not
[another shall dye] for them that say, It means [thou or thy surety] 1. They
add to Gods Law, out of their own Brain, 2. They make the Law to know a surety
before Sin; 3. They confound hereby Law and Gospel: For it is only the Gospel
that revealed a surety. 4. They make the Law to Curse the innocent, and to
threaten Christ for our Sin dangerously 5. They make Christ a surety a part
ante, and not ex post facto, and so corrupt the Doctrine of his Office. Let
them therefore prove it before they affirm it. I conclude therefore in this
case (as Grotius, Essenius, etc.) Dum alius soluit, simul aliud solvitur. And
therefore Mr. O. and others that grant alius soluit, must needs grant that
aliud solvitur. It was us and not Christ that the Law threatened, and therefore
it is not Christ's sufferings that is the Idem, the thing threatened, but ours;
nor that is a proper fulfilling of the commination in the execution. So that
the obligation is not ipso facto, in justice void on Christ's satisfaction, as
it would have been on our payment (had ours been possible,) and on the payment
of the proper Debt.

Again I argue, as before; that is not true Doctrine which denies Christ's
proper satisfaction: But so does the opposed Doctrine directly. Ergo, etc.

For satisfactio (stricte sumpta) and solutio stricte sumpta, are thus
different; satisfactio is solutio tantidem, and solutio stricte sumpta est
ejusdem. He therefore that affirms that Christ paid our proper Debt, denies
him to have made proper satisfaction for our non-payment.

Lest you should think me singular herein, I think it meet to show you in some
few Testimonies, what our greatest Divines say in this point.

1. Great Camero says, ( page 363 Operum folio.) Objectio qui pro alio
satisfecit, is soluit quod ille debet At Christus non soluit quod nos
debebamus: Ergo Resp. Ad majorem per distinctionem: Id soluit quod alius debet
Pondere and Valor, concedo: Id soluit specie; nego. Jam vero Christus id
soluit quod nos debebamus, pondere and valor; quod satis est.

2. Rivet Disput. de satisfact. page 253, 254. etc. that which he disputes for
the Laws Relaxation, makes wholly for this.

3. Mr. Ball of the Covenant, page 290. There is a twofold payment of Debt: One
of the thing altogether the same which was in the Obligation; and this ipso
facto freeth from Punishment, whether it be paid by the Debtor himself, or by
his Surety. Another of a thing not altogether the same which is in the
Obligation, so that some act of the Creditor or Governor must come unto it,
which is called Remission: in which Case deliverance does not follow ipso
facto, upon the satisfaction. And of this kind is the satisfaction of Christ.

4. Grotius in his Excellent Treatise De satisfactione, has the same more
fully.

5. Essenius defends it in Grotius against the cavils of Crellius at large.

6. Bils^n of Christ's Descent, page 45. and 262. (as cited by Parker.)

7. And Parker that opposes him, says as much as I do: de Descensu Christi,
lib. 3. page 108, 109.

Argu. 2. If Christ paid the Idem, or fulfilled the Laws threat, then we who
were the persons obliged, may be truly said to have fulfilled it in him. But
that is false, therefore I mean the Law is not fulfilled by Christ's Sufferings.
Of which see the next Question.

CHAP. VI. Prop. III. It was not the Law it self properly that Christ
satisfied, but the Legislator, as above Law.
FOR the understanding of this, you must distinguish between fulfilling the
Law, and satisfying for not fulfilling: Between fulfilling the the Precept and
the Commination; between satisfaction largly taken, pro desiderij impletione;
and stricty taken pro solutione aequivalentis; and between the Law i^ self and
its end. And so Isay, 1. Man fulfilled not the Precept of the Law, 2. Nor is
the threatening perfectly fulfilled on man by God; specially on the saved. 3.
The suffering of the penalty may be called satisfaction of the Law, as to the
Precepts; that is, the Law is satisfied for our violation of its commands; but
as to the threatening, it is properly the fulfilling of it. 4. Christ did fulfill
the precept of the Law in his own personal perfect obedience, and so was
himself Righteous q^oad continuationem, being initially Righteous before, from
his conception. 5. Christ did not fulfill the threatening of the Law as to
himself, for it did not threaten him. 6. Christ did not fulfill the threatening
of the Law, as to us; for that had been nothing else but to Damn us all. 7.
Christ might improperly be said to satisfy the ends of the Law: I mean the
remote Ends which are not Essential to it; but not the immediate nearest end,
which enters its difinition; viz. The terminus: The Debitum Poenae pro
comminationem Constitutum. God made Laws to rule men, and therein by
threatenings expresses his hatred of Sin, etc. This is as fully expressed in
the sufferings of Christ, as if the threat had been fulfilled. 8. Christ did
not satisfy the Law it self. (I mean the sense of the Law,) but the
Legislator. This is it which I must prove, having first removed this Objection.

Object. The end of Law, is the Law: But Christ satisfied the End of the Law:
Ergo, etc.

Answ. The next end, called the terminus, enters the definition in Relations.
This Christ did not satisfy. The Law did constitute the dueness of our
personal punishment (which is remitted) but not Christ's punishment (which was
suffered) The remote ends of the Law, are not truly the Law but proverbially so
called by some. The letter and sense, is the Law, and not those ends. Now that
Christ satisfied not the Law, I prove thus.

Argu. 1. If the Law know no satisfaction, (or be capable of none) but the
fulfilling of it, (which is not strictly satisfaction) then Christ's sufferings
were no satisfaction to the Law. But the Law knows no other, Ergo, etc.

We doubt not of his fulfilling the Precept himself, but that is not
satisfaction to the Law directly and properly for another violation of it. The
Major is unquestionable if we prove that Christ fulfilled not the threat: And
that I have done already.

1. If Christ was not threatened by the Law, (or if it threatened none but ipsum
delinquentem;) then Christ's sufferings were not the fulfilling of the threat:
(for he was not the delinquent) But, etc. Ergo, etc.

2. If Christ therefore suffered to relax the Law, and that its threatening
might not be fulfilled, then his sufferings were not the fulfilling of the Law.
But, etc. Ergo, etc. Prob. Min. that the Law knows no other satisfaction, but
fulfilling.

Argu. 1. Satisfaction strictly (as distinct from fulfilling) is Redditio
aequivalentis. But the Law, (as continuing the same) cannot commute or
substitute the aequivalens vel tantundem, for the Idem or proper Debt.

2. It is essential to the Law to constitute the Debitum vel officij vel
Poenae. But it constitutes not the Debitum alterius speciei, vel tantidem;
(else it should confound the ipsum debitum with the aequivalens.) The Law never
imposed it on Christ to satisfy for our sins: This was the obligation of his
own Sponsion.

3. Satisfaction which is the giving of the value for the proper Debt, implies
a relaxation of the Law to its acceptance: But the Law cannot relax it self.
Ergo, etc.

4. To admit of satisfaction, is the Act of the Lawgiver or Rector, as he is
above Law; therefore it is no act of the Law. As to make a Law, to pardon an
Offender, to abrogate a Law, etc. are acts of one above the Law, so is the
relaxing of the Law in pardoning the Sinner, and taking Christ's sufferings for
ours. Can any obligation dissolve or remit it self?

5. If the Law did neither threaten Christ in the first enacting of it, nor
has power to change it self since, by assuming another sense, then Christ's
sufferings were neither a fulfilling nor satisfaction to the Law. At verum
prius Erg^. If the name of Christ were put into the threatening after the Law
was made, then the Law was changed, and so is not the same; and it could not
change it self. Indeed if another for you pay a Debt, the Bond is satisfied,
because it was the ipsum debitum. But if another will bear the Death that you
deserve, the Law that threatens you is not satisfied nor fulfilled; But the
Lawgiver is satisfied, and the ends of the Law attained. But here note, that
this relaxation and non fulfilling of the Law, is not total and absolute; nor
such as derogateth at all from the honor of the Law or Lawgiver; but it is a
relaxation upon such terms as preserve both fully; the full weight of the
threatened Punishment being born or undertaken by the Son of God, before God
would relax his Law.

6. To this and the two former together, I add: If the Laws Commination be
fulfilled, or if Christ suffered the same that was threatened, or if we
satisfied fully in Christ, then we are not by that Law obliged to obedience
during this Life. But the consequent is false Ergo, etc.

The reason of the consequence is this. The Law obliges aut ad obedientiam,
aut ad poenam, disjunctively pro eodem tempore, and not and ad obedientiam and
ad poenam. Now Christ has satisfied for our sin not only against the Law of
Works by Adam, but against all Laws of Nature or Grace since, except the non
performance of the condition of the new Covenant, and this to our Death. So
that if we have in Christ fully satisfied the threatening for all sin in this
Life, then we cannot be bound by the Precept after such satisfaction, till
after this Life be ended. To say we are not obliged to the same Ends, is no
answer: For that Law can oblige us to no ends, which is fulfilled already, and
which did never oblige but aut ad obedientiam, aut poenam propter obedientiae
defectum.

CHAP. VII. Prop. IV. It was not only the Sins of the Elect, but of all, even
Elect and Non-elect which were the pro-causa meritoria of Christ's sufferings.
Or it was not only the Sufferings Due to the Sins of the Elect, but of all,
which Christ did undergo. And accordingly has made satisfaction for all.
IT is necessary that we speak of the efficient Causes of Christ's Death, before
we handle the Effects. And therefore we must consider quorum loco he Dyed,
before we consider how far they shall partake of the Benefits. Here it must be
remembered, that we have already proved that Christ did not represent our
Persons in satisfying; but yet he bore our sins, that is, the penalty due to
them; and so did in a larger sense suffer nostro loco or nostri loco; not as
our Delegate or proper ^^carius; but as a voluntary Sponsor, and so substitute
in suffering.

Also understand that Christ's sufferings had no real proper meritorious Cause:
But yet Man's sins were the pro-causa meritoria: He undertook to bear that
suffering which for them was due to us, (not to him.) And therefore when I say
he bore the sufferings due to us, I mean it materialiter only; such sufferings
for kind and weight he bore; but his obligation to bear them was only from his
own Sponsion, and not the Law. The Law by constituting the Dueness of
punishment to us, was the occasion of his suffering it, but not the obliging
cause. I add, that [accordingly he has satisfied for all:] For this will not
be denied, if the first be proved. For he satisfied by suffering what the
Sinner deserved: And in whose stead soever he suffered, for them he satisfied.

Now I shall think it meet to stand the longer on this point, because the
decision of the main Question [Whether Christ dyed for all men?] depends
mainly on it. For the strictest sense in which he is said to die for men, is,
to die in their stead; or to Die for their Sins as the procuring Cause, on his
own undertaking. Yield this once, and we shall much easilier agree on the
second Part, Pro quorum beneficio, or what the benefits be which Christ has
procured to all. At least, no man will think it unmeet to say, that [Christ
died for all men] if we can prove that he dyed for the sins, and in the stead
of all, and satisfied Gods Justice for all. And if he dyed for them, it is
certain that he satisfied for them (as is said) because God does neither
require nor accept the Death of his Righteous Son, but as it is necssary to the
satisfaction of his justice for Sin

Lastly, remember that I put the word [all] as contradistinct from the Elect:
pleading specially against them that would confine Christ's satisfaction only to
the Elect: Not that I doubt of Christ's sufferings for all, in the utmost
universality, but I think it far safer to dispute it as to all that hear the
Gospel: For God has plainlier showed us how he deals with these than the
rest; and it is not fair nor profitable to carry the disputation into the
obscurest part, to lose it rather than determine it: And if any agree with me
in this that I prove: [That Christ satisfied for all that hear the Gospel.] I
will not trouble them with disputing it about the rest, but willingly let them
enjoy their opinion, (though contrary to mine) as judging it to be to us of far
lesser moment My Arguments shall be first from the scope of Scripture Doctrine;
and 2. From some particular Texts, which expressly assert Universal
Satisfaction, or Christ's Dying for all: And then I shall answer the contrary
Arguments.

This First Argument shall be A conditionali remissione, and Jure ad Regnum
caelorum omnibus per Testamentum Christi donatis.

Argum. I.
If all men have a Conditional Pardon, Justification, Adoption and Right to
Glory, given to them by the New Testament, then Christ suffered and satisfied
for all. But the Antecedent is true, therefore so is the consequent. I add by
way of Explication, that the Condition is no Natural impossibility, or
unreasonable thing; but Faith in Christ, or the accepting of the good that is
bestowed and offered them; which is such a condition that many Learned Divines
(who incline to the Antinomian way) say it is no condition, but it is
equivalent to an absolute gift; and that it is so Naturally necessary that in
the most absolute gift, acceptance is still supposed; and that it is all one to
say [I will give thee this benefit] and [I will give it thee if thou will take
it.] I am not of their mind, as to the case in hand; but hereby it may appear
how reasonable Gods condition is, when Learned Men do take his gift to be
absolute or equivalent.

The Antecedent is proved by multitudes of express Texts of Scripture, John 3.
16. God so loved the World that he gave, etc. That whosoever believes, etc. 1
John 5. 10, 11. He that believes not God has made him a Liar, because he
believes not the reccord that God gave of his Son. And this is the record;
that God has given to us Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son: He that
has the Son has Life, and he that has not the Son has not Life. Mark 16.
15, 16. Go ye into all the World and Preach the Gospel to every Creature: He
that Beeth and is Baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be
damned. John 7. 37, 38. If any man thirst let him come to me and Drink: He that
believes on me, etc. Acts 13. 39. By him all that believe are Justified, etc.
Acts 16. 31. Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved. Romans 3. 22, 23,
24, 25, 26. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his
Blood, to declare, etc. That he might be the Justifier of him that believes in
Jesus. Rom 4. 24. To whom it shall be imputed if we believe, etc. Romans 10. 6,
7, 8, 9. But the Righteousness which is of Faith speaks on this wi^e, etc.
That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thy Heart that God raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved. Rev. 22. 17.
Whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely, Act. 10. 43. 1 Pet. 2.
6. John 5. 24. and 6. 35. 40, 47. and 7. 38. with many the like.

Where note that these are in several respects called a Gift, a Promise, and an
Offer. They are Christ's Testament, and so properly his Deed of Gift, and do
confer Right to the mentioned Benefits, conditionally first, and actual, and
absolute when the condition is performed. And this is the principal
consideration of them, that they are the Premiant act of the New Law, and the
Testament of Christ, and his Deed of Gift. They are an Offer of Christ and
these benefits, when they are applied by promulgation to particular Sinners:
And this Application or Offer is either by the mee^ terms of the Written Deed
of Gift in Scripture; or else by the further proclamation by Christ's Ministers
and Officers. In the former sense, the Gift and the Offer are materially the
same; but formally it is first Gods Conveyance or Deed of Gift, and then
afterward in order of Nature, it is his Offer. It is Gods Written Instrument
constituting a Conditional Right to Christ and his Benefits; but such an
instrument is a proper Conveyance or Deed of Gift. And the conditional Right
must be constituted before it can be offered: Or else the Offer should be an
act without its Object. But in regard of Actual Absolute Right, the offer is
antecedent, and supposes the thing offered not to be his to whom it is
offered; but that the Condition of Acceptance must first be performed. Yea
every man that is the owner himself who does seriously offer a benefit to any
man, without any meritorious or retaliating condition, but merely to be
accepted, does Eodem actu, convey or give Right to that Benefit on the said
condition. Now God does offer his Son, 1. By his Written Instrument or Word,
which must needs be his own act, and consequently his Gift as well as offer. 2.
By his Messengers, whose act is morally his own act, in that he has bid them
say what they say, and commanded them to proclaim it to every Creature. It is
called a Promise, not in respect to the Conditional Right but the Absolute,
because it promises them that if they will accept Christ he shall be theirs
with his benefits. And it does not Promise that God will perform any other
Natural Act for Conveiance of the benefit; but that by that same promising
Instrument the Right shall be conveyed.

2. It is undeniable that this gift, offer or promise [If thou will believe
thou shall be saved] or [Whosoever will, let him take, etc.] is, made to
unbelievers, as the Subject. We may not say to a Believer [If thou will believe
thou shall be saved] Except we speak of the continuance or renewal of Faith. It
is properly to Unbelievers that God offers or gives Christ, so be it they will
accept his gift. Now if it be to unbelievers, then it must needs be to all,
Elect, and Non-elect: For the Promise makes no difference, nor the Minister
knows no difference: God says not [Thou Elect person shall be saved if thou
believe] For then no Man could apply the promise, nor know whether he have
warrant to believe, as not knowing whether he be Elect: But he says to any Man
[If thou will believe thou shall be saved.]

3. Either Christ and his benefits are given conditionally (on condition of
believing) to all or to none. To the Non-elect, or not to the Elect. But rhey
are given to some, even to the Elect: Therefore to all. The Major is evident in
the tenor of the promise. 1. It is Universal, [Whosoever will] [Whosoeve
believeth] It is no where limited to the Elect. 2. If it were limited to the
Elect, it were useless, because none could know before believing whether he be
Elect. Indeed the thing promised is proper to the Elect, and so is the
Effectual, Actual, Donation, or Conveyance of Right by the promise: But that is
not (as to the Sense of the promise) as they are Elect but as believers, or
performers of the condition: And in this Sense only Believers are Heirs of the
promise, that is, its effectual conveying act, and so to the thing promised.

But the Great doubt is of the Minor with some. For they deny that Christ is
given conditionally to any Unbeliever Elect or not Elect; but only is decreed
for the Elect before time, and given to Believers in time. The Sense is; that
there is no conditional promise or deed of Gift, but all absolute. For if it be
made only to Men that do believe, their first believing cannot be the
condition; and if it be made on condtion of First believing, it is made to Men
that do not yet believe. But the main Scope of the Gospel proves the Minor, by
proving the conditional Gift, or promise: As the Texts even now cited, among
others. Where note (to put it out of doubt) 1. That the time of Gods enacting
this Law, or making this Testament, Gift or promise, was before we were born
and therefore before we believed. 2. that in its nature, it first speaks to
unbelievers as its Subject. For who will offer a gift to us to be accepted that
it may be ours, if we have accepted it already? Nay how can it be accepted
before it is offered? And how can we consent to have Christ and so be united to
him, except he first give himself to us on condition that we will consent? 3.
Note, that the promise is made in most proper conditional terms [If thou
confess with thy Mouth and believe in thy heart, Romans 10.] That whosoever
believes should not perish, etc. 4. And also note that faith has here the
Definition of a condition agreeing to it, i. e. It is an Arbitrary act on which
the free Donour has suspended the efficacy of his Testament or Deed of Gift.
(It is Arbitrary conditions that we have here to speak of, which some call
Potestative: And not casual, or mixed.) So to suspend the effect of the
Instrument, that hoc posito efficiet, and donec ponatur non efficiet, that upon
the doing or not doing, the Effect shall follow or not follow, and this by the
Positive ordination of the Donor is the very essence of a Condition in
Law-sence. And such ^s Faith. And what Divine, except Antinomians, does deny
Faith to be the Condition? And if it be so, then the Promise or Conditional
Gift, must needs be made to Unbelievers (that it may become effectual when they
believe:) For it can be no condition in this proper sense, if it be past
already. And therefore it must needs be made to all Unbelievers seeing
Scripture limitteth it not to any, but speaks; universally. Inded it is a
very hard questionhow far the promulgation may be said to be Universal, and how
far not: But that is nothing against the Universality of the Tenor of the Law
or Gift. And the command to the Promulgators is, [ Go into all the World and
Preach the Gospel to every Creature.

Next let us prove the consequence of the Major Proposition; and that thus. The
thing conditionally given is Pardon purchased by Christ's Blood, shed for the
Sinner to whom it is Given: Therefore the gift presupposes the shedding of his
Blood for that Sinner.

The Antecedent has two branches to be proved. 1. That the Pardon
conditionally given to all, is a pardon purchased by Christ's Blood. 2. That it
is by Christ's blood as shed for him to whom that pardon is given. For the
first, there is no Pardon given any other way but by Christ's blood shed,
therefore this is from his Bloodshed.

1. If there be Remission which is not purchased by Christ's blood shed, then
there are two distinct ways of Remission; one by his blood, and another
without. But the consequent is false. Ergo, etc.

2. If there be a remission without Christ's bloodshed, then all remission might
have been without it. But the consequent is false, else Christ Dyed needlessly.

3. Heb. 9. 22. Without shedding of Blood there is no Remission.

4. Heb. 9. 16. [For where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be the
Death of the Testator.] But this conditional Gift is Christ's Testament: So ver.
15. [For this cause he is the Mediator of the new Testament, that by means of
Death for the Redemption of the Transgressions that were under the first
Testament, they which are called might receive the promise of Eternal
Inheritants;] viz. all that are external^y called receive the conditional
Promise, and Believers the thing promised.

5. Luke 24. 46, 47. [It behoved Christ to ^uffer and Rise from the Dead the
third day, and that Repentance and Remission of Sins should be reached in his
name among all Nations, etc.] ^o that even Remission Preached, that is, offered
^n condition of repentance, (and Faith) presupposes Christ's Death as the Cause.

6. In the Institution of his Supper, he calls ^e Cup, the New Testament in
his Blood, that this signifies my Blood which procures the ^ew Testament. Now
none sure dare say that the ^^omise of Pardon and Life on condition of Be^^ving
is not the New Testament either whole or ^^t.

7. And therefore it is called the Blood of the ^venant (even to them that
tread it under ^^^t) Heb. 10. 29. and 13. 20. Zech. 9. 11.

8. Justification is by Christ's Blood, Romans 5. 9. [ Being Justified by his
Blood.] But Justification is the Effect of this Conditional Covenant or Gift,
(when the Condition is performed;) therefore the effect of this Covenant is
from Christ's blood, and consequently the Covenant it self which is an
intermediate cause. Though there be other sorts of Justification, yet that this
is one, and the first, is undeniable.

9. Actual Remission to Believers is from Christ's Blood; Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we
have Redemption through his Blood the remission of Sins, Col. 1. 14.) therefore
conditional remission to unbelievers is from his Blood. The reason of the
consequence is, that Christ procures the Effect of Justification or Remission
not immediately by his Blood as shed, but by procuring the Covenant or Promise
as the immediate Cause, and the effect by that Cause; and it is the same Gift
o^ Covenant which conditionally Justifies all, and actually Justifies
Believers; and that without any other ^^tervening act of God: When the
condition is performed (whose Nature is to suspend the Effect) then the effect
resulteth from tha^ same Promise, which before did not effect. Indeed Christ
gives his Spirit to cause his Own t^ perform the condition; but still the
justifying a^ is by the conditional Covenant. If therefore i^ be the same
promise which effectually justifie^ the Elect, and only conditionally
justifies other and Christ's Blood causes that promise which e^ fectually
justifies the Elect, then his Blo^^ caused that promise which conditionally
justifie^ all. John 3. 16. God so loved the World, that he g^ his only begotten
Son (1. For men on the Cr^^ 2. To men by the promise,) that whosoever believe.
etc. So that this conditional grant of Life comes from the giving of Christ to
Death.

And for the second part of the Antecedent, viz. That it is from Christ's Blood
as shed for him to whom the Promise is made. And 1. Ab ^nefficacia, Christ's
Dying for one man, cannot procure these great benefits to another. It cannot
have causality as to such an effect. God does not forgive Thomas because Christ
Dyed for Peter* 2. A non necessitate. There was a necessity of Christ's Death
(as is before proved) to the procuring of this pardon. But there was no
necessity for procuring pardon to one man, that Christ should Die for another;
therefore the necessity was that he Dyed for the person himself. 3. If Christ's
Death were not necessary to the conditional pardoning of the Non-elect, (but
that God does it without Christ's Dying for them; then it was not necessary for
the conditional pardoning of the Elect, but God might have done it without
Christ's Dying for them: But the Consequent is ^alse, therefore so is the
Antecedent. The Major is plain in that there is the same reason both as to
their Sin and Case, and Remission.

1. The Sins of the Elect did not differ from those of the Non-elect, so as
that they more ^eeded a satisfactory Expiation.

2 They were both under the same Law, ^urse and Wrath of God.

3. The Deed of Gift, or Promise which re^itteth one, is the same with that
which remitteth the other. The Minor is plain, for if any ^ould say, that
without Christ's Death, God ^ight conditionally have pardoned all Elect and
Non-elect; but not Actually. I Answer. 1. Then Christ should Die only to
purchase Faith: (which is false.) For God does perform no new act to make the
conditional Gift become actual, but only the giving of Grace to believe and so
perform the condition. 2. Then God might have made this new Law and Covenant of
Grace, [Believe and be pardoned and saved] or [ Whosoever will let him take the
Water of Life freely] without any expiatory Sacrifice or Satisfaction by
Christ; which, 1. So contradicts it self, (seeing the thing given is a Dead
revived Savior with his Benefits; and therefore it cannot be given which is
not.) 2. And so subverteth Christianity it self, that I think I need not spend
more words on it.

Only I add this (which is of considerable moment,) that on the contrary, the
great necessity and ends of Christ's Death are in respect to God as Rector per
leges, and not as Dominus absolutus, or benefactor mere arbitrarius: God
received no addition of Love, or Goodwill, nor of Wisdom, or Natural Power by
Christ's Death: But he received a Reparation of his honor as Legislator, and a
Moral Power (consisting in Convenient^ rei efficiendae) to pardon sin by making
a general act of pardon to all that will accept the Redeemer and his Benefits.
So that the proper use of Christ's Death was to be an Expiatory Sacrifice for
Sin, offered to God as the offended Rector. And therefore the New Law or
Covenant of Grace which follows hereupon (giving Christ and Pardon to all
that will Receive him) must needs be the proper effect of Christ's Death.
Whereas Faith is given rather by God as Dominus Absolutu^ arbitrarily doing
good to his Creature, then as Legislator; and is said to be purchased by
Christ's Death but in a more remote sense (as shall anon be showed.): so that to
deny this Conditional Gift, Covenant or Promise to be the fruit of Christ's
satisfaction, is to deny a very great part of the fruit of it; and tantum non
to make Christ to dye in vain.

The Consequence needs no proof, Therefore I pass to the next.

Arg. II.
If God do offer (by his Word and Messengers) Remission, Justification,
Adoption and Right to Glorification, to all (Elect and Non-Elect) then Christ
has satisfied for all. But God does so offer these to All: Ergo, etc.

A Remissione and Salute omnibus Oblatis.

The former Argument was drawn from the Gift, and this is drawn from the Offer:
which though it be inseparable from the former, and so employed in the former
Argument, yet I shall annex it because of them, who deny the Conditional Gift,
but confess the Offer. The Antecedent I think few will question, as to All who
hear the Gospel; and God as Legislator has done his part in offering it to
those that yet ^e^er heard it. 1. In making the Tenor of the promise or Offer,
of Universal extent. 2. And in Commanding his Officers to go into all the World
and Preach the Gospel to every Creature.

The Consequent is proved thus. 1. The Pardon offered is either a Pardon
purchased by Christ's Satisfaction for them to whom it is offered* or else
procured some other way: But there is no other way of procurement, Ergo, etc.

1. Not without Christ's Blood as is proved.

2. Not by Christ's Blood as shed for others, as is proved.

Object. But it is by his Blood as shed for all that will Believe.

Ans. 1. Believing is not the Condition of Christ's Dying for us; but of our
participation of the benefits thereby purchased: not of the Impetration, but of
part of the Application. Christ never said, If men (or this man) will Believe,
I will dye for them; But, [If thou Believe thou shall be justified and saved,
by him that has died for thee.] Belief is not presupposed as the Qualification
of the subject for whom Christ must dye* but is required after, and given
freely to his chosen, for the further Application of his Death.

2. His dying for them that will Believe, was either for certain determinate
persons who should Believe; or else without a determination of the persons. If
the latter only, then he died certainly for none. If the former then his dying
for one man would not procure pardon for another.

2. God does not offer that which he cannot give (for his offer is a gift, on
condition of Acceptance: and we must not dare to charge God with illusory or
ludicrous actions.) But God cannot give Pardon and Justification and Right to
Salvation, to any sinful man for whom Christ never satisfied: When I say [God
cannot] I mean not, that he cannot for want of Power, but because of his
Wisdom, Goodness and Justice, He cannot (being Rector of the World) do that
which is so Inconvenient, and such a Monster in Government, and so destructive
to the ends of his Government: All grant that quoad potentiam ordinatam now he
cannot: that is, He will not. If God may give these to one man, yea to All the
Non-Elect to whom they are offered, without Christ's satisfaction procuring
them, then he may do so by all: but that is not true, Ergo, etc.

Object. But i^ men will Believe God Can and Will give them what he offers.

Answ. This Objection supposes the Believing of that person for whom Christ
died not, or else it changes the subject of the question. For the Question now
is, Whether God can give Pardon to a Man for whom Christ has not satisfied?
And it is hereby answered, that He can if that man Believe? To which I reply,
that he cannot, or will not, supposing that such a Man should believe. For it
is Christ's Death that is principally requisite, and that before Believing,
without which all the Believing in the World will do no good. But some will
say, It may not be supposed that a Non-Redeemed man should Believe. I say, it
may well be supposed in dispute: But I shall have occasion fullier to answer
this anon.

3. Contradictions are not to be charged upon God: But to offer pardon to one
for whom no satisfaction is made, ( Consideratis Considerandis) is a
contradiction, Ergo, etc. An effect without its necessary cause, is a
contradiction: But a Pardon without satisfaction (which is the thing here
supposed to be offered) is an effect without its necessary cause, Ergo, etc.
The satisfaction must be given to God and Accepted by him, before the fruits of
that satisfaction can be (seriously and in plain dealing) offered to the
Sinner, that by Acceptance they may become his.

Arg. III. A natura Objecti, viz. beneficii oblati.
If it be a Christ who has satisfied for their sin, who is offered to men to
be Received or Believed in, then Christ has satisfied for the sins of all to
whom God does offer him. But it is [a Christ who has satisfied for their sin]
who is offered to men to be Received, Ergo, etc.

1. Here it will be easily yielded, I suppose, that Christ is offered to the
Non-Elect. 2. That himself is the principal Object of this Faith, and his
Benefits the consequential. 3. That he is offered to them as a Redeemer and
Savior. 4. That he does not offer to Redeem them by suffering again. 5. That
without suffering for them, he cannot be a Redeemer for them. 6. And therefore
he is offered to apply the Benefits of his Death, by actual Justifying,
Adopting, Sanctifying and Glorifying them. 7. And therefore it must needs
follow, that it is presupposed the rest of the work is already done, viz.
Satisfaction: Or else Christ is not offered to men as a Redeemer and sufficient
Savior; but he is offered to them for a Redeemer and sufficient Savior;
therefore as one that has satisfied for them. For he never offered to pardon
any Man without satisfaction for his Sins first made. So that the contrary
makes Christ either to be offered to Men not as a Redeemer and Savior, or as
one to redeem and save them without dying and satisfying for them both which
are untrue and unsufferable Consequents.

Arg. 4th. Ab effectu Universali ad Causam.
If all Men be delivered from the legal necessity of Perishing everlastingly,
which was brought on them by the mere breach of the first rigorous Law, then
Christ has suffered and satisfied for all: But the Antecedent is true:
Therefore so is the Consequent.

I suppose none will question the Major proposition, i. e. the Consequence: Or
imagine that there is any other way of freedom from the Legal Necesity of
Perishing besides Christ's satisfaction: If they should, the Scripture does
afford full and frequent Testimonies against them.

For the Minor, or Antecedent of the Major, 1. Understand, that I speak not of
a deliverance from all necessity of perishing, even for their Sin against the
Law: For there may be necessitas Consequentiae which is but necessitas Logica
vel Conclusionis a praemissis Praescientiae and Lecreti Divini, which may
remain; and necessitas ex rejectione remedii, follow, 2. And I speak not of
actual remission of Men's Sins against the Law, as if Christ had pardoned all.
But I say, all Men are delivered from that necessity of Perishing, which the
Tenor of the first Law (as standing alone sine lege remediante) did impose. If
Men perish now it shall not be merely, because they did not perfectly obey:
Whether you respect Adams Sin imputed to them, or any Sin of their own
consisidered merely as against the Law of Works: Whether this liberation be by
a proper Abrogation of the first Law: upon satisfaction undertaken) (as my
Reverend Friend Mr. G. Lawson maintains in some Papers to me) or only by a
Relaxation and Remission Per Legem Remediantem, i. e. an Act of Oblivion or
Grace, (as I judge) the matter is of no great Moment, nor fit now to be debated:
But that God condemns no Man in the World, directly or merely because he did
not perfectly obey, and because the Law remains without remedy, which says
[obey perfectly and live] or [he that ever Sins shall dye] is plain from all
that has been said already, and from many other plain Texts of Scripture, 1.
If Christ command his Gospel to be preached to all (every Creature in the World
viz. Rational) that is, Pardon and Life to be offered them, then they remain
not under that Legal necessity of pershing, ( viz, because all that Sin must
dye,) But the Antecedent is proved ergo, etc. 2. If God have given by his New
Testament or Law, a conditional pardon to all, then they are not under that
mere Rigorous Law sine remedio: But etc, ergo, etc. 3. It is impossible that
Men should be under the precept of the Gospel, and the mere remediless rigor of
the Law of Works both at once: But multitudes of Non-Elect are under the
precept of the Gospel Ergo, etc. The Minor is undeniable: It is their duty to
believe. The Major is as plain: For the remediless rigor of the Law, (I mean
the terror of the Law as standing alone, without the Law of Grace to remedy its
obligation) says, Cursed is he that does not all things, etc. Cursed is he
that once Sins: The Gospel says, Blessed is he that believes though he
has Sinned a thousand times: Or, he that believes though a Sinner, shall not
dye, nor come into Condemnation: And it commands Men to receive Christ as a
Savior, and so to believe that they may not perish. 4. Gods merciful dealing
with the very Pagans shows that they are not under the mere rigor of the Law of
Works: 1. The mercies themselves, 2. The use and end of them shows this, 1. It
is not denied (by any that fear to deny God the acknowledgment of his mercies)
but that wicked Men even Pagans, have many and great mercies from God. And its
undeniable that all those mercies are inconsistent with the rigorous execution
of the threatening of the first Law: And therefore that Law is not rigoronsly
executed on them. And therefore it is relaxed to them. And God will not relaxe
or dispense with his Law, but upon a valuable consideration, by which the ends
of the Law may be attained. 2. And the end and use of these mercies ( viz. the
use that God requires them to make of them) is to lead Men to repentance, and
to return to God from whom they are fallen. And such mercies were never given
according to the Covenant of Works, but only according to the Covenant of
Grace, which is founded in Christ's Blood. I do but touch on this because I
think anon to speak of it more largely. 5. All Gods descriptions of Judgment in
Scripture show that no Men are under the mere Law of Works, as remediless. Men
are not then examined merely whether ever they Sinned, nor accused merely as
Sinners: But the Question will be of that Sin in Specie which consists in
refusing to repent or believe, or abusing that mercy which should have led them
to repentance. Mat. 25. It is for not improving their Talents (which is not the
legal reason, as the Law of Works is alone) or for not loving and cherishing
Christ Jesus in his Members: It is for not knowing God, nor obeying the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is true that all their Sins also against the Law
shall cause their condemnation; for they were never pardoned: But that is
consequentially because they abused the Grace that should have recovered them;
and so the Wrath of God abides on them, that would not yield to his means for
removing it. I no where read, that God will make this Rigorous Law alone, the
Norma Judicii, and pass sentence on any merely on these terms [If thou have
never Sinned thou shall be saved, else thou shall be condemned] so that if we
have no discovery what way or on what terms in special God will judge them that
hear not of Christ; yet we have a plain discovery of the Negative, that he will
not deal with them on the forementioned terms of the sole Covenant of Works:
And consequently for the affirmative we are sure in general, that he deals with
them upon terms of Grace, i. e. Mercy contrary to their desert More of this may
be added anon.

Arg. 5. Ab aequitate novae Legis Credendi Debitum Constituentis.
The Faith which God requires of Men to their Justification, has not a
feigned or deceiving object: But it should have such an object if Christ have
not satisfied for all who are commanded to belie^ ergo, etc. Or t^^s; if Christ
have not satisfied for all who are commanded to believe in him to
Justification, then the Faith commanded them should have a feigned or deceiving
object. But the Faith commanded them has not a feigned or deceiving object
ergo, etc.

All the proof requisite is of the consequence of the Major Proposition. And
here we must first know what the justifying Act of Faith is, and then what the
object must be, and then the consequence will manifest it self, Divines are not
agreed what the justifying Act of Faith is, some think it must be but one Act,
and therefore it must be placed but in one faculty: Of these some place it only
in the understanding, as Camero and many others: Some only in the Will as
Amesius and some few with him. Some and most place it in both faculties and so
in diverse Acts (and that rightly). And inded it has diverse Acts in each
faculty: For as it is more then one particular Truth or exunciation which is
the object of Assent, and therefore must have diverse Acts of Assent; so it is
in more then one shape and profitable respect that the Goodness of the object
is presented to the Will, and therefore it must there have several Acts, as
consent, affiance, etc. Now let us first enquire after the Acts of the
understanding; where I will meddle with none but what is ordinarily by Divines
asserted to be justifying or prerequisite thereto. And 1. I will let that pass
which Dr. Twiss makes the first Act, viz. To believe Gods word to be true: For
if it be not known what that word is here is no material object of Faith; but
the formal object alone. 2. I will pass over the duty of repenting, which Dr.
Twiss says is next required (contrary to the usual Doctrine) though it is
manifest that repentance it self as a means to remission, cannot be required
but on supposition of satisfaction for Sin. The common answer to the Arminians
[ Quicquid tenemur credere verum est, etc.] Is, We are all bound to believe
that Christ died for all that will believe in him. See what Twiss says against
this Answer in Piscator Vindic. de promiss. lib. 2. Part 2. Sect. 20. Page 475.
( Vol. Parv.) 1. Men are not supposed first to be believers, and then Christ to
dye for them; nor has died at random without determining in quorum Loco, in
whose stead, and left it to their Faith to determine afterward. He has not
said, either, if thou believe I will die for thee? Or if thou believe, that
Death which I have undergone shall be tui loco, in thy stead, or for thy Sins,
Man's Sin being the loco causae meritoriae of Christ's sufferings, it must be
determined whose Sins he should suffer for before he suffer: For the
meritorious cause is before the effect. And therefore Christ died for them,
before they are believers; for else how did he procure them grace to believe.
Not only Davenant has well cleared this (in his dissert de redempt) but Twiss
( ubi super P. 474.) could say, Neque enim hujus propositionis veritas [
Christus est Redemptor Noster] est veritas consequens fidem nostram: Nec ejus
falsitas est falsitas consequens infidelitatem nostram sed antecedens:
Antecedens inquam natura in genere causae moralis, nempe meritoriae; non autem
in genere causae Physicae: Quod eo tantum addo, quoniam quod est prius natura
in genere causae Physicae, impossible est ut sit posterius tempore, eo quo
prius est natura: At quod est prius natura in genere causae moralis and
meritoriae, presertim ex libera Dei constitutione proficiscens, potest esse
posterius tempore etiam eo quod est prius natura.

2. There must therefore be some former consideration of those for whom Christ
died, Antecedent ( Moraliter) to his Death: And that can be nothing, but for
Sinners as such: It is therefore for all Sinners, or only for some. And the
Doctrine of those that contradict me, is, that it was not indeterminately [for
all that will believe] but determinately [to these particular Elect Persons,
[that they may believe] for whom Christ satisfied. Now then according to this
Doctrine, all Men where the Gospel is preached are bound to believe that Christ
satisfied for the Elect to procure them Faith and consequently justification,
that by so believing themselves may be justified: But, if they should so
believe, this Faith would not justify them for whom Christ Died not? so that
here is a justifying Faith Commanded, without a justifying object; as I shall
fullier show anon. 2. And whereas Dr. Twiss says, It is only the penitent that
are commanded to believe on Christ for justification, I Answer 1. Then the
Impenitent shall not be condemned for not believing in Christ for justification
(which is false) for the omission is not so much as a Sin, much less damning,
if faith be not commanded them. 2. It is nevertheless their duty, because other
duties (as suppose repentance) are first to be performed. God may constitute
many duties at once, though they are not to be performed at once but in order.
3. Repentance is a change of the Mind from Sin to God and duty. To repent or to
turn from unbelief, is the same thing with Faith. 4. If this repentance which
he says goes before Faith be sincere and saving, then sure it is not in an
unbeliever and unjustified Man; if not; how comes it to give them a peculiar
Right, and occasion their peculiar duty, of resting on Christ. 5. I shall show
anon that even repentance can be no duty (tending to pardon) if Christ has not
satisfied for them.

3. Others with great confidence say, that this is it that all are to believe
[that there is no other name under Heaven whereby Men must be saved but only by
the name of Christ made known in the Gospel] and Men perish for not believing
the necessity of a Redeemer and that Jesus is the Redeemer [Or more fully] 1.
Men are to repent and believe the Gospel to be the word of God to contain his
Will, and that Jesus Christ therein revealed is the Wisdom and power of God to
Salvation. 2. That there is an inseparable connection between Faith and
Salvation, by Gods appointment; Gospel faith carrying a Sinner quite out of
himself and from off his own Righteousness. 3. That there be a particular
conviction by the Spirit of the necessity of a Redeemer to their Souls in
particular, whereby they become weary, heavy laden and burdened. 4. A serious
full recumbency, and rolling of the Soul upon Christ in the promise of the
Gospel as an all-sufficient Savior, able to deliver and save to the utmost them
that come to God by him; ready, able and willing through the pretiousness of
his Blood, and sufficiency of his Ransom to save every Soul, that shall freely
give up themselves to him for that end, amongst whom he is resolved to be] so
Mr. Owen Page. 304. 305.

Sure it is, many Acts that are expressed in all these words. But 1. As I have
said, every Man that hears the Gospel is obliged to all these; though to be
performed in order, and not all at once. 2. A Judas may believe the necessity
of a Redeemer. 3. And that Jesus is the Redeemer. 4. That there is no other, is
an exclusion, which is necessary to the Faith which justifies; but will not
justify it self. 5. As to that of repentance, I have answered before. 6. The
Devils believe that Christ is the Wisdom and Power of God to Salvation. No Man
can believe that Christ has Power to save him, that first believes not that
he has satisfied for him. 7. The Devils may believe truly that there is an
inseparable connection between Faith and Salvation. But this is too general a
Speech. It must be known in what respect and to what use Faith is so connexed
to Salvation: And what Faith it is. No Faith is by God annexed to Salvation,
but that which supposes Christ to have satisfied for the believer. 8. Judas
was convinced of the necessity of a Redeemer, and was weary and heavy laden. If
it be special godly sorrow and hatred of Sin, that is meant, then such are
justified already, and therefore were before obliged to believe to
justification. 9. The recumbency mentioned is an Act of the Will of which we
shall speak anon. 10. The promise is made to none that Christ died not for: For
it is a promise of the benefits of his Death. 11. Christ is a sufficient
Savior, able and willing to save only those that he died for. Supposing that
he satisfied not for any Man, he is not sufficient or willing to save that Man
though he should believe. How can it be said that by the sufficiency of his
Ransom he is able to save them, for whom it is no Ransom? Indeed the
sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction is one principal object of that part of
Faith which consists in Assent. But I shall show anon, that if any Man be
bound to believe Christ's satisfaction sufficient to justify him for whom it
was never paid, he is bound to believe an untruth.

2. But the main answer given by Dr. Twiss and others, is, that the object of
justifying Faith is not true, but good. It is Christ, whom they are bound to
rest upon for Justification and Salvation. The truth is here are several Acts
of the will requisite. The first is consent. Christ is offered to all where the
Gospel is published, and it is their duty to consent to the Offer. Now if they
should consent it would be an Act merely frivolous, supposing Christ had not
satisfied for them. For it is certain that he consents not to be the Head and
Savior of any such. And Man's consent without Christ's, would do no good. They
are commanded therefore (according to this Doctrine) to do that which if it
were done would do no good.

2. The next Act is that Affiance, which some make the only justifying Act. Now
according to this Doctrine this would be to many a vain Act: To rest upon
Christ to save Men by his Blood which was never shed for them, is to rest on an
insufficient Ground, which would deceive them. But (according to this Doctrine)
Men are bound to rest on Christ to save them by his Blood which was never shed
for them. Therefore according to this Doctrine. Men are bound to rest on an
insufficient Ground, which would deceive them.

Let none say, God knows they will not rest on Christ: For we are speaking now
but of the Duty. God will never make it any Man's duty to rest for Salvation on
that Blood that was never shed for him; or that satisfaction which was never
made for him.

But because this reaches but to those that have heard the Gospel, the next
argument shall reach further.

Arg. 6th. Ab aequitate legis cum sufficientia mediorum in suo genere.
If Christ has not satisfied for all, then God has appointed Men to use those
means for their recovery and Salvation, which would do nothing to recover and
save them if they were used. But God has not appointed Men to use such vain
and delusory means. Ergo, etc. Here I suppose that God has appointed to all
the World some means which they are to use for their recovery. I avoid the
Remonstrants extreme: I say not that all have sufficient means or Grace to
believe, or to Salvation. And I avoid that fouler extreme, which says that
Heathens are under the mere Law of works as it stands without remedy, and have
no Means appointed them, or helps afforded them toward their recovery. I shall
after prove that they have much mercy from Christ's Blood: But now I am to prove
that God has not so left them remediless, but that he has appointed to all
Men some means of their recovery. And 1. It is apparent they have much of the
Light and Law of Nature: They have the Book of the Creatures wherein they may
read much of God. 2. They have teaching providence, Mercies and Judgments. By
these they may know that there is a God, and that he is the governor of the
World, true, Just, Merciful, etc. That we owe him perfect obedience; that Sin
deserves his wrath. By experience they may easily know that they are Sinners,
and so liable to misery: By Gods Judgments, Sickness, Death, etc. they may know
that God will punish: That the Soul is immortal, and punishments and rewards
are specially in the Life to come, most Pagans do acknowledge. Gods abundant
Mercies to them may acquaint them that he deals not with them in rigorous
severity, and on terms of mere justice, but in mercy: And his not executing his
Judgments on them according to desert, but showing so much mercy to them, is
some kind of pardoning them. Hence they may see that some way God has for
showing mercy to the undeserving, and for pardoning Sinners, without any wrong
to the Honor of his Justice, and Holiness, or to the ends of his Government.
And hence they may see that they are not certainly help less, and remediless
nor their condition desperate Though they discover not the meritorious cause
they may discern Gods mercy, the principal Efficient moving cause. Natural
self-love binds Men in misery to seek out after remedy, and to discover what
it is, and how they may attain it. All this the Heathens have manifested to us
undeniably, in that all ages and Countries of them have confessed Gods being
and Sovereignty, the Duty of our obeying him, and that they were Sinners and
deserved his Wrath, in this Life and that to come; especially for greater Sins;
and that their condition was not hopeless, but Gods mercy had a way to help
them; and therefore they plied him with their Prayers and Sacrifices.

Arg. 1. If those that never heard of Christ are bound to take their case for
desperate, then they are bound to believe an untruth; (for Christ may be
discovered to them, and they saved.) But, etc. Ergo, etc.

2. If they are bound to judge their case remediless, then they are bound to
contradict the experience of Gods merciful dealing with them; (which are an
actual remedy to part of their misery and may give them hope of more from the
same cause, if they will seek it.) But, etc. Ergo, etc,

3. If they are bound to judge their case remediless, or not to judge that
there is some remedy; then they should not be bound to use any means, (Praying,
Repenting. sending abroad to enquire after the Remedy in more knowing
Countries, etc.) for the attaining Remedy. But the consequent is false. Ergo,
etc.

If a Star appearing brought the wise men so far to seek Christ, and if men,
will travail all over the World for Riches by way of Merchandise; How
diligently should men that find themselves miserable, enquire far and near for
a remedy? And if it were not their duty to use means for recovery, then it is
not their Sin that they do not use them. But he that dare tell them so, let
him, for I dare not; but the contrary I dare tell them.

4. If all such men are not bound to judge their case remediable, and cureable,
but hopeless; then God should lose all that common honor and service that he
has from them, and the World would be as Hell, full of nothing but hatred of
God, and blaspheming him, and sinning to the utmost without any self-restraint.
For he that has no hope, will use no means, nor forbear any evil, but hate God
as his Enemy.

5. The Ninevites discerned a remedy and some hope, and Repentance and
Humiliation was Gods means, by which they were actually recovered, I am sure,
from under some of Gods wrath, which else would have broke out on them; whether
from eternal wrath, I know not; but its most probable; For they believed God,
Jonah 3. 5. and Repented, Mat. 12. 41. Luke 11. 32. Yet there is no intimation
that Jonah Preached Christ to them, or that they ever heard of him. Men
therefore that hear not of Christ are bound to use means for remedy. And indeed
the satisfaction of Christ is of greater necessity to man's Salvation, than our
knowledge of Christ, or Faith in him: God can save them that never knew Christ,
if he will, (witness the case of Infants; and else there were but few saved
before Christ's coming) but morally we may say, he cannot save them without
Christ's satisfaction for their Sin.

6. Acts 17. 27. It is the duty of all Pagans To seek the Lord, if happly they
might feel after him and find him. And doubtless this is to seek the recovery
of his favor, and not to seek it in despair, as the Devils.

7. Acts 14. 17. Gods giving rain and fruitful seasons, and filling men's hearts
with food and gladness, and doing them good, is his witness among them. And
sure it witnesses his mercy to them, and consequently their duty.

8. Romans 2. 4. The Holy Ghost expressly tells us that men should know that the
forbearance, long-suffering and goodness of God leads to Repentance; that is,
is a help thereto, and manifests it to be their duty to Repent: And doubtless
this Repentance is not a hellish despairing Repentance; (for Judgments are
fitter to move to that than Mercy,) but a Repentance which is to be used as a
means to recovery.

9. It is the description of wicked men, that they seek not after God, Romans 3.
11. Psalm. 14. 2 God looks to see if there be any that seeks him.

10. Many Texts in the Prophets show it to be all men's duty to seek the Lord,
in order to their finding mercy; (and to deny it, is to turn out the remnants
of obedience, or all seeds of Religion from the World:) And that God calls them
all to Repentance, and to that end that they may not Die, but escape his wrath
and be recovered. And that he has sworn That he has no pleasure in the Death
of him that Dies, but rather that he Repent and Live. So that I think it is
clear that God appointed even to those that hear not the Gospel, certain means
toward their Recovery: Much more evident is it of all those where the Gospel is
preached.

I say not that he commands all the former, or any directly to believe in
Christ; but it must be understood, that all men are many degrees distant from
Christ, before he draws them effectually to himself. Now the Pagans are more
degrees from him than professed Christians (mostly:) It is not Christ's way to
bring men to himself per saltum, but by those Degrees of Recovery, which are
the particular cure of their degrees of distance. One wicked man knows of
Christ and does half entertain him, but sticks at some pleasing Sin. Another
knows not that he is miserable by sin, nor ever considered how to be recovered,
nor ever prayed God to show him a way to escape his wrath, nor ever heard of
Christ: This latter must receive much of Christ's mercy before he be brought so
near to Christ as the former. Christ loved one wicked man as not being far from
the Kingdom of God; and some with Agrippa, are almost persuaded to be
Christians. Those that be not come so far must (ordinarily) by degrees be
brought to this, before they can go further. If you be in a higher room, and
call your Servants to you, you intend they shall come up the stairs step by
step; and if one be two stories distant from you, and another but one, the
former must go up all the first stairs before he come as near you as the latter
is. The Gentiles that believed not, are further off, and more strangers to God
than the common Jews were. Now God has not given them that hear not of Christ
sufficient means or help to Believe (nor has he given any believer sufficient
Grace for Salvation, till he saves him.) But he prescribes some means to all
men in the World which they are to use, to bring them nearer Christ and Faith,
and to remove impediments: As to consider of what the Book of Nature and daily
providence teach them of God: To study him in his mercies and Judgments. To
study their own hearts till they find their Sin and misery: To use all their
interest and utmost endeavors to enquire what remedy God has revealed to the
World: To continue in Prayer, fasting and Alms deeds as Cornelius did, and to
break off their Sins by repentance. These are their duties: And for not doing
these, in the improvement of their Talents, they shall be condemned by Christ
the Redeemer at the Bar of grace, (as opposed to that of Justice according to
the sole Law of works.) And (though that belong not to this controversy) I
doubt not but they have sufficient help which is not effectual to the doing of
more in these means then they do; and so they will be left unexcusable at
Judgment. Even as the Ignorant and ungodly where the Gospel is preached, have
sufficient power (which is not effectual through their own wilfulness) to hear
the word, to come into better company and to use more means to get Faith then
they do, though they have not power or grace sufficient to believe. And the
duty of hearing, etc. Goes in order before that of believing.

All this being thus evinced (That God has prescribed to all Men, means of
recovery) I come to the Argument. And for the Minor I think I need not stand to
prove it (That God has not appointed Men delusory means, which if used
according to his appointmennt would not do any thing toward the attainment of
the end) so apparently is such a conceit injurious to the Wisdom, goodness and
faithfulness of God.

And for the Major it seems to me as plain, (That no means can do any thing to
the recovery or Salvation of that Man, for whom Christ made not satisfaction by
his Death) Supposing this means were used never so rightly.) For 1. The use of
all means is but to apply or convey the benefits of Christ's Satisfaction.
Therefore where Christ has made no satisfaction for a Man, there it is
impossible that any means should give him to participate of the benefits of his
satisfaction: At least of Pardon and Salvation. 2. Else you make a Savior of
the means, or make them more necessary then Christ's Satisfaction: For if by
means that Man may be saved that Christ dyed not for, then he is saved without
Christ's Death. And if God might do so by all the Non Elect, why not by all the
rest.

If any say, It is certain that they will not use the means rightly and
therefore will not be saved; I answer 1. This shall be anon further considered
2. That is nothing to the matter. The question is, Why these Men are not saved?
Whether it be not for want of a right use of the means? But according to the
Doctrine opposed, it is not: For no means could save them, if they were never so
well used. 1. No Prayer can be heard if satisfaction be not first made for the
Sins of the Petitioner. 2. Repentance can be no means, but only a Concomitant
of desperation if satisfaction for Sin go not before it. 3. Faith is but
resting for Salvation on one that never redeemed the Person, and so cannot save
him, if satisfaction for that Person go not before it. 4. Hope would be wholly
ungrounded, and deceitful like the hopes of the wicked, if there were no
satisfaction. 5. Love to Christ as our Redeemer, and gratitude for
satisfaction, would be a mistaken Act, as being for a mercy never received. 6.
Nay should the Non-redeemed live as holily as any Saint on Earth, yea as
innocently as an Angel, it would not save him; because of the guilt which he
has already contracted. So that by this Doctrine all the means which God has
appointed most Men for their pardon and Salvation, would be delusory and vain
if never so well performed: Which is not true, nor tolerable.

Arg. 7th. A veritate promissionis, and fidei conditionalitate.
If Christ satisfied not for all those to whom God promises pardon and Life on
condition of believing, then God makes promises which he would not, nor could
he fulfill though the condition were performed. But the consequent is false:
Therefore so is the Antecedent.

There is nothing here requires any proof but the consequence of the Major
proposition: And that is proved thus. God would not nor could give pardon and
Life to any Man for whom Christ has not satisfied. Therefore the consequence
is good. 1. Else God should give pardon and Life without a Redeemer: Which he
will not. 2. And he should do that which in the Judgment of most Divines he
cannot do: (Not through impotence, but because of the inconvenience and
unfitness of the thing:) For though he can alter the nature of the Creatures,
and so make that to be fit which now is unfit, yet stante rerum natura he
cannot make those things fit, which ex natura rei are unfit: Nor can God do
that which is unfit. And if it had not been unfit for the supreme Rector of the
World to pardon Man's Sin without satisfaction, God would not so dearly have
satisfied his own justice. Yea all say, that quoad potentiam ordinatam, God
would not forgive Sin without satisfaction, whatsoever he might have done quoad
potentiam absolutam. Now how gross is it, for any Man to imagine, that God
should make so solemn a promise, in form of a Law of Grace, that he will pardon
and save Men if they will believe, when if they could and should believe, he
neither would nor could pardon or save them, for want of satisfaction to his
Justice! Yea that he should require his Ministers so importunately, and
unweariedly to entreat Men in his name to believe and be reconciled to him, and
to tell them from him Man by Man [If thou will believe thou shall be saved]
When yet if he did believe he should not be saved.

Object. But if he should believe then he is one that Christ satisfied for; and
therefore should be saved.

Ans. The Persons are determined of long ago for whom Christ satisfied. Either
he has satisfied for me or he has not, before my Faith. If he have not, then
my Faith will not cause him to satisfy for me, either by suffering again, or
by making that satisfaction to have been paid for me, which was not.

Object. But it is a thing that never will be, for one to believe for whom
Christ did not satisfy: And therefore it is a thing not to be supposed.

Ans. 1. Things may and must be supposed in dispute that never will be. That
the Elect should have the desert of their Sin, or be unredeemed, or be forsaken
of God, or deprived of any mercy which God will give them, are all things that
never will be: And yet a Christian may argue on supposition they had been or
should be, to raise his thankfulness: What if God should have denied me his
Grace? Or his Redemption? Or let me perish in my Sin, and State of nature? What
a Case would my Sin have brought me under.

2. If it be a thing not to be supposed in dispute, that a Man should believe
for whom Christ satisfied not, then it is because it implies a contradiction.
(Else it may be supposed.) But it implies no contradiction, Ergo, etc.

Object. It is a contradiction: Because Christ purchased Faith for all those
for whom he satisfied; and therefore for a Man to believe for whom Christ
purchased not Faith is a contradiction.

Ans. 1. I shall take it as a groundless fancy till it be proved, that Christ
purchased Faith to be eventually certainly given to all those for whom he
satisfied. 2. If he had, this argument is not from satisfaction as such, but as
it is meritorious of Faith. 3. still it is no contradiction, because it
implies no contradiction for a man to believe without that Grace which Christ
has purchased; though it be a thing that will never be done. 4. They that will
still affirm the contrary do the more destroy their own Cause. For they then
assert, that all Gods commands by his Laws and Ministers to the unredeemed, (as
they suppose them) for believing in Christ, do require mere impossibilities,
and such contradictions as are not to be so much as supposed in dispute, which
I think few sober men will grant; but rather avoid that opinion that is the
ground of such an assertion. 5. And (which is more) the same absurdity will
follow, as to all other means whatsoever, (as well as Faith) which God has
prescribed to such men for pardon and salvation; (as they are means) and so
bring this reproach on the whole New Law, as made to all such Men.

Object. But the same may be said against Gods Foreknowledge or Decree. For if
God Foreknow or Decree that men shall certainly perish, then it may as well be
said, that though they should believe, God neither would nor could save them.

Answ. 1. As to the Power of God, it is not straitened by his Decree. It
follows not [God will not do such a thing, therefore he cannot,] The same
Divines whom I now argue against, use to argue thus about Physical
Predetermination [Gods Determination of his own will, destroys not his Power
or liberty to the contrary act; therefore his determination of our wills,
destroys not our Power or Liberty to the contrary acts] whereby they grant
that God can save those that he decrees not to save; and so can give them
Faith. etc. and that he is still free to do it or not do it.

Object. If he should believe and be saved, whom God has foreknow nor decreed
to be condemned for Unbelief, then God should be deceived or change. But it is
impossible for God to be deceived or change; therefore it is impossible for him
to believe and be saved whom God has foreknown or decreed to condemn for
unbelief.

Answ. It is a vicious Argument. There Is more in the conclusion than in the
premises. No more will follow but this, [therefore he will not believe and be
saved whom God, etc.] not [it is impossible] for God never foreknew or decreed
that it should be impossible for him to believe and be saved, but only that he
would not eventually believe and be saved.

2. When I speak (before in the Argument) of Gods will, it is not of his will
of Decree, but of his will as he is in the relation of Rector per Leges and so
gives that Salvation as executor of his Laws and Sentence, which by his Laws
he first gave Right to. God as Rector and Legislator neither will nor can give
Salvation to any that Christ dyed not for, if they should believe: But God as
Legislator or Rector would give salvation to all that Christ Dyed for if they
believe, though it were supposed that he had foreknown or decreed that such men
would not believe. Only it would follow that God was mistaken* And therefore
such a thing will never come to pass* for God will not be mistaken. It is God
as ^egislator to whom it belongs to be true, in making good his promises, which
is the thing in Question.

3. The want of an expiatory sacrifice does morally necessitate the Damnation
of Man, though he should believe both in respect of the Law of works (as
^hrists Death is Causa necessaria liberationis; as want of a Ransom may be
said to necessitate a Captives perishing) and properly in respect to the new
Law, whose Penalty is, 1. Non-liberation. 2. And a sorer punishment. For the
chief cause of that Non-liberation or Non-salvation must needs be the defect of
that which should be the chief cause of Deliverance and Salvation rather than
the defect of (Faith) a subservie^ cause or condition which ever supposes the
former cause. If two men at Christ's bar be ^^^leaded as liable to Damnation;
and it be ^^^d to one [Thou have no Right to Salvation for Christ never Dyed
for thee] and to the other, [thou have no right, because thou did not
believe; is not the former more valid, then the latter; or as valid: But to
say, [Thou have no right because God did decree the contrary is not right
arguing. 4. We must not argue a minus notis, as the Decrees are, as shall be
showed.

Arg. 8th. A Causa pereundi negative.
If Christ has not satisfied for all men, then the cause of men's perishing is
for want of an expiatory s^cri^i^e But the want of an expiatory (...) is not
the cause of men's (...) therefore Christ has satisfied for all. By (...)
cause* I mean not the meritorious cause, for that no doubt must be some sin of
Man:) And I suppose that Unbelievers are not condemned according to the first
Law of works* as standing without Remedy, that is, not merely because they did
not perfectly obey; but at the Redeemers bar, because they believed not, and
would not have Christ to Reign over them, or because they improved not their
Talents of Grace, (that is, of mercy given contrary to desert) And of those
that hear the Gospel, this is undeniable; (and I think it is certainly true of
all others.) So that it is perishing in reference to a Gospel Judgment at the
Mediators Bar that we mean; and specicially in a comparative sense: And by
[cause] I mean, the Reason of their perishing to be alleged: So that if you
ask, seeing all are equally condemned by the Law of works, and mercy has found
out a Remedy, what is the reason that this man is condemned at the Redeemers
Bar, when that is acquit? Or that this Man ( Judas) is not delivered and saved
as well as that ( Peter?) Is it because Christ Dyed only for one, or that one
only believed and the other refused Christ? Here according to the Doctrine
which denies Universal Satisfaction, it must be said that either the only or
the principal reason that men perish when others are saved, is for want of an
expiatory sacrifice, or satisfaction for their Sin; i. e. because they had no
Redeemer when others had, or no Christ to Die for them. But this is contrary to
the Scripture. The consequence is evident, that it is more principally, the
want of a Savior or satisfaction then the want of Faith that is the reason of
their perishing, if Christ satisfied not for them. 1. Because satisfaction is
prerequisite to the efficacy or usefulness of Faith: Sed non e contra. 2.
Satisfaction has the greatest work to do, and is the greatest cause: And faith
has a far and a lower work; and is a lesser cause, or indeed no cause at all,
but a mere condition. 3. God could not fitly save Sinners without satisfaction:
But he could, if he had pleased, have saved them for that satisfaction, without
a personal Faith as he does Infants, and as he saved the Church before Christ's
Incarnation, without that Faith which now justifies. viz. Believing that this
Jesus is the Christ; and without believing in any Articles of our Creed. If two
Men be mortally sick, and one be healed, and the other not, because one had a
costly Cordial, and the other had none prepared for him, but only a nonimal
offer without the thing; though this Man refuse that nominal or feigned offer,
yet the chief cause why he was not healed was the want of the medicament,
rather then his refusal.

And for the Minor, its plain through the whole New Testament that the cause of
Men's perishing is not for want of an expiatory Sacrifice, but for want of Faith
to receive the Redeemer and his benefits, Mat. 23. 37. How often would I have
gathered thee, etc. ye would not, Isa. 5. 4. What could have been done more to
my Vineyard, etc. Mat. 24. 4. 5. Tell them which are bidden, behold I have
prepared my dinner. My Oxen and Fatlings are killed and all things are ready
Come unto the Marriage. But they made light of it, etc. verse 8. The Wedding is
ready, but they which were bidden were not worthy, i. e. There is no want on
Christ's Part, his Sacrifice and satisfaction is sufficient: But they lost the
benefits for want of believing, Mat. 25. 1. 2. All the Virgins might have been
accepted at the Marriage, if their own sloth had not shut out the foolish,
verse 14. All the Servants had Talents (mercies purchased by Christ's Death) but
it was, not well using them that condemned one. Men tread under Foot the Blood
of the Covenant wherewith they were sanctified: And deny the Lord that bought
them, Men's destruction is of themselves. But in God (through Christ) is their
help. All the Scripture shows this, that Men perish for their rejecting a
Redeemer and not for want of the Price of Redemption: For quoad pretium, Christ
has taken away the Sins of the World.

Arg. 9th. A Sufficientia pretii pro omnibus.
If Christ died for all Men quoad sufficientiam pretii, then he has satisfied
for all. But he died for all Men quoad sufficientiam pretii Ergo, etc. The
Minor is maintained by the generality of our Ancienter Protestant Divines, who
use ordinarily this distinction to solve the doubt, whether Christ died for
all? viz. he died for all sufficiently, and for the Elect only effectually. And
indeed this one distinction rightly understood, and this answer thence fitted,
is most full and apt for the resolution of the question. The Schoolmen go the
same way.

The consequence of the Major proposition is acknowledged by our late most
rigid Anti-Arminians, who on that reason do deny the Minor. For our new Divines
have utterly forsaken the old common opinion, and in stead of saying that
[Christ died for all Men sufficienter] They will not so much as say that [His
Death was sufficiens pretium pro omnibus] But only that [It is sufficient to
have been a price for all.] For all our former Divines (and the most of these
times; so far as I can discern) who acknowledge that Christ died for all Men
quoad sufficientiam pretii, and for the Elect quoad efficaciam; they say the
same, and as much as I; and therefore I need not say much more to them. For
Christ cannot dye for Men sufficienter and yet not die for them at all, or not
satisfy for them. I may well take up with this one argument. If Christ's Death
be a sufficient price for all, then it is a Price for all: But Christ's Death is
(by their confession) a sufficient Price for all: Therefore it is a Price for
all. Here understand that it is first in order of nature a Sacrifice expiatory,
or a satisfaction, before it is meritorious of further benefits, or is a Price
for them. Had it not been to satisfy Justice, God would have been so far from
taking his Sons Death for meritorious, that he would have been utterly
displeased in it: For he delights not in the Death of him that dies; how
much less of the innocent; and lest of all of his only Son.

Note here also in what sense we say, Christ's Death is sufficient, and in what
sense it is called effectual: There is a double effect of Christ's Death, and so
a double efficacy, and so a double sufficiency to those effects. The first
effect is to be a satisfaction to the offended Justice of God, and a
demonstration of his legal Justice. The sufficiency to this effect was in the
dignity of the Person, and greatness of the suffering, supposing Gods voluntary
Acceptance of it, instead of the Sinners own suffering. The efficacy
immediately followed the suffering: Yea it went long before it, upon the
undertaking and the acceptance as in Moral Causes it is not unusual. The 2d.
sort of effects, are more remote, even the actual good of the Sinner: Of these
some are general and common, (as the freeing of all Men from that necessity of
perishing, which lay on them by the Curse of the first Law as it stood without
remedy, etc.) And so Christ's Death is sufficient for all and effectual too.
Some fruits of his Death are special and follow the performance of the
condition imposed on us (Faith and Repentance) such are Pardon, Justification,
Adoption, Sanctification, Glorification. These being the main effects of
Christ's Death which Scripture most frequently mentions, and to which the rest
are but general preparatives, therefore our Divines use to call these
peculiarly [Redemption] and [the Effects of Christ Death] and they say his
Death is effectual, when these effects are produced. And so I conclude that as
to the first effect of satisfaction to God, Christ's Death is both sufficient
and effectual for all: Or else he could not be said to die for all, quoad
sufficienciam pretii. For it is impossible that Christ should intend it as a
Price, and make it a sufficient Price, and yet that God should not accept it as
such: Seeing Christ is God; and the will of the Father and the Son is one. And
the like I say of the General Common benefits. And as for the great particular
special benefits of Pardon and Sanctification and Glory. I say Christ's Death is
sufficient for all; but effectual only for the Elect. And this must needs be
the meaning of our forementioned Divines. For the sufficiency to Justification
and Salvation, contains the efficacy and effect in point of satisfaction.

But our new more rigid Divines will make me more work: And therefore to them I
must form my Argument otherwise, or else they will say, I beg the question:
With them therefore I argue thus.

If Christ's Death be sufficient for all, then Christ satisfied for all: But
Christ's Death is sufficient for all: Ergo, etc.

In these terms they use to acknowledge the Minor proposition themselves. And as
to the several effects, 1. They frequently say that Christ's Death is sufficient
for the Pardon and Salvation of all Men in the World, if they will believe.
Where the Words [if they will believe] must needs be referred to the effect
[Pardon and Salvation] and not to [sufficient:] For Man's belief adds not to
the sufficiency of Christ's Death. Nor will Faith make it sufficient, if it were
not so before. The sufficiency goes before Faith: But that which is sufficient
to justify men, shall not actually do it till Men believe 2. They say, that
Christ's Death is sufficient ut esset pretium pro omnibus, to have been a Price
for all. But then they say, that it is not sufficiens pretium a sufficient
price for all, because no price for all. Now I shall prove that both their
concessions do warrant my consequence; and, 1. That If Christ's Death be
sufficient for the Pardon of all, if they would believe, then he has satisfied
for all; and it was all Men's Sins that procured his punishment, and which he
bore on the Cross: Or that Christ's Death is insufficient to the Pardon of any
one for whom he has not satisfied. 1. That which has not satisfied offended
Majesty, is not sufficient to the pardon of Man's Sin though he should believe.
But Christ's Death (As these Men say) Has not satisfied the offended Majesty:
Therefore it is not sufficient, etc. He that denies the consequence must hold,
that Sin may be pardoned without Christ's satisfaction 2. That which leaves the
great impediment of Men's Remission unremoved, and not removeable by Faith, is
not sufficient to the Pardon of Men, though they should believe. But Christ's
Death, if it be not suffered for Men, o^ have not satisfied for their Sin, does
leave the great impediment of remission unremoved, and not removable by Faith:
Therefore it is not sufficient to the pardon of these Men though they should
believe.

The impediment I mean, is in a word all that which did necessitate or require
satisfaction: That Faith, cannot satisfy God instead of Christ's Death, is
undeniable: Nor yet can it make that satisfaction or be mine that was never
made for me. There is neither in the nature of Faith, nor in the Office which
God has appointed it, any sufficiency to be instead of a Redeemer, or
satisfaction. And therefore it is not merely nor chiefly for want of faith that
such would perish, but through the insufficiency of Christ's Death. If they
shall still say, that it is not to be supposed that the Nonredeemed should
believe: I Answer: Do not they suppose it themselves when they say that, the
Death of Christ is sufficient for the Pardon and Salvation of all Men, if they
would believe.

3. That which leaves the strongest Faith (supposing it were) both without
ground, and use or profit. is not sufficient to remission or Salvation, though
Men should believe: But so does Christ's Death, if it be not suffered for Men,
and have not satisfied for them: Ergo, etc. 1. If all the Faith in Christ that
is in all Men in the World were confined to one Man, it would not do the least
good to his Justification or Salvation, if Christ have not satisfied for him as
is already proved. 2. Nay indeed such a Faith would be but an ungrounded fancy
or presumption. To expect pardon from a satisfaction that was never made for
me, is a vain expectation.

4. If Christ's Death have no more conducibility, or virtue for any Men's
remission and Salvation, then if he had never died at all; then it is not
sufficient to Pardon those Men if they will believe. But if Christ has not
satisfied for Men, his Death has no more conducibility or virtue for the
Remission of those Men's Sins, or for their Salvation then if he had never died
at all: Therefore his Death is not sufficient to the Pardon or Salvation of
those Men, though they should believe.

The Major is clear: The Minor is proved, in that satisfaction is the first and
great effect of Christ's Death, and where that is not made, there is nothing
done by it that can any way Conduce to the Remission of Sin: And if that
satisfaction be not already made, it never will be; for there is no more
Sacrifice for Sin. So that methinks I may confidently conclude, that they deny
the Sufficiency of Christ's Death for the Pardon of all Men's Sins though they
should believe, who say, he did not suffer and satisfy for all.

And that this is unsound Doctrine I will now prove only by their Judgments who
are the owners of it: 1. Mr. Owen of Redemption Lib. 4. c. 1. Page 173. says,
[The maintaining and declaring of this (dignity, worth, preciousness and
infinite value of the Blood and Death of Jesus Christ) is doubtless especially
to be considered: And every opinion that does but seemingly clash against it,
is exceedingly prejudiced, at least deservedly suspected; yea presently to be
rejected by Christians, if upon search it be found so do ^^ really and indeed,
as that which is injurious and Derogatory to the merit and honor of Jesus
Christ. The Scripture also to this purpose is exceeding full and frequent in
setting forth the Excellency and Dignity of his Death and Sacrifice, etc.] And
Page 174. [But its true worth consists in the immediate effects products and
Issues of it, with what in its own nature it is fit and able to do,] Is it not
therefore strange that this Author should ( Page 175. 176) say, [1. That this
fullness and sufficiency of the merit of the Death of Christ, is a foundation
for the general publishing of the Gospel to all Nations, with the right that it
has to be preached to every creature; because the way of Salvation which it
declares is wide enough for all to walk in: There is enough in the remedy it
brings to light to heal all their diseases, to deliver them from all their
evils, If there were 1000 Worlds the Gospel of Christ might on this ground be
Preached to them all, there being enough in Christ for the Salvation of them
all, if so be they will derive virtue from him by touching him by Faith; the
only way to draw [refreshment from this Fountain of Salvation] [2. That the
Teachers of the Gospel in their particular Congregations, etc. may from hence
justifiably call upon every Man to believe, with assurance of Salvation to
every Man in particular upon his doing. knowing and being fully persuaded of
this, that there is enough in the death of Christ to save every one that shall
so do.] To all which I briefly reply 1. I have disproved this in what is said
before; and showed that Christ's death cannot be affirmed sufficient for any
Man's Salvation, for whom it never satisfied, though he should believe 2. How
can he say [there is sufficient merit] where there is no merit at all. The
Death of Christ has no merit as to the Pardon of Devils, or any for whom it
was never suffered. 3. How can he call any thing [a way of Salvation wide
enough] which presupposes not Christ's satisfaction for the person? Can Men
walk to Heaven by Faith without a Redeemer? Or is there such a true Faith? 4.
How can he truly say [there is enough in the remedy] Which is as to them no
Remedy? Is there enough in that remedy to heal the Devils if they believed? 5.
How can there be enough in it, or how can it be any remedy, to heal all
diseases, and deliver from all evils, before it have made satisfaction? Must it
not do that before it can heal any other disease? 6. How can he say, [There is
enough in Christ for the Salvation of them all, if so be they will derive
virtue from him by touching him by Faith?] Must not the application be first to
God by satisfying him before it can be made to Man by believing? Is not the
Salvation of Men the Fruit of Christ's dying for them? And can there be the
effect without the cause? Has Christ virtue to be derived for the saving of
any that he died not for? Will believing make Christ to die for them that he
has not died for already. 7. In plain truth your ground of preaching Christ to
all, is your foreknowledge that only the Elect will believe, and not the
sufficiency of Christ's Death, knowing that there is nothing in Christ's Death to
save any man that he did not Die and Satisfy for, though he should believe
never so strongly.

2. But let us come to the first effect of Christ's Death, and see whether it
were sufficient to that, viz. to be a satisfaction for the Sins of all: And
here they do maintain that it is only materially or aptitudinally sufficient,
(as the money which my rich neighbor has in his purse, is sufficient to pay
my debt, which he resolves never to pay: Or as the Ransom paid for one man,
was enough to have redeemed another also, if it had been paid for him.) And
what the better is he for whom it was never paid? And what difference (as to
their ransom) between most men, and Devils? For the form of a satisfaction or
Price for all, they affirm, that Christ's Death has it not sufficiently or at
all. These men must once more therefore new moddel their Doctrine, or reform
their expressions, and give over saying that [Christs death is sufficient for
the pardon of all if they would believe,] for that is notoriously false
(according to them;) seeing the effecting of satisfaction, is that wherein the
sufficiency of it lies as to remission: But they must hereafter say only that
[Christs Death was sufficient to have procured pardon for all men, if he would
have suffered it for all.] And I will give them this encouragement so far to
innovate, viz. Though they speak not only against Scripture and the Primitive
Fathers, and the Church of Christ in all Ages, and the generallity of our most
severe Protestant Divines; yet because, 1. It is against Arminius, an
adversary: 2. And tends to extremes. 3. And so is agreeable to Nature; they
shall perhaps with applause, at least with far less wounding of their
Reputation, raise up these novelties, than a Sober, Moderate, Judicious Divine
shall beat them down again, or revive any one Truth which extremes have
clouded, laid by and trodden under foot.

But I will not stay here to show the absurdity of men's so confident asserting
Christ's death to be aptitudinally sufficient for so many for whom it was never
suffered, seeing I shall deal on this purposely in the next Argument: But how
useless this sufficiency is, and no foundation at all for our general offer of
Christ and mercy to all if they will believe, may be seen in what is said
before. And how useless and insufficient it is to encourage any man to believe,
we shall yet further have occasion to show anon. In the mean time, I think the
unsoundness of their Doctrine, who deny Universal Satisfaction is manifest
hence, in that it fully overthrows the sufficiency of Christ's Death for the
pardon of all men's sins if they should believe, which yet the generality of our
Divines do maintain.

Arg. 10th. Ab absurdo: and injuria coutrariae Doctrinae in Christum.
If Christ have paid a Price of satisfaction, sufficient for the sins of all
the World, and yet paid it not for all the World, then he suffered much in
vain. But he suffered not any thing in vain. Ergo, etc.

The Minor none will deny that is a Christian.

The consequence of the Major is proved ad hominem by the concessions of them
of the contrary Opinion.

For, 1. No Reformed Divine does deny but that as one part of the value of
Christ's sufferings was from the Dignity of the person, so the other (and a
necessary part) was from the greatness of his sufferings.

2. And all conclude that there was more suffering necessary for the expiation
of the sins of all the World than for one particular sin, or then for one man's
sins; and so more necessary to expiate the sins of all men, then of the few
only that are chosen: And consequently, if Christ suffered no more than was
sufficient for the Redemption of the Elect, then it was not sufficient for the
Redemption of all. And if it were sufficient for the Redemption of all
(materially) then it was more than was sufficient for the Redemption of the
Elect. Our Divines generally disclaim and exclaim against that presumptuous
fancy of the Friars that say, Minima guttula sanguinis Christi sufficeret ad
redimendos mill mundos. Vid. Parker de Descens. l. 3. p. 107, 108. And I meet
yet with few that like John Geodwins conceit, of the sufficiency of Christ's
mere willingness and readiness to suffer, without any actual suffering. They
that say, the same degree of suffering is sufficient for a thousand men as for
one may, as well say next, that one sigh or groan, or one drop of Christ's Blood
had been sufficient for all: And next they may as well say, it had been
sufficient though he had only been willing to suffer; and next, that his
suffering was needless. Socinianism, if not Infidelity, may easily creep in at
this Gap.

3. And as thus it is evident that Christ's suffering for some, had been enough
to have redeemed all, does make him to suffer in vain as to the proper end of
his suffering ( viz. Expiation of Sin) so they that go this way, have not yet
showed us, to what other end or use, such great sufferings of Christ were
necessary: And till they have done that we must take it as if they charged
Christ with suffering in vain.

4. Moreover, the consequence is fully granted by themselves. For they accuse
those that maintain Universal Satisfaction, as making Christ to suffer in vain,
if he suffered for those that after perish (though we can easily repel that
vain objection by showing them many excellent ends and effects of those his
sufferings.) How much more evidently do they themselves make him suffer in
vain, that feign him to have suffered the same degree of Punishment, even
enough for all the World; when yet (they say) he suffered it not so much as in
the stead of all, nor as any satisfaction for their sins. We say his Death was
for all, in some kind, and therefore not vain. They say, it was for them in no
kind, and yet enough for them; and therefore he suffered Superfluously.

Arg. 11th. Ab absurdo, and injuria contra Justitiam Divinam.
If Christ suffered enough for to have been a satisfaction for all, and yet not
for all, then God did inflict on him more sufferings than were due to him. But
God did not inflict on Christ more sufferings than were due, Ergo, etc.

He that denies the Minor does directly accuse God of injustice.

The consequence of the Major is proved thus: He that inflicteth that, or
requires as much for the Sins of the Elect only as is due for the sins of all
the World, does inflict and require more than is due (for there is not so much
due for the sins of the Elect only as for the sins of all the World) But thus
they suppose God to have done, (which is not to be supposed,) Ergo, etc. They
that will fly from the force of these Arguments by flat denying even the
Material and Hypothetical sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction for all men, will
fall under many and great inconveniences before intimated and also under the
force of this next Argument. (Read my Answer to their Fourth Argument asserted.

Arg. 12th. Ab injuriosa negatione Passionum Christi.
It is very injurious to Christ for men to extenuate or deny his sufferings,
but so do they that deny that he has satisfied for all men. Ergo, etc.

When God has laid upon him the Iniquity of us all, and he has born the sins
of the whole World, and was a Propitiation for them, does not that man vilify
(that I say not blaspheme) his sufferings, who shall say it is not so; he bore
the Sins but of the few that are chosen; he suffered no more than was due to
them; he paid no more than would discharge their Debt. If he that denies all
Christ's satisfaction, do sin so damnably, then sure he that denies the
greatest part both of his satisfaction formally, and his suffering materially,
does not lightly offend. If he should sin so hainously that should deny God to
be Creator of the greater part of the World, and so rob him of the honor of
the most of his Workmanship, then it cannot be a trifle to deny the greatest
part of Christ's sufferings and satisfaction, and so rob him of so much of the
honor of the work of Redemption, by the extenuation of his sufferings: For God
has set up the work of Redemption, as that wherein he expects to be as much
honored as in the work of Creation. Suppose the Kings Messengers, Mat. 22.
should have told those whom they invited, [Though we are commanded to invite
you all to the Wedding, yet the truth is, there is not half provision enough
made ready for you all, if you should come, but yet we are commanded to
persuade you all, because the King knows your minds that you will not come]
should these Messengers have deserved thanks for such a Message.

Arg. 13. A Debito Amoris and gratitudinis erga Redemptorem.
If all Men do owe Love and thankfulness to Christ for his satisfying for their
Sins, and for the Fruits of that satisfaction, then he has satisfied for all,
But all Men do owe him love and thankfulness, etc. ergo, etc.

I mean, all Men that hear of Christ, are bound to love him as Redeemer, and be
thankful to him for making satisfaction for them, and those that never heard of
him are bound to love Deum Miserecordem, God as merciful to them and to be
thankful for those mercies which are the Fruits of Christ's Death.

The Antecedent has two Parts, 1. That all are bound to love and gratitude 2.
That they owe these for Christ's dying for them. And as to the debt it self. I
hope few Christians will deny it: For if they do, 1. They will deny a great
part of the Law of Christ, and if such a curse be denounced against him that
adds or diminishes, as to the Law of ceremonies, what shall be due to him
that wipeth out so great a part of the Gospel at a dash? 2. It is plainly High
Treason, to discharge so many of Christ's Subjects of their Allegiance, or of
the chief part of their duty, even Love and Gratitude: His Subjects I may call
them, though Rebellious; because though they acknowledge him not, or not
sincerely, yet he is their rightful Lord. 3. It is notorious compliance with
Satan, to say, Duty is no Duty, and that so great Duties as these; and that Sin
is no Sin, and that such heinous Sins. 4. If tends most desperately to the
Damnation of Souls, by drawing them to neglect these duties, and hardening them
in impenitency when they have done. For if it be no duty to Love Christ for
Redeeming them, and to be thankful for it, then it is no Sin not to love him,
and not to be thankful, and if it be no Sin, they need not repent of it. 5.
They will wickedly justify Men from the Accusation of the guilt of these Sins,
at the Bar of Christ, and dare any that now boldly maintain this cause in
dispute, undertake to justify and vindicate them at Judgment, and prove, that
it was never their duty to love Christ, or be thankful to him for Redeeming
them, and therefore that it was not their Sin, that they did it not? This will
be a harder task, then it is now to find a flourish of words which seem to
prove it. 6. And worse then all this, They will condemn Christ for condemning
them for these Sins. When he has sentenced them, [Go you cursed] For not
loving him and showing it to his Members, Mat. 25. And pronounced that Man
Anathema Maranatha that loves not the Lord Jesus; if these Men can prove that
it was none of their duty, then they must accuse Christ and his Law of
injustice, and condemn his condemnatory sentence.

2. And as they owe Christ this Love and Gratitude, so the thing that they owe
it for, is his Redeeming them, or dying in their stead, or satisfying for their
Sin: For 1. It is doubtless that they owe it him, not only as Creator but as
Redeemer, and if so, it is either for Redeeming others, or themselves. Not only
for Redeeming others: For 1. The nature of gratitude is to respect some
benefits that our selves receive, (either in our own Persons, or in those whose
welfare is part of ours) And 2. Man is naturally so near to himself, and the
love of himself, so deeply rooted by God in his nature, that he naturally looks
at himself before others, and values things as they respect himself. 3. Others
good is no mercy to us, further then we participate with them in the benefit;
Yea Divines generally conclude, that it will be so far from comforting the
damned to see that the Godly are in Heaven, that it will increase their
torment. 4. Else it would lay no greater an obligation on these Men to love
Christ and be thankful to him, than it does on the Devils, that Men are
redeemed, or than they owe God, that the good Angels are preserved while
themselves are condemned. 5. Scripture not only allows Men to love and be
thankful in reference to our selves, even for that which is good to us, but
shows it to be our duty, and the nature of those affections; and that for our
own mercies received, we are obliged hereto, 2 These. 2. 10 Men are forsaken and
damned for not receiving the love of the Truth that they might be saved. How
often are the Israelites (all of them) Commanded to love the Lord with all their
Hearts, as their Redeemer from Egypt, which was both an effect and Type of
Christ's work of Redemption. Deuteronomy. 6. 5. and 10. 12. and 11. 1, 13, 22. and 19.
9. and 30. 16. 20. Yea all Gods mercies as well as this deliverance from Egypt,
is made, in diverse of these Texts, the motive that should provoke them to love
and thankfulness: And doubtless, these are all effects of the Death of Christ
for them. To love for love and for benefits is that which Sinners do, Luke 6.
32. Not as Sinners, but from the common humanity that is left in them. We love
him, because he first loved us, 1 Job. 4. 19. This [because] is not meant only
Effective, but also objective, as to Gods love. The first love of the Soul to
Christ cannot be moved from the knowledge of Christ's special love to the Soul:
(For 1. Love accompanies justifying Faith in the same moment, (And indeed in
some Sense is part of it) And does not stay till the Soul discern his own
believing, and thence discern Gods special love. 2. There is a love of desire,
which goes before the knowledge of Gods special love 3. Many a poor Christian
loves Christ long before they know the special love of Christ) And therefore
this first sincere love must needs be raised from the apprehension of Christ's
excellency as to us, and his general love to mankind: Which can be no other
then that which is manifested in their Redemption.

Object: Wicked Men are bound first to believe and thtn to love, when they know
by their believing that Christ died for them.

Ans. They are bound immediately in the same instant to love Christ as to
believe; and not to delay their love till they try their Faith, or by
discerning it get assurance of Gods favor. They are bound to accept Christ as
good for them, when he is offered them: And that acceptance is essentially
love, as it is said to be in the rational appetite. He that loves not truly,
believes not truly. And how can any Man prove Gods special love by the
evidence of a false Faith? Must Men first believe without love that by the Mark
of such a Faith they may have ground for love? That will be a deceitful ground,
as it is a deceitful Mark.

Object At least, Men are bound to be humbled first, and believe that there is
no other name under Heaven but Christ's, by which they can be saved; and then to
rest on him, and love him.

Ans. This is answered before. If the humiliation and Assent that they mention
be proper to the Regenerate, and so be a true note of Gods special love 1. Then
it will follow that other Graces go before that Faith which unites us to
Christ, (Which few will grant) 2. Then Men must find special Marks Antecedent
to Faith that from thence they may gather a warrant to believe: Which is false
Doctrine, I think, in the judgment of all 2. But if these Antecedent Acts be
common and such as reprobates also may perform, then either every Man that
performs them is bound to love Christ as his Redeemer (And to rest on him for
pardon) Or only some: If every Man, then some reprobates are bound to love
Christ as their Redeemer (And to rest on him for pardon by his Bloodshed for
them) And to be thankful for his satisfaction: And then certainly Christ did
Redeem them by satisfying for them. If but some, then how shall any Man know
that he is one of them. So that I think I may conclude, that they that deny
universal satisfaction by Christ's bloodshed, do leave Men no ground for their
first special love to Christ as Redeemer: For that first love, must be raised
upon the knowledge of Christ's general love and mercy, or be groundless, Seeing
there is no knowledge of special love and Mercy Antecedent.

Object But how can the knowledge of Christ's common love cause in us a special
love to him. Then we must love him first with a special love.

Ans. Christ has a special love to us, before we have a special love to him:
But we cannot know it, and therefore cannot love him for it. His special love
is the efficient cause of our love to him, but not the objective or moving
cause of our first love. The love of Christ is not the less because its
manifestation is general. And therefore that glorious mercy of general
satisfaction, though common, not only may be, but is, the ground or motive of
our first special love, if it be orderly and rightly raised: though Christ's
special love be the efficient.

Object Then none do love God a right at first but those that hold Universal
Redemption.

Ans. 1. Yet they may love him sincerely, though they are brought to it
(through the fault of their Teachers) in a disadvantageous and disorderly way,
2. Young Converts are not used so soon to be troubled with the Controversy of
Universal Redemption. 3. I have known few in my observation, but at their first
closing with Christ, they have had the same judgment of the Universality of
Christ's satisfaction (so as to be sufficient for all Sinners and wanting only
their own Faith to make it effectual to Remission) which I plead for. 4. It is
the usual way of Preachers in their popular Sermons to speak far more soundly
in these points then in their disputations: And indeed their way of Preaching
for the Conversion of Sinners, does plainly intimate Universal satisfaction;
For they use to lay all the blame on the Wills of Sinners (and justly) as that
only which can deprive them of the benefits of Christ's sufferings, and to urge
them to accept him, and to let them know that their case is not left remediless
and desperate: Yea and to tell them plainly that Christ's Death is sufficient
for all, to pardon all their Sins be they never so many or great, and if they
will believe they shall have the Fruits of it: Which is in other words* to say
[Christ has satisfied for all] So that upon these right grounds they use to
bring Men to believe and love Christ at the first, and then they must have some
longer time before they can pervert them again, by working out these
apprehensions, and acquainting them, that Christ has not satisfied for all,
but for the Elect only.

Object Men's first love to Christ, is not to him for what he has done, but for
what he can do for us, and as he is to us a desirable good; because it is but
Amor Concupiscentiae.

Ans. It is also a love of gratitude: And all the good that we can expect from
him for the future, or desire him for, is but the fruit of what he has done
for us already, and therefore presupposes it: And he that looks for Mercy
from Christ as not procured by his satisfactory sufferings, knows not the
Gospel nor what he expects. The Gospel at its first Preaching is glad
tidings, and brings news first of what Christ has done for Men, and next, of
what he will further do.

Object But it is not for Dying [for me in particular] that I am first obliged
to love Christ; but for paying a sufficient price.

Ans. 1. If by [For me in particular] you mean [more for me then others] I
grant it: But it is for dying and satisfying for fallen Mankind in general, of
whom I am a Member. 2. I have showed that according to this New Doctrine,
Christ's Death is not sufficient to pardon all, if they did repent; nor formally
a sufficient price but only materially or Aptitudinally, sufficient to have
been a price. Now that this can engage any to love or thankfulness is past my
reach to apprehend: For it is not a benefit, (to such as for whom it was no
price.) If 100 Men lie in Prison for debt, and one shall pay as much for the
debt and discharge often of them as was sufficient to have satisfied for the
debts of them all, and yet would not pay it for them, but rather give it
superfluously then that they should have any benefit by it, how does this
oblige these Prisoners to love and thankfulness to this Man? At least, not as
any Redeemer or Friend of theirs? Rather they will think him envious and an
Enemy to them, that would rather cast away his Money (Giving for one that which
was sufficient for all) then they should have any benefit by it.

Object But it is not for his Death, that Men are bound at first to love Christ
and be thankful, but for the free and general offer of himself and his benesits
to them in the Gospel.

Ans. 1. The negative is wicked and Unchristian 2. The part affirmed is a
contradiction to their denial of Universal satisfaction. For Christ is offered
to Men as their Redeemer only. And the Word [Redeemer] signifies 1. One that
has paid a price for them already 2. One that will recover them by the
effectual conveyance of his benefits, if they accept his offer. And the later
always implies the former: The effect cannot be without its cause. He is no
Redeemer to them for whom he suffered not. And he cannot be a Redeemer to them
by Pardon and Salvation, for whom he has not been already a Redeemer by
satisfaction. And he does not offer to satisfy for them de futuro, a new, and
therefore the offer certainly proves a general satisfaction, as is showed
before. 3. And if Christ offer himself to any Men, as their Redeemer whom he
never did Redeem, no nor can Redeem by Remission and Salvation, because he has
not first Redeemed them by price and satisfaction, charging the refusal upon
them to their deep damnation, does this oblige Men to love and gratitude? If he
procure by his Death no possibility of their Salvation, but induce a necessity
of their deep condemnation? If he offer them the benefits of a death never
suffered for them, (that is effects without their cause) and which he cannot
give them, and destroy them for not receiving them; Is this all the obligation?

Object But it is the Law of God that obliges them to love and gratitude: And
therefore they are obliged, though Christ be none of their Redeemer, and though
his Death were not a benefit to them.

Ans. 1. These are duties that result ex natura rei, viz. boni oblati, and
beneficii ^ollati, and so from the Law of nature, and not from a mere positive
Law. Love and gratitude are not ceremonies, and therefore where the nature of
the thing obliges not, there is no obligation. 2. There must be an objective
cause of love and gratitude, as well as an efficient, and exemplary cause; And
therefore our question is only of the objective cause. God does not alter the
nature of love and gratitude by commanding them; He does not command love that
has not good for its object (for there is no such thing in rerum natura) nor
does he command a gratitude that is not for a benefit.

Object But it is unknown to them whether Christ died for them or not, For
ought they know he did, And therefore they are bound to love and gratitude.

Ans. 1. An unknown benefit binds not to love and thankfulness. 2. It is Real
favors and not feigned, that Christ obliges Men by: As it is real love and
thanks and not feigned that he expects from them. 3. Else that common love
and thankfulness which the Non-elect do give Christ as their Redeemer, would be
a mistake. 4. And when their Eyes were opened in Hell, they would repent that
they loved Christ at all, and were thankful to him at all, seeing they would
then discern it was upon a mistake, and for a benefit that was never given them
or for them: Whereas contrarily they will be convinced then of their Sin and
folly in loving Christ no more, and being no more thankful.

Yet further, that these Men are bound to love and gratitude to Christ as their
Redeemer, I will add some more Scripture proof. 1. If the Non-elect are not
bound to love Christ for Redeeming them or not dying for them, then the Elect
are not bound to it, till they know themselves to be Elect; But the consequent
is false, therefore so is the Antecedent. He that dare say, No Man in the World
is bound to love Christ and be thankful to him for dying for him, till he know
he is Elect (That is, have assurance of Salvation which so so few attain to at
all, or at least so many Christians want) Dare say that which I dare not, Rom
5. 8. But God commended his love to us, in that while we were yet sinners
Chrift died for us. Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever, etc. 1. If Gods love to the World and Sinners
before Conversion, in his Redeeming them by Christ, be propounded to the
consideration of unconverted Sinners, then it is to manifest that they owe him
love again and thankfulness for it: But the Antecedent is true, therefore so is
the consequent.

These Texts and many other do propound the consideration of Gods love, in
Redeeming them, to Men before Conversion (as might abundantly be proved) and
that must need intimate their duty of love and gratitude, or else the Law of
nature is abrogated, which binds us to return love and thankfulness for love
and benefits. 2. Let me add one other Argument for the Minor ( viz. that the
Elect are bound to love and gratitude to Christ as their Redeemer, before they
know themselves to be Elect) and it is such a one, as I think, makes the case
so clear, that it will be hard for the most prejudidiced not to discern it, if
they will consider it.

If the Elect are not bound to love and gratitude for Christ's Redeeming them,
before they know themselves to be Elect, then they are never bound to it at
all, (and so never ought to perform it) But the consequent is intolerable,
Ergo, etc.

The consequence is proved thus. They cannot know themselves to be elect
(unless by extraordinary Revelation) till they first know their love and
gratitude to Christ for Redeeming them; Therefore if they are not bound to love
and gratitude before they know themselves Elect, then they are never bounnd to
it. The reason of the consequence is, that the same thing cannot be, [Before]
and [Not before] before their knowledge of Election, and not before it. If it
must go before the knowledge of Election, then they were obliged to it before
(for that we are not obliged to, is no duty and that which is no duty, is no
Mark of Election:) but it must go before, Ergo etc.

The Antecedent is proved thus, There is no other sign without this love and
gratitude which is sufficient to discover a Man to be Elect; Therefore no Man
can know himself to be elect (by ordinary means) without the knowledge of these.

Two things will be replied, to this. 1. That Faith is before love and
gratitude, and a sufficient sign. 2. That it may be known without signs by the
Testimony of the Spirit.

To these in order. And 1. For Faith, as it is in the will and is the
acceptance of an offered Christ, is the same thing with love, as love is in the
rational appetite, as I have elsewhere fully proved; and Aquinas often expresses
this love to be but velle bonum. 2. If love be distinct (as it is exercised on
the same object, for else there is no question of it) Yet it is certain that it
is concomitant, and does not in one moment of time come after Faith: Much less
so long as that a Man must first by reflection discern his Faith before he be
obliged to love. 3. Faith is no true Faith that is not accompanied with love,
and a false faith can be no true sign of Election, as is said before. The Acts
of Justifying Faith in the Will are principally these two. 1. To accept of
Christ as he is offered; Now he is offered as a Redeemer, i. e. 1. As one that
for the time past has paid the price of our Redemption. 2. And for the time to
come will give us the benefits of it, on his own terms. Now Christ cannot be
received as a Redeemer, without respect to both. He that receives him to
pardon and save him any other way then by the price of his Blood already shed,
does not receive him as he is offered, nor as the Redeemer; And if it be
necessary that he must be received in respect to what he has done for us, as
well as what he will do, then it is as necessary that he be loving and
thankfully received. For as bonum recipitur volendo, which is our love; and
cannot possibly be received qud bonum but lovingly; so bonum preteritum is the
object of this Amor Gratitudinis, (The benefit may remain, but the act of the
benefactor is past) as bonum futurum is the object of Amor Concupiscentiae, and
Bonum Presens, of Amor Complacentiae. So that no Man living can know that he
has received Christ as a Redeemer, if he do not know that he has lovingly and
thankfully received him. And no Man can know the good that Christ will do for
the future, nor receive it, without knowing the good that he has done in his
Sacrifice for the time past, and thankfully acknowledging it. 2. After
acceptance of an offered Christ, the next Act, is affiance (which most Divines
make the Principal, and some the only justifying Act) And this presupposing the
loving consent, acceptance, the Velle, before mentioned, I do not need to
prove, that affiance is no certain Mark of Election, without love; Nay
moreover, as it presupposes love, so it contains love in its own nature, as
every Act of the will toward goodness, must needs do. I rest on Christ as one
to do me good for the future by virtue of his ransom already paid; and so here
is still the double good, past and present, which affiance does respect, or
else it is not in Christ as Redeemer that we have affiance. 3. The like I might
easily show in respect of desire after Christ: An early Grace, and before which
none finds a distinct certain sign of his Election: Yet goodness is its object,
and love is in its nature; from whence we use the term of Amor Concupiscentiae.

Object. But you said before, that the Faith and Love of Young Converts that
hold not Universal Satisfaction may be sincere, though not rightly ordered,
grounded or raised.

Answ. True, for if one should conceit that Christ Dyed but for Englishmen, or
for a very few at least, and that he is one of those few, he might truly love
Christ for dying for him; though yet he grounded his apprehension amiss of his
interest in Christ. But still here is no certainty of Faith, without certainty
of Love: Nor certainty, or any knowledge of Election, without the knowledge of
both Faith and Love.

Object. Then a Socinian can have no ^ertainty of Election: For he that
believes not Christ's Satisfaction can have no Love or Thankfulness for it.

Answ. No wonder if he have no certainty of Election, who can have no grounded
hope of Salvation. If it be not only some circumstances, or Terms or
Law-notions; but the substance of this Doctrine, which any Man shall deny, viz.
That Christ has taken away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself, and having made
Purgation of our sins, is ascended, etc. And has by one Sacrifice perfected
for ever them that are sanctified, and became a Curse for us, to free us from
the Curse, and so has taken away the Sins of the World (quoad pretium,) And
has born our transgressions, that we might be healed by his stripes, and has
Dyed for us, the just for the unjust, so that now we must be justified by his
Blood: I say, he that believes not this, I think is no Christian. See 1 Cor.
5. 7. Heb. 9. 26. and 10. 1, 2. etc. and 1. 3. and 10. 14. Gal. 3. 13. Isa. 53.
4, 5. John 1. 29. 1 Pet. 3. 18. Ephesians. 1. 17. Romans 3. 25. and 5. 9. Col. 1. 20.
Heb. 9. 22. and 13. 12. 1. Pet. 1. 2. 19.

I know nothing more of moment that can be here objected and therefore will go
to the next Reply.

2. Which was, that men may know their Election by the Testimony of the Spirit.

To which I answer.

1. The Spirit shows to us the things given of God, of which Love to Christ
is a principal.

2. The Spirit witnesses our Election mediately and not immediately (that I
know of.) 1. By giving those graces that will prove it, and do flow from it. 2.
By exciting them. 3. By illuminating us to see them, and try by them. 4.
Filling the Soul, with those sweet affections, which are a kind of taste of the
Love of God: But all affections are raised mediante intellectu, and therefore
knowledge goes before them. Who can know that he rejoices Spiritually, and
that his Joy is a fruit of Election, that knows not why he rejoiceth.

3. However, it is desperate Doctrine to teach poor Christians, that they have
no ground to Love or Thank Christ for Redeeming them, till the Spirit have
without any signs revealed their Election to them (which I think it never does.

Lastly, The Spirit witnesses with our Spirit: Now our Spirit witnesses only
from evidence that we are Gods Children, and not without; and therefore whether
the Spirit be a concurring witness in the same Testimony, or its Testimony be a
concomitant Testimony, distinct from though conjunct with that of our
Conscience, (I think the former) yet alls one to the point in hand, seeing they
witness together.

So much for the Minor, viz. that the Elect are bound to love and thankfulness
for Redemption before they know themselves Elect. Now for the consequence of
the Major, it it clear from what is said, that the Elect could not be bound to
this, except the Non-Elect are also: Because (as is proved) no Man can know
whether he be Elect or not, before he know himself so much as obliged to love
and gratitude for Redemption. For Elect and Non-Elect are not to to be
discerned till Faith and love do put a difference. And therefore, methinks, I
may conclude confidently, that the Non-Elect are bound to love and thankfulness
for Redemption, or satisfaction, and therefore they are redeemed or satisfied
for.

If any shall make the common objection, viz. The Non-elect, or the Elect not
yet converted are bound to love and gratitude to Christ for satisfying for all
that will believe, I have answered this often already.

1. The Doctrine which I oppose is that Christ has not only died for Men if
they will believe, but died only for the Elect that they might believe; so that
it is determined by name for whom he Died, and the rest he Died not for at all;
and therefore his Dying for another, is not that which obliges a man to
Thankfulness: And their Ignorance that they are excluded, I have showed, can
add no obligation.

2. Men's believing will not cause Christ to Die for them, nor is it a condition
of it, as if Christ would Die for Men if they will believe; Believing
presupposes Christ's Dying for us, and what then can be their meaning that say
Christ Died and Satisfied for all men if they will Believe? When they say
absolutely withal, that he Died not for all at all, but only for the Elect,
that they might believe. Will they say that he Died for the Non-elect, if they
will believe? Then either they must mean that he underwent the Penalty, and
left it undetermined quorum loco, in whose stead and for whose sins it should
be, till their believing determine it: But 1. This is as much denied by those
whom I oppose, as by me. 2. And it is a contradiction. For it is Essential to
Punishment to be propter peccatum; that Relation is its formal Nature, as it
differs from Affliction in general; And therefore Christ suffered no
Punishment, if it were not determinately for Sin: And the meritorious cause is
considered as before the effect, and not after it; Or else if they speak of
[Believing] not as any condition on man's part, but a Divinely-infused Character
of those for whom Christ Died, then the sense of their words is but this
[Christ Died for the Non-elect, if they be Elect] or [Christ satisfied for all
men, if all men be Elect] or [Christ Died in stead of all, if he will give
Faith to all.] And who sees not that these words are a plain Negation, and all
one with these [Christ satisfied not for all] q. d. [I leave in my Will such a
Legacy to Titus, if Titus be not Titus, but Sempronius] what Lawyer knows not
that is a denial, or an illusory nothing! And how then can this bind men to
Love and Gratitude.

If I could bethink me of any other considerable Objection I would answer it:
But I cannot.

Furthermore for the Antecedency of the obligation to love, mark how Christ
makes it a condition to his own Love and his Fathers (as in a greater degree,
and as manifested) Joh. 14. 21. He that loves me shall be loved of my Father,
and I will love him, and will manifest my self to him. Christ Loves Men before
they Love, as he is Dominus Absolutus and a free Benefactor, (and as a Natural
Lover of his own Workmanship) But he loves man after his Faith and Love to him
as Rector per Leges, as putting on the resemblance of goodness, and justice in
civil Sense, and as he now stands in that Relation to them, in which he is by
his own Law, as it were obliged to do them good: Note this difference of
Christ's love, Prove. 8. 17. I love those that love me, and those that seek me
early shall find me. So ver. 21. Luke 7. 47. Many sins are forgiven, for she
loved much. If it be meant [therefore she loved much] yet it would not make
against this.

From John 3. 19. I argue thus. If men are condemned for loving darkness rather
than Light, (and Christ is this Light) then they were obliged to love Christ
the Light. But, etc. Ergo, etc.

And I have showed it is as Redeemer that he must be loved: For to Love Christ
as an excellent Prophet only, that a Turk may do, for Mahomet so confesses him
to be, Mat. 10. 37. It is Christ's condition propounded to all, That if they
love not him better than Father, Mother, House, Land or Life they cannot be his
Disciples; So that those that are not yet his Disciples, are obliged at once to
love him above all, and become his Disciples. 1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love
not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema, Maran-atha.

And then more specially for Gratitude (because I have hitherto insisted on the
other species, Love) there are many Parables in the Gospel that show that
wicked men are condemned for ingratitude to their Redeemer, Mat. 21. 37, 40.
etc. Christ convinces his Auditors, that those unthankful Husbandmen, that
refused to pay the Fruits, and killed the Son that was sent to them; (he was
sent to be entertained as Redeemer) would deservedly be destroyed with a
miserable destruction, and the Vineyard let out to others, i. e. that the
Kingdom of God should be taken from them and given to a Nation bringing forth
the Fruits thereof. And what is that Kingdom (here meant) but the Gospel? The
proclaiming and offer of Christ as Redeemer, and of mercy in and with him? Mat.
22. 8. It is unthankful refusal of the feast prepared, when all things were
ready, and they invited which was the unworthiness that there is mentioned,
which shut out those Guests, Mat. 18. 32. Unthankfulness is intimamated as part
of the Sin of that wicked Servant, who took his fellow Servant by the throat
for 100. Pence, when himself had been forgiven 10000 Talents: [ I forgave thee
all the debt] signifies such a mercy as Men may have that perish (as is plain
verse 34. 35.) and yet certainly presupposes Christ's dying for them, and
obliges them to thankfulness: If any ask the sense of the Text, I shall give
it after by it self more fitly.

Let me therefore conclude thus. That Doccrin which subverteth a very great
part of Religion is not of God: But so does this which denies Universal
satisfaction: Therefore it is not of God. The Minor is proved from what is
said: It destroys the ground of all Men's first love to Christ for Redeeming
them: It justifies all the Non-Elect in their ingratitude and not loving
Christ as their Redeemer: Besides what was said before of its destroying the
use of repentance and all Means. But we shall recollect more of these
consequences in the end, and show you more fully the face of the Doctrine which
I dispute against.

I have proved that all Men that hear the Gospel, owe Christ love and
thankfulness for Redeeming them by dying for them. I should next show that all
Men in the World do owe God love and thankfulness for those mercies which are
the effects of Christ's satisfaction: But especially those within the Church who
have in the New Covenant, made over to them a conditional remission of their
Sins, and adoption, and everlasting life, viz. If they will accept Christ with
his benefits: Those that are sanctified with the Blood of the Covenant, and are
made partakers of the Holy Ghost and were escaped from the pollutions of the
World through the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and and have
tasted the good word of God and the Powers of the World to come, etc. Certainly
these have received the fruits of Christ's satisfaction for which they were
bound to be thankful. But of those more particularly in their place.

Arg. 14th. Acertitudine fidei, and possibilitate recte credendi.
If Christ has not satisfied for the Sins of all, then no Man has a
sufficient ground for his first justifying Faith: (All Men are left at an utter
uncomfortable uncertainty whether they may believe to Justification or not) But
the consequent is false: Therefore so is the Antecedent.

That which is said before does show so much of the grounds of this Argument,
that I shall be the shorter in it now. All the doubt is of the consequence of
the Major, and to clear that, I suppose it is granted that all firm, sufficient
Faith for justification, must not only have a command to warrant it, but also a
fit object about which it must be exercised. God commands no Man to believe a
falsehood to make it become true by believing it, nor to trust to a person or
promise that is not to be trusted, as being not only fallible, but certainly
will deceive. As for the Act of affiance or recumbency, commonly called the
justifying Act, no Man can groundedly or comfortably rest on Christ for
justification by his Blood, who does not first know that his Blood was shed for
him, and has satisfied for him: Else he must rest on that which he knows not
to be sufficient for him to rest upon: For it has been proved that Christ's
death is not sufficient to justify any for whom it was not suffered, though
they should believe. He suffered not superfluously, as I have showed: Take the
confession of a Divine that for fear of Arminianism joined Hands with the
Antimonians, Maccovius colleg. disp. de justif. disp. 5.. 22. Quoad substantiam
poenae nihil olus perpessus est Christus quam per legem debebatur: Neque enim
vel Amor Patris, vel etiam justitia permittere potuit, plura ut filio
imponerentur, quam quae illi necessario tanquam sponsori ferenda erant; Quoad
circumstantias autem, patientis personam, patiendi causam, passionis efficaciam
plusquam sufficiens satisfactio Christi. Neque enim lex requirebat ut Deus
moreretur, neque ut sine peccato proprio quis moreretur, neque morstalis quae
suffecisset pro peccatis totius mundi, sive pro omnibus and singulis hominibus.
Here he confesses that Christ suffered no more than was due by Law, and than
was necessary for him to suffer as Sponsor: And yet that his Death was
sufficient for the Sins of all the World, even for all Men and every Man. And
if so, then either he suffered as Sponsor for all: Or else circumstances did
make that Death sufficient for all, which yet quoad substantia poenae (as he
calls it) had none of that which the Law required, and was necessary for the
Sponsor to undergo. And thus I think (with that added which is said before) it
is evident that none have ground to rest on Christ's Blood to justify them, or
on Christ to justify them by his Blood, till they know that his Blood was shed
for them seeing it is sufficient for no more. But no Man before justifying
Faith knows that Christ's Blood was shed for him any more then for others that
shall never be justified by it, therefore no Man has ground thus to believe.
And for the intellectual Act of Faith, if it be that which Maccovius says it
is ibid. disput. 3.. 17. Fides in Christum quae requiritur a nobis ad nostri
justificationem est, ut credamus pro redemptionem and sanguinem nos justificari
and salvari, then most Men are bound to believe an untruth, if they are bound
to believe to justification. If it be said that, it (...) believe that Christ's
Death is sufficient to pardon him if he believe, I answer that no Man can truly
believe that neither, but he that first knows that he died for him, which none
can do but he that knows that he died for all. I marvail how such Divines (as
Twiss and Maccovius who hold the main Antimonian Principles) who say that Faith
justifies only as we are ascertained, or receive the knowledge of justification
already past at Christ's death, can tell how to Salve this. How can they choose
but say, that either God does not command all where the Gospel comes to believe
to justification, or else, that he commands most Men to believe a falsehood: Or
else, that all Men are justified by Christ's death.

Let me add here (for I will not make another Argument of it, being built on
the same grounds with the former) that if Christ died not for all, then not
only all Men at their first invitation, but even all true believers whenever
they loose the fight of their evidences, that is, of their own Faith and other
Graces, have no ground left them to renew an Act of justifying Faith, nor to
cast their Souls with any confidence on Christ: For as long as he knows not
himself to be Elect and a true believer, he cannot tell whether, Christ died
for him, and consequently he knows not whether he may rest on him as a
sufficient Redeemer, as not knowing whether he satisfied for him or not. If any
say, he must believe that he may know, I answer 1. It must be a revealed truth
before it is believed. 2. Believing will not make it true, if it were not true
before. We are not to believe that Christ may die for us, but to believe that
he did die for us. Hear Maccovius his confession of that also, Ibid disp. 9..
16. At toto caelo errat Haereticus (Socinus) Neque enim fidem requiri ad hoc
dicimus, ut pro nobis satisfiat; sed ut pro fidem satisfactio ista Christi quae
perac to est ante fidem nobis innotescat (so that when God commands Men to
believe, he commands them to take knowledge of Christ's satisfaction for them
before made: And surely men cannot know that which is not true, unless it be to
know it to be false.) And thus it seems plain to me that many, if not most true
believers will be left without any sufficient ground to believe, through a
great part of their lives. For I think, assurance is not so common a thing as
some imagine, nor so constant with them that have it: Though Maccovius says
(as one Error draws on another.) Ibid. disp. 9.. 11. Respondeo, (salvo aliorum
judicio) negando sensum illum (qui in nobis oritur ex agnitione nostrae
Iustificationis) aliquando tolli penitus in homine: Our Divines that teach poor
Souls to use their Faith of Adherence when they want evidence, do go another
way to work; and suppose an Universal promise and before that an Universal
satisfaction: Or else Adherence without evidence has no sufficient object or
ground, and then farewell the Christians most constant stay.

Arg. 15. Ab ordine credendi perverso.
If Christ satisfied not for all, then the knowledge or assurance that we have
justifying Faith must go before justifying Faith: But that is impossible as
being a contradiction, Ergo, etc.

The reason of the consequence is plain in what was said on the last argument.
For no Man can believe to justification, but by believing that Christ is a
sufficient Redeemer, and has made sufficient satisfaction for his Sins, and by
accepting him as offered to apply the fruits of that satisfaction to us, and by
resting on him for those fruits. Now all this has no ground till a Man knows
that Christ has already died and satisfied for him: And that cannot be known
(if Christ died not for all) till Men first know themselves to be Elect and
believers, and that cannot be known till after we do believe; For if the thing
to be believed is that Christ died for believers, and for me if I believe, I
must know that I believe before I can know that he died for me, and yet I must
know that he has died and satisfied for me before I can believe to
Justification. See what contradictions are here, and how Men are put upon
impossibilities, I know the necessity of believing that Christ has satisfied
for me, is denied but I have proved it before.

Arg. 16. A peccatorum aggravatione.
If it be the great aggravation of all Men's Sins committed against that mercy
which tends to their Recovery, that they are against the Lord that died for
them, then Christ did die for all such Men: But the Antecedent is true, Ergo,
etc.

Only the Antecedent requires proof; That wicked Men do partake of Mercy
tending toward their recovery, (as to the nature of the mercy, and in Gods
legal Ordination) I think I need not prove among Christians; And that they Sin
against such mercy, is a thing that needs as little proof; The main proof of
the Antecedent [that these men's Sins are aggravated, in that they are against
Christ that died for them] will be from several Texts of Scripture which do
thus aggravate such Men's Sin, which because I intend to handle particularly, I
will refer you thereto, and now pass them by. Further, 1. It is confessed that
these Men's Sin is aggravated in that they are against the Blood of Christ as
offered to them in its Fruits, and as against Christ himself offered to them as
Crucified and as Redeemer, and as against the offers of pardon, Adoption and
Salvation, which are all Fruits of Christ's satisfaction. But all these imply
satisfaction for them to whom they are offered, as is proved already, Ergo etc.
Many of our Divines (as Perkins Reform. Cathol. of Justif. and others) say that
in this we differ from the Papists, that they make Christ's satisfaction to be
but the meritorious cause of our Righteousness, but not our Righteousness it
self as we affirm it (I do not now judge of these words, but) if Christ's
satisfaction be our very Righteousness or any part of it, then certainly Christ
satisfied for all to whom he offers his Righteousness: But that he offers his
Righteousness to all without exception is beyond doubt: And he would never
offer them a Non-ens, that which is not: He does not offer to one Man the
satisfaction made only for another and not for him, for that would be no
Righteousness for him: But it is Righteousness that Christ offers, and
therefore it is satisfaction for that sinner himself which is offered to that
sinner, to be his Righteousness. Now the offer supposes the being of the thing
offered, except it were only an offer to do or give something hereafter, which
is not the case here. And for them that say, [Christ is only offered to Men if
they will receive him, or believe] it is idle: For Christ is offered to Men
whether they will receive him or not, but none but receivers do enjoy him. God
does not make our receiving the condition of his offering, as to say [I will
offer thee Christ's satisfaction if thou will receive it] but he makes it the
condition of our attaining the good offered q. d, [Christ with his benefits
offered to thee shall be thine if thou will receive him.]

2. If it be only the Blood of Christ shed for others, and not for them which
unbelievers sin against, then the sin of Devils might (as to this respect) be
as well aggravated from the Blood of Christ sinned against as theirs: But the
consequence is palpably absurd, Ergo etc.

3. Consider what heinous consequents will follow, if you deny this aggravation
of the Sins of unbelievers. 1. You harden them in the most desperate
impenitency: For they cannot repent of that which they know not to be a Sin,
and they cannot know that they have sinned against him that dyed for them, till
they know that he did die for them; and who dare say to all the World, that yet
know not that they are true believers, [you ought not to repent for any Sin as
being committed against him that died for you.] Perkins Treat. of repentance,
and multitudes of our godly English Writers when they press Men to repentance,
do use this as the greatest motive, to consider what our Sins did cost the Lord
Jesus, They cost him Blood, and should they not cost us tears? and should we
make light of that which lay so heavy on him? Such arguings are common in
almost all Writers and Preachers: Now if Christ did not bear all Men's Sins, and
if all Men's Sins did not cost Christ so dear, then this Argument or Motive to
repentance can be used to no Man, nor by any Man but only those that have got
assurance of a special interest in Christ. 2. Hereby you deny that God may
justly aggravate Men's Sins, or condemn Men for Sinning against Christ that died
for them. 3. Hereby you persuade Men that their consciences shall not thus
agravate them in Hell, nor torment them for Sinning against him that suffered
for them, all which I shall show anon, to be false. 4. Hereby you forbid
Ministers from thus aggravating their Peoples Sins, and so from using the most
effectual motive to draw them to repentance. And hereby you condemn almost all
the most powerful Preachers in England, who generally take this course. And you
reject the most powerful Books and Sermons which God has blessed to the
Conversion of many Souls. I mention this, the rather because some still object
that those who are against Universal Redemption succeed as much in their
Ministry to the Conversion of Souls, as those that are for it: The reason is,
because they commonly Preach for it, or on grounds that suppose it, in their
practical Sermons, when in their disputes they speak against it. That you may
see I wrong them not, I will instance in one, learned, Holy Perkins: who has
writ more confidently against Universal Redemption then he? And when he comes
to win Men to Repentance and to Christ, see how he Writes, in particular in
that excellent short Treatise, the choicest piece I think that ever he wrote, I
am sure a piece that has long ago workt more on my own Heart then most, if
not then any that ever I read, and which I have cause to thank God that ever I
saw: I mean his Treat. of the Right Knowledge of Christ Crucified in the first
Vol. of his Works, Page 626, etc. I will transcribe some passages Page 626.
When he has showed that we must feel the need of Christ, and desire him, he
adds [The ad. Part of knowledge is Application (every Man is bound to apply
Christ) whereby thou must know and believe, not only that Christ was Crucified,
but that he was Crucified for thee, for thee I say in particular. Here two
rules must be remembered and practiced, one that Christ on the Cross was thy
pledge and surety in particular, that he stood there in the very room and place
in which thou thy self in thy own person should have stood: That thy very
personal and particular Sins were imputed and applied to him: That he stood
guilty as a Malefactor for them, and suffered the very Pangs of Hell: And that
his sufferings are as much in acceptance with God as if thou had born the
curse of the Law in thy own person eternally. The holding and believing of this
point is the very foundation of Religion, as also of the Church of God, etc.
The 2d. Rule is, that Christ Crucified is thine, being really given thee of God
the Father; even as truly as Houses and Lands are given of Earthly Fathers to
their Children: And hence it is that the benefits of Christ are before God ours
indeed, for our justification and Salvation] and Page 630. [First of all, the
serious consideration of this, that the very Son of God himself suffered all
the pains and torments of Hell on the Cross for our Sins, is the proper and
most effectual means to stir up our Hearts to a godly sorrow for them. And that
this thing may come to pass, every Man must be settled without doubt that he was
the Man that Crucified Christ; that he is to be blamed as well as Judas, Herod,
Pilate, or the Jews, and that his Sins should be the Nails, the Spears and the
Thorns that pierced him. When this meditation begins to take place, bitterness
of Spirit with Wailing and Mourning takes place in like manner, Zach 12. 10.
And they shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and they shall lament for
him, as one lamenteth for his only Son. (What a Doctrine then is it that
teaches us, that none but they that know themselves to be Elect, should once
accuse themselves of this, that their Sins did Crucify Christ?) Peter in his
first Sermon struck the Jews as with a Thunderclap from Heaven, when he said
unto them, ye have Crucified the Lord of glory: So that at the same time 3000
Men were pricked in their Hearts and said Act. 2. 37. Men and Brethren what
shall we do to be saved? Again, if Christ for our Sins shed his Heart Blood,
and if our Sins made him sweat water and Blood, O then why should not we our
selves shed bitter tears, and why should not our Hearts bleed for them? He that
finds himself so dull and hardened that the Passion of Christ does not humble
him, is in a lamentable ease, for there is no Faith in the Death of Christ
effectual in him as yet. (These words show that Perkins speaks not this only to
believers.) 2. The meditation of the passion of Christ is a most notable means
to breed repentance and reformation of Life in time to come. For when we begin
to think that Christ Crucified, by suffering the first and 2d. Death has
procured to us remission of all our Sins past, and freed us from Hell. Death
and damnation; then if there be but a spark of Grace in us we begin to be of
another mind, and to reason thus with our selves, what? has the Lord been thus
merciful to me that am of my self but a firebrand of Hell, as to free me from
deserved destruction, and to receive me to favor in Christ? Yea; no doubt he
has, His name be blessed therefore: I will not therefore Sin any more as I
have done, but rather endeavor hereafter to keep my self from every evil way.]
3. The right knowledge of our selves arises from the knowledge of Christ
Crucified in whom, and by whom we come to know five special things of our
selves. The first, how grievous our Sins are, and therefore how miserable we
are in regard of them. If we consider our offenses in themselves and as they
are in us, we may soon be deceived, etc. But if Sin be considered in the Death
and passion of Christ whereof it was the cause, and the vileness thereof
measured by the unspeakable torments endured by the Son of God; and if the
greatness of the offense of Man be esteemed by the endless satisfaction made to
the justice of God; the least Sin that is, will appear to be a Sin indeed, and
that most grievous and ugly. Therefore Christ Crucified must be used by us as a
mirror or Looking-Glass in which we may fully take a view of our wretchedness,
etc. And before [and for our Neighbors, those specially that are of Christ's
Church, they are to be known of us on this manner: When we are to do any duty
to them, we must not barely respect their Persons, but Christ Crucified in
them, and them in Christ.] And Page 631.] The 5th. point is that we owe to
Christ an endless debt, for he was Crucified only as our surety and pledge; and
in that Spectacle of his passion we must consider our selves as the chief
debtors, and that the very discharge of our debt, that is, the Sins which are
inherent in us, were the proper cause of all the endless pains and torments
that Christ endured, that he might set us most miserable Bankrupts at liberty
from Hell. Death and damnation. For this his unspeakable goodness, if we do but
once think of it seriously, we must needs confess that we owe our selves our
Souls and Bodies and all that we have as a debt due unto him. And so soon as
any Man begins to know Christ Crucified, he knows his own debt and thinks of
the payment of it.] And that you may be sure that Perkins speaks not only of
the Elect, see Page 631. Col. 2. [The common Protestant likewise comes short
herein for 3 Causes. 1. Whereas in word they acknowledge him to be their Savior
(this he blames not in them) that has redeemed them from their evil
Conversation, yet indeed they make him a patron of their Sins. The Thief makes
him the receiver: The Murderer makes him his refuge, The Adulterer (be it
spoken with reverence to his Majesty) makes him the Bawd, etc. Thus Christ that
came to abolish Sin is made a maintainer thereof, and the common Packhorle of
the World to bear every Man's burden. 2. Men are content to take knowledge of the
merit of Christ's passion, for the remission of their Sins, but in the mean
season, the virtue of Christ's Death for the mortifying of Sin, is little
regarded, etc. 3. Men usually content themselves generally and confusedly to
know Christ to be their Redeemer (it seems then, that it is true) never once
seeking in every particular Estate and condition of Life, and in every
particular blessing of God to feel the benefit of his passion. What is the
cause that almost all the World live in security never almost touched for their
horrible Sins? Surely the reason is because they did never yet seriously
consider that Christ in the Garden lay grouling upon the Earth, sweating Water
and Blood for their offenses. (Can a Man speak plainer for Christ's dying for
all?) Again all such as by fraud and oppression or any kind of hard dealing
suck the Blood of poor Men, never yet knew that their Sins drew out the Heart
Blood of Christ! And proud Men and Women that are puffed up by reason of their
attire, which is the badg of their shame, and never cease hunting after strange
fashions, consider not that Christ was not Crucified in gay attire, but naked,
that he might bear the whole shame and curse of the Law for us. These and such
like, whatsoever they say in word, are flat Enemies of the Cross of Christ, and
tread his precious Blood under their Feet. Now then considering this so weighty
and special a point of Religion is so much neglected, O Man or Woman, high or
low, young or old, if thou have been wanting this way begin for very shame to
learn, and learning to know Christ Crucified: That thou may attain to this,
behold him often, etc. 1. Look on him as a glass or spectacle in which thou
shall see Gods Glory greater in thy Redemption then in thy Creation. etc. 2.
Thou must behold him as the full price of thy Redemption and perfect
Reconciliation with God: And pray earnestly to God that he would Seal up the
same in thy conscience by his Spirit. 3. Thou must behold Christ as an example
to whom thou must conform thy self by Regeneration, etc. Read the History of
Christ's passion: Observe all the parts and circumstances thereof, and apply
them to thy self for thy full Conversion. When thou read that Christ went to
the Garden as his custom was where the Jews might soon attack him, consider
that he went to the death of the Cross for thy Sins willingly, and not of
constraint and that therefore thou for thy part should do him all service
freely, Psalm. 110. 3. When thou hear that in his agony his Soul was heavy
unto death, know it was for thy Sins; and thou should much more conceive
heaviness of Heart for the same: Again that this sorrow of his is joy and
rejoicing to thee if thou will believe in him: When thou read that in the
Garden he prayed lying grovling on his Face, sweating Water and Blood, begin to
think seriously, what an unspeakable measure of Gods wrath was upon thy blessed
Savior, that did prostrate his Body upon the Earth, and cause the Blood to
follow; and think that thy Sins must needs be most heinous that brought such
bloody and grievous pains upon him. Also think it is a shame for thee to carry
thy Head to Heaven with haughty looks, to wallow in thy pleasures, and to draw
the innocent Blood of thy poor brethren by oppression and deceit, for whom,
Christ Sweat Water and Blood; and take an occasion from Christ's agony to lay
aside the pride of thy Heart, yea, even to bleed for thy own offenses, etc.
When thou read that Christ was taken and bound, think that thy very Sins
brought him into the power of his Enemies, and were the very bonds wherewith he
was tied: Think, that thou should have been bound in the very same manner
unless he had been a surety and pledge for thee: Think also that thou in the
same manner art bound and tied with the Chains of thy own Sins, etc. Lastly
think and believe that the bonds of Christ serve to purchase thy liberty from
Hell, death and damnation When thou hear that he was brought before Annas
and Caiphas, think, it was meet that thy surety and pledge who was to suffer the
Condemnation due to thee should by the High Priest as by the Mouth of God, be
condemned: And wonder at this that the very Coessential, and Eternal Son of
God, even the Sovereign judge of the World; stands to be judged, and that by
wicked Men, persuading thy self that this so great confusion comes of thy Sins:
Whereupon being further amazed at thy fearful state, humble thy self in dust
and ashes, and pray God to soften thy stony Heart, that thou may turn to him,
and by true Faith lay hold on Christ, etc. When thou read that Barrabas, the
murderer was preferred before Christ etc. Thy very Sins pulled on him that
shameful reproach: and in that for thy cause he was esteemed worse than
Barrabas, etc. When thou read that he was openly and judicially condemned to
the cursed death of the Cross, consider what is the wrath and fury of God
against Sin, and how great is his mercy to Sinners; and in this Spectacle look
on thy self and with groans of Heart say, O good God, what set thou before
mine Eyes, I even I have sinned, I am guilty and worthy of damnation! Whence
comes this change that thy blessed Son is in my room but of thy unspeakable
mercy! Wretch that I am? How have I forgotten my self and thee my God: O Son of
God how low have thou abased thy self for me! Therefore give me grace O God
that beholding my own Estate in the person of my Savior, thus condemned, I may
detest my Sins that were the cause thereof and by a lively Faith embrace that
absolution which thou offerest me in him who was condemned in my stead and
room. O Lord Jesus, Savior of the World give me that Holy Spirit, that I may
judge my self and be as vile in my own Eyes as thou wast vile before the Jews:
Unite me unto thee by the same Spirit, that in thee I may be as worthy to be
accepted before God, as I am worthy in my self to be detested for my Sins, etc.
When thou read that he was script of his clothing, think, it was that he
being naked might bear thy shame ou the Cross, etc. When thou read of the
complaint of Christ that he was forsaken of his Father, consider how he
suffered the pangs and torments of Hell as thy Pledge and Surety, etc, When
thou read of his Death consider that thy Sins were the cause of it, etc.

Thus far Mr. Perkins, whose words I have thus largely set doown, both as a
pattern for Ministers how to Preach the Doctrine of Redemption, and to show the
necessity there is that Ministers and People do see (and discover to others)
their Sin in this great aggravation, [as they were the crucifiers of Christ]
and to show you what English Ministers Preach to the People whatever they speak
in Disputes; and what kind of Preaching it is which has succeeded so in
England for the conversion of Souls! If this be not a plain Preaching of
Universal Redemption or Satitfaction, as to all that hear the Gospel (whom he
requires so often to consider that Their sins crucified Christ) then I know not
what is. And if any quirke may be produced to wrest so plain words to a
contrary sense; I am sure the poor sinners to whom it is Preached know not
ordinarily those evasions, but receive it in the plain sense. I could fill a
Volume with the like passages as this, out of our most powerful and successful
Preachers.

Here then are two distinct aggravations of sin, both necessarr to every
penitent Soul, both which are denied by the denial of Universal satisfaction;
The first is that our sins killed Christ as being the cause of his Death. Is
not a man bound to mourn over him whom his sins have pierced before he knows
himself to be Elect? How few then of the Elect themselves should do it? 2. The
second aggravation is that all our sins against recovering mercies, are
committed against him that Died for us: He that denies both these aggravations
of sin does not a little wrong Christ and men's Souls.

Lastly, I argue thus; If without those forementioned aggravations of sin, no
man can truly and savingly Repent, then all men are bound thus to aggravate
their sins (in their self accusations.) But without these there can be no
saving Repentance, Ergo, etc.

The consequence of the Major is proved, in that all men are bound truly to
Repentance, even with that which is called Repentance unto Life.

The Antecedent or Minor is proved.

1. In that else it can be but a Legal Repentance and not an Evangelical if it
be not for sin as the crucifier of Christ, and for sin as against our Redeemer.

2. From the description of true Gospel Repentance, Zech. 12. 10. They shall
look on him whom they have pierced, and mourn over him, etc. Or if it were
proved that there is besides this a true Repentance foregoing, yet it is but
part of that great work, seeing this Evangelical Repentance must go close with
it. And if any say tha tmen are bound first to believe before they are bound to
this evangelical repentance for sinning against the blood of Christ. I answer.
1. They are bound to both at once; and the Apostles pressed both at once on men,
To Repent and Believe. 2. Most Divines make Repentance with Faith to go before
Justification. 3. Some have writ whole Volumes to prove that it goes before
Faith it self. 4. All acknowledge that it goes before assurance or knowledge of
our Election. And if Christ died only for the Elect, then no man could repent
of his sins as that which killed Christ. or as against his blood, till he first
knew himself to be Elect, and then many true Christians should never so repent
in this Life, and always the Gospel Repentance would not only follow
Justification, but even the knowledge of Justification: Whereas Amesius and
most of ours do make it with Faith, go before both Justification and
Sanctification.

Argum. 17th. A novo jure Dominii and imperii.
If Christ have a new Dominion and Empire over all men, grounded ( quoad
meritum) on his redeeming of all, (or satisfying for all,) then he did Redeem
(or make satisfaction for) all: But the Antecedent is true, Ergo, etc.

I might have used these as two distinct Mediums; but for brevity I will
conjoin them, and argue specially a jure imperii, which in order of Nature
follows the jus Dominii, and is grounded on it: Man being made a rational
Creature, there was a necessity he should have a Government Moral according to
his Nature; and God being his Lord and Owner it was therefore necessary that he
should be his Supreme Rector: For the right of disposure belongs to him that is
absolute Owner, or full Propietary: And Regiment is part of the disposure of
the reasonable Creature. So then the necessit as regiminis passive considerati,
is founded in the Nature of Man; but the jus imperii is founded in the jure
Dominii (in our present case.) So that where ever God has as Redeeemer the jus
imperii, it is necessary necessitate consequente and Consequentiae, that he
have the jus dominii: And wherever he has the jus dominii, it is necessary
necessitate Antecedente and consequentioe that he have the jus imperii; if so
be that the Creature be capable of Government Moral, else not; for the jus
supposes that capacity. And therefore Christ's Dominion is larger than his
Empire. I still here take the term [ Domini^m] in the strict sense, as it
signifies mere Propriety, and not in the large sense as it comprehends both
Propriety and Empire, as its parts. As Gods Rectorship is founded in his
Propriety, so his Legislation presupposes his Rectorship: So that in natural
order he is first Dominns Absolutus and then secondly, Rector Supremus; and
then ex jure imperii, he is Legislator. Now God at first was owner of the World
as Creator, and thence had a right to Govern the World as Creator; and thence
made them that perfect Law fitted to the state of a perfect Creature, and
expressing the perfection of the Creator, Ruler and Lawmakers. Upon the breach
of this Law, and the ruin of the World thereby, the maker becomes the repairer;
Christ redeemeth the World: And hereby has first a novum jus Dominii, a new
Propriety in it. 2. A novum jus imperii, a new right to Govern it. 3. And hence
he is novus Legislator, he does make new Laws, even the Laws of Grace and
Faith. Now as Gods Creation of all was the ground of his right of Governing of
all and that Right was the ground of his actual Government of all, So Christ's
redeeming of all is the ground of his new Right to Govern all, and that Right
is the ground of his actual Government. And as God had not a propriety in one
Man, or a Right to govern him, because he made another Man, but because he made
that Man, so Christ has not his new propriety in Reprobates or his new Right
to govern them, merely from his redeeming other Men, viz. The Elect, but from
his redeeming all Men, and them among the rest: And as God had his jus imperii
by Creation over the Rebellions as well as the obedient (for God lost not his
right when Adam did Rebel) so has Christ by Redemption his jus imperii over
Unbelievers, as well as over the faithful. And as, if God had let the World go
on, under the mere Regiment of the Law of Creation, it would not follow that
God would certainly save all Men, because he made all (for then the Devils
would be saved, and none could be damned) so under the Administration of Christ
according to the Law of Redemption, it will no more follow. that Christ will
save all, because he redeemed all. For Gods Creation had gracious or favorable
ends for the Creature, as well as his Redemption: And he might as truly be said
to create them to Life, as to Redeem them to Life: Nay, he gave all Men in our
first Parents actual possession of Paradise, of Righteousness and Holiness and
the favor of God, which is Man's happiness, and yet he permitted them to lose
it: So Redem^tion obliges not the Redeemer to save all the redeemed: nor does
necessarily infer their future Salvation. Yet here is no ground for that charge
which is laid on the Arminians, to be laid on this Doctrine, viz. that then
Christ's Blood might be lost; for Gods decrees will see to that. Gods
foreknowledg denominates the Salvation of the Elect, infallibly certain: His
decree of Predestination makes their Salvation future: Redemption is a part of
the execution of that Decree; and it is (as Creation was) not a part peculiar
to the Elect, and inseparable from Salvation, but a general part, common to
all, and laying the necessary groundwork for the more special parts of
execution.

And therefore when the Apostle says [whom he foreknew them he did
Predestinate to be conformed, etc. And whom he did Predestinate, them he
called; whom he called, them he justified: And whom he justified, them he
Glorified, Romans 8. 30.] he never says, [whom he died for, or whom he redeemed
them he called, or justified or glorified] no more then [whom he Created] so
that Redemption as presupposing the Predetermination of Election is an
infallible means of attaining the Salvation of the redeemed that were so Elect;
the infallibility and futurition being not properly from Redemption as such,
but from Predestination and foreknowledg, and so from Redemption as joined
thereto; (that is, from Gods Intention, or purpose de hoc eventu.) But
Redemption does not presuppose all the redeemed to be Elect by decree, and
therefore does not necessarily infer the Salvation of all the redeemed. They do
therefore sorely mistake that suppose Redemption has this for its direct end,
viz. The Salvation of the redeemed; or that it is its end at all, that all the
redeemed shall be infallibly, eventually saved: But Redemption lays first the
ground of Christ's new Empire, and Administration to all the World: Upon this
groundwork is the whole Government of the World built, and all the Judicial
proceeding, and execution at the last day: And therefore they that deny
Universal Redemption know not what they do: They deny the Foundation of Gods
Dominion as Redeemer, and of his new Empire, and Legislation, and Judgment.
Redemption now, is necessarily Antecedent to the Condemnation of perishing
Unbelievers, as well as causal of the Salvation of Believers.

Obj. Then it may be said, that Christ Redeemed Unbelievers to the day of evil;
for it is said God made the wicked Man for the Day of evil, Prove. 16. 4.

Ans. In the same Sense as one is spoken, the other may be spoken truly: For if
it be spoken of Gods Legislative Will, or legal ordination, then as it is true
that [God by his Law has made the day of evil, that is, of punishment, for
wicked Men] or that [God when he had Created Man, ordained by his Law that the
wicked should be punished] so the same may be said of the Redeemed [When he had
Redeemed all Men, he ordained that all that reject so great Salvation shall
undergo a far sorer punishment] or if the meaning be of Gods Decretive will de
eventu [God when he made Man, did intend to destroy the Non-Elect for their
wickedness] so it is as true of Redeemed ones [God Redeemer when he Redeemed
Man, did intend to destroy the Non-Elect for their rejecting of his mercy] But
as it is not the meaning of the Text, that [Mens damnation was Gods end in
creating them] (as Twiss has fully proved) so is it not true, that Men's
damnation was Christ's end in Redeeming. It is no effect therefore of
Redemption, but an accidental consequent: And therefore Christ says he came
not into the World to condemn the World, but that the World though him might be
saved: that is, the Salvation of all was, 1. The end of Christ's Legislative
will, that is, the end propounded to Man, 2. And Redemption has the nature of
a means (sufficient in suo genere) for all Men's Salvation, and so God might be
said, not to Create the World that he might condemn it, but that the World
through him might be saved: Though yet eventually they are not saved: Christ
intended in suffering for Man's Sin, that his satisfaction should remove that
great impediment of their Salvation, viz. The dissatisfaction of the offended
Creator, as he was Rector according to the first Law: And that it should be the
ground of his New Law whereby he gives freely Remission and Salvation to all
Men, on condition they will accept himself and his benefits with him. So that
as it would be intolerable delusion of Men's Souls, for any Preacher to tell
Men, that all that are Created shall be saved, so is it to tell them that are
Redeemed (as to the price and satisfaction made) shall be saved: For then when
they find in Scripture that Christ died for all, and is a propitiation for the
Sins of the whole World, they will conclude that they shall certainly be saved.

Thus much I thought meet to say for the ground work of my Argumentation, by
way of explication; because I find that Truth is sometimes better let in by the
clear unfolding of it, then driven in by force of arguing.

To proceed to the Argument; It must be understood that we speak not here of
the old right of Dominion and Government, which Christ as God Creator and one
with the Father, had before the Sin of Man; And then that which I have to prove
is 1. That Christ has a new right of Dominion and Government, and that over
all Men whatsoever. 2. Yet this right is founded in his work of redemption, and
the Fathers delivering all to him as in the relation of Redeemer. 3. That his
right to Dominion and rule over all, is not merely from Redemption of the
Elect, but of all, even of each person to whom he has this right.

As for the first, I hope few Christians will deny it, if any do I prove it
thus. 1. If Christ have not as Redeemer a right to govern all, then he may not
make Universal Laws for the Government of all, But Christ has made such
Universal Laws, Ergo, etc. His Laws command all Men every where to repent, and
all that hear the Gospel to believe: And promise and threaten accordingly.

Obj. The Indians never heard his Laws.

Ans. 1. That restriction is ex part promulgantis for want of publication, but
not ex part legem ferentis for want of Enacting a Universal Law; The Law
excludes none in the tenor of it but commands all to believe without exception.
2. The Officers or Heralds of Christ have authority to publish it to all the
World. 3. Christ has more Laws then the written or published Gospel in
fullness. The dispensation of all things by, providential disposal, are Christ's
Law, that is, they are the signs and discoveries of mercy and Man's duty: They
show the World 1. That they are not left under that helpless, remediless case
that they were in by the desert of their own Sin: For the rigid Law of works
never allowed to them that had violated it, and were cursed by it, so great
mercies as all Men now enjoy, and daily find flowing in upon them a Deo
Miserecorde, and that to such ends as their repentance and recovery. 2. These
mercies and other works of Christ, do show the World the duty of repenting:
Paul says that the mercies of God lead them to repentance. Now repentance is
not here taken for hellish despairing repentance, as the Text plainly shows:
But for that which has a tendency to recovery, and is joined with such a hope
as excludes utter despair, and may encourage to the use of means as means and
that which thus reveals Christ's mercy and Man's duty and means, is sure
Christ's Law.

2. Arg. If Christ as Redeemer has not a right to Govern all Men, then he may
not command his Messengers to go into all the World and preach the Gospel to
every Creature: But he has so commanded them, Mat. 16. 15, 16. Where Christ
has not Authority to Rule, there he has not Authority to bid his Messenger
Rule under him, or publish his Laws, or command Men to obey him.

3. Arg. If Christ as Redeemer have not Authority to rule all to whom the
Gospel comes, then all such are not bound to take him for their King and Lord;
But all such are bound to take him as their King and Lord, Ergo, etc. (4.) If
Christ as Redeemer have not right of governing all that hear the Gospel, then
there are no Rebels (for Rebellion is only against a rightful Power) nor do
they Sin in actual disobeying him when he commands as Redeemer. But the
consequents are wicked and intolerable, Ergo, etc. Luke 19. 27. Those mine
Enemies that would not I should Reign over them, bring hither and slay them
before me. (5.) If Christ have not this right over all the World then all the
World is not guilty of Sinning against him; But all the World is guilty of
Sinning against the Redeemers Laws, Ergo, etc. They Sin against those mercies
which lead to repentance (6.) A multitude of plain Texts prove Christ's
Universal Dominion and Empire. Mat. 28. 19. All power is given to me in Heaven
and Earth, Joh. 13. 3. All things are delivered unto him of the Father:
delivered into his Hand, Joh. 5. 22. The Father judges no Man; but has given
all judgment to the Son, etc. Phil. 2. 7. 8. 9. Romans 14. 9.

2. That this Right is founded on Redemption, is proved by all that is said in
the forementioned Arguments and Texts; and I think few Christians will deny it,
Romans 14. 9. For this end he both died, rose and revived, that he might be Lord,
of the dead and of the living. If it were the end of his death and resurrection
to obtain this Dominion, then surely this Dominion is grounded in that Death
and Resurrection, and belongs to him as a Redeemer, Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11. he became obedient to Death, even the Death of the Cross: Wherefore God
also has highly exalted him, etc.

3. And that it is not Christ's dying only for the Elect that is the ground of
his Dominion and Empire over all, I prove thus. 1. The Dominion of Christ and
his Jus Imperii over the Non-Elect is of the same kind with his Dominion and
Jus Imperii over the Elect, and therefore has the same cause. It is not such
as his Dominion over Devils or Brutes, as we shall further show anon. I say not
that Christ exercises his Imperial power in the same way over all, but the
relation of Rex or Imperator which Christ has rightfully over all, is the same
to all: And the relation of Subjects to Christ, which all stand in to him quod
debitum veljus, is the same relation; all Men as well as the Elect, to whom his
Laws are promulgate, are bound to acknowledge him their King and Lord in the
same sense as the Elect are: And are bound to give up themselves to him as his
subjects in the same sense as the Elect are, and with a subjection of the same
kind: For the New Law which constituteth the duty, is general, and
distinguishes not, as to this, between Elect and Non-Elect. 2. It is manifest
that Christ's Blood cannot be purchasing of Dominion or Empire immediately, but
only meante virtute satisfactoria, as it is a placament or propitiatory
Sacrifice to the offended Majesty; For were not Christ's Blood first necessary
to this expiatory use, it would be so far from being purchasing or meritorious
of any further benefit, that it would not be acceptable to God at all: For he
is not bloodthirsty, he takes not pleasure in the Blood of the innocent, Nay,
he is averse from it. So that Christ's Death must needs be first satisfactory to
Justice in order of nature, before it purchase Dominion or Empire. Now if he
may have this right to a peculiar Dominion and Empire over most of the World
without satisfying for them, then either his right over most is immediate
without flowing from satisfaction (which is evidently false) or else it is
founded in his satisfaction for others, viz. the Elect: And if so then why
might not he as well have right of Dominion and Empire over the Elect without
satisfying for them, as over all others without satisfying for them? And if so,
then he might do all that which now he does as Lord and Rector, without
satisfaction Antecedent. And if so, then he might make his New Law which now he
has made, wherein he Repeals the bondage of Ceremonies and provideth a remedy
against the curse, and whereby he gives pardon, and glory to all if they will
receive him; But this may not be granted.

3. It is also proved hence, that Christ's rule over all Men is founded in his
satisfaction of Redeeming of those same Men; because when he is offered to them
and they commanded to receive him, it is in the Relation of Lord Redeemer: All
are commanded to take him for their Lord Jesus Christ, no Man is commanded to
take him as Lord and King only, and not as Redeemer and Savior: Nay, our
Divines commonly make the act of justifying Faith to confist only in receiving
Christ as Redeemer or satisfieror Savior, as saving us by his Blood from
guilt; excluding the reception of him as King and Lord from being the
justifying Act of Faith (wherein yet I am forced as zealouly to contradict them
as in almost any one point) only they confess it is of absolute necessity that
Christ at the same time be received as Lord, when he is received as Redeemer.
Now all Men are bound (that hear the Gospel) to believe to justification,
that is generally granted: And if so, then all Men are bound to receive Christ
as their Lord-Redeemer, and not as Lord to them and Redeemer to others: And if
so, then doubtless Christ is their Lord-Redeemer. Now Redemption has two
parts, the first is the paying of the Price that is, satisfaction by dying for
us: The 2d. is, applying or conferring the benefits of that satisfaction, by
actual delivering or Redeeming from the guilt and power of Sin: The first is
that chief part of Redemption from whence the whole is chiefly denominated. Now
the first part is past and done whether Men believe or not and is not offered
to be done on any condition, nor to be done for our Sins: Christ does not say,
I will pay the price of thy Redemption, if thou will take me for thy Redeemer,
it is paid already, but it is the 2d. part of Redemption that is offered on
condition. The first is general and absolure: The second is generally given on
condition; and special as to the actual Collation by Christ and fruition by
Man. So that when Christ says to a Man, [take me for thy Redeemer] it is as
much as to say, [take me for one that has made satisfaction for thy Sins and
if thou will receive me I will pardon and save thee thereby] now if Christ did
not Redeem Men, by satisfying, and yet require them to take him as their
Redeemer, then he requires them to take him to be that which he is not, and to
have done that which he has not: For Christ cannot be a Redeemer to any Man
that he has not paid the paid the price of Redemption for: Which if it be not
done, Faith will not cause it to be done, So that it being certain, that the
Lordship and Empire of Christ which he has right to over all, and which all
are commanded to acknowledge and submit to, is inseparably conjoined with his
Redemption, he being offered to no Man as Lord, to whom he is not also offered
as Redeemer, it is evident that his Jus novum Dominii and imperiii, his new
right of propriety and Rule over all Men, does presuppose his Redeeming all, as
to the price and satisfaction.

Obj. But if that be so, then he Redeemed or died for Bruits, Devils and good
Angels: For he has a Right of Dominion and Rule over these.

Ans. This Objection, though otherwise scarce worthy to be taken notice of,
has been so entertained, yielded to and confidently managed by some, that it
is become necessary to make a discovery of its vanity. 1. Christ has not a
proper Empire or Rectorship over Bruits: For they are not capable of being
Subjects of a Kingdom. 2. His Dominion over them is but as they are subservient
to his ends for Man, and as they are Man's Servants and Utensils. 3. Christ has
not (that I can find in Scripture (any novum jus Dominii, any new propriety as
Redeemer, in Devils or in good Angels: But having an ancient propriety in them
as being their Creator he uses them accordingly for his Redemption ends. 4.
Nor do I find that he has purchased any new proper absolute jus imperii or
Rectorship over them, but only a power of using them for his Church, and for
service about Man he shall send them on. 5. And therefore I say, the Empire of
Christ over Angels is not of the same kind with that which he has over Men,
and which we use in the Argument to prove that he died for Men. if both should
be called by the same title of a novum jus imperii, yet the difference of the
Subjects suffices to show the different Sense of the same attribute as
severally applied: I find not that Christ any where proclaims himself* the King
of Devils or Angels, nor requires them to take him for their King, nor has
made any new Laws to govern them by, as he has done for Men, nor has restored
any forfeited mercy to them, nor offers them pardon of any Sin upon condition
of repentance, nor will judge them on such terms. So that if it should be proved
that the good Angels are part of his Kingdom as Redeemer, yet it would be but
as their confirmer, and not as a Redeemer of them: For he is never offered to
them as a Redeemer, nor did they need any, for ought I know: He took not on him
the nature of Angels, but of the Seed of Abraham. He is Head over all things,
to his Church, Ephesians. 1. 22. That is, He is superior to Angels and all things,
and has the disposal of them for his Churches use, but he is only Head of his
Church de facto as to proper Kingly Rule* and of the rest of the World de jure
who shall suffer as Rebels for not acknowledging his Title, and because they
would not that he should reign over them, Luke 39. 27. But so shall not Bruits
or Devils; So that the Argument will hold good ^ jure novo Dominii and Imperii,
from Christ's new propriety in and Rectorship over Men to his Redeeming them by
his Blood: But so it will not from that kind of Dominion which Christ has over
Bruits, or that kind of Rule that he has over Angels or Devils, to his
Redemption of them; And yet for Bruits, as they suffered for the sake of Man,
and as they shall be restored from their suffering for the use and sake of Man,
so the same Blood which purchased Man's Restoration, did remotely and
collaterally purchase theirs. Let us illustrate all by a similitude, as near
resembling the present case as we can imagine; Suppose when King James Reigned
in England, that Ireland had all fallen into Rebellion, and so open, bloody and
malicious that the King were resolved not a Man of them should be pardoned or
escape: Hereupon in the height of their malice, they entice all Scotland into
Rebellion also: But because they are but deluded into it by the Irish, and not
maliciously bent against him as they, or because being his Countrim^^ he has a
special respect to them, it is concluded betwixt him and his only Son, that his
Son shall pay their ransom, or by some publicly shameful suffering, shall
make that satisfaction to the Law, and that Reparation to the King which may
suffice to deter all others from Rebellion* and openly in his suffering shall
publish* This I (...) willingly for the offense of my Rebellions (...), to
procure them mercy: Hereupon, by agreement, the Prince is to undertake it as
his further business, to use means for the bringing them all back to their
allegiance: To which end the whole Kingdom of Scotland, is given up to him as
King upon his satisfaction and Ramsome, and he is to make a General pardon or
Act of Oblivion to all, so be it they do by such a day come in and lay down
Arms and return to their Allegiance, and acknowledge the Kings Grace, and the
Princes singular favor in Ransoming them, and will take him for their King
upon this Ransom: And for those that will not accept this offer, the Prince is
to subdue them by force and destroy them, that they shall have no benefit of
the Ransom; And for all the Irish which he finds among them, seducing them, he
is to destroy them, or use them to what servitude in the mean time he please:
Also he is to make use of any of the Kings Servants or Subjects of England, to
send on his Message to summon them to come in. Now I demand. 1. Has not the
Prince here Ransomed all the Scots over whom he has his Jus Dominii and
Imperii? That is absolutely all? 2. Does it follow that therefore he has
Ransomed the Irish, because he has power to judge and destroy them, or use them
in servitude? 3. Or does it follow that he has Ransomed the Trees, Beasts, and
Lands of the Country, because he has a propriety in them as the Goods or
Utensils of them whom he Ransomed. 4. Or did he Ransom any of the Kings
Servants or English, because he has power to send them on his message or
command them on his Service into Scotland? If one argue thus with a Scot [the
Prince has a new Title of Dominion and Empire over all you Scotsmen as
ransomer, therefore he ransomed you all] this is no unsound arguing: And would
you confute it b^ saying that [then he ransomed the English and Irish too, yea
the Lands, and Trees, and Beasts] By the Scots I mean, mankind, By the Irish
the Devils, by the Kings Servants, or English, the Angels: And by the Lands,
Trees, etc. I mean all the creatures on Earth as Servants of Man.

A Man would think that those Men that do so vehemently contend that Christ is
the Head of the visible Church, and the King of this visible Kingdom which
comprehends good and bad, should easily yield to this Argument.

If Christ be the Head or King of all the visible Church, and consequently of
more than the Elect, then did he die for the visible Church, and so for more
than the Elect: But the Antecedent is maintained stiffly by themselves, Ergo,
etc.

When they have voluminously pleaded for the Honors and Privileges of the
Church visible, viz. That even the unregenerate part of it are Disciples,
Christians (...), Believers, Adopted, in Covenant, etc. And that Christ is
their Master, King and Head, will they say that yet for all this Christ did not
die for them? Why hereby they incur these intolerable inconveniences. 1. That
such excellent gifts and Gospel Privileges should flow from any other fountain
than the Death of Christ* and that Men should have so great mercies, for whom
he never died (of which before 2. That Christ's Office should be so divided, as
that he should be their King and Head for whom he never died: It is their use
to argue on the Contrary that Christ died not for Men whom he does not
sanctify and save, because the parts of his work are not divided: Though this
be no better arguing then to say, God created no Angel or Man, putting them
under a Covenant, and in a way of Life, but only those that attain to Life
hereby: Yet it is an undeniable consequence on the other side, that Christ died
for Men because they receive such Privileges and benefits and because he is
become their Head or King, even as it follows that God Created Adam to Life by
that Covenant, if he had attained Life thereby.

And it is not inconsiderable how they lay themselves open to the Lashes of one
another by their error in this point; When those that are for Discipline have
pleaded the Jus Divinum of their work, as from Christ as the King or Head of
the Church visible, the Erastians tell them that Christ is not King where he is
not Priest; he is not the King of any but the Elect, or Saints because he died
for none but the Elect, See what Ludovicus Molinaeus (who would unite the
Erastians and Independents against the Presbyterians) says Paraenes. Page 68.
Etenim primum dubitari potest an Christus qua Caput and Rex Electorum seu
Corporis mystici, qualis hic in foro interno describitur, recte statuatur in
alio foro, eoque externo potestatem legislationis and jurisdictionis committere
personis circares and causas, quarum judicium and cognitio, non sub est judicio
and Cognitioni illius, qui sumus est judex in foro externo. This Book is newly
Printed many Years since this Disputation was written, though I here insert
this passage.

Ad hominem, I am sure this Argument is not contemptible: There is no Evasion
but by saying that Christ is not the King or Head of the unregenerate part of
the Church visible, as he is mediator, but purely as God: But that is as
destructive to their cause as if they denied him to be their King at all; For
they will never evince that he takes Men into the Gospel Covenant, and becomes
their King and makes them Saints, Adopted, Christians, Believers, etc. and all
this merely as he is God and not as he is Mediator.

Arg. 18th. A Beneficiis in omnes Collatis, qua satisfactionis sunt effecta.
If Christ give to all Men those mercies which are the effects of his dying for
them, then Christ died (or satisfied) for all Men: But Christ does give to all
Men those mercies which are the effects of his dying for them, Ergo, etc.

The Minor only requires proof, and here I have these three things to prove. 1.
That Christ gives mercies to all. 2. That these mercies are the effects of his
Death and satisfaction. 3. That they are the effects of his Death for those Men
to whom they are given. For I look to meet with three sorts of opposers. 1.
Such as say, wicked Men have no mercy ( viz. The Non-Elect) for all is given
them in judgment and wrath, and shall but aggravate their condemnation. 2. Such
as say, They have mercies, but it is from Gods common providence, and not from
Christ's Blood. 3. Such as say, their mercies are from Christ's Blood, but only
as shed for the Elect, and not for them.

1. For the first, It is so openly blasphemous against God and his providence,
for Men to say, that God is merciful to none but the Elect, that one would
think no Christian should ever own such an Assertion. 1. If none but the Elect
have any mercy from God, then none else are obliged by mercy to repentance: But
the mercies of God lead others to repentance, Romans 2. Even those that by
hardheartedness and impenitency do heap up wrath against the day of wrath and
Revelation of the righteous judgment of God. 2. Else none but the Elect should
be obliged to love and thankfulness for mercy, which is false and wicked. 3.
Else none but the Elect should be guilty of sinning against mercy, or should
need to confess any such Sin, or need pardon of such, or can be accused,
condemned or punished for any such, which are all false. 4. Their own words do
confute themselves, for whereas they say, that Reprobates have no true mercy
because all do but increase their condemnation and misery; It is evident that
if they were not real mercies, no Man's condemnation or punishment could be
aggravated by the abuse or rejecting of mercy, Jo^. 4. 2. God had mercy on more
Ninevites then were Elect, Jon. 3. 10. and 4. 11. Christ himself says God is
kind to the unthankful and the Evil, Luke 6. 35. and commands us to imitate
him in loving our Enemies and being merciful as he is merciful, Psalm. 106. 7.
Psalm. 145. 9. His tender mercies are over all his Works, Act. 14. 17. Mat. 5.
45. 48. Mat. 25. throughout; sure those that deny the Non-Elect to partake of
any mercy on Earth, think it no mercy to be out of Hell, to have Christ and
pardon and glory given them, on condition of acceptance, they would hardly
yield then that God is merciful to the very damned in Hell, and yet our own
Divines and Papists say it is past doubt. See Ursin Catech. Page 68. Edit.
Parai posthum. and Robert. Baronius disput. de peccat Mortali and Veniali Page
75. Aquin. 1. q. 32. a. 4. c. and 1. and 1. q. 21: a. 4. 1. Scot. in 4. did.
46. Page (mihi) 250. etc. Bradwardin, de causa Dei lib. 1. Cap. 34. So Cajetan,
Lorinus, Paes, Feuerdentius Salmeron, Genebrard, etc. (I say as Jac. Laurentius
in Jac. 2. 12.) And our most judicious British Divines in the Synod of Dor^ do
well conclude, that Gods mercies must not be denied or accounted less because
wicked Men yet perish through their abuse of them.

2. And that these mercies are the effects of Christ's Blood and satisfaction,
is proved thus. 1. Of some of them it is expressly affirmed, Heb. 10. 29. [hath
counted the Blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified an Unholy thing]
2. God cannot according to the tenor of the Covenant of Works ( voluntate
saltem ordinata) give Men so much mercy as they all receive: For that Covenant
curses them, and sentenceth them to Death, and leaves no proper mercy, at
least none that has a conducibility to repentance and recovery: Dare any Man
think that all the mercies temporal, and the offers of Christ and Grace, and
the Word and other means, and the common gifts of the Spirit, and the
conditional pardon of the Non-Elect, and the patience, and long-suffering of
God inviting and beseeching them to be reconciled to him, promising them Life
and Glory if they will believe, that all these are given according to the Law
of Works? If not, then it must be according to the Law of Grace and the New
Covenant, or according to no Law* If the former, then none will question, I
think* but it must come from Christ's Blood: For the New Law and Testament is
founded in his Blood, and Sealed by it: If the later, then at least the Law of
Works must be first relaxed, and they so far pardoned, seeing according to that
Law they should have lived, not among these mercies, but in misery: And
Scripture assures us, that it was the Blood of Christ that delivered us from
the Curse of the Law, and that on the Cross he took down the hand writing that
was against us, etc. And without his suffering there is no Relaxation of the
Laws obligation. They that set open so wide a door of mercy to all the World
beside Jesus Christ, do not lightly wrong him and do dangerously deceive
themselves and others: I am sure Christ will expect repentance, thanks and
obedience for these mercies, and condemn Men for not improving these Talents
which he committed to them; however Men may now tell Sinners that all comes but
from common providence and not by the Blood of Christ. 3. Yea, that which they
call common providence is the disposal of things by the Redeemer: For all
things are delivered to him of the Father, and all power given him and to that
end he died, rose and revived that he might be Lord of the Dead and Living: And
therefore if Men have any mercy now, it must come through the Redeemers Hands,
and consequently is a fruit of his Blood. But this will yet further be proved
in the next which is.

3. That it is Christ's dying for those same persons to whom he gives these
mercies, that is the ground of them: And this further is proved thus. 1. Some
of the mercies given are such as could no other way be procured and given, as
is ordinarily granted: Such as are, the Universal Remission, Justification,
Adoption, and gift of Christ himself on condition that Men will accept them;
Christ given as Redeemer supposes his Redemption as to paying of the price to
be past; Without Blood there is no Remission neither conditional not absolute
(as is proved in the first Argument:) But a conditional Remission to all, is
given in the New Testament, Ergo, etc. The Remission also of their punishment
for the time of this Life, or at least of so much of it, is actual (though not
plenary) Remission, and wicked Men partake of that; Of one of these two Christ's
speaks in the parable of the ungrateful unmerciful Servant, Mat. 18. 27. 32.
35. [ The Lord of that Servant was moved with compassion, and loosed him, and
forgave him the debt, etc. His Lord said, O thou wicked Servant, I forgave thee
all that debt, etc. So likewise shall my Heavenly Father do also by you, if ye
from your Hearts forgive not every one his Brother their Trespasses.] But of
this Text more hereafter. So that God does remit to the Non-Elect most of the
temporal punishment of their Sin actually, and all the Eternal punishment
conditionally. That he remitteth the temporal punishment, is further proved,
Psalm. 78. 38. [ But he being full of compassion for gave their iniquity and
destroyed them not: Yea many a time turned he his anger away and did not stir
up all his wrath] He that reads out the rest of the Psalm will not believe that
all these dissembling Israelites were Elect. So for the legal forgiveness of
Sin upon the use of Ceremonies, See Lev. 4. 26, 31, 35. and 5. 10, 13, 16, 18.
and 6. 7, and 19, 22. Numb. 15. 25, 26, 28. It shall be forgiven all the
Congregation of the Children of Israel, and the Stranger that sojourneth among
them, seeing all the People were in ignorance] but all Israel were not Elect,
Numb. 14. 19. Pardon I beseech thee the iniquity of this People, according to
the greatness of thy mercy, and as thou have forgiven this People, from Egypt,
even until now. 20. And the Lord said I have pardoned according to thy Word,
Dev. 21. 8. Psalm. 85. 2. Isa. 40. 2. So the Example of Ahab, the Ninevites,
etc. Show clearly: For that which God did in mercy in respect to their
humiliation, was some kind of Remission. 2. And further I prove it as by these
express Texts of Scripture, so by this Scripture reason: Either God remitteth
much of the temporal punishment, or else he shows them no mercy: (And
consequently they are not beholden to him, nor owe him any thanks) but God does
show them mercy, Ergo, etc. He that remitteth none of the punishment due,
shows no mercy, in this case: And he that shows mercy remitteth part of the
punishment, for it was part of the punishment to be deprived of the mercies
which wicked Men enjoy: Who dare once imagine, that Health, Strength, Friends,
Liberty, Peace, Riches, Honor, Food, Raiment, Houses, Accommodations, Cattle,
all Creatnres to serve us, Public Peace, Sun, Rain, Fruits of the Earth,
prospering of our Labors, etc. Knowledge, Parts, Motions of the Spirit,
excellent means, and offers of Grace, Godly society and Examples, Admonitions,
Taste of the good word of God and the powers of the World co come, Illumination,
Partaking of the Holy Ghost, working Miracles, casting out Devils, hearing the
word with joy, believing for a time, clean escaping the pollutions of the World
by the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to be sanctified with the
blood of the Covenant, to be loved of Christ (as the man was Mar. 10. 21.) to
have the easiest place in Hell, etc. who dare say that none of all these are
Mercies? Or that the enjoyment of these may stand with the full execution of
the sentence of the Law? If the Curse lay in the deprivation of these, then the
enjoyment of them is a remission of that curse or Penalty: But etc. Ergo, etc.
read Deuteronomy. 28.

Now that this Remission is granted to none, but by virtue of Christ's dying for
him, I will now but refer you to the whole multitude of Reformed Divines, in
their Writings against the Papists about Purgatory, Indulgences, and Humane
Satisfactions, where they argue with greatest Zeal, and many Arguments, that
temporal punishments are remitted only for Christ's Satisfaction: even the same
men that deny Universal Satisfaction; not remembering how this overthrows
their own cause. The reason, I conceive, is, that here the evidence of truth
constrains them; but in the denial of Universal Redemption, they constrain
themselves to it, merely because they have not found out the way of reconciling
Universal Satisfaction, with Special Predestination, and therefore think they
are necessitated to deny the former (though against the clear light of many
express Texts of Scripture) for fear of contradicting the later.

1. Amesius says, Bellarm. Enervat. To. 2. li. 5. c. 2. p. (mihi) 158.
Christus per spiritum suum nihil in nobis operatur, nisi virtute satisfactionis
plenae Deo anteapro nobis presentatae. Neque quidquam per nos facit, quod
ipsemet antea satis and perfect fecit. 3. Per Causas secundas Deus non
operatur Creationem ex nihilo: sed Satisfactio and Redemptio eundem locum
habent in ordine Gratiae quem Creatio habet in ordine naturae (and p. 172. Deus
aliquando parcit iis quibus non est proprie reconciliatus, etc.)

2. Sadeel is full this way, Adversus humanas Satisfactiones, p 211. he says,
[ Aut Christus merito mortis suae delet culpam peccatorum venialium ( ut
vocant) aut non delet; Si dicant, non delere: Ergo Christus non pro omnibus
peccatis mortuus est, sed tantum pro mortalibus. O blasphemos homines si quidem
id dixerint! and quid est aliud delere ac remittere culpam ejus peccati, quod
ex ipsorum sententia poenas temporales promeretur, quam nullas exigere poenas
temporales propter illud peccatum promeritas. Nesciunt profecto isti homines
quid sit peccati culpa, nec advertunt poenam peccati non posse definiri absque
mentione culpae. (So that sin it self may be said so far to be pardoned, as the
punishment is remitted: and therefore he says it was only the punishment and
not the fault that Christ bore) p. 215. At quomodo Christus satisfecit Deo pro
peccatis nostris, An non id factum est quia Christus peccatorum nostrorum, non
culpam pertulit sed poenam. Sic. p. 228. Nam Chrisius ( ut nostram non nostris,
sed Augustini verbis explicemus sententiam) suscipiendo poenam and non
suscipiendo culpam, and culpam delevit and poenam.]

3. So Chamier at large, shows that it is only through Christ's Satisfaction
that fault or punishment is remitted, and that God cannot remit without
satisfaction, Tom. 3. l. 23. c. 2. 22. Itaque in genere concedo, non posse Deum
impunita peccata dimittere, id est, nisi puniantur vel in peccatore vel in
Mediatore: (of which Voetius in his Thesis is full) and 31. Nihil ergo rectius
quam luisse pro nobis Christum poenas: number aliquas tantum, an vero omnes? etc.
si non luisset omnes, neminem liberant ab omnibus. So that he takes the
argument to be good a liberatione ad solutionem per Christum, and 27. Remissio
opponitur exactioni poenarum. Now I have proved that God remitteth much
punishment to wicked men not Elect: yea even in Scripture phrase, the remitting
of that punishment is called, the Remission of their sin, as is showed before,
and lest any should say, it is but a delay of their punishment till the Life to
come: I answer, 1. Is not punishment due to them both in this Life and that to
come? And therefore to remit one is true remission. 2. No Scripture intimates
that God will lay so much the more on them in Hell, merely because he punished
them not more on Earth, but for their abuse of Mercy on Earth. 3. Does not
Christ himself expressly speak of not forgiving sin in this life or that to
come? 4. Many have so much remission here, as tends to the great abatement of
their everlasting torments: for Christ gives them that freedom from
temptations, and such means, and common Grace, as brings them to be almost
Christians, and almost Saved, and such as the man whom he is said to have
loved, and said to him, thou art not far from the Kingdom of God. Whereas
doubtless the rigorous execution of the Curse of the Law requires that men be
wholly forsaken of God, as to any such Grace or Mercy, and consequently given
up to the prevalency of their own Lusts.

And it is a doubt whether they that make all this Remission and Mercy to the
Non-Elect, to befall them without the satisfaction of Christ, do not wrong
Christ somewhat more than the Papists themselves (who in their vile Doctrine of
Satisfaction and Indulgence) do ascribe all to Christ radically and remotely,
and to man directly; saying that for temporal punishments Christ satisfies in
and by man, to whom he has procured that power by his own immediate
satisfaction. These give Christ some part of the honor, but the other none at
all.

And that a conditional remission of the eternal punishment is given in the
Gospel to the Non-Elect, under Gods hand, is so plain, that he that knows it
not, knows not the plain tenor of the Gospel.

Besides, if it be said that all this can be given to the Non-Elect without
Christ's satisfying for them, then it would follow that it may be given to the
Elect also without Christ's satisfying for them, but all our Divines call that
Impious and blasphemous (in their disputes against Purgatory, Indulgences, and
humane Satisfactions.) Nay mark well, that the same conditional deed of Gift of
Christ and his Benefits, which is uneffectual to Unbelievers, because they
perform not the condition, is the same that becomes effectual to the
Justification and Adoption of Believers, and that without any new additional
real act of God.

Lastly, Satisfaction for one man will not serve to the remitting of any part
of the Debt of another; so that I may conclude that Christ satisfied for All,
seeing all receive the fruits of that satisfaction. The effects cannot be
without their cause.

Arg. 19. A comparatione Legis Gratiae cum Lege operum.
If Christ Died not for all (to whom the Gospel comes) then the Law of Grace
does contain far harder terms than the Law of Works. But the consequent is
false, therefore so is the Antecedent.

The Consequence of the Major Proposition I prove thus: The Law of Works, as
given to man in Innocence, required nothing that was Impossible for man in that
state to do: But (if Christ satisfied not for all) the Law of Grace should
require Impossibilities, and condemn men for want of them, and so should
contain much harder terms than the Law of Works; Yea the Law of Works as given
to fallen man (if so it were) contained nothing contradictory, and so
impossible in it self, though man through sin was disabled to perform it: But
the Law of Grace, should, if this Doctrine opposed were true. If the Law of
Grace require men to take him for their Redeemer, and rest on him as their
Redeemer, that never redeemed them, it should contain a contradiction. If
according to this Law, men must be everlastingly condemned because they did not
receive him as their Lord-Redeemer, that never paid for them any price of
Redemption; and because they did not receive and apply to themselves the
effects and benefits of a satisfaction, which was never made for them* and so
could not possibly be a cause of such effects* and because they did not rest on
Christ to Justify and Save them by his Blood which was never shed for them;
these are impossibilities, and far harder terms than those of the Law of Works.
Yea, if when man is already condemned, the Law of Grace say, that he shall
undergo a far sorer punishment, and it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah
in the day of Judgment than him, except he will do these impossibilities, this
is still harder. It is not all the believing in the World (supposing it were
performed) that would make Christ's Death, which is past, to be suffered for
those that it was not suffered for. This makes Christ to come into the World to
condemn the World, and that to a far sorer punishment than the Law of Works did
oblige them to, without procuring them any possibility of escaping; For there is
no possibility of that man's escape, for whom no price of Redemption is paid.
Nay it lays an absolute necessity ab extra, and unavoidable, on men of
perishing under this double damnation. For he that before I am born makes a
Law, that I shall dye except I have part in a payment that was made 1000 years
ago and that only for others and not at all for me, he does necessitate my
Death by that Law: For it is impossible that I should ever have part in it, if
it were not paid for me. Now I know our Divines speak of Gods necessitating
man's Damnation by Foreknowledge and Decree, which they call only Necessitas
Antecedentis, non Causae: But who ever affirmed that Christ in giving the New
Law [ He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be
damned] did necessitate and that Causally, and that Antecedenter ad Culpam, the
far greater damnation of miserable wretches that were condemned already.

And that the Gospel is not so much harder than the Law I prove: Mat. 11. 27,
28, 30. My Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light, Heb. 8. 6. Jesus is the
Mediator of a better Covenant stablished on better promises [ Heb. 7. 22. And
the Author of a better Testament] Romans 5. 14, 15, 20. Where sin abounded, Grace
much more abounded, John 3. 16. God so loved the World, that he gave, etc. Ephesians.
3. 19, 20. Heb. 11. 40. His service is a reasonable service: His Commandments
are not grievous: His tender mercy is over all his Works. He is kind to the
unthankful and unjust. His mercies lead men to Repentance: He delights not in
the death of him that dies but rather that he Repent and Live: He calls all
men every where to repent and seek after God: All the day long does he stretch
out his hand to a froward and gainsaying generation: He deals not with us
after our sins: He inviteth the Non Elect to the Wedding Feast and tells them
that all things are ready: and some of them he compels to come in: as he did
him that had not on the Wedding Garment: he charge his Messengers to beseech
men in his stead to be reconciled unto God: He would gather under his Wings
even as a Hen gathers her Chickens, those that Will not be gathered. All
these with a multitude the like, are the Scripture expressions, of Gods gentle
and merciful dealing with men under the Law of Grace. And so much of the
execution as we see is answerable. He offers mercy to all in the Church: and
confers much Mercy on every man in the World; He deals with no man according
to the strict rigor of the unremedied Curse of the Law of Works. Abuse of the
Talents of undeserved Mercy, is the thing that men must be condemned and perish
for. No one sinner on Earth is excepted or excluded by him out of his Offer and
Promise of Mercy, so be it, they will themselves consent, whoever Will may have
the Living Waters freely, without Money and without Price: and if their sins be
as red as Scarlet, he offers to make them as white as Snow; and to cast them
all behind his back, and bury them in the depths of the Sea: He calls to them,
return; why will ye dye? How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity! and
ye scorners delight in scorning and fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my
reproof, behold I will pour out my spirit unto you; I will make known my words
unto you, Prove. 1. 22, 23. He has received Gifts for men, even for the
Rebellious that the Lord may dwell among them God has sent his Son Jesus to
you (says the Apostle Act. 3. last) to bless you, in turning every one of you
from his iniquities. And when men will not hear, he says, O that my People had
hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my mays, Psalm. 81. 13. O that there
were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my
commandments always, that it might be well with them, and their Children for
ever. Deuteronomy. 5. 29.

Can any man then believe that the tenor of the new Law or Covenant, is so
much harder than ever was the Law of Works, as is before expressed? As for them
that say, the New Covenant is no Law, and Wicked men or the Non-Elect are not
under it, they manifest so great ignorance, and go against so full light of
express Scripture, that I think them not worthy a confutation: Only I would
have the Lutheran Divines remember, that near to the Apostles times, it was not
only an unquestioned truth, but also was part of the Christian Creed, [
Christum predicasse Novam legem, and novam promissionem Regni Caelorum]
Tertullian. de Prescription cap.

Arg. 20. A Legis Mosaicae Abrogatione.
If all men (that were any way under it) are freed by the blood of Christ, from
the Bondage of the Mosaical Law of Ceremonies, then Christ died for All such,
(and consequently not only for the Elect:) But the Antecedent is certain. Ergo,
etc.

Some Divines say, that All the World were thus far subject to the Jewish Law,
that they could not be saved without knowing it, and submitting to it in
obedience, because God had then no other Church nor stablished way of Worship.
If this be true, then all the World has a deliverance in the Abrogation of
that Law. Others say, that it obliged only the Jews and Proselites; and that
others at the remotest distance should not have been obliged by that Law, if
they had known it. If that be so, then it was only the Jews and Proselytes
(such as had opportunity to incorporate with them, or join to them) that had
this deliverence. However, it is evident it was to all the Jews, and so to more
than the Elect: and then almost all the Arguments against Universal
Satisfaction are hereby overthrown, for they are built on this, that Christ
died only for the Elect.

Here I must prove, 1. That Moses Ceremonial Law is abrogate. 2. That it was
done by the shedding of Christ's Blood for those that were under it. 3. That it
is abrogated to All.

1. And for the first, it is so generally acknowledged, and the Scripture so
express in it, (specially Act. 15. and all the Epistle to the Galatians) that I
may spare that labor, only some doubt whether the Moral Law as part of Moses
Law be abrogate. But as long as we acknowledge. 1. That the same Moral Law
stands as it was part of Christ's New Law (which most confess) 2. And also as
part of the Law of Works or Nature given to Adam (as most think) we need not
much matter the former; Though I think that all Moses Law is Abrogated. 1.
Because the Matter cannot stand as part of that Law when the Form cease (for
with the form, the essence and name is gone) and most (if not all) confess that
the form of Moses Law (as it is specifically distinct from the Law of Grace) is
abrogated. 2. The Apostle expressly says (2 Cor. 3. 7, 11.) that [The
Ministration of death, written and engraven in Stones, was glorious (and that
was only the Decalogue) so that the Children of Israel could not steadfastly
behold the Face of Moses, for the glory of his Countenance, which was to be
done away. For if that which is done away was glorious, much more that which
remains is glorious] some say, it was the Glory and not the Law that was done
away, but it was not the glorious which ver. 11. is called glorious, but the
Law, from the manner of delivery, and therefore it was not the Glory only, but
the Law that is done away.

Obj. But it was only the manner of delivery then that is done away, and not
the Law.

Answ. That was a transient act, and ceased at the time, and was not done away
by Christ. The Moral Law therefore as part of Moses Law is abrogated, because
it is impossible the matter should remain without the Form, as part of that
Compositum. But the same Moral Law is in force as much as ever, as it is the
matter of another Compositum, viz. the Law of Christ proper to the Gospel
times. The Law is in force still quae fuit materia Legis Mosaicae; sed non qua
materia Legis Mosaicae. But for this, if any think otherwise, I will not
contend with them. It suffices to my present purpose that it is granted that
the Law of Ceremonies is abrogated. And that this Law was a burden and bondage
is plain; even such as the Church was not able to bear, Act. 15. 10. see Gal.
3. 23. and 21. and 4. 21. and 5. 3. etc.

2. And that it was Christ's dying for men, that freed them from the Law, is
proved Gal. 4. 3, 4, 5. When we were Children we were in bondage under the
Elements of the World, but when the fullness of the time was come, God sent his
Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, to Redeem them that were under the
Law etc. Gal. 3. 13. Christ has Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being
made a Curse for us, Col. 2. 14. Blotting out the hand writing of Ordinances
which was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way,
nailing it to his Cross, see ver. 20, 21. Ephesians. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16. But now in
Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were afar off, are made nigh by the blood of
Christ, for he is our peace who has made both one, and has broken down the
middle Wall of Partition between us: having abolished in his Flesh the enmity,
even the Law of Commandments, contained in Ordinances, for to make in himself
of twain one new man, so making Peace. And that he might reconcile both unto
God in one Body, by the Cross, having slain the Enmity thereby.

3. And for the 3d. point that Christ has abrogated Moses Law to all, Elect
and Non-Elect without difference, is evident, in that all are forbidden to keep
it: And that which is abrogated is abrogate to all, because the Word signifies
the total nulling of it, and destroying of its Essence, and that which is not,
does not bind. 1. Else the Non-Elect Jews (at least) should still be bound to
offer all the Sacrifices, and use all the Ceremonies prescribed by the Law: But
I never yet heard or read any Divine Preaching such Doctrine, and I hope never
shall do. He that reads, Act. 15. and the Epist. to the Gal. and Heb. sure will
not believe it to be true Doctrine, if he understand what he reads. 2. Nay the
very curse is so far taken away for all, that it now lies not on them as the
unremedied curse of the Law, but is put into the power of the Lord-Redeemer,
who has by the tenor of his Testament or New Law, taken it away from all Men,
on condition they will accept him: And this may be said also of the Law of
Works as given to Adam; So that he that says, Christ died only for the Elect,
must needs say, ( I think, if he will not contradict himself) that all the Non
Elect must turn Jews, and be circumcised, and keep all the Law of Moses: And
consequently that all the Elect themselves must do so, till God assure them
that they are Elect and so that Christ died for them, Because they cannot avoid
the duty upon a ground that is wholly to them unknown.

Arg. 21. Ab officio praedicantium Doctrinam Evangelii.
If the whole or main work of the Preachers of the Gospel do suppose Christ's
Universal satisfaction as its ground, then Christ has satisfied for all: But
the Antecedent is true, therefore so is the consequent.

It is only the Antecedent of the Major proposition that requires proof. To
which end let us enumerate the parts of the Work of Preaching: And the
enumeration is to be taken from the enumeration of the parts of the New Law,
for that is the subject which we must preach of: Now the Law, is, first a
Declaration of the Occasion, or Narration of the matter of Fact, as an
Introduction to the more essential parts. 2. Those parts themselves which are
1. The precept constituting duty: To which I join the prohibition, as one part
of it, being but preceptum de non agendo. 2. The constitution of the debitum
premii vel beneficii. 1. By an absolute promise. 2. By a conditional promise or
gift. 3. The constitution of the condition as such. 4. The constitution of the
debitum Poenae, by the threatening. This much quoad materiam. And then quoad
finem, the Preacher must manage all these. 1. To the glorifying of God for the
great work of Redemption. 2. For the winning of Souls to Christ, and confirming
them in the Faith: This is the Ministerial Work.

Now. 1. For the Narration or Declarative part of the Gospel, which is matter
of Assent; I have already showed that if his Universal satisfaction be not
declared, the main part is left out, that should honor the Redeemer; and there
is nothing declared that can groundedly encourage a Sinner to believe, and rest
on Christ as a sufficient Savior. 2. The precept is, that Men believe in
Christ and rest on him as their Redeemer, for justification by his Blood: And
the contrary unbelief and distrust is forbidden. Now what ground can a Minister
have to press all Men to believe in Christ as their Redeemer, when they know he
redeemed but the smallest part? Or to charge them to rest on his Blood for
Remission, when he knows it was shed for the smaller number, and will profit
none but those whom it was shed for? Yea how can he urge any to rest on Christ
at all? For till they know they are Elect, they know not that Christ died for
them (according to the opposed Doctrine: And till they know that Christ died for
them, they cannot rest on him as their Redeemer, nor on his Blood as sufficient
to procure their pardon, seeing (as is confessed) it is but materially and not
formally sufficient, to pardon them if they should believe. And they cannot
know that they are Elect or that Christ died for them, till they rest on him:
And therefore I see not how any Minister can press Men groundedly to rest on
Christ, by a justifying Faith, or to accept him as their Lord-Redeemer. And
then for the duties of repentance, Love and Thankfulness to Christ for
redeeming them, I have showed before how this Doctrine evacuates them all, and
so that no Minister can groundedly press them. 3. And for the promise, how can
any Minister in Christ's Name assure a sinner of pardon by that Blood which was
never shed for him, on condition he will believe. As if you should say to a
Debtor, believe that such a Man has paid thy debt or trust him, and then thy
debt shall be discharged, when you know he has not paid it, or know not that
he has? Indeed a Man may come off with some kind of truth in his words, if he
certainly know that the Party will not believe. But the certain knowledge that
Men will not believe, is not the reason why God calls them to believe, and
offers them Christ and Life. 4. And for the threatening, with what Heart can a
Minister tell Sinners, [Christ is a Redeemer but to the Elect, yet all the rest
of you shall perish for not taking him for your Redeemer, and for not resting
on that Blood that was never shed for you.] And that as to the ends of
preaching. 1. How will the divulging of these, glorify God? When he has
purposely designed the glorifying of Love and Mercy directly, and justice
accidentally, by this great work of the Redemption of the World; and has
unhinged the Sabbath which was for Commemoration of the work of Creation, to
the first day of the Week for the Commemoration of the Work of Redemption,
which he will now have admired as his most glorious work, which (as Ames. in
the place cited in Argument 18. says) is to the works of Grace the same that
Creation is to the works of Nature, and so is the ground of Gods New Right of
Dominion and Empire, and of his governing and judging the World: And how is
this glory eclipsed by the opposed Doctrine? 2. And for Man's Convesiron to the
Faith, I have showed how unfurnished a Minister is, rightly to endeavor it on
the opposed grounds. Whereto let me add this: The Soul is never closed to
Christ sincerely, till it close in Love: (Love ^eing, as all Divines say, at
the same moment of time as Faith, produced: And as Maccovius before-cited truly
says (and so does Chamier and many more) Love to the Redeemer the object of
Faith, is of the Essence of justifying Faith it self.) Now it is Love that must
cause Love, I mean objectively, and not only efficienter. He cannot close in
Love with Christ that knows nothing of Christ's Love to him, though he know it
to others, (so near is Man to himself; and Christ is to be received as my
Redeemer, and not only as another Man's.) Now no Man can know that Christ loves
him with a special love, before he know that he himself loves Christ (that is
past question.) And yet no Man can soundly love Christ as Redeemer, that knows
not Christ's love to him: What remains therefore but that it must be Christ's
common love in redeeming the World, and making the conditional gift of pardon
and Life, and this offered to me in particular among others, that must first
cause my grounded love to Christ. Let us see what Scripture says of the ground
of Ministerial duties, Math. 22. The work of the Ministers was to invite the
Guests, and compel them to come in: And the ground was, all things are ready:
Else might not the Guests have said. [If we should come, there is nothing for
us, we may go as we come You do but take this advantage to jeer us, because you
know our minds that we will not come] 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20. The work of
Preachers is, the Ministry of teconciliation: And wherein lies it? verse. 20.
Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we
pray you in Christ's stead, be ye Reconciled to God, so then the work of the
Ministry is, to beseech Men in Christ's stead and Gods name to be reconciled to
God. But on what ground is this? verse 19, 21. To wit, that God was in Christ
reconciling the World unto himself not imputing their Trespasses to them, and
has committed to us the word of Reconciliation (which Text we shall afterward
further explain and vindicate.) Is there not an absolute necessity that the
price of Reconciliation be first paid to God and accepted by him, before any
Sinner can be entreated to be reconciled to God on the ground of that price
paid and accepted? Let me desire Ministers seriously to consider, with what
Face they can stand up in the name of the Lord Jesus to beseech poor Sinners to
be reconciled to God, and tell them that else they shall be doubly miserable,
when yet there is no price paid for making them way to God, nor Gods justice
satisfied for their Sin, which is supposed before any of their own endeavors
can do any thing toward Reconciliation. Let me imagine such a Dialogue as this
between such a Teacher and a Sinner?

Minister, Sinner I beseech thee in Christ's stead be reconciled to God.

Sinner, I have Sinned so much that he will not be reconciled to me: All that I
can do, will do nothing to bring me again into his favor.

Min. Christ has satisfied for all the Elect.

Sinner. But what is that to me, unless I knew my self to be Elect.

M. But Christ has satisfied for all if they will believe?

Sinner, Did you not tell me he satisfied only for the Elect, and that
determined by name? Either he has satisfied for me before I believe or not? if
not my believing will not satisfy, nor cause him to do it now. If he have, how
shall I know it?

Min. You must believe first, and then you shall know it afterward: For God
has ordained inseparable connection between Christ's dying for Men, and their
believing: And therefore for all my beseeching you to believe, if you be not
one that Christ died for, you neither will nor can believe, for none is able
but those for whom he purchased it: But if you can believe it will be a sign to
you ab effectu that Christ died for you.

Sinner, Alas! Then all that are not redeemed (and I, if I be one of them) are
far worse then hopeless and remediless: For they have neither any price paid
for them, nor any one has redeemed them, nor are they able, nor can be able to
believe, and yet their torment must be multiplied for ever because they did not
believe, and take him for their redeemer that never paid one farthing of their
debt: But what is it that you would have me believe?

Min. That Christ has died for all that will believe.

Sinner. Will that justify? When the Devils believe that.

Min. That Christ's Death is sufficient to pardon all, if they would believe.

Sinner. Then I should believe an untruth, for ^is all should believe, it is
not sufficient to pardon them, because it was not suffered for them. Besides*
the Devils do believe the sufficiency of Christ's Death, as far as it is true.

Min. But they believe not that it is sufficient for themselves.

Sinner. Nor can I, except I knew that it was suffered for me.

Min. But you must rest on Christ as a sufficient Redeemer, and then by
reflecting on that Act you may know as by a certain sign that he redeemed you.

Sinner. Then I must believe a Proposition of uncertain truth, that I may know
it to be true, and rest on an uncertain ground of trust, that I may have a Sign
of its certainty: And so my first faith must be groundless and uncertain. But,
as it is not in my power of my self to believe, so I have long been
endeavoring to believe and trying my Faith, and though I find I have some
Faith (and so had many that perish) yet I cannot find whether it be sincere and
saving: And I know many (yea most that seem godly) that never are sure all
their life time, that their Faith is that which is justifying and proper to the
Elect, and more then the unrooted Faith of temperaries: How shall I then, or
any that are uncertain of the truth of their Faith, know that Christ died for
them?

Min. You must labor for assurance of the Truth of your Faith, that you may
know that Christ died for you.

Sinner. I no where find the Scripture using that motive to persuade Men to
believe, or to get assurance: But what must I do in the mean time? and all such
as I that never come to assurance?

Min. Adhere to Christ as thy Redeemer, sufficient and willing to save.

Sinner. But I have no knowledge whether he be either my Redeemer, or
sufficient, or willing? And must I still continue that groundless Act? and that
merely to get a Sign, when yet it will be no sign till I attain assurance of
the truth of my Faith* And must I never love Christ as my Redeemer* nor be
thankful to him, nor praise him for it* till I have assurance? Respondeat qui
potest.

Arg. 22. A differenti statu h^minum non-electorum, and Daemonum.
If Christ died only for the Elect. then all the rest have no more remedy
provided for their misery then the Devils (nor are in any more capacity or
possibility of Salvation) But the Consequent is false, therefore so is the
Antecedent.

Only the Minor requires proof, for the consequence of the Major is evident:
For he that has no expiatory Sacrifice or satisfaction made for his Sin, is
left utterly remediless: To say, he is not remediless, because Christ is
offered him, is but to deride him, while they say withal, that he is offered
only an interest in the satisfaction that was never made for him, that so by
not believing as by a sign he might manifest that it was not made for him, and
so that Christ did not purchase him Faith; And can the Devils be left worse
then remediless.

Now that Christ has not left the Non-Elect as remediless as the Devils
appears. 1. Christ speaks of his coming into the World and executing his
office, as having such ends to all Men, as they had not to the Devils, as he
was the 2d. Adam, and took on him our nature and not the nature of Angels; so
he never says that he came into the World to save Devils, but he says that he
came into the World, not to judge the World but to save the World, of whom he
expresses unbelievers to be part Joh. 12. 47. 48. And God sent his Son into
the World not to judge the World, but that the World by him might be saved: Even
that World which in the next verse is distinguished into believers and
unbelievers, Joh. 3. 16, 17, 18. It is never said that God sent his Jesus to
bless the Devils in turning every one of them from their iniquities: But it is
said so of every one of the Jews (Elect or not) to whom the Apostle spoke Act 3
last, unbelievers perish not for want of an expiatory Sacrifice, but for
rejecting it, not for want of a Jesus, but for want of Faith: But it cannot be
said so of the Devils, God sends Men in his stead to beseech unbelievers to
be reconciled to God (upon supposition of the payment of the price of
Reconciliation by Christ to the Father:) But he does not so to the Devils. All
say Christ's Death is sufficient to pardon all Men if they will believe ( Ames.
cont. Bel^ar. says we never doubted of it: Sadeel cont. human. satisfact.
says, let him be blotted out from among the number of Christians that denies
it.) But I know none that dare say ^o of the Devils. To unbelievers is given
Christ himself and all his benefits, by Gods Act and Deed on condition they
will receive him: But who can show such a deed of gift to the Devils? Giving
Christ (though but on condition of acceptance to any one,) implies and
presupposes, giving him on the Cross for them. God entreats wicked Men daily
to accept of Christ that they may live, but he never did so by the Devils. The
Spirit of Christ convinces and soliciteth some of the Non-elect to believe,
and striveth with them till they grieve and quench it: But so he does not by
the Devils. All Men in the Church Elect and Non-Elect are called on to take
heed lest a promise being left them of entering into rest, any of them should
prove to come short of it through unbelief Heb. 4. 1. The wicked are condemned
and everlastingly punished, for refusing a Redeemer, and not coming in to the
^east when all things were ready, and for neglecting so great Salvation, and
treading under Foot the Blood of the Covenant, and because they would not have
Christ to Reign over them; But it is far otherwise with the Devils, the wicked
will be left unexcusable at the Redeemers Bar, when they are judged according
to the New Law for refusing Christ that bought them: But the Devils would have
excuse enough if they were judged on those Terms. So that I may well conclude,
that the Doctrine is not sound which makes Christ to have died no more to
expiate the Sins of the Non-Elect, then of the Devils but left them equally
remediless: But such is the Doctrine now opposed, Ergo, etc.

Argum. 23d. A statu hominum saltem non pejore statu Daemonum.
If Christ Died not for all, (that hear the Gospel) then Gods dealing with the
Non-elect part of fallen Man is much harder than his dealing with the Devils,
but the Consequent is false, therefore so is the Antecedent.

The Minor I think I need not prove, all acknowledge it that ever I heard or
read, on this subject: If they should think that God dealt alike with the
Non-elect and the Devils, yet sure none will say that he deals far hardlier
with the Non-elect: Hell is prepared for the Devil and his Angels, they are
reserved in Chains of Darkness to the Judgment of the great Day; till then they
believe and tremble, and look for the time of their full torment without any
hope of escape: Compare with this, but what I have before proved to be Gods
dealing with men, even them that perish, and you will see that their case is
not worse than the Devils.

And for the Consequence of the Major Proposition, I prove it thus; by
comparing both together. When the Devils had fallen from their first estate,
God leaves them without remedy or hope of recovery. But when man is fallen,
(according to the Doctrine which I oppose) God does not only leave him
remediless but also makes a new Law that shall oblige him to suffer a far sorer
punishment, except he will believe in a Redeemer that is not his Redeemer, and
trust for salvation to that Blood that was never shed for him, and accept the
benefits of a satisfaction that was never made for him, even effects without a
cause: Yea and causes his Son to make a satisfaction materially sufficient for
the sins of all; and yet had rather it were superfluous and vain, and merely
lost, then that it should be paid for him: As if he would rather when three Men
owe 100 l. a piece, pay 300 l. for one of the three, than the other 200 l.
should be tendered for the rest; And when he knows that Christ never satisfied
for any of the Non-elect, yet does he follow them with daily solicitations by
his Word, Spirit and Ambassadors, beseeching them to come in and accept of
Christ, ordaining and resolving that all these beseechings, shall harden them,
or at least aggravate their sin and and misery, that it may be easier with
Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment than with them that refuse these
Offers. And thus Christ shall necessitate them causally by his Law to a far
greater torment, as if their misery were not sad enough before without
procuring them any possibility of escape, (for there is no such possibility
without satisfaction to God's justice,) If God should make a Law, that the
Devils who are miserable already, should have ^ar sorer punishment if they
would not believe in Christ as their Redeemer who never redeemed them, would
not this be harder dealing than now God uses toward them? when all the offer
is on supposition that they cannot and therefore will not believe, and if it
were possible to believe it would do them no good. If then this would be harder
dealing with them, than those are hardlier used than the Devils with whom God
so deals, and therefore he deals so with none.

Arg. 24. A benefica Natura Evangelii.
If Christ died only for the Elect, then should the Gospel to most men where it
comes be of it self directly one of the greatest plagues and signs of God's
wrath that ever he sends on a People on earth, but the Gospel is no such
Curse, but a great blessing, Ergo, etc.

The Consequence is thus proved, That which brings an unavoidable obligation to
a far sorer punishment, (without giving any possiblity either of escaping
former misery, or this additional misery) must needs be one of the greatest
Curses and Plagues in the World, and so the sign of Gods greatest wrath; but
such were the Gospel (or new Law) to most men where it comes (if the opposed
Doctrine were true), Ergo, etc.

Let him that denis the Major, show me a sorer Plague that ever God inflicted
on any man on Earth, if he can.

Object. Is not the Gospel the savor of death to some? and Christ a stumbling
stone, and Rock of offense?

Answ. That is not of his own nature, nor of the nature of the Gospel, nor yet
as a proper Cause per se, but as an occasion, and by accident, through Man's own
wickedness* and wilful rejection and abuse. A Man may burn himself with the
fire that should warm him, or choke himself with the food that should nourish
him.

Object. But does not God decree it?

Answ. His decree causes not the thing, any more than his foreknowledge,
having no influence into the Object; as our Divines, actus immanens nihil ponit
in objectio. Predestinatio ^i^^l ponit in praedestinato. It imposes no causal
necessity as all confess, only as foreknowledge, so decree has a Logical
necessity, in ordine argumentandi, called Necessitas Consequentiae, Twisse
himself says* there is no more, and the Schoolmen are of his mind in that, and
affirm no more.

And for the minor, its evident in each part. 1. The new Law obliges all that
believe not, to damnation, because they believe not, and to a far sorer
punishment than before was due to them, Heb. 10. 29. Mar. 16. 16. Joh. 3. 18,
19. Mat. 25. last. 2. And that it is an unavoidable obligation appears, 1, In
that God made the Law whether Man will or not, Man could not hinder that* 2.
And it is an impossibility which the Law is feigned to require: To accept a
Redeemer that never Redeemed them, to rest on a satisfaction for their
justification and pardon which is no satisfaction, for as to them it is none:
It being maintained by them whom I oppose, that it is none, and that it is only
materially sufficient, that is, matter (of suffering) sufficient to have made a
satisfaction if God would; but not formally sufficient; that is, indeed it is
no price or satisfaction (as to their debt) at all; for if my Neighbor and I
owe each of us 20 l. he that pays his debt, though he over-pay, does no more
thereby to the discharge of mine, than if he had done nothing at all. I have
proved before, that here is no sufficient ground for that faith, supposing
Christ satisfied not for the Believer. And even those whom I argue against,
will not endure to have it supposed that any Man should believe for whom Christ
dyed not. Or if they will let us sppose such a thing, then it is undeniable
that such a Man would be never the more pardoned or saved, because there is no
Salvation withont a Savior, and no Remission without satisfaction: And as in
those that are pardoned and saved, the efficacy of Christ's satisfaction is
before all possibility of any power or snccess of Man's Faith: So in those that
perish (if they had no price of satisfaction paid for them) the want of a
Redeemer would be the first want, concluding their damnation and
non-deliverance from former misery, and the want of Faith could be but the
secondary consequential want, which Faith if it were present would not satisfy
or save, no more than believing now would save the Devils. And thus it is
evident that on the grounds opposed, the Gospel would causally per ^e,
unavoidably be the greatest plague on earth to all where it comes, except the
Elect; and not only accidentally by their own Sin.

Now for the Minor (that the Gospel is not so,) I prove from Scripture; it is
called the glad tidings of the Kingdom of God* Luke 8. 1. Before men are
Converted, the Apostles say* we declare unto you glad tidings, Acts 13. 32. 33.
The Preachers of it bring glad tidings of good things, preaching the Gospel of
peace, Romans 10. 15. even the unsanctified, receive the word with joy, Mat. 13.
20. (and not so great joy as they had cause) so Mark 4. 16. it is called the
Gospel of the grace of God, Acts 20. 24. it is a Wedding-Feast, even ready for
those that would not come to it, who are therefore said to be unworthy of it;
and so it was to him that came without the Wedding garment, Mat. 22. if it were
not a mercy, then Men did not sin against mercy in rejecting it, which who dare
say? It gives men promises of entering into rest, who yet by wilful unbelief may
come short of it, Heb. 4. 1, 2, 3, etc. See 1 Cor. 10. to the 13th, God sent
Jesus to bless the Jews (more than Elect) in turning every one of them from his
Iniquity, Acts 3. last. The unthankful Servant had his debt freely pardoned
him, (and that was a mercy) who after took his fellow by the throat, and by
ingratitude lost that pardon which he had: It declares God's tender Mercies
over all his works, and such mercies as are to lead all men to Repentance,
Psalm. 145. 9. Romans 2. It is good tidings of great joy which shall be to all
people, Acts 2. 10. It freely gives to all the water of life, if they refuse
not the gift, Rev. 22. It is the Gospel that brings Salvation to all men,
Tit. 12. 11.

A hundred Texts might be brought to prove how great a blessing of it self the
Gospel is to that People to whom it is given, and if it be turned to a Judgment
and hurt them, it is merely accidentally, through their wilful rejecting it, or
turning the grace of God into wantonness, or sinning, because Grace has
abounded; and not from any thing in it, nor for want of a reality in the
benefit which it offers.

Arg. 25. A differentia status damnatorum and viatorum.
If Christ dyed not for all men, then the state of most men (all that he dyed
not for) were as deplorate and remediless as the State of the Damned: But the
consequent is false, therefore so is the Antecedent.

The Consequence of the Major proposition is plain, in that the state of all
men that Christ dyed not for must needs be utterly hopeless, and remediless,
for there is no other satisfaction to be hoped for besides that made by the
blood of Jesus, and that is nothing to them, nor is there any hope or
possibility that ever they should have part in a satisfaction that is no
satisfaction for them; without blood there is no remission: If they should
believe, and repent, and pray for mercy night and day, it would be but as the
Rich Epicure in Hell prayed for a drop of water, all in vain, for betwixt God
and them is so great a gulf or distance by sin, that nothing without a Redeemer
can do them any good, as to the least hope of Salvation. If you say, it is not
to be supposed that they can believe, repent, and pray, I answer, that is (in
your own sense) because it is supposed they are not redeemed, and the
impossibility of their not repenting and believing shows the more fully the
impossibility of their Salvation. And the reason why they do not actually
despair, is not because they have any more remedy than the Damned, or cause to
hope; but only because they are yet ignorant of the hopelesness of their own
Condition, and as soon as they know the truth they will fully despair. So that
there is no more possibility that a Man for whom Christ dyed not should be
pardoned or saved, than that the Damned should, for both are equally
impossible; If any say that God can find out another remedy besides and without
Christ's satisfaction, though he will not, and therefore it is not impossible. I
will not examine the truth of that now, but if it be true of them on Earth, why
not also of them in Hell? When once Men are in that state that there is no
Sacrifice for their sin, then there remains nothing but the fearful
expectation of Judgment, and Fire that shall devour the Adver^ary.

Object But does not God's foreknowledge and decree make men's Salvation
impossible, as well as Christ's not Dying for them? and so your argument is as
much against them.

Answ. No, They do nihil ponere in Objecto; nor are the removal or denial of
any efficient cause of Salvation, they infer only Necessitatem Consequentiae,
they make no Man's Salvation impossible, but only prove it not future: And as it
is not omne Possible that is futurum, so neither omne non futurum that is
Impossible. And it is agreed that foreknowledge presupposes the futurition or
non futurition of the thing foreknown. But there is much more necessary to be
said to resolve this doubt which I may not now insist on, only I add, that the
matter of God's Decrees, and the futurition of things as depending thereon, are
so high, and so far above us, that it becomes us not to be too inquisitive into
them, much less so peremptorily to determine of them as some do, and least of
all to try plainer Cases by such determinations, and reduce certainties to
uncertainties, when we should tather reduce uncertainties to certainties.

And for the Minor, (that the state of most men even in the Church, is not so
hopeless, deplorate and remediless as is the case of the Damned) I prove it
thus. They might be saved who are yet on Earth, if they would but receive the
love of the truth, 2 These. 2. 9, 10. If they would believe they might all be
justified, and should not perish, but have everlasting life; whoever of them
will, may have the water of Life freely, and it is offered them, and they
entreated to take it, and if they have it not, it is because they will not, and
not because there was no object or ground for their willing, or no Sacrifice
for their sin. God offers them pardon and Salvation, but God offers no other
Pardon or Salvation but what is purchased by Christ's Blood: He that tells us
there neither is nor can be any other Remission or Salvation, but what Christ
purchases, will not offer any other to men, and urge them to accept it, yea,
Pardon and Life (as purchased by Christ) are in Gods deed of gift, together
with Christ himself, conditionally bestowed on all, even if they will have
them, (a Condition which among men is seldom thought worthy the name of a
Condition, it being supposed in nature that every man is willing of his own
good, and so of all excellent advantages thereto.) Is all this so with those in
Hell? Christ is neither given, nor Pardon and Life offered to them; they are
not commanded to repent and believe to this end, that they may be justified and
saved: But those on Earth are, and therefore their Pardon and Salvation is
possible, for God will not command them to seek or to accept of an
impossibility, and then Condemn them for not seeking and not accepting it. If
the Damned could repent or believe, it would not save them, but it would save
them on Earth. Nor is their belief it self such an impossibility, as is the
Damneds believing. Moreover, Christ says now, how often would I have gathered
you? But he would not gather the Damned. God would have all men to be saved,
and come to the knowledge of the truth, but he says not that he would have the
Damned to be saved. This Life is called the day of their Visitation, the day of
grace, the acceptable time, the day of Salvation; and they are called on to
hear the voice of God, to day, while it is called to day, and not to harden
their hearts, least he swear in his wrath that they shall not enter into his
rest; that is, least their case become desperate, and their Salvation
impossible, therefore it was not so before. They are warned to take heed, least
sinning wilfully after the knowledge of the truth* there remain no more
Sacrifice for Sin, etc. Implying, that before there is a Sacrifice for their
sin, it is said that it is impossible to renew them by repentance, who tread
under foot the blood of the Covenant, and do despite to the Spirit of Grace,
implying, that before it was not impossible; and also that they might have had
(if they had not) a share in that blood and that Spirit. They have a promise
left them of entering into his rest, Heb. 4 1. and a Salvation proclaimed to
them, and if they perish, it will be for neglecting so great Salvation, Heb. 3.
2. They are invited to come in because all things are ready; they are commanded
to seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near:
None of this is so with the Damned, God is not near them, nor may be found of
them, nor have they any day of Grace, Visitation or Salvation, where the word
is preached, it is [that they might be saved,] 1 These. 2. 16. Paul sought the
profit of many, and to please all men, that they might be saved, 1 Cor. 10. 33.
Even when men are delivered to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, it is
that the Spirit might be saved, 1 Cor. 5. 5. yea, God sent his Son into the
World, that the World through him might be saved (that World which consists of
Believers and Unbelievers) Joh. 3. 16. 17. when Jesus was proving his
Mediatorship to the Jews, he says [ These things I say that ye might be saved]
Joh. 5. 34. so that Men's Salvation is possible while they are on Earth (till
they have sinned against the Holy Ghost, or totally Apostatized by
abrenunciation of Christ,) else what business have Preachers with them? Why do
we entreat them to be reconciled to God? Do we not tell them daily (and truly)
that yet there is time, yet there is hope, and advise them to take time while
they have it; and let not slip the Day of Grace and Salvation, 2 Cor. 6. 1, 2.
We beseech them that they receive not the Grace of God in vain: for behold, now
is the accepted time: behold, now is the day of Salvation. And Christ says,
weeping, over Jerusalem, If thou had known, at least in this thy day, the
things that belong to thy Peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes, etc.
Because thou knew not the time of thy Visitation, Luke 19. 41, 42, 43, 44.
An hundred places more might be produced to prove, that men on Earth are not
left as desperate, deplorate, or remediles as those in Hell, which yet they
must be if they had no Redeemer, or no Sacrifice for their sin.

Arg. 26. A processu Judiciali and causa condemnationis.
If Christ himself shall therefore condemn men in Judgment, because they
received him not as their Lord-Redeemer, or because they abused the fruits of
his Death, suffered for them, then he died for All men: But Christ will condemn
men in Judgment because they received him not as their Lord-Redeemer, or
because they abused the said fruits of his Death: Therefore he died for All-men.

That he will condemn all the Unbelievers that heard his Gospel, because they
did not believe in him nor receive him for their Redeemer and Savior, and Lord
to Reign over them, nor rest on him for Salvation, is confessed by all, and
past dispute, Luke 21. 27. Joh. 1. 10, 11, 12* and 3. 18. 1 John 5. 11. 2 These.
1. 8. and 2. 10, 11, 12* Mar. 16. 16. Job. 5. 22. Mat. 25. per totum.

That all men shall be judged according to their well or ill usage of the
Talents of Mercy bestowed on them, and repenting or not repenting in the day of
Grace, is plain in Mat. 25. in the Parable of the ten Virgins and of the
Talents. I have proved before that these Talents are Grace ( i. e.
Miserecordiae contra meritum, effectus) and procured by Christ's satisfaction,
and not given without Christ's satisfaction.

The consequence therefore of the Major proposition is evident. For shall any
man dare, (without better proof) to affirm that Christ will sit as
Lord-Redeemer in Judgment, and condemn most of the World to everlasting flames,
for refusing a Redeemer that was not their Redeemer? and for not believing in
him to save them by his death, who never died for them? and for not resting for
Salvation, on him that never made the least satisfaction for them, and
therefore was not a sufficient stay to rest on; and for not believing, where,
if they had believed, Faith would do no good. And where it is objected (as
before) they should have believed, that it might have been a sign to them that
Christ died for them. I answer (besides what I answered before) 1. It being
first granted that Christ did not dye for them, then if they had believed it
would have been no sign that he died for them, for it cannot be a sign of that
which was not. And Christ's dying or not dying for them, for it cannot be a sign
of that which was not. 2. Never Judge did pass sentence upon a sign instead of
a cause: or make the want of a sign to be the cause of condemnation. Then the
principal cause should be [ non Redimi:] that Christ died not for us, and the
signal (which is our not believing) must be the less principal, And so the
Sentence should pass thus [I adjudge thee to Hell Fire, for not being redeemed
by my blood, and consequently for not having that faith which might have been a
sign that I redeemed thee.] But who dare feign Christ Jesus to pass such a
Sentence; Says Abraham far be it from thee, to destroy the Righteous with the
Wicked! shall not the Judge of all the World do righteously?

Also how could Christ condemn Pagans or any for not improving his Talents of
Mercy, if they had none? And if Christ died not for them, they had none. For I
have proved, it could not come any other way: Grace, as I said, proper to the
Gospel, is [Mercy contrary to Merit] as Grace to the first man new created,
was, [Mercy without Merit] now common or special Gospel Grace (contrary to
merit) comes all from Christ's Blood, and can come no otherwise. The Law came by
Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, of his fullness we all receive,
and Grace for Grace. All the gifts in the Church, of Tongues, Miracles, casting
out Devils, Healing, Prophesying (all which, those may have that shall perish)
are yet from one and the same Spirit, even the Spirit of the Son, procured by
his Blood. In him it is that God blesses us with all spiritual blessings
(common or special.) Now if men have none of the Talents which Christ's Death
has purchased them, how can he condemn them for abusing that which they had
not?

I know, some reply, that God may condemn and torment his Creature without any
fault, if he please, and that justly, because his Will is the rule of Justice.
To which I answer as he is Dominus Absolutus he may do with his own as he
please, and therefore may torment the Creature as he please (at least he might
have done, before he undertook to dispose of them as Rector according to his
Laws) but as he is Ruler of the Rational Creature, he will not, and therefore
cannot condemn or punish any but for sin; seeing every punishment is essential
for a fault. And therefore if God should torment the undeserving Creature, it
would be but an Affliction or mere Suffering (which is the matter of Punishment
without the form) but no punishment: And therefore it would be neither just nor
unjust, being not capable of either Title: But to say that God as Judge can
condemn or punish a man without desert, is plain Blasphemy.

Arg. 27. A condemnandorum inexcusabilitate.
If Christ died not for all, then the condemned would not be left without any
just excuse, But the condemned shallbe left without a just excuse, therefore
Christ died for All.

The Minor is plain in Scripture. All mouths shall be stopped, and all the
World be guilty before God, Romans 3. 19. And Christ says, They have no Cloak
for their sin. See Romans 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.

And for the consequence of the Major, there is enough said to prove it before.
And further let me add for explication a few words. Excuse is contrary to
Accusation: As there are therefore diverse sorts of Accusation, so is there of
Excusation: Men may be Accused at the Bar of God. 1. Upon the grounds afforded
in the Law of Works. 2. Or according to the Mediators new Law, or the Law of
Grace. According to the Law of Works men may be accused. 1. Of violating the
Precept. 2. Of being liable to the penalty: For the first of these no man on
Earth has any just excuse, for all have sinned, and must confess it, and he
that says he has no sin is a liar. 2. If any man be accused of being liable
to penalty according to the tenor of the Law of Works, this also must be
confessed and has no excuse: no not for them that Christ died for in the
strictest sense, or that are Justified. 2. And for Accusation in the reference
to the Law of Grace, either men will be accused, 1. Of not performing the
duties of that Law, as commanded. 2. Or of not performing the condition of it,
as it is a condition. 3. Or of being liable to the penalty, 1. Privative. 2.
Positive. 1. For the first, all men must confess that they are guilty: For
though in the Law of Nature the Duty commanded, and the condition, were the
same, yet in the Law of Grace, the Duty commanded is of larger extent than the
condition. For perfect obedience is commanded, though only faith and sincere
obedience be the condition: Only the Duty commanded is the matter about which
sincere obedience, which is part of the condition is exercised. Now here no man
can excuse himself by saying that he has done all that Christ commanded him:
But the non-redeemed may excuse themselves for not doing it: For against every
part of the Precepts proper to the Gospel, they have excuse, as will appear
anon, when we speak of the conditions. 2. The condition of the new Law or
Covenant is, Faith working by Love, Repentance. Thankfulness and sincere
Obedience. He that performs not these must perish. Now if an unredeemed
person shall be accused for not performing these, though he must confess the
nonperformance, yet he has these reasons to give for his excuse. 1. Where
there is no gift, there can be no condition, in proper sense, of obtaining: But
Christ's blood was not given to us, and consequently not the proper fruits of
it. Therefore 2. How could we believe in, or receive Christ as our Redeemer,
who never Redeemed us? Or trust to his Blood for Justification, which was never
shed for us? And therefore would not have been sufficient to save us, had it
been possible for us to have believed in it, or had we actually believed?
Moreover believing to Justification, is but the accepting or receiving Christ
as an offered Savior and Head, or as conditionally given us, viz. if we will
receive him (this is commonly confessed:) now how can there be a receiving or
accepting without a giving? Is there any contradiction more palpable? We
therefore to whom Christ was not given could not receive him: and if he were
not given for us, he could not be given to us: seeing the latter does
presuppose the former. 3. Repentance to Life presupposes some hope of Life
given (I mean, spem possibilitatis, and probabilitatis, and si non spem
certitudinis.) But there is no hope given to any, but in and by the blood of
Jesus Christ shed for them: for there is no other name by which they can be
saved; without this hope we might have an Infernal despairing tormenting
Repentance, but could not possibly have a Repentance unto Life, or such as
could be to us any means of our recovery (as all Gospel Repentance is.) And it
was not in our power to give hope to our selves by causing Christ's blood to be
shed for us, had we been never so willing. 4. How could we love God as merciful
in Redeeming us, or love Christ as our Redeemer when we knew him not to be our
Redeemer; and it now appears he never was our Redeemer. 5. How could we love
the Brethren as our members of the same body, and our fellow-redeemed ones
(which is the new commandment) when they were none of our Brethren in that
sense, nor could we prove that they should be so? 6. Why should we be thankful
to Christ for Redeeming us, when he did not at all redeem us, Should we be
thankful for nothing? 7. How could we obey Christ as our Lord-redeemer, who was
not our Lord-redeemer? How could we hear him as such, and call on him as such,
or trust him as such,? If his offices are all of equal extent, and it be
certain that he was no Priest to us, as not offering himself a sacrifice for us
at all; then he could be no King or Prophet to us. And why then should we obey
a King that is not our King? Or, Why then should we hear that Prophet who was
no Prophet to us?

3. And then as to the last accusation; if men be accused as being liable or
obliged to the penalty, for nonperformance of the condition; or for want of a
Savior: Every true Believer has two things to answer for his full
Justification: 1. That Christ has satisfied for him (and therefore the Laws
obligation is justly dissolved.) 2. That he has himself performed the
condition of the new Covenant? (and therefore has part in Christ's
satisfaction, and is not to be condemned as an Unbeliever) or ungrateful Rebel,
and therefore ought not to be deprived of the reward or benefit given, (which
is deliverance from the Curse of the Law and the guilt of sin and deserved
punishment, together with a greater superadded glory:) Nor yet to suffer the
positive penalty (which is both the Non-liberation from the foresaid misery,
and the greater torment threatened to unbelievers.) Now the unredeemed may all
plead that the said penalties are not due to them. 1. Because no redeemer did
ever satisfy for them; and they could not satisfy for themselves, nor cause
Christ to satisfy for them; which is ever presupposed to their own believing;
seeing believing is but to give them a right to the satisfaction and benefits
of Christ, and not to be our righteousness as of worth in it self; now all the
believing in the World would not make that satisfaction to be for me, which was
never made for me, but only for another, no more than believing that another
man has paid my debt, would make it true; or make a payment to be for me which
was only for another: As Mr. Perkins says [and least any should imagine that
the very act of Faith in apprehending Christ justifies, we are to understand
that Faith does not apprehend by power from it self, but by virtue of the
Covenant: If a man believe the Kingdom of France to be his, it is not therefore
his: Yet if he believe Christ and the Kingdom of Heaven by Christ to be his, it
is his indeed: Not simply because he believes, but because he believes upon
promise and commandment; for in the tenor of the covenant God promises to
impute the obedience of Christ to us if we believe.] Vol. 1. True Gain. page
662. So that the unbeliever has this excuse, that his believing supposed the
Gift and Promise, and he could not by believing have made satisfaction to Gods
Justice (Faith having no such worth, nor being ordained to that end) nor yet
could he get interest in a satisfaction never made for him: Nor would God have
imputed such a satisfaction or obedience to him, had he never so much believed.
Indeed he deserves the misery threatened by the first Law for sin against the
Creator, or for sin as sin; but not the penalty proper to the new Law; either
privative consisting in non-liberation, or positive, as in sorer punishment. 2.
Besides he is excused by the former reasons which excuse him for
nonperformance of the conditions; for then he cannot be punished for that
nonperformance. If the Devils were accused for not believing in Christ as
their Redeemer, and consequently being obliged to the penalties of the new
Covenant, would not they have all this excuse?

Argum. 28th. A natura poenae infernalis positivae.
If Christ Died not for all (but only the Elect) then Conscience will not
torment the Damned for rejecting Christ their Lord-Redeemer, or the fruits of
his Redemption: But Conscience will torment them for so rejecting Christ and
his benefits (and thereby wilfully procuring that destruction which else they
might have avoided) Ergo, etc.

The Argument seems to me so clear that I need not say much in confirmation of
any part of it.

1. For the Minor it is generally granted,

1. That the Torment of Hell lies much in the Horrors and Accusations of
Conscience.

2. And that this is a right judging, and not an erring Conscience. It is not
melancholy mistakes that torment poor Souls in Hell (as to think they have
sinned when they have not) but the apprehensions of real evils in and upon them.

3. Conscience will never torment men for that which never was in their power
to avoid, (directly or indirectly, in it self or in the means) though he had
been never so willing. Did you ever see a rational man wounded in Conscience
for not being an Angel, or not seeing God face to face, or not redeeming his
own Soul? But it is for wilful sinning that men's Consciences scourge them. When
there was a possibility of being saved, yea a probability put into our hands,
yea a certainty if we would yield to Christ's conditions; and yet men did
negligently and wilfully slight all, this will wound them everlastingly: This
will feed the never-dying Worm, and make them cry out against themselves for
ever, O what a fool, what a wilful wicked self-hater was I, that had a price in
my hands, but had not a heart to improve it! That had a Redeemer offered me
that suffered for my sins, and had not a heart to receive him: That had his
blood tendered me for the washing of my Soul, and the healing of my Wounds, and
had not a will to accept it! That might have had Christ, and Pardon, and
Adoption, and Salvation, and would not! I thought my pleasures and profits
better than Christ and Glory! I chose dung and dross before the Crown of Life.
How justly am I now excluded from that blessedness, which I set so light by,
and endure that misery which I wilfully run into. (See more of this in the
Third Part of my Book of Rest, in the aggravations of the Damneds Torments.

But if the damned should then truly know that there was never any possibility
of their recovery; and that Christ never died at all for them; nor was their
Redeemer; and that if they could have or had believed, it would not have saved
them; yea that Christ being never given for them, could not consequently be
given to them, and consequently could not be accepted or received as being not
an object caprble of being received; yea that God could not give them pardon
and Salvation as purchased by that Blood that was never shed for them, had they
believed never so much; will not this take of all the accusations of
conscience, and turn all their clamors against God himself? And so make Hell
thus far to be no Hell? If a great Man come to a poor Prisoner, and say, take
me for the payer of thy debt, (as having already done it) and thou shall be
free, and moreover advanced, but otherwise thy imprisonment and punishment
shall be far sorer] suppose the Man believes him not, and thereupon is closer
imprisoned and grievously punished: If the offer were real upon a true
discharge of his debt, the Prisoner will blame himself: But if it be certainly
known to him that there was no such discharge or payment, and that it was
offered merely to increase his misery, because the offerer had some
foreknowledg that he would not believe him, and that if he had believed him he
had been never the better, because no payment was made, would this Man blame
himself? Or would he not approve of his ow^ unbelief, and say, why should I
have trusted such a one? And would he not have cried out on the offerer as a
deceiver, and unjust and cruel? Consider and judge. And thus with the Minor I
have also confirmed the Major Proposition. Christ told the Jews, If he had not
come and spoak to them (and done the Works that no Man else could do) they had
not had Sin (in not believing on him) but now they had no Cloak for their Sin.
But if Christ had not redeemed Men nor been an object for their Faith, then
much more evidently may it be said that they had not had Sin who had not
believed in him or taken him as their Redeemer: For defect of an object will
more excuse then defect of evidence. If the Works of God discovering his
invisible things, leave Sinners (Heathens, as most Exspositors judge) without
excuse; and so they had been excusable but for those works; much more excusable
would unbelievers be, if they had no Redeemer to believe in, whatever
proclamations of him were made to the World: And consequently conscience would
excuse the damned, and so would not torment them, for an excusing conscience
tormenteth none. But whatever Men may say now, I am certain that those
miserable damned Souls will have no such alleviation of their misery: They
shall not be able then to stop the Mouth of conscience by all the Arguments
against their Redemption that now seem so strong; nor to say, what should I vex
my self for that which I could never help, if I would; and torment my self or
accuse my self for not accepting a Redeemer that never was given me? Or for not
redeeming my own Soul.

Arg. 29th. A natura Poenae infernalis Privativae.
If Christ died not for all (but only for the Elect) then the punishment of the
damned should not at all consist in a Privation of the But Fruits of Christ's
Sacrifice (or satisfaction.) the punishment of the damned (at least many, if
not all) will consist in a privation of the Fruits of Christ's satisfaction,
Ergo, etc.

For the better understanding of the force of this Argument you must know, 1.
That there may be a Privation of that which we are but in a possibility or
probability of enjoying, much more if we have a certainty on some easy, and
reasonable condition; specially if the condition be but the accepting of a free
gift; as well as there may be a Privation of what is actually enjoyed. 2.
Though some that understand not the nature of the New Covenant or Law do deny
that it has any peculiar penalty, yet it is a clear truth beyond doubt. For 1.
It is an entire law, and therefore does promise and threaten, and consequently
does premiare and punire reward and punish. 2. It is that Law by which we shall
be judged at the Redeemers bar, and therefore it does reward and punish, that
is, constitute the dueness of rewards and punishments: else it could not
possibly be Norma judicii in Absolution, and condemnation. 3. It is said
expressly, Heb. 10. 22. Of how much sorer punishment shall they be thought
worthy that tread under Foot the Son of God, etc. And therefore the punishment
of unbelievers in the New Testament is expressed to be in unquenchable Fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, whereas the punishment of the old Law
was expressed but by the name of Death, or at least not so hideously as the
other. Not that I am any whit of their opinion that think, there was no actual
everlasting pain threatened by the old Law, but only annihilation: Nor will I
contest against any Man that says, it is only a punishment gradually different
(as to the positive part, and much of the privative) from that of the first Law
which is threatened by the second: For a gradual natural difference may
constitute a moral specifical difference: It is but in degree of pain that a
prick with a pin differs from Caesar's stabs in the Senate House, or from the
pulling of a Man's Flesh of his Back with Nails or hot Pincers. Yet some of the
privative, and objective of the positive torments of the two Laws do differ in
specie. For as to the positive, the consciences of the damned shall torment
them for rejecting a Redeemer, and pardon, Adoption, and Glory with him: But
according to the first Law, conscience should only torment Men for casting away
that Life that Adam did enjoy (or if more were promised, for not obeying
perfectly that they might attain it.) 4. And it is undeniable that this New Law
has a punishment privative specifically distinct in Natura rei from that of
the old Law. That is, the privation of Christ as their Head, and of pardon,
justification by him, Adoption by him, and Salvation from deserved misery,
beside, the loss of a greater promised glory, yea and a second loss of their
first happiness. If any therefore shall say, that because Men are condemned
already and the Gospel does only Non-liberare not save unbelievers; therefore
it is a mere promise, and not a Law, and so has no proper penalty of its own;
I answer. 1. I have showed it has a sorer punishment as its positive penalty.
2. The denial of a greater glory, which Christ gives by the New Law, above
what the old Law gave, is a proper and grievous punishment. 3. The denial of
those blessed Relations of [a Member of Christ and in him an adopted Son of
God, and Heir of Heaven, etc.] is a sore and proper punishment. 4. The
Privation even of that Life which was given by the first Law, is a proper
penalty of the second, because the New Law, does restore to all Men their lost
right to Life, on an easy condition, and therefore as the Privation of Life is
first given or promised in the first Law, was the penalty of that Law, so the
Privation of the same Life as redeemed and restored by the Mediator, is the
penalty of the new Law: So that it is a recovered happiness that they this way
lose, and so are twice dead, as Jude speaks. 5. The very Non-Liberation of the
new Law, in denial of Remission and Salvation, is a great and proper penalty:
As the Non-continuation of Adams happiness in paradise was a penalty of that
Law (and the not-giving of a greater, if that Law did promise a greater.) If a
Prince make an Act of pardon and oblivion for a company of imprisoned condemned
Malefactors in these terms, that if they will repent and thankfully accept his
favor, they shall all be pardoned, and also dignified to be Princes and his
Favorites: If they will not, none of them shall be pardoned, but all shall die
by a more cruel Death. Here this Law of Grace has as its peculiar penalty. 1.
Their Non-liberation, and so their first deserved Death, not as first deserved,
but as confirmed, and peremptorily adjudged to them for their ingratitude; and
so. 2. The loss of Life, as it was conditionally restored, and was in Law, as
it were, a new Life. 3. And the loss of the promised offered dignities. 4. And
the sorer kind of death, so is it in the case in Hand.

For the confirmation of the Minor, I need not to say much more, seeing for
ought I know it is generally granted. I never met yet with any, that durst say
that all the Non-Elect do undergo none of the fore described penalties of the
new Law; but only the mere penalties of the first Law: Doubtless God is
offended specially at their unbelief, and will destroy them as Christ's Enemies
because they would not that he should Reign over them, Luke 21. 27. and Christ
will come in flaming fire rendering vengeance to them for not knowing God, and
not obeying the Gospel of our Lord Jesus 2. These. 1. 7. 8. 9. and he will damn
them all that obeyed not the Truth (of the Gospel) but had pleasure in
unrighteousness, 1 These. 2. 10. 11. 12. And this is the condemnation that Light
is come into the World and Men love darkness rather then light because their
deeds were evil: And because when Christ came to his own, his own received him
not, Joh. 1. 10. 21, 11. For it shall come to pass that every Soul that hears
not the voice of this Prophet shall be destroyed, Acts 3. 23.

And they that believe not Jesus is the Christ shall dye in their sins; And
except men repent, they shall all perish, Luke 13. 3, 5. yea whoever believes
not shall be damned, Mar. 16. 16. For he is the Author of Eternal Salvation to
them (only) that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. So that as men suffer for sin against the
new, so also from the obligation of that Law binding them over to Judgment: and
therefore they are judged by that Law, Mat. 25. yea I doubt not but all the
World shall be judged by the Redeemer, for misimploying his Talents of Grace
(those that perish) and not only for not perfect fulfilling the Law of Works:
none is condemned merely for that. And if it be so, then the same Law of Christ
must needs constitute the penalty to be executed. Nor did I ever meet with any
that durst say that it was no punishment to Unbelievers, to be denied Pardon
and Justification and Salvation from their deserved damnation, which were all
offered to them in the Gospel, and which Believers do receive: much less should
any say, that the additional torments of such, and the loss of the greater
promised glory are no punishments. Yea even in this life the non-elect receive
of the punishments proper to the new Law, viz. non remission and non
reconciliation, and the forsaking of God, when he casts them off, and gives
them up to themselves because they would none of him, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. and
leaves them desolate because when Christ would have gathered them to him in
tender mercy, they would not, Mat. 23. 37, 38. and gives them over to believe
lies because they received not the love of the Truth that they might be saved,
2 These. 2. 10, 11. and takes his holy Spirit from them, because they grieved
and quenched it.

And all this will be out of doubt if we consider the definition of Punishment,
which is a natural evil inflicted because of a Moral: or the hurt of our
persons inflicted for sin. Now there is no doubt but all these forementioned
are evils to us, or hurtful to men's persons; and no doubt but they are
inflicted for sin: and then as to the species; They are inflicted for sins
against the Law of Christ, by force of the obligation of the commination of
that Law, and the sentence past by Christ as Redeemer and Author of that Law.
Yea what if I said that strictly and directly men suffer not at all the penalty
of the Law of Works? For all are delivered from that penalty on condition they
Repent and Believe, and so the obligation of that Law is suspended to all,
(though not strictly abrogated) and transferred, and as it were sequestered into
the hands of Christ to be disposed of by him, (inflicting or not inflicting it)
as men deal with him according to his terms of Grace, so that now, the penalty
is immediately and strictly the penalty of the Law of Christ, as it does both
non-liberare and peremptorily bind men over to it; and it is properly the loss
of a Life recovered by Christ's blood, which is the punishment; though remotely
it be also from the obligation of the first Law, which being but suspended by
Christ, and conditionally dissolved, remains in force upon the
nonperformance of the condition, as soon as the time of performance is
expired. So that it is undeniable that the damned suffer the privation of the
fruits of Christ's death and satisfaction: yea and of his satisfaction for them
in particular. For as it is certain that there is no remission without blood,
and no Justification or Salvation without Christ's satisfaction; so it is as
much beyond doubt with all sober men, that Christ's satisfaction for one man
will not procure Pardon and Salvation for another. So that the Minor is fully
clear.

And for the Major proposition it is as clear. For there can be no effects
without a cause: As no man can receive the effects of Christ's Death, but those
for whom he died; so no man can lose or be deprived of those effects, but those
for whom he died; for the cause is presupposed. A Negation is no Punishment. It
is not a punishment to a Stone that it is not a Man, that it is mute, liveless,
etc. nor to a Beast, not to be saved, nor to an Angel not to be Redeemed, nor
to the Devils, not to be partakers of Christ, and of Pardon and Salvation by
him. Now its true, the Pardon of the Damned, and their Salvation was not
actually effected, but the meritorious cause was full and perfect in Christ's
satisfaction (and moral causes go long before the effects sometimes, and may do
all their part, and yet the effect not follow through the defect of some
other,) and the effects were conditionally given or produced by the New
Covenant, and thereby become not only possible and probable, but certain if the
condition were performed: So that here is a proper privation, and not a bare
Negation. Nor is it the mere matter of such effects that men are deprived of,
but formally as they were effects conditionally granted, and were to have been
effects actually of the death of Christ. They should have been such effects, if
they had done their part to procure them by performing the condition as Christ
did in the Cause; for he required not them to effect it as concauses, but only
suspended the effects of his own full sufficient (but Moral) cause, on their
condition, which all Lawyers, and all that know what a Moral Cause is, or what
a proper condition is, know to be most usual. Now if you suppose that Christ
died not, and satisfied not for these men, then the loss of Pardon, Adoption,
Membership of Christ, final Absolution, Salvation, besides all the greater
Glory, and all the Spirits Graces and Workings in this life, cannot possibly be
punishments to them, for they cannot be Privations. For there was never any
cause to procure them, and therefore they were never possible, much less due:
and Man's Faith was not required by God to be the meritorious cause, or to
satisfy Gods Justice, nor yet to procure Christ or any other to satisfy it,
nor yet to make that satisfaction to be now for us, which was made for others
and not for us: to none of these ends was Faith required, but only to be the
condition of our enjoying Christ, and the fruits of his satisfaction; on
performance whereof the Moral Cause which was long before in full being, should
produce its effect, or else not (as to us) so that satisfaction as the Cause is
necessarily supposed to Faith as the condition, seeing the office of the
condition is, that on it the effect of the cause be suspended, till that
condition be performed: And therefore there can be no condition where there is
not first the Moral Cause: I mean there can neither be condition constituted by
Law, Testament, Deed of Gift, or Covenant, nor yet condition performed, for it
cannot have the form of a condition. Or if that be disputable as to any other
case, I am sure it is not in the case in hand; No man will say that the
non-remission, non-salvation of the Devils by the Blood of Christ, is a
Punishment to them.

Object. That is because it was never offered or conditionally given them by
Covenant, as it was to the Unbelievers.

Answ. Nor could it have been given so to Unbelievers, if Christ had not died
for them. Could God give them Christ as a Satisfier and Redeemer, who never had
satisfied for them or redeemed? Or could he make over to them effects which had
no Cause, viz. the effects of his dying for them, when he did not dye for them?
Would the New Covenant serve to pardon men without Christ's Sacrifice and
Satisfaction? Nay is it not beyond all doubt that this which I call the New
Covenant or Testament, He that believes shall be saved, etc. is the Redeemers
Law and Testament, and presupposes his Death and Satisfaction, in esse Morali
at least: It is the New Testament in his Blood, he first buyeth men to be his
own by satisfaction, and then deals with them as his own by Promise and
Legislation: Only the Promise of God to give Christ for a Redeemer to the
World, and his Prophesies of him therein, are in order of nature before the
Moral being of Christ's death, but so is not the Law of Grace. I know nothing
that has any great show of Reason that can be said against this Argument,
which so clearly evinceth the truth of Universal Redemption, and for vain
objections, I will not trouble my self and the Reader with them.

Arg. 30. A Comparatione doctrinae universalem satisfactionem affirmantis cum
doctrine eandem negante.
If they who assert Universal Redemption ( quoad satisfactionem and pretium)
have all these forementioned Arguments from Scripture for their cause, and a
multitude of express Texts, and no one ill consequence following their
doctrine, nor one sound Reason, nor one text of Scripture against them; And if
the deniers of Universal Satisfaction have all the contrary disadvantages; then
they that affirm Universal Satisfaction are in the right, and they that deny it
do err. But the antecedent is true, Ergo. etc.

Here I will 1. Look over these Arguments again, and from thence show you the
face of the consequents of the denial of Universal Satisfaction.

2. I will lay you down together the express Texts that are for Universal
Satisfaction.

3. And also the Texts that are brought against it.

4. And then the particular search of those texts on both sides, and the answer
to all the Arguments that are usually brought against Universal Satisfaction, I
intend shall follow afterward in their own places more fully.

The Doctrine which denies Universal Satisfaction has all these
inconveniences, and absurd consequents, following, therefore it is not of God,
nor true.

1. It either denies the Universal Promise or Conditional Gift of Pardon and
Life to all men if they will believe, and then it overturneth the substance of
Christ's Law and Gospel promise: or else it makes God to give conditionally to
all men a Pardon and Salvation which Christ never purchased, and without his
dying for men.

2. It makes God either not to offer the effects of Christ's satisfaction
(Pardon and Life) to all, but only to the Elect: or else to offer that which is
not, and which he cannot give.

3. It denies the direct object of Faith, and of Gods offer, that is Christum
qui satisfecit, [a Christ that has satisfied.]

4. It either denies the Non-Elects deliverance from that flat necessity of
perishing, which came on man for sinning against the first Law, by its
remediless unsuspended obligation, (and so neither, Christ, Gospel or Mercy,
had ever any nature of a remedy to them, nor any more done toward their
deliverance then toward the deliverance of the Devils:) Or else it makes this
deliverance and remedy to be without satisfaction by Christ for them.

5. It either denies that God commands all to believe (but only the Elect:
Or else makes God to assign them a deceiving Object for their Faith,
commanding them to believe in that which never was, and to trust that which
would deceive them if they did trust it.

6. It makes God, either to have appointed and commanded the Non-Elect to use
no means at all for their Recovery and Salvation, or else to have appointed
them means which are all utterly useless and insufficient for want of a
prerequisite cause without them, yea which imply a contradiction.

7. It makes the True and Righteous God to make promises of Pardon and
Salvation to all men on condition of believing, which he neither would nor
could perform (for want of such satisfaction to his Justice) if they did
believe.

8. It denies the true sufficiency of Christ's Death, for the pardoning and
saving of all men, if they did believe.

9. It makes the cause of men's Damnation to be principally for want of an
expiatory Sacrifice and of a Savior, and not of believing.

10. It makes Christ to have suffered much in vain, enduring as much for the
sins of the Elect only, as if the sins of all men had layen on him.

11. Or else it dangerously extenuateth and denies the sufferings of Christ,
as if he did not suffer as much as was due for the sins of all and it
extenuateth his love, as if he took on him only the sins of the Elect.

12. It either denies that any but the Elect should love Christ or be thankful
to him as their Redeemer (yea or any Elect that have not the knowledge of their
Election) and so should not repent of the want of this love and thankfulness,
or else that they should love him and be thankful for that which never was
true, and never was done for them or given them.

13. It makes God to have inflicted more on Christ then was due, even as much
for the Sins of the Elect only, as was due for the Sins of all the World.

14. It leaves all the World, Elect as well as others, without any ground and
object for their first justifying Faith, and in an utter uncertainty whether
they may believe to justification or not.

15. It makes the knowledge that we have justifying Faith to go before the
having of that Faith.

16. It denies the most necessary humbling aggravation of Men's Sins, so that
neither the Minister can tell wicked Men that they have sinned against him that
bought them, nor can any wicked Man so accuse himself, no nor any Man that does
not know himself to be Elect: They cannot say, my Sins put Christ to Death, and
were the Cause of his sufferings: Nay a Minister cannot tell any Man in the
World certainly,] thy Sins put Christ to death] because he is not certain who
is Elect or sincere in the Faith.

17. It subverteth Christ's new Dominion and Government of the World, and his
general legislation, and Judgment according to his Law, which is now founded in
his Title of Redemption, as the first Dominion and Government was on the Title
of Creation.

18. It makes all the benefits that the Non-Elect receive, whether Spiritual
or corporal, and so even the relaxation of the curse of the Law (without which
relaxation no Man could have such mercies) to befall Men without the
satisfaction of Christ, and so either make satisfaction, as to all those
mercies, needless, or else must find another Satisfier.

19. It makes the Law of Grace to contain far harder terms then the Law of
Works did in its utmost rigor.

20. It makes the Law of Moses either to bind all the Non-Elect still to all
Ceremonies and bondage-ordinances (and so sets up judaism) or else to be
abrogated and taken down, and Men delivered from it, without Christ's suffering
for them.

21. It destroys almost the whole work of the Ministry, disabling Ministers
either to humble Men by the chiefest aggravations of their Sins, and to
convince them of ingratitude and unkind dealing with Christ, or to show them
any hopes to draw them to repentance, or any love and mercy tending to
Salvation, to melt and win them to the Love of Christ; or any sufficient object
for their Faith and affiance, or any means to be used for pardon or Salvation,
or any promise to encourage them to come in, or any threatening to deter them.

22. It makes God and the Redeemer to have done no more for the remedying of
the misery of most of fallen mankind, then for the Devils, nor to have put them
into any more possibility of pardon or Salvation.

23. Nay it makes God to have dealt far hardlier with most Men then with the
Devils; making them a Law which requires their believing in one that never
died for them, and taking him for their Redeemer that never redeemed them, and
that on the mere foresight that they would not believe it, or decree that they
should not; and so to create by that Law a necessity of their far sorer
punishment, without procuring them any possibility of avoiding it.

24. It makes the Gospel of its own Nature to be the greatest Plague and
Judgment to most of Men that receive it, that ever God sends to Men on Earth,
by binding them over to a greater punishment, and aggravating their Sin,
without giving them any possibility of remedy.

25. It makes the case of all the World except the Elect as deplorate,
remediless and hopeless, as the Case of the damned, and so denies them to have
any day of Grace, Visitation or Salvation, or any price for happiness put into
their Hands.

26. It makes Christ to condemn Men to Hell Fire for not receiving him for
their Redeemer that never redeemed them, and for not resting on him for
Salvation by his Blood, which was never shed for them, and for not repenting
unto life, when they had no hope of mercy, and Faith, and repentance could not
have saved them.

27. It puts sufficient excuses into the Mouths of the condemned.

28. It makes the torments of conscience in Hell to be none at all, and
teaches the damned to put away all their sorrows and self accusations.

29. It denies all the privative part of those torments which Men are obliged
to suffer by the obligation of Christ's Law, and so makes Hell either no Hell
at all, or next to none.

30. And I shall anon show how it leads to Infidelity and other Sins, And after
this, what Face of Religion is left, unsubverted? Not that I charge those that
deny Universal satisfaction with holding all these abominations, but their
Doctrine of introducing them by necessary consequence: It is the opinion and not
the Men that I accuse.

2. Next let me give you some express Texts of Scripture, which I shall anon
run over more fully and vindicate, and see which opinion is the truth of God,
Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life, 2
Pet. 2. 1, 20, 21. But there were false Prophets also among the People, even as
there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction, 20. 21. And as Jude has it. 4. There are certain Men crept
in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly Men,
turning the Grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord
God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 2. 5. 6. For there is one God, and one
mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom
for all, to be testified in due time. 1 Job. 2. 2. He is the Propitiation for
our Sins, and not for ours only, but also for the Sins of the whole World, Romans
5. 18. Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all Men to
condemnation, Even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
Men to justification of Life, Heb. 2. 9. That he by the Grace of God should
taste Death for every Man, Tit. 2. 11. For the Grace of God that brings
Salvation, has appeared to all Men, 1 Timothy 2. 3, 4. Who will have all Men to
be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, Joh. 3. 17. 18. God sent
not his Son into the World to condemn the World, but that the World through him
might be saved. He that believes on him is not condemned, But he that
believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name
of the only begotten Son of God. And this is the Condemnation, that light is
come into the World, and Men loved darkness rather then light, because their
deeds were evil. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. For the love of Christ constrains us,
because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead: And that he
died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves,
but unto him which died for them, and rose again. 1 lim. 4. 10. We trust in the
living God, who is the Savior of all Men, specially of those that believe.
Mat. 22. 2, 3, 4. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a certain King, which made
a Marriage for his Son. And sent forth his Servants to call them that were
hidden to the Wedding, and they would not come. And he sent forth other
Servants, saying tell them, that are bidden, behold, I have prepared my dinner,
my Oxen and Fatlings are killed, and all things are ready: Come unto the
Marriage. And verse. 8. Then said he to his Servants, The Wedding is ready, but
they which were bidden were not worthy. Add verse. 12. 13. So 2 Cor, 5. 18, 19,
20, 21. And all things are of God who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus
Christ, and has given to us the Ministry of Reconciliation, to wit, that God
was in Christ, reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them, and has committed unto us the word of Reconciliation.
Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did heseech you by us, We
pray you in Christ's stead, be reconciled to God. For God made him sin for us,
who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Joh. 4.
42. This is indeed the Christ the Savior of the World. 1 John 4 14. 15. And we
have seen and do testify that God sent his Son to be the Savior of the World:
Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him and
he in God, 1 John 5. 9. 10, 11. For this is the Witness which he has testified
of his Son. He that believes on the Son of God has the Witness in himself. He
that believes not God, has made him a Liar because he believes not the
Record that God gave of his Son. And this is the Record, that God has given us
Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son: He that has the Son, has Life, and
he that has not the Son has not Life. Heb. 6. 4, 5. 6. For it is impossible
for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and
were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God,
and the powers of the World to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them
again to Repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh,
and put him to open shame. Heb. 10. 26, 27. 28, 29. For if we sin wilfully
after that we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more
Sacrifice for sins, But a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery
indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries. He that despised Moses Law,
died without mercy, under two or three Witnesses: Of how much sorer punishment,
suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God, and has counted the Blood of the Govenant wherewith he was sanctified, an
unholy thing, and has done despite unto the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 4. 1. 2.
Let us therefore take heed lest a promise being left us of entering into his
rest any of you should seem to come short of it. For unto us was the Gospel
preached as well as unto them: But the Gospel preached did not profit them, not
being mixed with Faith in them that heard it. Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape if
we neglect so great Salvation, etc. Joh. 12. 47, 48. And if any* man hear my
words and believe not, I judge him not: For I came not to judge the World, but to
save the World. He that rejects me and receives not my words he has one
that judges him: The word that I have spoken the same shall judge him at the
last day. Luke 13. 39. How often would I have gathered thy Children together as a
Hen gathers her Brood under her Wings, and ye would not. Behold your House is
left unto you desolate, etc. Mar. 16. 15. Go ye into all the World and Preach
the Gospel to every creature: He that believes and is baptized shall be saved
but he that believes not, shall be damned. Act. 13. 38. 39, 40, 41. Be it
known to you therefore Men and Brethren, that through this Man is preached unto
you the forgiveness of Sins: And by him all that believe are justified from all
things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Beware
therefore least that come, etc. Behold ye despisers and wonder, etc. Verse. 46.
Seeing ye have put it from you, and judged your selves unworthy of Everlasting
Life, etc. Mar. 18. 27, 32, 34, 35. Then the Lord of that Servant was moved
with compassion, and loosed him and forgave him the debt, etc. Then his Lord,
after that he had called him said unto him, O thou wicked Servant, I forgave
thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me, should not thou also have had
compassion on thy fellow Servant even as I had pity on thee; And his Lord was
wroth and delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due
unto him. So likewise shall my Heavenly Father do also unto you if ye from your
Hearts forgive not every one his Brother their Trespasses. Joh. 6. 51. I am the
living Bread which came down from Heaven: If any Man eat of this Bread he shall
live for ever: And the Bread that I will give is my Flesh which I will give for
the Life of the World. So verse 33. 34, 35. Joh. 1. 29. Behold the Lamb of God
that takes away the Sin of the World 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. For as by Man came
Death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the Dead. For as in Adam all die,
even so in Christ shall all be made alive. Romans 14. 15. Destroy not him with
thy meat, for whom Christ died, 1 Cor. 8. 11. And through thy knowledge shall
thy weak Brother perish, for whom Christ died? Heb. 9. 15. 16. And for this
cause he is the Mediator of the new Testament, that by means of Death, for the
Redemption of the transgressions under the first Testament, they which are
called might receive the promise of Eternal inheritance. For where a Testament
is, there must also of necessity be the Death of the Testator. Col. 1. 20. And
having made peace through the Blood of his Cross by him to reconcile all things
unto himself by him, whether they be things in Earth or things in Heaven. Col.
2. 14. Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which
was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross, Act.
3. last unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless
you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities. Hos. 7. 13. Though I
have redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies against me. Destruction to them,
etc. Isa. 53. 6. He laid on him the iniquity of us all, Romans 14. 9. For to this
end Christ both died, rose and revived that he might be Lord both of the Dead
and of the living. Isa. 45. 21, 22. There is no God else beside me, a just God
and a Savior, there is none beside me, look unto me and be ye saved all the
ends of the Earth, Joh. 1. 7. The same came for a Witness to bear Witness of
the Light, that all Men through him might believe, See 1 Cor. 10. 1. 2. to the
13th. John 3. 17. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so
must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have Eternal Life, Rev. 22. 17. Whosoever will, let him take the
water of Life freely, Col. 2. 28, whom we Preach, warning every man, and
teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus, John 5. 22, 23, 26, 27, 28. For the Father judges no man, but
has committed all judgment to the Son, that all men should honor the Son,
even as they honor the Father, etc. For as the Father has Life in himself, so
has he given to the Son to have Life in himself, and has given him Authority
to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of Man. Marvel not at this, for
the hour is coming in which all that are in the Graves shall hear his voice,
and shall come forth, they that have done good to the Resurrection of Life, and
they that have done evil to the Resurrection of Damnation, Acts 3. 22, 23. A
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your Brethren like unto
me, him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you, and it
shall come to pass that every Soul that will not hear that Prophet shall be
destroyed from among the People, Luke 20. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Then said the
Lord of the Vineyard what shall I do? I will send my beloved Son, it may be
they will reverence him when they see him, etc. The Stone which the Builders
rejected is become the head of the Corner, whosoever shall fall upon that stone
shall be broken, but on whomsoever it shall fall it will grind him to Powder 1
Cor. 6. 20. And ye are not your own, ye are bought with a Price, therefore
glorify God in your Body and in your Spirit, which are Gods, Deuteronomy. 32. 4, 5,
6. They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his Children,
they are a perverse and crooked Generation, do you thus requite the Lord, O
foolish People and unwise? is not he thy Father that has bought thee? has he
not made thee and established thee? ver. 15. Then he forsook God that made him,
and lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation, see Psalm. 78. throughout, ver.
35, 36. They remembered that God was their Rock and the high God their Redeemer,
nevertheless they flattered him with their mouth, and lied unto him with their
tongues, for their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in
his Covenant, but he being full of compassion forgave their iniquity, etc. Isa.
63. 8, 9, 10, He said, surely they are my People, Children that will not lie;
so he was their Savior, in all their afflictions, he was aff^icted, and the
Angel of his presence saved them in his love and in his pity he redeemed them,
and he bare them and carried them all the days of old, but they rebelled and
vexed his Holy Spirit, wherefore he was turned to be their Enemy, and fought
against them, see Romans 10. 6. to the 14th. Acts 13. 23. 26. 32. Of this Man's
Seed God according to his promise has raised unto Israel a Savior Jesus. Men
and Brethren, Children of the stock of Abraham, and who ever among you fears
God, to you is the word of this Salvation sent, and we declare unto you glad
tidings, etc. see ver. 38, 39, 40, 46. before cited: And compare this with Luke
1. 67, 68, 69, etc. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and
redeemed his People, and has raised up an horn of Salvation for us in the
Honse of his Servant David, etc. Mat. 25. throughout.

Mat. 28. 19, 20. All Power is given to me in Heaven and Earth, go ye therefore
and Preach, etc. Acts 10. 36. 43. And this contains power to forgive Sins, Mat.
9. 6. So that you see what the Scripture says to this point.

3. And then there is neither one Text of Scripture, nor one solid Reason
against it, nor any ill consequence at all that follows on it.

1. There is not one Text of Scripture that says Christ died not for all, or
Christ dyed only for his Chosen, or any thing equivalent. The Texts commonly
alleged, are, John 17. 9. I pray for them, I pray not for the World, 19. and
for their sakes I sanctify my self, Joh. 10, 11, The good Shepherd gives his
Life for his Sheep, Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his Son, but gave him up for
us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things, 1 Cor. 5. 18.
God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing to them
their Trespasses, Romans 5. 8, 9, 10. For if when we were Enemies we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall
be saved by his life, John 11. 51, 52. That Jesus should dye for that Nation,
and not for that Nation only, but that also he should gather together in one
the Children of God that were scattered abroad, Mat. 1. 21. for he shall save
his People from their Sins, Joh. 15. 13. Greater Love has no man than this,
that a man to lay down his life for his friends, 1 John 3. 16. Hereby perceive
we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us, Romans 8. 34. who is he
that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather, etc. 1 Pet. 3. 18. Christ
has once suffered for Sin, the just for the ^njust, that he might bring us to
God, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. knowing that you are not redeemed with corruptible
things, as Silver and Gold from your vain conversation, received by Tradition
from your Fathers, but with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 29.
He bore our sins on the Tree, that me being dead to sin should live to
Righteousness, Tit. 2. 14. That he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify to himself a peculiar People zealous of good works, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26.
Even as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it that he might present
it to himself a glorious Church not having spot or wrinkle, etc. Isa. 53. 11.
By his knowledge shall my righteous Servant justify many, for he shall bear
their iniquities, John 17. 2. Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he
should give Eternal Life to as many as thou have given him, Mat. 7. 23. Depart
from me, I never knew you, etc. Heb. 9. 28. Christ was once offered to bear the
Sins of many, etc. Heb. 10. 14. For by one offering he has perfected for ever
them that are sanctified, Psalm. 16 9. Their drink offerings of blood will I not
offer, nor take up their name into my lips, Genesis 3. 15. The Seed of the Woman
shall break the Serpents head, and his seed bruise her heel, Mat. 11. 25. I
thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because tho^ have hid these
things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them to Babes, Ephesians. 1. 7.
In whom we have Redemption through his blood the forgiveness of sins, 2 Cor. 5.
21. For he made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him.

These are all the Texts that at present I can remember, or find used by those
that write against Universal Redemption, which have any considerable show of a
proof. of all which there is not one that excludes the Non-Elect* nor any in
the World from being the Persons for whom Christ dyed, as we shall see when we
come to review them more particularly.

Nor is there any ill consequence following the Doctrine of Universal
Satisfaction, but all that terrifies men from it, is seeming ill Consequences
for want of right understanding it: most men think (who go that way) that
Universal Redemption is inconsistent with absolute Election, and with special
differencing Grace, and with Christ's special intention of calling and saving
his Chosen, whereas indeed it is so far from being inconsistent, that it is
necessarily concomitant and supposed, and they may as well think that Universal
Creation is inconsistent with Election and special grace. Indeed God has in
admirable wisdom laid Universal Grace as a ground work, and built special grace
(as to the executive part) thereupon, and to deny the Universal Common grace,
is to destroy the groundwork of special grace. If this were well understood,
there would few sober Divines be against Universal Redemption, and therefore I
still say, that it is a clear explication that must do more here (and is more
needful) than argumentation. Yet because some do so importunately call for
Arguments I have given these Thirty (and might add many more) and shall now
proceed to those that are drawn from particular Texts of Scriptures having
first laid down one or two more general considerations from the Scripture
Language in this particular.

That Election and Redemption are not of the same extent, and not all Elected
that are Redeemed, but Redemption is Universal, and Election special may be
strongly evinced by comparing together the language of the Scripture,
concerning one and the other* how differently it speaks.

1. We find God charging Men to give all diligence to make sure their Calling
and Election, 2 Pet. 1. 10. But not one word in all the Scripture to command or
persuade Men to make sure that they are redeemed (unless we meant it not of the
price, but the fruits:) Paul says to his Converts, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your
selves whether you be in the Faith, know ye not your own selves that Jesus
Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates? But he never bid any man, examine thy
self whether thou be redeemed, or whether Christ dyed for thee? or whether thou
be one of those for whom Christ dyed? we have marks given in Scripture to know
by, whether we are the Children of God or no? whether sanctified, justified,
pardoned, or no, but never a mark laid down in Scripture to know by, whether we
are of those that Christ dyed for; no more than there is to know whether we are
of those that God Created. And would not the perfect holy word of God have
given marks of this, or bid men make sure of this, and try it if it were
needful, and were not unquestionable because universal.

2. We find the Saints (as David) complaining of God's hiding his face, and
seeming their Enemy, and writing bitter things against them, and groaning under
that burden of Sin, and crying for Pardon, and saying God had forsaken and
forgotten them, etc. But we never find any Man good or bad (that believed Gods
word to be true) to doubt whether Christ dyed for him, or whether he were
Redeemed, or complaining of his danger for want of a Redeemer, or Expiatory
Sacrifice.

3. We find God ordinarily saying of Christ Jesus, that he is the Savior of
the World, and came not to condemn the World, but to save the World, and took
away the sins of the World, and is a propitiation for the fins of the whole
World, and dyed for all, tasted death for every man, and was a ransom for all,
etc. But we have no one word in Scripture that says he predestined all to
Salvation, or decreed to save the whole World: Nay, the very term of Election
contradicts Universality, for it is no choosing if it be all, and if some be
not left.

4. We find Wicked Men condemned, and their sin aggravated for denying the Lord
that bought them, 2 Pet. 2. 1. But never for denying the Lord that Elected them.

5. We find Christians by the Apostles warned that they destroy not their weak
Brethren for whom Christ dyed; and saying, through thy knowledge shall he
perish, etc. But he nevea says, destroy not him (or by thy knowledge shall he
perish) whom God has Elected: but contrarily, Christ says, if it were
possible they would deceive the very Elect.

6. We find them that fall away described to be such as were sanctified by the
blood of the Covenant, but never to be such as were Elected to Salvation. And
their Sin is aggravated, as being a treading under foot the Son of God, and
putting him to open shame, but not as treading under foot Gods Election. And
their misery is in this, that there is no more Sacrifice for Sin, but a fearful
looking for of Judgment, and Fire, etc. But not that there is no more Election.

7. Men are warned to see that they refuse not Christ that speaks and
threatened that they shall not escape if they neglect so great Salvation, and
they shall speed worse at Judgment than Sodom and Gomorrhah: But none are so
threatened for sinning against Election, nor are they warned to take heed of
rejecting it; nor is it said, how shall we escape if we neglect so great a
mercy as Election. Also men that unworthily receive the Sacrament are said to
eat and drink damnation to themselves, and to be guilty of the Body and Blood
of the Lord: But no Man that is not Elect, is said either to be the cause of
his own Non Election, or to be guilty of abusing or rejecting his Election.

8. Also I find men warned on pain of Damnation to receive Christ as their
Redeemer, Be they never so wicked, it is our office to persuade them to this;
and therefore to preach the Gospel to every Creature. But we are not to command
men to take God for their Elector; I may not go to all the ignorant profane
men men in the Country and charge them to take God for their Elector.

9. We must command all men to love Christ as their Redeemer, and be thankful
to him, and in thankfulness to obey him; and we may say to them, You are not
your own, you are bought with a price, therefore glorify God with your Bodies
and Spirits for they are his. But we cannot persuade all men to love God as
their Elector or to be thankful to him for Election; or to obey God because he
has chosen them.

10. We find Scripture telling us, how hardly flesh and blood will digest the
Doctrine of predestination, and how they will quarrel at Gods chosing one and
not another, and how God stops their mouths with an answer drawn from his
absolute Lordship and Propriety over them, as the Potter over the clay, he may
make them vessels of honor or dishonor, and do with his own as he list. But
we never find any murmurrings of Flesh and Blood that Christ should die for one
man and not for another: Nor do we find God ever acknowledging any such thing
much less giving them a reason from his Absolute Dominion.

11. Besides we find God uses to give the reason why men be not saved by
Christ, from their own wilfulness and rebellious rejecting him. This is the
cause given why his blood is not applied to them. But when it comes matter of
Election or Non-Election, the Answer is, Oh Man! Who art thou that disputest
against God? So that all these things laid together and considered, it seems to
me clear, that Redemption is a Universal Cause, as Creation is, and not a thing
proper to the Elect only, as Gods Election is; and that on this Universal
Ground of Redemption, Christ is entitled the Redeemer of the World, and has
founded his jus Dominii and imperii, his right of Propriety and Government over
all (even those That will not that he should Reign over them,) as God was
called the Creator of the World because he Created them, and on that ground did
found his first Title of Dominion and Empire over all the World. And that
Redemption has no more an infallible connection to the Salvation of all the
Redeemed as subsequent, than Creation has with the Salvation of all the
Created: But both Creation and Redemption as they are the means between
Election and its End, have an infallible connection with the consequent of the
Salvation of the Elect.

2. It is a rule of great use, and approved generally by Divines, that when
texts seem contradictory one to another, or several interpretations and
opinions are contradictory indeed, that we must ever reduce uncertainties to
certainties, and not contrarily certainties to uncertainties: and we must
interpret obscure texts by reducing them to the plain ones, and not the plain
ones by reducing them to the obscure. This rule Dr. Sanderson presses well:
And Augustine said excellently, [Shall we deny that which is plain because we
cannot comprehend that which is hid and secret? Shall we say that is not so
which we see to be so, because we cannot find why it is so? Aug. l. de bono
persever. c. 14] O that this rule were better observed! When God tells us as
plain as can be spoken, that Christ died for and tasted death for every man,
men will deny it, and to that end subvert the plain sense of the words, merely
because they cannot see how this can stand with Christ's damning men, and with
his special Love to his chosen. It is not hard to see the fair and harmonious
consistency: But what if you cannot see how two plain Truths of the Gospel
should agree? Will you therefore deny one of them when both are plain? Is not
that in high pride to prefer your own understandings before the wisdom of the
Spirit of God, who indicted the Scriptures? Should not a humble man rather say,
doubtless both are true though I cannot reconcile them. So others will deny
these plain truths, because they think that [All that Christ died for are
certainly Justified and Saved: For whomsoever he died and satisfied Justice
for, them he procured Faith to Believe in him: God cannot justly punish those
whom Christ has satisfied for, etc.] But does the Scripture speak all these or
any of these opinions of theirs, as plainly as it says that Christ died for
all and every man? Does it say, as plainly any where that he died not for all?
Does it any where except any one man, and say Christ died not for him? Does it
say any where that he died only for his Sheep, or his Elect, and exclude the
Non-Elect? There is no such word in all the Bible; Should not then the certain
truths and the plain texts be the Standard to the uncertain points, and obscure
texts.

Also Divines generally make it a rule for the Interpretation of Scripture,
that we must not leave the most obvious plain sense of the words, without
necessity, and clear compelling evidence; Now then let them be viewed by any
unprejudiced man, and let him tell us what is the plain and obvious sense of
these foresaid words? And for my part I see no necessity of going from that
plain sense. Some here will tell me, then we must say Christ is a Door, a Way,
a Vine, and the Bread is his Body, etc. But this is nothing to what I am
speaking of: For I did never say that we must take the literal sense in
opposition to the figurative, but only the plain obvious sense in opposition to
a wyerdrawn extorted sense. Some figurative speeches are so usual, or plain and
well known, that he that should interpret them literally would be derided by
any Plowman: And every ignorant man uses figurative speeches in his common
talk, and use makes the true sense as plain and obvious as if they were not
figurative. You can scarce hear three sentences from any Countryman, but will
convince you of this. If any man of common reason had heard Christ say; [ I am
the way to the Father] would he have thought his plain obvious sense to be [I
am an Earthly or other Material way to be trodden on by the Feet of them to
come to God?] What will not the lust of contradicting persuade men to? Now I
would know of any man, would you believe that Christ died for all men if the
Scripture plainly speak it? If you would, do but tell me, what words can you
devise or would you wish more plain for it than are there used; Is it not
enough that Christ is called the Savior of the World? You Will say, but is it of
the whole World? Yes, it says, He is the propitiation for the sins of the
whole World? Will you say, but it is not for All men in the World; yes it says
he died for All men, as well as for all the World. But will you say, it says
not for every man? Yes that it does, he tasted death for every man. But you may
say, It means all the Elect, if it said so of any Non-Elect I would believe.
Yes, it speaks of those that denied the Lord that bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift destruction. And yet all this seems nothing to men prejudiced.

3. Furthermore, it deserves consideration, whether men can considerately go
against the plain light of so many express Texts of Scripture without some
reluctance and regret of Judgment? And then, whether using a man's Judgment to
such a course, to bear down the evidence of of many express texts of Scripture,
be not a matter of a dangerous nature, both symptomatically and effectually.
Does it not signify a defect in our belief of the truth of Scripture? Or at
least of our reverend esteem of it, when we dare use it as a Leaden rule, and
Nose of Wax (as the Papists presumptuously call it.) He that can think it will
endure such bending, is in danger of thinking it may endure breaking. Has it
not too plain a tendency to infidelity and disobedience? It is the truth of
this word that must preserve us from both. And he that thinks so meanly of the
Scripture, as that it will patiently endure such violence and stretching, is in
great danger of being drawn to question whether it be Gods Word or no, and of
venturing over its bounds in practicals, in case of temptation. For what have
we to persuade us that Christ is the eternal God but plain Scripture? And is it
plainer in this than in its affirming that Christ died for All? All tender
conscionable Christians should be as fearful to adventure against the plain
meaning of Scripture in the matter of Faith, as to adventure against its plain
precepts and prohibitions in matter of practice. And therefore I conclude that
when God says so expressly that Christ died for All, and tasted death for every
man, and is the Ranfom for all and the propitiation for the sins of the whole
World, It beseems every Christian rather to explain in what sense Christ died
for All men, then flatly to deny it.

The first text of Scripture ordinarily used, and which I shall insist on, is
Job. 3. 16. God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son that
whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life. Here it
is plainly expressed that the giving of Christ proceeded from Gods Love to the
World as the principal efficient, and that it was to this end, that whosoever
of this World believe in him should be saved. One would think all were plain
here, yet men have found or made almost as many knots as words. If a King had
his whole Army prove false to him and turn to the Enemy; and when they are in
his power the Enemy Imprisoneth them, and makes them Slaves, in this misery
the King says of them [I so love my Army that I give so much money or my own
Son in Ransom, that whosoever will thankfully accept my kindness, and return to
his Allegiance, shall not remain in slavery but be delivered fully into my
favor and their dignities] would not ordinary men easily understand this
speech? Would so many doubts be raised, whether he mean the whole Army or part?
What is meant by [Love] by [Whosoever] etc. yet here we have such a dust raised
in as plain a case, or as plain words as such Divine mysteries could well be
expressed by.

1. It is doubted what is meant by [the World.]

2. And then what is meant by [Loved.]

3. And what is meant by [Whosoever.]

The 4. What is meant by [Believeth in him] we need not here stand on.

And for the first some say by the World, is meant the Elect part of the
World: some say (as Dr. Twiss and others) it is meant of Mankind as distinct
from Angels, excluding none, and not of the Elect only; and withal that it
speaks only of the sufficiency of Christ's Satisfaction; which if it were not
sufficient for All, there were no place for the General Promise, Whoever
believes shall be Saved. There is more truth and soundness in this exposition,
than will stand with some other contradictory passages in the same Authors. For
my part I stand to this exposition of Dr. Twiss (as you may find him
industriously explaining this text, Vindic. Great. lib. 1. part. 2. 7. page
(mihi) 203.) I will repeat part of his words, [ Ad locum illum ( Joh. 3. 16.)
quod attinet, negamus ex his evinci posse [Mundum] eo in loco significare
[Electos] in mundo degentes. Ad cujus loci majorem elucidationem, observandum
est cum decrevisset Fidem and Rescipiscentiam electis suis non modo concedere,
sed and easdem modo naturae ipsorum rationali convenientissimo, nempe per
Suasionem and exhortationem in ipsis operari and consequenter Evangelium sub
generali invitationis forma proponendum esset in hunc modum [Quisquis
crediderit, salvus erit: qui non, damnabitur] hinc evincitur mittendi
Mediatoris duplicem Deo habendam fuisse rationem, alteram Pretii; alteram
Efficaciae Nam and Pretium oportuit sufficiens esse redimendis omnibus; alias
enim tam generali promissioni [ quisquis crediderit salvus erit] locus nullus
fuisset: and rursus oportuit efficax esse redimendis electis: alias enim
frustra fuissent constituti ad obtinendam salutem per Jesum Christum, si
salutem per Christum non fuissent assecuturi. His hunc in modum constitutis,
apparet fieri posse ut quaedam loca Scripturae de Christo mediatore tractent,
quoad pretii ipsius sufficientiam, alia vero quoad mortis ejus efficaciam.
Locum autem hunc de quo agimus existimo, significare tantum pretii ipsius
sufficientiam. Ratio est quia agit, non de efficacia Spiritus sancti, in danda
hominibus fide, sed de modo quo fides dari solet, nempe per predicationem
Evangelii and Generalem omnium invitationem ad fidem in hanc formam [ Quisquis
credit in Christum, non peribit, sed habet vitam aeternam] Hujus autem
invitationis Generalis fundamentum, est pretii a Christo soluti sufficientia.
Atque hic rursus sese in gerit (...) peculiaris divinae clementiae propensio in
genus humanum, quod scilicet pro peccatis humani generis pretium sufficiens
solutum iri voluit non autem pro peccatis Angelorum.

For the better understanding of this, it must be remembered that there is a
double efficacy of Christ's death.

1. Its satisfying God's Justice for the Sins which Christ bore.

2. The effecting of Pardon, Justification, Sanctification, and Salvation of
Sinners. It is only of this latter that solid Divines speak, when they
distinguish the efficacy of Christ's death from its sufficiency: But the former
(the effecting of satisfaction) is presupposed to the sufficiency (as being the
proper immediate end of Christ's death) for there is a double sufficiency.

First, a sufficiency material, antecedent to satisfaction (passive as we may
call it) by which it is said to be sufficient to satisfy God for all Men.

Secondly, A sufficiency of this price and satisfaction so made for the
pardoning and saving of all that will believe. It is the latter sufficiency
which is to be distinguished from the latter efficiency, and that implies some
efficiency as necessary to that sufficiency, viz. The efficiency of
satisfaction. And the Doctor can be understood no otherwise here than according
to this interpretation.

1. Because he makes it the necessary ground of the general promise, without
which it could have no place. Now leave out the efficiency of satisfaction to
Justice from Christ's death, and it is no more a ground for an Universal
promise, than if he had not paid a satisfaction materially sufficient at all:
For it is not sufficient to pardon all men, if they did believe, except Justice
be first satisfied for them.

2. He expressly makes it to be sufficientia pretii, and not ut sit pretium,
(though I know elsewhere he contradicts that.)

3. He makes it the interpretation of those Scriptures that speak of Christ's
dying for all, which cannot be if he satisfied not for all.

4. He makes a general promise and invitation to be grounded on it: But surely
Christ is not with his Salvation given so much as conditionally to any but whom
by satisfying for them he has purchased that mercy to.

5. Yea he expressly in his Reason shows, that by the efficacy of Christ's death,
he means that which consists in the Spirits efficacy in working Faith.

Others say, that by [the World] is meant only the Elect, but not as Elect, but
as they are Gentiles who are called the World in contradistinction to the Jews.
This cannot be true, for

First, Then no Elect Jews should be included, but it should run thus, God so
loved the Gentiles, that he gave his only Son, etc.] whereas Christ was sent to
Jews as well as Gentiles, and that first in some respects.

Secondly, This way crosses themselves also, for the Gentiles consist of Elect
and non-Elect, and therefore according to their Doctrine it should only run
thus [ God so loved part of the World] if the Gentiles be the World, or else
they must say, that by [the World] is meant the Elect part of the Gentiles. But
I shall prove further that this is false, by proving that it includes the
Non-Elect also. By [the World] it is evident is not meant the containing World,
the Air, Earth, etc. Nor Angels, or unknown Superior Creatures, nor yet brute
Beasts, but the Men living on Earth. It is granted that the usual obvious sense
of words is not to be denied without evident cause, and when there is cause of
denying that sense, we must go but to the next obvious and usual sense, and not
to a remote unusual improbable one. Now it is known that the word [World] used
for Men, does most directly and obviously signify Mankind in general, without
excluding any. Next to that it signifies the greater part or common sort of
the World. Next that it signifies the generality or greater part of some
Country where the speaker then is; not to speak of more remote significations.
If therefore we be forced to forsake the first signification, it must be proved
that we are also forced from the second before we must take the third, and both
second and third must be disproved, before we can take the World for the Elect
only.

2. The effects of that love, and giving of Christ here mentioned, are
undoubtedly such as are given to all, and not only to the Elect (as to the
Tenor of the Law or Deed of Gift, they are given to all Mankind, and as to the
promulgation, they are given to all those that hear the Gospel.) Therefore the
World here mentioned is all, and not only the Elect. I think none will deny the
Consequence, and for the Antecedent, it is evident through all the Scripture as
well as this Text. The effect of the giving of Christ here expressed, is the
conditional gift of Salvation: But the conditional gift of Salvation is to all,
and not only to the Elect, Ergo, etc. [ That whosoever believes in him should
not perish] is a plain giving of Salvation on condition of believing; it being
usual in Scripture and common speech, to make [whosoever will] and [if you
will] equally conditionally. Whosoever will, let him take the water of Life
freely, is equivalent to this [it shall be yours if you will take it.] If you
beat up the Drum for Soldiers, you proclaim [whosoever will come to such a
place and list himself under such a Commander, shall have Entertainment and
Pay,] here [whosoever will come and list himself,] is equivalent to [if any or
all of you will come and list your selves] So that where they put the question,
whether the word [whosoever] be distributive? I answer, no, not directly, it is
but the universal extension of the Conditional Promise, with an expression of
the conditionality; but consequently it is distributive, though Antecedently
and directly it be not. As in the former Comparison, when you say [whosoever
will list himself, etc] the word [whosoever] is not directly distributive, for
you offer all that hear you that privilege, and all may accept it if they
will, and then there would be no distribution: But because all will not, and
this is foreknown, therefore consequently it is distributive. So here; and that
it is distributive is from the will of Man, and the event, and other exterior
differencing Causes; but not properly from the promise or deed of gift at all,
except by accident.

3. The next words show what [World] it is that is here spoken of, viz. That
which comprizeth men that believe, and so are not Condemned; and those that
believe not (which Consideration is consequential, and not antecedent to
Christ's dying for them) and so are Condemned already, because they have not
believed, etc. v. 18. They that will affirm a greater restriction in the sense
of the word, must prove it. For (though I have proved here the larger sense)
yet indeed it belongs to them to prove their assertion, who recede from the
commoner and more extensive sense. I shall briefly examine what they say to
that end.

Only I must entreat the Reader, that if they compare my Writings with any Book
which contains the Reasons which I confute, that you would not expect that I
should take any notice of any of those strangely-confident, Juvenile,
Triumphant Expressions which some do abound with, but that I draw out only the
pith of their Arguments, and set Reason against Reason, and let the heaps of
Worldly Rhetorical Gloryings alone: Much more must I expect that you will not
take me to be engaged to defend any Arminian misinterpretations and weaknesses,
and to confute what any man says against them, but only that which seems of
force against the interpretations or assertions that I my self do maintain.

The first Reason they give for proving that it is only the Elect that here are
called the World, is drawn from the Love which is here said to have the World
for its object, which cannot be common to all, but is proper to the Elect. This
we deny, and they attempt to prove by these five Reasons.

1. Say they, it is the most transcendent and remarkable Love, and therefore
proper to the Elect. I must desire the Reader to see this answered afterward in
my answer to their interpretation of John.

2. It is an Eternal act of God's will.

Answ. But what that is to the purpose I know not.

3. It was the cause of sending Christ.

Answ. That Is true, it was one cause, but how follows the consequence?

4. They say that Love which is the cause of giving Christ, is always the cause
of bestowing all other good things.

Answ. That Love which caused the giving of Christ for the Elect, is the cause
of giving them all things with him; but that love which caused the giving of
Christ for all, shall not eventually give them all things. I refer you to what
I shall say anon to Romans 8. 32. for the full answer to this.

5. They say this Love is an assured Fountain of Salvation to all that are
beloved with it.

Answ. I deny it, if they mean by [assured] such as shall eventually be saved;
but, say they, the issue of this Love being not perishing but obtaining Eternal
Life, happens only to the Elect, Ergo, etc.

Answ. The Text speaks of no other effect of this Love, but the giving of
Christ, and the giving of Eternal Life on Condition of believing. Now for the
former, there is a twofold giving of Christ; First, giving him on the Cross for
us. Secondly, Giving him in the word of Promise to us.

The Text seems to comprehend both. He is given on the Cross for all, he is
given in the word conditionally to all, and so is Eternal Life with him.

Now, though the actual right to Eternal Life and fruition of it be not the
portion of all, yet that makes no alteration or differencing nature in this
Universal Conditional promise, it is because one believed, and another did not.
The Promise antecedently to the performance or nonperformance of the
Condition, gave Christ alike to the Elect, and non-Elect, and Life with him.
But that some believed rather than others, was not from the gift of this
Universal Conditional Promise, but from another cause, even Gods secret decree
of Election.

Their second Reason for proving that by [the World] is meant only the Elect,
is because it is the same World that Christ came to save, ver. 17. but that is
only the Elect, else God should fail of his intention.

Answ. This is to pervert one Text by perverting another, as I shall show anon,
when we come to that Text.

Their Third Reason is, that its usual to call the Elect the [World.]

Answ. It was a very Pious Judicious Grave Divine that said [I profess I cannot
find any one clear place where [the World] must of necessity be taken for the
Elect only. Ezekiel. Culverwell in his Answer to Objections against his Treaty of
Faith.]

They allege for what they say these Texts, John 4. 42. where Christ is called
the Savior of the World, a Savior of Men not saved, is strange.

Answ. So are all things strange to Men till they understand them. It Is no more
strange than that God Created all Men to Life (that Happiness which the first
Covenant promised) who yet did dye for Sin.

The Second is John 6. 33, 57. which shall be vindicated anon.

The Third is Romans 4. 13. Abraham is said by Faith to be Heir of the World,
which ver. 11. is called to be [the Father of the Faithful.]

Answ. A bold interpretation, but here is no proof, nor appearance of any that
the Father of the faithful is all one with (Heir of the World) is too unlikely
a thing to be received on a Man's bare word: Especially considering that it is
proper to Abraham to be (Father of all them that believe) verse. 11. But to be
Heir of the World, verse 13. is not proper to him: For it is said, (the
promise, that he should be Heir of the World, was not to Abraham or to his
Seed, through the Law.) I never read where Abraham is called (Heir of the
Faithful) nor can he so be conveniently called: But he is called Heir of the
World: Therefore by the World is not meant only the Faithful.

The Next is Romans 11. 12. If the fall of them be the Riches of the World, and
the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles, etc.]

Ans. It is more than the Elect Gentiles that shall be and are enricht by
Christ (though not as the Elect) others are enriched with that Church state
visible, which Paul here speaks that the Jews were broken off from: As also
with the Gospel, and ordinances, and conditional gift of Christ and
justification and glory; besides many other mercies. The next Text cited to
prove that the [World] is put only for the Elect is Col. 1. 6. [Which Gospel]
is come unto you, as it is in all the World, and brings forth fruit, as it
does also in you. etc.

Ans. 1. It is not said, that it brings forth fruit in all the World, but
that it is come into all the World, and brings forth Fruit, viz. in some
where it comes.

2. But suppose it were otherwise, does not Christ say, that the Gospel does
bring forth fruit in more than the Elect, viz. in many that fall away when
Persecution arises? Mat. 13. And in whom the cares of the World do choke that
Fruit.

3. Were these Colos. all Elect to whom Paul speaks?

4. It is a known truth that the Gospel comes to more than the Elect; for many
are called, but few chosen; next they allege 2 Cor. 5. 19. which makes
sufficiently against their whole cause as shall be shown anon, when we come to
it. Another place cited by them is, 1 John 2. 2. Christ is the propitiation of
the sins of the whole World.

Ans. If they may thus beg the question, all Texts shall mean as they would
have them. Of this anon. Another place cited is Psalm. 22. 27. All the ends of
the World remember and turn unto the Lord: And all the Kindreds of the Nations
shall worship before thee: For the Kingdom is the Lord's, and he is the
Governor among the Nations.]

Ans. 1. [All the ends of the World] is not so large as [all the World.]

2. It is plain that this Text speaks of the establishment of Christ's visible
Kingdom, which contains more than the Elect. The Net of the Gospel brings
Fishes good and bad. The Heathen Countries that have turned to the Lord from
Paganism and Infidelity, have not all believed to Salvation. The Kingdoms of
the World shall become the kingdom of the Lord and of his Christ: But they are
not all Elect.

These are all the Texts that I find urged to to prove that by the World is
signified only the Elect.

2. And what if it were so in some places?

1. It follows not that it is so here.

2. The usual Sense must not be forsaken without cause: Nor is it sufficient
that unusually it is otherwise taken.

3. The conjoined words will show the necessity of a restrained Sense, where
such a Sense is necessary to be received; but so they do not here, but
contrarily, as has been showed.

Their 4th. Reason to prove that by the [World] is here meant [the Elect only]
is this. If every one in the World be intended, why does not the Lord in the
pursuit of this Love reveal Christ to all so loved?

Ans. This is to be fully answered anon among the main Objections, by it self.

Lastly, they say, else all these will follow.

1. That some are beloved and hated also from Eternity.

2. That God's Love toward innumerable is fruitless and vain.

3. That the Son of God is given to them that never hear word of him, and have
no power granted to believe in him.

4. That God is mutable in his Love, or else he still loves those that be in
Hell.

5. That he gives not all things to them to whom he gives his Son.

6. That he knows not certainly before, who shall believe and be saved.

Ans. To the first I thought no Antiarminian Divine ever denied it. God hates
all the Workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5. 5. You will not say, that he hated them
not from Eternity: Many of the Workers of iniquity are Elect, and so loved from
Eternity. God's Love is spoken, say Divines, ab effectu, potius quam ab
affectu. God from Eternity so loved Men, not Elect, as to give them on Creation
Everlasting Life in Adam, on condition of fulfilling the first Covenant; and to
give them everlasting life in Christ on condition of believing according to the
second Covenant: And yet he decreed not to give any Men Grace to perform the
condition of the first covenant; nor to give all men Grace to perform the
condition of the second.

To the 2d. Consequence I shall answer fully by it self anon among the contrary
Arguments.

To the 3d. also I shall there answer.

To the 4th. I say (for it is not worth a fuller answer.)

1. All Divines that I know say that God loves those in Hell, as his Creatures
and as Men: Aquinas and the rest of the Schoolmen have it frequently: Yea
Ursine, Rob. Baronius and many of our Protestant Divines say, that he punishes
those in Hell short of their deserving, and so shows some mercy there; that I
will not meddle with.

2. If you speak of God's Love as it is in effectu and not in affectu, then it
is certainly mutable. He gives Men those mercies, which for their ^buse he
removes or turns to judgments. He gives to all a conditional Pardon, and
Life: And after condemns most to Death for not performing the condition. To
the Elect themselves these Effects are changeable.

3. If you say, God's Love is but his Velle bonum alicui; and therefore he
cannot be said now Men are in Hell to continue to will them a conditional
Pardon and Life: Therefore God's Love must be mutable. I answer, Let those Owls
that love to blind themselves by gazing on the Sun of God's undiscernable
Infiniteness, undertake to tell what God's Love is, and what his Will is, and
how he Wills that which is past, etc. For my part I pretend not to a capacity
of discerning any such things.

2. You may enforce your objection as strongly concerning God's Love to the
Elect: He once willed their Creation, then he willed to redeem them by Christ,
then he willed to call them, and to give them their first justification, to
deliver them from this sickness and that danger, then he willed that they
should die, and then that they should rise again: If you will tell me how God
after the Resurrection, will continue to all Eternity, to will to create Man,
to redeem him, to call him, justify him, deliver him, raise him, etc. then I
will tell you how God will Eternally will the giving Christ Pardon and
Salvation conditionally to all. If you say, he Wills them as preterita, and not
as presentia vel futura; you may say so by this. If you say, that there is no
preteritum vel futurum with God, but all present, and therefore he wills them
as preterita sic dicta quoad hominem vel fidem mensuram humanam, sed ut
presentia quoad Deum; the like you may say here also.

To the 5th. Consequence I must answer anon by it self when we speak of their
Argument from Romans 8. 32.

To the 6th. It is a naked affirmation, as easily denied. Dare Men say, that it
was no mercy or love of God, to give mankind in Adam Eternal Life on condition
of keeping his Law, because God foreknew or foredecreed, they would not or
should not keep it? And so not attain the fruit of that Govenant thereby? Dare
these Men (pretending to preach the Gospel) tell their hearers, that to all of
them (except the Elect) the preaching, the Gospel (and therein the offer and
conditional gift of Christ, Pardon, Justification and Salvation is no mercy,
nor from any love of God to them? And so that in rejecting it they never were
guilty of rejecting or sinning against any love or mercy?

Having examined what they say, to prove that by [the World] is meant [the
Elect only] I find it needless to examine the rest about the Sense of the word
[loved] and [whosoever] partly because what they say requires not much
confutation, and partly because enough is said on occasion of this. I affirm
that by love is not meant a mere natural affection, nor yet a mere Act: (But if
we must speak of God after the manner of Men) it is an Act proceeding from the
goodness of God's nature. And I deny not this Act to be free: And therefore
take not natural, For,

Physical (as if God loved us as the Fire burned, quantum in se)

2. Nor yet Constrained: And it must be observed, that both the Text, and those
that thus interpret it, speak only of God's Love to Mankind or the World, and
not directly to the [Salvation of the World.] The conditional gift of Salvation
to the World is the Effect of that love to the World; and it is true love,
though it infallibly procure not that Salvation.

And for the other words [whosoever believeth] as I have said before, they are
primarily and directly the conditional expression, and to all: But secondarily
and accidentally distributive, because all perform not the condition. So Romans
10. 13. Whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord shall be saved: Which
verse 9. is conditionally thus expressed [if thou believe and if thou confess]
and verse 11. It is put in equipollent terms, whosoever believes on him shall
not be ashamed. So Romans 9. 33. Joh. 11. 26. Act. 10. 43. Whosoever believes in
him shall receive Remission of Sins. Act. 2. 21. Joh. 12. 46. Mar. 10. 15. Mar.
8. 34, 38. Mat. 18. 4. and 5. 19, 21, 22, 28. and 10. 14, 32, 33, 42.

The 2d. Text that I shall alledg, is the next Verses, Joh. 3. 17, 18, 19. For
God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World, but that the World
through him might be saved. He that believes on him is not condemned, but he
that believes not is condemned already; because he has not believed on the
name of the only begotten Son of God. And this is the condemnation, that Light
is come into the World, and Men loved darkness rather than Light, etc.]

Here 1. It is expressly said that Christ came into the World, that the World by
him might be saved: And therefore he died for them.

2. Yet this World is distributed into such as believe and are not condemned,
and such as believe not and are condemned: And therefore it is not only the
Elect.

3. This condemnation is for not believing; which, as I have proved,
presupposes Christ's dying for them.

Now let us see what they bring to prove that by the World here is meant only
the Elect. They tell us here of a notable (...) as if by the Word [World] were
meant several things, when here repeated: But for proof of what they say, you
must take their words. Is it not good Sense and true to say [ God sent not his
Son into the World,] viz. into the World of mankind, or among Men, [ to condemn
the World] viz of Mankind [ but that the World] of Mankind [ through him might
be saved.] But what if their various acception were granted? Still the World
that Christ was sent to save, is divided into Believers eventually saved, and
Unbelievers eventually condemned. If this be denied, the next words annexed are
so clear, that I desire the Reader, but without prejudice, to consider them,
and use no violence with his judgment in expounding them. Their Reasons for
their Senseare these.

1. Because all are not saved: And the Lord has said he will do all his
pleasure, and his purpose shall stand.

Ans. 1. He will do all that he is pleased to do: But not all that he is
pleased to command Man to do: Nor all that he is pleased to promise to Man on
certain conditions, when those conditions are not performed. His purpose shall
undoubtedly stand: But when will it be proved that God did purpose or resolve
eventually, and actually to save that World that is here meant? As God has a
Will de rerum eventu, and a Will de debito, which I call Legislative: So each
act of his Will has its proper end (as we may ascribe any end to Gods Will,
distinct from himself by improper speech.) His decreed or purposed ends he
always attains (supposing them absolute: For I will not in this place touch
that controversy, whether God have a conditional decretive Will de rerum
eventu: But his Legal prescribed ends he does not always attain. The end of his
Law is the fulfiling of its conditions, and Man's attaining the reward thereby:
This may be called God's end.

1. In that God prescribes it to Man to be by him intended; and so sending
Christ into the World to satisfy his justice, he has bound the World to seek
and accept Life and Salvation in and by him.

2. In that God has made Christ and Faith to have the nature of a means, in
reference to that command: And all Men are bound (that hear the Gospel) to take
Christ by believing in him, as a means of Salvation provided by God.

3. Because God has truly made to all Men a deed of gift, or a legacy of
Christ and Salvation with him to all that will take him, and therefore he may
well be said, to have given Christ that the World through him might be saved:
Having given them Salvation in Christ they will have it.

4. He therefore gives Christ to the World of Unbelievers, that conditionally
they may be saved: That is, if they will: That is, if they will have Salvation
in and with Christ. And

5. In so doing God does all that belongs to him to do as Legislator: For it
must be understood that here he speaks those words [ that the World by him
might be saved] not as absolute Lord merely or properly, but as Rector per
Leges. And it belongs to him as Legislator, only to propound Salvation, to Man
as his end: And to promise it on his conditions, and prescribe those conditions
and command Man to perform them: And to threaten him with the loss of that end
(of Salvation) if he perform them not. But to give Faith, which is the
condition it self, does not belong to God as Legislator. (No Man living can
claim the first Act of Faith, or effectual Grace thereto, from God by any
promise that he has made): But he gives it as Dominus absolutus, and as one
that may do with his own as he list. So that it is Finis prescriptus and
conditionaliter datus, that is here spoken of; and not Finis Decretus to be by
God eventually infallibly accomplished. It is the end of Gods Law, and
Legislative Will, and so of God as mere Legislator or Rector per Leges: And not
of his decretive Will de eventu, and of God as absolute Lord above Laws,
without them disposing of his own. (The prediction of Events does collaterally
and secundum quid belong to his Law: But not per se and directly.)

And 6. Consider, that if it be never so much denied that God has properly a
conditional Will de rerum eventu, yet it is beyond all question true, that he
has a conditional Will de debito, ( officii, Praemii and Poenae) and so his
Law is contidional most commonly. He has constituted the Debitum praemii, the
dueness of Salvation on condition of believing, loving and sincerely obeying
Christ. And therefore they must not deny conditional promises and threatenings,
though they deny conditional, decrees. This I add, because I know they here
usually answer that God intends no end conditionally, but where he intends
also the condition it self, that so it may be equivalent to absolute: But he
intends as Legislator that Faith shall be the prescribed means to Glory, and
Glory the end promised to all that perform that condition; and so conditionally
gives it.

7. Consider also that even in regard of Gods Will de Eventu, our Divines
generally with the Schoolmen confess and maintain that God has a conditional
Will in this Sense.

That is, that he wills such a thing shall be a condition of the
accomplishing, giving or event of another thing; and so that he wills Faith
shall be a condition of Salvation: Though nothing be the condition of Gods Act
of Willing. So that ex part voliti it is conditional, though not ex part
actus volentis.

This Dr. Twiss says o^t consid. of Tilenus Sinod of Dort and Arlis reduced
Page 61. He says [ Ger. Vossius interprets the Will of God touching the
Salvation of all, of a conditional Will, thus: God will have all to be saved,
to wit, in case they believe: Which conditional Will in this Sense, neither
Austin did, nor we do deny] And Page 143, 144. I willingly profess that Christ
died for all, in respect of procuring the benefit, (of Pardon and Salvation)
conditionally on condition of their Faith] and against Cotton p. 74 [Still you
prove that which no man denies, viz. that God purposed Life to the World upon
condition of Obedience and Repentance, provided that you understand it right;
viz. that Obedience and Repentance is ordained of God, as a condition of Life,
not of Gods purpose.

8. And lastly, Let it be considered that Christ being man, we may the better
speak after the manner of man concerning him; and so ascribe to him a Velleity,
or a Will which attains not the thing willed in a sense beyond all those
senses before mentioned.

All this I have laid here together that it may serve when the like question or
text falls again in our way, and so I must take leave to refer you hither. And
by this may very many Scriptures be interpreted, which ascribe such Velleities
and Unaccomplished willings to God: Yea were these few lines given in answer to
this question well weighed, (if through partiality I overvalue them not) I
think they might give much light to show the true mean in the greatest of the
Arminian Controversies.

The second Reason they give, that it is the Elect only that are here meant by
the World, is, because the most of men were at that instant actually damned.

Did he send his Son that they might be saved?

Ans. This is anon to be answered by it self as a great argument against
Universal Redemption; and I am loath to repeat one thing oftener than needs I
must. Only I say, when Christ died Millions of Men were actually saved: Did God
send his Son to save them that were saved already? yes, no doubt: even to do
that which he had undertaken to do presently on the fall, to pay a sufficient
satisfaction for the sins of all, whether since that undertaking they be saved
or damned.

Thirdly, They say, Christ was appointed for the fall of some, therefore not
that all and every one might be saved, Luke 2. 34.

Ans. Themselves will fasten no other sense on that of Luke but this [God has
decreed to permit many through their own wilfulness to stumble and fall on
Christ: and so he shall by accident, or as an occasion, be their ruine] Now
this is no whit inconsistent with Gods ordaining him to be per se and directly
a means for all men's Salvation, in the sense before fully opened.

4. They say, the end of God in sending Christ was not contrary to any of Gods
Decrees; which were eternally fixed concerning the condemnation of some for
their sins: Did he send his Son to Save such?

Ans. 1. As it is no contradiction for God to command an action, and to decree
the non-futurition of that action; so it is no contradiction for God as
Legislator by his Law or Testament to ordain that Salvation shall be to every
man the end prescribed him when he is commanded to believe; and faith a means
to that end; and to give him Salvation under his hand in his Testament on
condition of believing; and to purpose accordingly that he shall be saved if he
will believe; and yet at the same time either not to Decree to give him Faith,
or to Decree not to give him Faith, and consequently not actually de eventu to
save him.

2. Do not these men know that they vent all these confident zealous
insultings, directly against the Scripture expressions, as well as against
ours? Does not Christ say to Jerusalem, How often would I have gathered thee, as
a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not? yet did not God
decree their not being so gathered? Are you sure that all those Jews were
Elected and Saved to whom Peter says Act. 3. last. To you first God sent his
Son Jesus to bless you, in turning every one of you from his Iniquities? Or
rather, is it not spoken of the end of Gods Legislative Will, and so is meant
of a conditional gift? God will so bless you, if you are willing or reject it
not? For by turning from Iniquity there is meant the work of Sanctification
following the first act of Faith, and perhaps of Justification too. Multitudes
of such expressions may be found in the Scripture, which I am loath needlessly
to tire my self and the Reader with the recital of.

The third Text which I shall allege is that of the same importance with both
the former, John 12. 47, 48. And if any man hear my words and believe not, I
judge him not, for I came not to judge the World, but to save the World. He
that rejects me and receives not my words, has one that judges him: the
word that I have spoken, that same shall Judge him at the last day. An ordinary
wit would think that Christ had spoken here so plain and full as to stop the
passage against all sober exceptions; For,

1. In the 46 verse Christ says, I am come a Light into the World, thereby
showing that he is an Universal Cause, as the Sun is of Light, which is the
same in its shining to all, though some are blind, and therefore see not by its
Light, yet that is not either for want of Light in the Sun, or because it
shines differently to one and to the other, but because their Eyes are not
capable of enjoying and using its Lights so is Christ as a Satisfier and as the
object of justifying Faith; though efficienter as the Author of Faith by his
Spirit, he works differently.

2. It is the World into which and among whom Christ is said to come as a Light.

3. The end of his coming is the conditional Illumination of all. That
whosoever believes on me should not abide in darkness.

4. This World contains such as [hear Christ's words and believe not.]

5. Lest any should have a pretense to think, that the World, which he came to
be a Light to, was only the Elect, and those that believed not were no part of
them* he repeateth all again more plainly, saying, he came not to judge the
World but to save the World.

6. To put all out of doubt that Unbelievers were part of this World that he
came to save, he adds the causal conjunction [For] proving that, or giving it
as a reason why, he would not Judge Unbelievers, because he came not to judge
the World (what force was in that reason, if they were none of that World)
but that to save the World. Was it any proof that he would not judge
Unbelievers because he came not to judge but to save the Elect?

7. Yet that there might be no place for doubting left, he again shows that
Unbelievers are part of this World that he came not to Judge but to Save,
saying, He that rejects me and receives not my words, has one that Judges
him, which is plainly opposed to the former negation, I judge him not, and, for
I came not to Judge the World.

I know not what can be said against this, but the former objection, that it is
only the World of the Elect that Christ came to save: But I have said enough
in answer to that, and shall, say more anon. As for their feigned (...) here
are expressions plain enough to exclude it: and were it granted, it would do
them no good; except withal they prove not only that by the World, v. 46. is
meant the Earth (which yet is unsound) but that by the World in both parts of
the 47. v. is meant only the Elect; which they will, I think, never be able to
prove. And indeed their pretended (...) does make Christ's reason to be invalid,
and so contradicts the Text.

The fourth Text to the same sense is, Joh. 6. 32, 33, 35, 36, 40, 51, 64, 66.
compared; where note,

1. That the persons he spoke to were many unbelieving murmuring Jews, yea and
many of his own Disciples which yet believed not, ver. 60. 61, 64. that is,
such as followed him and professed to be his Disciples; and yet did not
heartily and firmly believe, and therefore they then went back and walked no
more with him, v. 66.

Yet 2. Note, That to all these Christ says, ver. 32. My Father gives you the
true Bread from Heaven. For the Bread of God is he which comes down from
Heaven and gives Life to the World; yet ver. 36. he tells them, that they
believe not, and ver. 51. I am the living Bread which came down from Heaven. If
any man eat of this Bread he shall Live forever, and the Bread that I will give
is my Flesh, which I will give for the Life of the World. Where note, not only
that the gift is universal for the Life of the World; but also that he puts the
giving his Flesh for the World.

1. As that which he will do absolutely without any condition.

2. And which he puts in order of nature, before the second act, which is the
giving his Flesh to men to eat (which is the application of the benefits of his
death.)

3. And then comes their eating or not eating, and so living or not living
after both these. At least it is undeniable that Christ here gives his Flesh to
more than do take and eat it, even to them that believe not, but forsake him
from that day. And therefore the Jews say, ver. 52. How can this man give us
his Flesh to eat? Now what is said against this? The answer I find in these
words in one Writer [ That the World here cannot signify All and Every one,
that ever were or should be, is as manifest as if it were written with the
beams of the Sun, and that because it is made the object of Christ's intendments
to purchase for them, and bestow upon them Life and Salvation. Now I ask,
Whether any man, not bereaved of all Spiritual and Natural sense, can imagine
that Christ in his Oblation intended to purchase Life and Salvation for all
them whom he knew to be damned many ages before? or who dares affirm once that
Christ gave himself for the Life of them, who notwithstanding that, by his
disappointment do come short of it to eternity? so that if we had no other
place to manifest that the word [VVorld] does not always signify All, but only
some of all sorts, as the Elect are, but this one produced by our Adversaries,
to the contrary, I hope with all equitable Readers our defense would receive no
prejudice.]

Ans. If this be true, I must confess my self, bereaved of all Spiritual and
Natural sense; which yet I am not willing to do, seeing by one I should confess
my self no Christian, and by the other, not a man, at least to have no reason
in exercise. This is a heavy charge on all the Fathers, and later Divines and
Godly People that differ from this Author. Specially unless his Reasons were
stronger; for I confess his Sunbeams are wholly clouded to me. His first
reason is answered briefly already, and must be fully afterward by it self. The
flesh of Christ was Morally given presently on the fall, before any of the
World was in Hell: and therefore it must be physically given on the Cross in
time, according to that undertaking which was the moral gift and satisfaction.

2. His second Reason is also answered fully before, and shall be after. If
Christ give Salvation to all on condition they will receive it in him, then we
may dare to affirm that this is the fruit of the giving himself on the Cross:
may we not dare to affirm that God created all mankind in Adam, that they may
live to him and so be blessed, (as Ursine and multitudes of our Divines do
affirm) though yet, he knew that man would do otherwise eventually? For God
commanded him to live to him, and gave him means, and promised him everlasting
Happiness if he obeyed. And why may we not as well say Christ Redeemed men to
Salvation, that yet for rejecting it are not saved? As showing themselves
unworthy of eternal Life. But I like not his phrase, that men come short of
Salvation by Gods disappointment. Gods not giving them Faith, nor yet his
adjudging Unbelievers to Death, are neither of them to be called his
disappointing them of Life. But because he asks, who dare say this? let us next
see whether the Holy Ghost dare not.

The fifth Text which I shall insist on is 2 Pet. 2. 1. But there were false
Prophets also among the People, even as there shall be false Teachers among
you, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. And verse 20, etc.
For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the World through the
knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning: For
it had been better for them not to have known the way of Righteousness, then
after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto
them: But it is happened to them according to the true Proverb, The Dog is
turned to his own Vomit again, and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in
the mire.] VVhereto for fuller explication add but Jude's words of the same
men, ver. 4. Ungodly men, turning the Grace of our God into Lasciviousness, and
denying the only Lord God and our Lord Jesus Christ,] put all these together
because they all speak of the same men.

Now 1. The Text expressly says, they denied the Lord that bought them.

2. That it is the Lord Jesus that is this Lord, appears,

1. In that it is expressly said in the 20. ver. that it was by the knowledge of
the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that they escaped the pollutions of the
World.

2. Jude expressly says, They denied the Lord Jesus Christ.

3. There have been few that have denied God among all Apostates in comparison
of those that have denied Christ: Nay, it is a great doubt whether it can be
proved of any, directly that were in those times.

4. Their Apostasy is described by turning from the holy Commandment delivered
to them, which is called the way of Righteousness, and to their former Vomit
(which must needs be the state they were in before they turned Christians) and
to the mire, after they were washed; And this state of Apostasy is opposed to
escaping the pollutions of the World, by the knowledge of the Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, so that it is left past doubt that it is the Lord Jesus Christ
that bought them whom they are said to deny. And Jude says of them, that they
are twice dead, plucked up by the roots, by which it appears that after their
first death, they had received some kind of new Life by Christ.

Lastly, Note, that here are many benefits which they received, which could not
have befallen them, but through the Death of Christ; They could no other way
have been washed, and have escaped the worlds pollutions, and have known the
way of Righteousness, etc. yea Jude says, They turn the Grace of God into
Lasciviousness, therefore it was a sin against Grace: and all Grace is by the
blood of Christ: yea it seems they had themselves some Grace, that is, (Mercy
contrary to merit and tending to a recovery) which they so turned into
Lasciviousness. And Peter in the next chapter shows that their Apostasy lay in
a not-believing Christ's second coming, because of his seeming delay, and
therefore they gave themselves up to their Lusts, and said mockingly, Where is
the promise of his coming? so that it is both evident that they were purchased
by Christ, and that it is Christ that bought them whom they are said to deny.

Yet as plain as the Holy Ghost has here spoken, what industry is used to
raise a Dust, and compel these words to receive an alien sense.

1. It is said that all things for Universal Redemption are here Uncertain: but
against it, this is certain.

1. That there are no spiritual distinguishing fruits of Redemption ascribed to
those false Teachers, but only common gifts of light and knowledge which Christ
has purchased for many for whom he did not make his Soul a Ransom.

2. That else the Redemption of any by the blood of Christ, cannot be a
peculiar aggravation of the sins of any, because they say, he died for all: and
yet this buying of the false Teachers is held out as an aggravation of their
sin in particular.

Ans. 1. It is here merely begged and never was yet proved, that Christ has
purchased common gifts of light and knowledge for men without making his Soul a
Ransom, i. e. his Life a satisfaction for them, and that all that he satisfied
for have distinguishing fruits of Redemption. It is easier to take these as
certainties than to prove them so.

2. Redemption is no aggravation of that man's Apostasy, that never was an
Apostate. It cannot be said, that they deny the Lord that bought them, who
never denied him: And therefore it is a common aggravation of the sin of all
that do sin against him, and of all their denial that do deny him: but all do
not deny him. May not that be an aggravation of these men's sins in particular,
which would also aggravate the sins of any other, according to the several
quality of the sin? May it not be said of an Atheist* [He denies the God that
made him,] as an aggravation of his particular sin? and will you by force of
Wit thence prove that God made not all men? Now to the uncertainties.

And 1. They say it is uncertain whether Christ as Mediator be here intended as
Lord or no; there is not any thing in the Text to enforce us so to conceive.

Answ. It may enforce the unprejudiced I think; review what I have produced out
of the Text to prove it. But they give these reasons against it.

1. God only, as God with his dealing toward such, is mentioned, of Christ not
a word.

Answ. 1. Is not Christ God? And from this Text Divines have proved it (joined
with Jude 4.) against the Arrians; and must we give up that argument for
nothing? 2. I have before showed special mention of Christ.

2. They say [the name (...) properly Herus, attended by Dominion and
Sovereignty, is not usually if at all given to our Savior in the new
Testament, etc. Nay is the name proper for our Savior in the work of
Redemption? (...) is such a Lord and Master as refers to servants and
subjection.

Answ. 1. I hope we must not also deny Christ's Dominion and Sovereignty, and
deny our selves to be his Servants and Subjects, (as he is Mediator) only that
we may the better deny his Universal Sacrifice and Satisfaction: If we do, it
will be a dear bought conclusion. All power in Heaven and Earth is given to
him, and the Father has committed all judgment to him, and for that end he
Died, Rose, and Revived, that he might be Lord of the Dead and Living, Matthew.
28. 19. John 5. 22. Rom 14. 9.

2. It is sufficient if here it be evident that (...) is applied to Christ;
seeing there is no dissuading reason can be brought from the word. It is
undoubtedly true of the reign of the Mediator, in the largest sense; (now all
power is given to him) that (...) as it is said of God, Psalm. 103. 19. by the
Sept. Erasmus says, siquid interest (...) privati juris nomen est, (...)
honoris and authoritatis: And then we may see that both both belong to Christ,
and yet no wonder if he be more often called (...).

3. If it were God the Father that is here called Lord, yet all is one to the
main point, for he ^ Deus Redemptor, and he bought them by the blood of his
Son, but that is the next Question.

2. They say it is uncertain that by [buying] is meant purchasing with the
ransom of his blood.]

Answ. 1. What other price than Christ's blood does God buy men with?

2. I have proved it before, that it was purchasing with Christ's blood; both
in that Jude mentions the Lord Jesus Christ (and some think that the former
Title (the only Lord God) is given of Christ too, and the place invincible to
prove Christ's Godhead;) and in that the benefits received by them could come no
other way. But let us see their Reasons.

1. They say the Apostle insisteth on a Comparison with the times of the Old
Testament, and the False Prophets that were then among the People.

Answ. What of that?

1. Is not the Comparison clear, as those false Prophets were part of the
Typical Redeemed People, so are these of the truly Redeemed.

2. That Typical Redemption out of Egypt was not only a Type, but also a Fruit
of Christ's Redemption, in its moral being considered.

1. They say the word (...), signifies primarily the buying of things,
translatitiously the Redemption of Persons.

Answ. 1. It signifies any buying in the Market for a price, whether thing or
person. And what other buying with a price can you here devise?

2. It Is well known the Holy Ghost uses it to signify Christ's purchasing of
us by his blood, what means it, Rev. 5. 9. (...) and Rev. 14. 3. (...) And 1
Cor. 6. 20. (...), Rev. 14. 4. with many the like.

2. They say [Here is no mention of blood, death, price, or offering of Jesus
Christ, as in other places where proper Redemption is treated on.]

Answ. 1. As if (...) did not alone signify to buy with a price.

2. Has every place that treats of proper Redemption such an addition? View
those before cited, and be convinced of the contrary, what is added, Rev. 14. 3.

The third Reason is, that [the Apostle affirms their deliverance to consist in
the escaping of the pollution of the World, as Idolatry, false Worship, and the
like, by the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, plainly declaring
that their buying was only in respect of the enjoyment of the knowledge of the
truth, but of the washing in the blood of the Lamb, he is wholly silent.

Answ. The question is of the satisfaction by Sacrifice, whether Christ bought
them thereby: This Reason is from the effects and application, if they had not
so much as escaped this pollution of the World, it would not follow that Christ
did not buy them by his satisfaction, but only that they received not this
benefit of it.

2. It is easier begged than proved, that Christ satisfied for none but those
that are washed by his blood.

3. If it had been said that they were washed in the blood of the Lamb, had it
not been easy for the same wit to have found another interpretation? and to
have said it was spoken but (...), because they professed it to be so?

4. He that will well prove that God can and does so far relax his Law, as to
give all these mercies without Christ's satisfying for them to whom they are
given, viz. washing, escaping the Worlds pollutions by the knowledge of the
Lord and Savior; yea, clean escaping from them who live in error, ver. 18.
etc.) will do the Socinians a greater pleasure, and say more against the
necessity of Christ's satisfaction, than ever I saw yet done by any.

And here I would have one strange passage observed in very many Divines, that
it may appear how prejudice and studium partium, prevails in Men's Studies, and
how much the Will can command the Understanding. When we plead that God does in
pardoning Sin for Christ's Sacrifice relax his Law, or dispense with it, and
not properly execute it according to its sense, they stiffly deny it, and say
that it is but an interpreting it (...) according to its reserved exception,
and that Christ's suffering was the proper fulfilling of the Law, and the
Reason they give is, because they think it of flat necessity that the Law be
executed according to its sense, or else it should not be true; or at least God
should not be just; (even Essenius himself forsakes Grotius in this point,) and
yet these same Men will maintain either that God does without any satisfaction
at all so far relax the same Law to wicked men, as to give them all the mercies
which they enjoy ( viz. illumination, a taste of the good word of God, and the
powers of the World to come, to be made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and
believe for a time, and be sanctified by the blood of the Covenant, and loved
of Christ, and clean escape from them that live in error, and to escape the
World's pollutions, and be washed, etc.) or else that God does this without
relaxing his Law, and so, that by the rigorous Law of Works Sinners are not
deprived of these Mercies. To the Non-Elect God relaxeth that Law without
satisfaction, which to the Elect he does not, yea cannot relax upon
satisfaction. These things are harder to me than to be well digested.

Before I come to their last Reason, I will give you the Judgment of some
Orthodox Interpreters on this Text, that you may see whether it be the Mediator
Christ, or the Father only, whom they are here said to deny; and whether it be
meant of proper Redeeming, or some mercy which they had without Christ's dying
for them.

1. And the first shall be Calvin, whom I hope in this Controversy none will
except against, his words are these, in loc. [ Etiam Dominum qui illos redemit.
Tame^si variis modis abnegatur Christus, eum tamen hic meo judicio attingit
Petrus, qui extrimitur apud Judam; nempe dum Gratia D^i in l^sciviam
convertitur. Redemit enim nos Christus, ut populum haberet segregatum ab
omnibus mundi inquinamentis, addictum sanctitati and innocentiae. Qui igitur
excusso fraeno in omnem licentiam se projiciunt, non immerito dicuntur,
Christum abnegare a quo Redempti sunt.] But because Calvin judges (truly) that
these are the same that are spoken of in Jude 4. Let us see what he says of
that Text also, lest you think he overshot himself here through inadvertency.
His words are these; [ Christum vero abnegari intelligit, Quum hi qui sanguine
ipsius Red^mpti fuerant, diabolo se rursus mancipantes, incomparali^e illud
pretium, quantum in se irritum faciunt.

And that you may see (...) is taken for Christ both in Peter, and here, and
that this is a full Testimony for Christ's Godhead, it being Christ that is
here called, [the only Lord God, and our Lord,] see the foregoing words. [
Deum, qui solus Herus est: Vetusti quidam Codices habent [Christum qui solus
est Deus ac Herus] and certe. (Others say it is an uncertainty) in secunda
Petri Epistola, solius Christi fit mentio and ille herus vocatur.] You see
Calvin speaks both for the sense of these Texts, and the point of Universal
Redemption as much and as plain as I.

The second shall be the Divines of the Assembly in their last Edition of their
Annotations. Thus they say [ The Lord that bought them, that gave a price
sufficient for them, even his own precious blood, Acts 20. 28. 1 Cor. 6. 20. 1
Pet. 1. 18, 19.] This is their first exposition, and as a second, they add that
from their profession. And they refer us farther to Jude 4. where they say thus
[Denying the only Lord God and our Lord Jesus Christ; denying Christ to be God,
who was their Master by profession (for they professed themselves to be of his
Household) and their Lord by public Authority over them, or by their deeds
denying Christ] so that (...) is Christ in their judgment in both places; and
this Text speaks for Christ's Godhead.

The Third shall be Deodate, who says [that bought them, viz. who by the price
of his blood, which they had professed to be partakers of through Baptism, had
gotten the Right and Title of Lord and Master over them, to make them his
Servants, see Heb. 10. 29.]

4. Beza also expounds it of Christ as their Redeemer professedly.

5. Dr. Willet expounds Jude 4. (which is confessedly the same with this of
Peter in sense) thus [and deny God the only Lord and our Lord Jesus Christ.
These words thus Translated seem to speak of two Persons, of God the Father,
and God the Son: But indeed the whole Sentence is to be understood of Christ,
who is called God and (...) Master, and (...) Lord, So that Lord here in the
first place should be translated Master: For Christ is God in respect of his
Godhead with his Father. He is our Master, because he has bought us, 2 Pet. 2.
1. He is our Lord, because by him all things are preserved, 1 Cor. 8. 6. Heb.
1. 3. So that he is God as our Creator, Lord as our Preserver, Master as our
Redeemer.

6. Mr. Dav. Dickson on 2 Pet. 2. 1. expounds it of Christ as professed by
them to be their Redeemer.

7. Erasmus's Paraphrase is plainly, they shall deny Christ by whose blood they
were Redeemed, and whom they professed.

(Many more are here omitted.)

8. Even Piscator himself confesses it spoken of Jesus Christ, and says thus
[ Per quas illi abnegaturi sint Dominum, id est, Christum, qui ipsos mercatus
est.] and [Periphrasis Christi argumentosa quasi dicat: Christus illos est
Mercatus, ergo non debebant eum negare. Mercatus est, viz pretioso suo
sanguine, Conser. Acts 20 28. 1 Cor. 6. 20.] Then comes he in with his last
shift, not (...) sed (...)

I Will not now stand to transcribe any more, these being of such Authority, and
so impartial and the last the most extreme in these Controversies of almost any
Learned Judicious Pious Divine.

3. I come next to the Third and last Reason, which is given to show that
Christ bought not these men: The foresaid Author says Neither is it more
certain that the Apostle speaks of the purchase of the Wolves and Hypocrites,
in respect of the reality of the purchase, and not rather in respect of that
estimation which others had of them, and by reason of their outward seeming
profession ought to have had, and of the profession that themselves made to be
purchased by him, etc.] This is the great answer, which is the last refuge: It
was (...), and not (...). I am ashamed unfeignedly to remember the time when I
took up with this interpretation my self, and had the face to maintain it.

Consid. 1. It was no act of theirs which the Apostle mentions, (which
profession, though dissembled, might have warranted him to ascribe to them, as
he may call those Holy, that seem to be Holy by profession:) but it is an Act
of Christ (and his passion) long ago performed: He bought them.

2. It is not an act ascribed to them during the time of that profession, while
that profession might have better warranted a mistaking charitable judgment;
but it is after by Apostasy they cast away that profession, and so if before we
might have indulged a charitable mistaken judgment, yet after we may not.

3. It is the words of the Holy Ghost who is the Spirit of truth, and sent to
lead the Apostles into all truth: And shall we feign the Spirit of Truth to
assert a falsehood, merely because men profess that falsehood, and this after
they reject that profession. Wicked men say Christ bought them, and afterward
renounce or deny Christ, therefore the Spirit of God shall write it to the
Churches as Gods word, that Christ did buy them, even they who once falsely
said so, but now deny him: O what a bold dealing it is with the Holy Ghost to
interpret his words thus, without any need or fair reason!

4. May not a Man by this dealing say what he will as the meaning of Scripture?
May not almost any truth of God expressly affirmed in Scripture, be said to be
spoken (...), and not (...)? God says as Man would have him, and in giving his
Laws to be a rule to the World, he speaks untruly, because men speak so before
him, making their speeches the rule of his speech, which is a rule to them.

Blame us not too zealously, if we do not swallow these things so easily; even
merely because Mr. such a one, or such a one says so.

But let us see why they say so; for sure they have some show of reason why.

1. They say, [It is the perpetual course of Scripture to ascribe all those
things to every one that is in the fellowship of the Church, which are proper
to them only who are true spiritual Members of the same, as to be Saints,
Elect, Redeemed, etc.

Answ. 1. All professed Christians are Saints by separation from the World to
the Church Visible, and Elect or chosen to that Condition.

2. Scripture speaks thus of none but those that seem to be such; the Penmen of
Scripture therein speaking of men that knew not the heart.

3. But when by denying Christ they manifest the contrary, does the Scripture
say yet that they were Elect Saints, etc. or rather that they were before of
old ordained to this Condemnation?

4. Why else may not we still use this Language, if it be true that it is the
perpetual course of Scripture? Be not then offended with us if we write and say
that Christ redeemed by his blood all professed Christians; Nay, then we might
say Julian was a Saint Elect, and so was Judas, etc.

5. I would our Brethren of the separation would speak in the same Language
when they are judging of Church Members, and Communicants, as they do when they
use these Arguments against Christ's Universal Ransom, or at least come near to
this charitable vein, laying by the delusory part.

2. But the great prop of this Cause is, that they will prove from other Texts
that the Scripture speaks thus. And three Texts I find urged, and I may
safely say sadly abused.

The first is, Mat. 27. 53. Jerusalem is called the Holy City, because it was
so in esteem and appearance] says my Author.

Answ. Must we needs take his bare word for this, when we know it was Holy by
Gods own separation of it from the rest of the World, for the principal place
of his public Worship, and residence of his Church and Priests, and so
denominated by himself? What Man then will believe that it was called Holy,
merely from the Peoples professing to be Holy?

The Second Text is John 5. 18. It is said of Christ that he had broken the
Sabbath, which he only did in the corrupt Opinion of the blinded Pharisees.

Answ. 1. The words seem to speak only of the Jews accusation of him, i. e.
what they charged him to have done, and not what he did, [therefore they sought
to lay hands on him, not only because he had broken the Sabbath, etc.]

2. Distinguish between breaking the rest of the Sabbath naturally (by Natural
actions, contrary to rest but without sin) and breaking it morally by sin. The
former way Christ did break the Sabbath, the latter he did not, take this
distinction from Christ himself, who tells you, that the Priests in the Temple
brake the Sabbath ( viz. the external rest of it, by labor) and are blameless
(and therefore broke it not morally.)

But the Text that I find alleged most frequently and confidently by very many
Learned Men, is 2 Chronicles. 28. 23. (and I desire God to forgive me, that in my
ignorance I have often so abused it my self) The words are these [For he
Sacrificed to the Gods of Damascus that smote him; and he said, because the
Gods of the King of Syria help them, therefore will I sacrifice to them, that
they may help me] The last words are confessed to be the false words of the
deluded Idolater Ahaz; but all the question is of the former words, which are
the words of the Holy Ghost [He Sacrificed to the Gods of Damascus that smote
him,] where by supine oversight, Men have taken it, as if the Text made this
smiting the act of the Gods, whereas it makes it the act of Damascus, or the
Men of Damascus. It was Damascus that smote him, and not the Gods of Damascus,
according to the Text.

Tremelius and Junius render it thus plainly, [ Sacrificavit enim Diis
Damascenorum percutientium ipsum] not Diis Damascenorum percutientientibus
ipsum. And would one think now that so great a stress should be laid by prudent
sober men, on such an oversight. Darmesek being a collective, the Cities name
put for the Peoples (than which nothing more usual when there is mention of the
acts of Cities and Countries) did truly smite Ahaz: As England did smite
Scotland: Or Rome conquered so much of the World: And Venice holds War with the
Turk.

2. What if it had been otherwise? May not God give power to those Devils which
were the Gods of Damascus, really to smite Ahaz? As well as he gave the Devil
power to smite Job a better man.

3. And what if all that they supposed of this Text had been true? If God had
spoke in so strange a language once in all the Bible? If we shall thence take
liberty to interpret him so elsewhere, without proving this to be the sense, we
may then indeed make any thing of the Scripture. And though I doubt not but God
in mercy will bear with the weakness of good men that by the power of prejudice
do run on such expositions, having a zeal for God, though not according to
knowledge, and supposing themselves necessitated to it; yet certainly the
proper natural tendency of such violent dealing with Scripture is to infidelity
it self, and the questioning of the truth of Scripture: and if we escape that,
we lie fair open to the invasion of Popery, to conceit a necessity of an
Earthly final Judge of the sense of Scripture as being insufficient to manifest
its own sense. In the mean time, how do we gratify Papists and Scepticks by
this dealing.

But inded the Text is plain; though I confess the Septuagint; and some
Translators might give occasion to some of this common mistake.

The sixth Text that I shall allege is, Heb. 6. 4* 5, 6. For it is impossible
for those who were once enlightened and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and
were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God and
the powers of the World to come, if they shall fall away to renew them again to
Repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put
him to open shame.

Here these Apostates are said to crucify the Son of God afresh (...) It is
not barely to crucify Christ again, but to crucify him to themselves again:
That is, either finaliter (as some expound it) or efficienter (as others) which
way soever it be, it is not efficaciter, but quantum in se.

1. If it be the first, then the meaning is this: If such be saved, then it
must be by a new Sacrifice, and so they bring themselves into that case that
Christ's Death on the terms that first it was accepted, will not serve to save
them, (because he died not to satisfy for that sin.) So Paraeus expounds it;
sed quomodo hoc faciendo Christum denuo crucifigunt sibimetipsis? Quia filium
Dei semel crucifixum abnegando, nolunt salvari ejus morte ex qua sola dependet
resipiscentia and salus. Si igitur resipiscere and servari deberent, denuo
crucifigendus esset eis Christus; quod est impossible, quia amplius mori non
potest. Sic infra cap. 10. Videtur declarare, non est eis reliqua hostia pro
peccato postquam unicam Christi hostiam semel abjecerunt and conculcarunt.
Impossible igitur est eos resipiscere and servari.

So Calvin also: Porro haec ratio est cur iterum dicat Christum crucifigi, quia
nos hac condition illi commorimur, ut meditemur perpetuam vitae novitatem.
Qui^ ergo in mortem recidunt, opus habent secundo sacrificio, ut capite decimo
habebimus. Crucifigentes sibi; hoc est, quantum in se est.

Yea Beza himself who seeing what might be said for Universal Redemption from
this Text endeavors to put in a bar, yet concludes thus: Et fortasse sic
potest ista sententia explicari acsi declaretur istos non posse rursum
renovari, quoniam rursus oporteret Christum crucifigi and illis ludibriis
exponi, quod fieri amplius non potest, illo semel pro mortuis credituris
crucifixo, nec in gratiam istorum apostatarum rursum crucifigendo: quam
sententiam si amplectamur uti sane probablis and commoda mihi videtur, etc.] I
will add no more (though many more might be added. Now according to this
exposition it is evident that it is implied that Christ died for these men: or
else there seems no force in the Argument to prove their sin unpardonable, and
themselves unrecoverable. For the Holy Ghost here plainly intimates that this
unrecoverableness is the fruit of their Apostasy; and that they were not
unrecoverable before they were Apostates; and yet the reason of their
uncureableness lies in this, that it is necessary to their pardon and cure that
Christ should die again, which cannot be: Now it implies that he died for them
as they were in their state before Apostasy, or else on this reason it might be
said as well that their recovery and pardon was as impossible then, and so
their Apostasy should not be the reason, but Christ's not dying for them at all
should be it: Which is plainly contrary to the Text.

But if any will needs deny this most probable interpretation, and expound it
efficienter, [that they do as much as they can to kill Christ again by their
malice and contempt, and making him to be but as a malefactor, do approve of
the Jews crucifying him] (as Grotius and many more expound it) still it
intimates that their sin did put him to Death once before or else, what force
is there in the Argument? For it seems to run thus, [they, that as much as in
them lies, put Christ to Death twice (or a second time) are remediless: But so
do these Apostates, Ergo, etc.]

Now if their sin (as the pro-causa meritoria) had no hand in his Death at
first, how can they be therefore remediless for endeavoring it a second time?
For it was but once by them. And if the same sin was pardonable in those that
not only in desire but in act, did put him to Death, viz. the Jews; then it
appears that it was a pardonable sin: And that the same sin, (nay the Conatus
or mere desire of it) which was pardonable then, should become unpardonable
since, as it is a fancy, and has no Scripture proof; so it is apparently
false, seeing it supposes that the Law of Christ is not now the same as then,
which is false.

A second Argument for Universal satisfaction, this Text affords us: Christ
satisfied for all those who are enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly
Gift, and are made partakers of the Holy Ghost, etc. But some Non-Elect are
such: Therefore Christ satisfied for some Non Elect, and consequently for all.

This Argument is urged before, therefore I shall say little to it. Some answer
to the Minor that it is to be denied, because this Text does nihil ponere sed
tantum supponere.

Answer, But it does not suppose that which never was nor will be, nor is
possible. Most Interpreters (almost all) that are against Universal
satisfaction, do expound this Text of those gifts which may and often are really
lost: The number is so many that I will cite none

2. It is further said by some, that these benefits presuppose not Christ's
dying for them.

Answer, This is answered already. They that can prove that God can, will and
does give all these without satisfaction to his Justice first made, are but a
step from Socinianism, and may next say, he can and will give pardon without
satisfaction: And then they are within a step of infidelity, and next in danger
of saying, that Christ Died in vain, surely the Holy Ghost is given by Christ
Crucified, and I think only to them for whom he was Crucified. The Devils are
not therefore uncurable (for ought any Scripture reveals) because they would
put Christ to Death, through malice, if it were in their power; nor had they
ever these fruits of his Death. But according to their sense against whom I
argue, the Devils might hence be said to be unpardonable as well as Apostates.
Which is no Scripture Doctrine.

The 7th. Text, which I shall urge is, Heb. 10. 26, 27, 28, 29. For if we sin
wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no
more Sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and
fiery indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries. He that despised Moses
Law, died without mercy, under two or three Witnesses: Of how much sorer
punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden nunder Foot
the Son of God, and has counted the Blood of the Covenant wherewith he was
Sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite to the Spirit of Grace?
Hence I raise two Arguments.

1. Those who receive the mercies here mentioned are of the number of them for
whom Christ died: But such are some Non-elect, Ergo, etc. The Blood of the
Covenant is shed before it is sprinkled, or Sanctifies (shed Physically or
morally) and it cannot sanctify Men, before it is shed for them. For
Sanctification, being some degree of application, presupposes it shed for
them: I mean, If by Sanctification, be meant, either separation relative from
the World to the Church, and to Christ secundum quid: Or else Sanctification
real, by giving Men a temporary Faith and other Graces proportionable, and
their escaping the pollutions of the World by that Faith. But some think that
by Sanctification is meant that cleansing which immediately followed the
Sacrifice (the word being used from the Jewish Sanctifyings;) and so by
Sanctification, should be meant that conditional justification, or cleansing
which all Men have immediately from Christ crucified before any further
Personal application. And if this be so, then the Case is plain and past
question.

The 2d. Argument is from those words [there remains no more Sacrifice for
sins, but, etc.] Here the Apostle proves the uncurableness and desperateness
of their Case, in that there remains no more Sacrifice: And this is proper to
them when they are Apostates. Now if there were never any Sacrifice for their
Sins, then this reason will prove their case no more desperate since their
Apostasy than before; nor will it prove the Case of Apostates any more
desperate than the Case of all wicked Men for whom Christ died not. But that is
contrary to the Text. It is either their own sin or the Elects sin, or some
other Men's for whom the Apostle says, there remains no more Sacrifice. If
other Men's, then that proves not their case any more desperate than it was: For
a Sacrifice for other Men's sins hinders not their Case from being desperate
before: Besides, it is no loss to them to lose the Hopes of Life by such a
Sacrifice: For they could be no hopes. But it is mentioned here as their loss,
and the sad consequent of their Apostasy. If 100 Soldiers be taken Prisoners by
the Enemy, and their former Prince shall Redeem 50 of them by a Ransom, and
when he has done shall send to all the 100 to come to him, and be true
Soldiers again; and hereupon they all come (though not all alike affected to
him) and he tells them all [if ever you sleep on your watch and so be taken by
the Enemy again, or if you forsake my Colors and perfidiously turn to the
Enemy, there remains no more Ransom for you,] would not any Man wonder both how
the 50 not ransomed should come out of Prison at all? Or why the Prince should
tell them, There remained no more Ransom for them when they were never ransomed
at all? Doubtless the Holy Ghost does not pronounce these Apostates to be
therefore miserable, because there remained no more Sacrifice for other Men's
sins: As if you should say to a man in a Consumption, There is now no hope of
your Life, because the Physician has given one effectual Receipt to your sick
Neighbor, and will give him no more.

But if it be acknowledged (as it must be) that the Text means, there is no
more Sacrifice for the sins of these Apostates; then it plainly intimates that
there was once a Sacrifice for their sin till they by Rejection, deprived
themselves of the benefit of it.

Obj. There was a Sacrifice sufficient for their sin before their Apostasy.

Ans. 1. And was it not sufficient materially after? Sure according to the
opinion of the opponents it was.

2. If it were only sufficient to have been a Sacrifice for them, but was not a
Sacrifice for them at all, (which is their Sense;) then their condition was as
remediless before their Apostasy as after; and then this could be no part of
their misery procured by Apostasy.

3. The Apostle says not [there remained no more sufficiency for them in the
Sacrifice] but [there remains no more Sacrifice.]

Obj. They did now fully discover that Christ died not for them, which was
never discovered before; and therefore they are more miserable.]

Ans. Then all the inconvenience that Apostasy brought on them was but a
disclosing of the truth (that they had never any remedy or Sacrifice for their
sin) a little sooner than it should else have been disclosed. But that is a far
smaller matter than the Apostle intends. And then it should rather be said
[there is no more ground left for false hopes and mistakes: All this while you
falsely thought Christ died for you, but now because you have denied him, it is
disclosed to you that he never died for you.] Indeed this Doctrine suits well
with the Antinomian fancies, which make our love and obedience to Christ to
have no more tendency to Salvation than as mere signs and duties.

2. The Text plainly intimates the contrary to what this objection affirms:
For it says not [there is no more false conceits of a Sacrifice for sin] but
[there is no more Sacrifice for sins.]

Obj. It was before offered them by the Word and general conditional promise:
But after their Apostasy it is offered them no more; and therefore it is said,
there is no more Sacrifice.

Ans. 1. It cannot be offered to them, with a possibility of their acceptance
or benefit, till it be first offered for them to the Father: That which is
offered is [a Christ that has redeemed us; with his benefits] A Christ that
has not redeemed or ransomed us, is a gift that would not save us, if he were
offered by God and accepted by us.

2. Indeed Christ's Sacrifice for sin was offered only to the Father, and is not
at all offered to us. Christ himself is offered to us, but not as a Sacrifice,
but as a Ransomer, or one that was a Sacrifice offered to God for us, and now
would be a Head and Husband to us. His benefits also by this Sacrifice merited
are offered to us, but not the Sacrifice it self.

Calvin on the Text says thus [ Hostiam ergo iis residuam esse negat qui a
Christi morte discedunt; quod non fit particulari aliquo delicto, sed abjecta
in totum fide, etc. Nam quum mors Christi unicum sit Remedium quo ab aeterna
morte liberamur, qui vi^ illius atque beneficium quantum in se est abolent,
nonne digni sunt quibus preter desperationem nihil reliquum fiat? Qui in
Christo manent, eas ad quotidianam reconciliationem Deus invitat: Quotidie
irrigantur Christi sanguine: Quotidie expiantur eorum peccata perpetuo ejus
Sacrificio, si extra eam non est quaerenda salus, ne miremur omnes qui eum
sponte relinquent, omni spe veniae privari, etc. Eos igitur solos notat
Apostolus qui Christum impie deferendo mortis ejus beneficio se privant.

Paraeus makes it to be the Apostasy it self that had no Sacrifice, [ si ab
agnita veritate Evangelii ad judaicas hostias mali^iose relabantur, nulla eis
reliqua sit hostia pro (...) peccato expiando.] And comparing this Text with
Heb 6 6. And showing that they speak of the same thing, he shows that this is
the punishment of Apostates, that [there is no more Sacrifice for sin.] But
certainly if there were never any Sacrifice for their sin at all, that could
not be as a punishment for their Apostasy: Christ did not punish Men's Apostasy
on the Cross by not dying for them, Paraeus adds [ Hostiam pro peccato
intelligit expiatoriam propter quam Deus placatus remittat eis peccata. Negando
hanc reliquam esse Apostatis, negat spem remissionis, veniae, gratiae aut
salutis ullam eis superesse. Negando enim causam negat affectum: Quaeris cur
nulla supersit? Quia non est nisi unica Hostia peccatorum expiatrix, nempe
Pontificis Christi hactenus ad longum demonstrata: Hanc vero abjiciunt
Apostatae. Nulla igitur alia eis est reliqua.) So that there was a Sacrifice
remaining to them for their sin, before their Apostasy.

Bullingar in loc. says [ Jam vero cum non sit alia nisi una pro peccatis
hostia, illi autem hanc unicam contemnant; certe aliam non invenient ullam.]
Marlorat adds [ talibus ergo contemptoribus nulla s^es veniae relinquitur] So
that they had a Sacrifice for sin till they Apostatised. So Dickson also in
loc. Piscator, and many more (for I will name none but who are known to be
against universal Redemption, lest their exposition be rejected.) To all this I
find no more objections of our opponents; but to the first argument which we
draw hence they return many words. Which was, both from all those benefits
which here Apostates are said to partake of, which only Christ's Blood has
procured them, and specially in that they are expressly ascribed to Christ's
Blood: for they are said to have been sanctified by the Blood of the Covenant:)
Now to this they say (to give you the Sense briefly: For if I should recite and
answer the maze of words which some here use, I should provoke the Reader to
throw away all in weariness or loathing.

1. This speaks only of some that were professors of the Faith of the Gospel,
separated from the World, brought into the Church, etc. but these are not all
Men.

Answ. Grant that it is some Non-Elect, and it is as much as I desire from this
Text. And if that be granted, I think there is few would question but that it
is for all the Non-Elect in the Church that Christ died. And for those that
never heard of him (though I am past doubt that Christ satisfied for the sins
of all Mankind, yet) the use of the point is so small, that I will not contend
much about it with any.

2. They say [the Apostle does neither declare what has been, nor assert what
may be, but only adds a commination upon a supposition of a thing, etc.]

Ans. This I answered before. I Will stand to the Judgment of almost any learned
Expositor on this Text, though against Universal Redemption. See Calvin, Beza,
Paraeus, Piscator, Perkins, Dickson, Bullinger, etc.

3. They say [It is certain that these Men made profession of all these things,
etc. and therefore the open renouncing them was a sin so heinous as deserved
all this Commination, though the Apostates themselves had never interest in
Christ's Blood.

Answ. What Is this to the point? The Text says, they were sanctified by the
Blood of the Covenant, and not only they professed that they were.

4. They say [it was the manner of the Saints and Apostles themselves to esteem
of all baptized initiated persons, ingrafted into the Church as sanctified
persons: So that speaking of Backsliders, he could not make mention of them any
otherwise, than as they were commonly esteemed to be, and at that time in the
Judgment of charity were to be considered, etc.]

Answ. 1. How much does it differ from the language of Men when they are
pleading for Separation? Then they cannot endure to hear that all the baptized
are called Saints by the Apostles and Churches.

2. Indeed only those are so called that seem probably to be so.

3. And therefore what is this to them that by Apostasy into a remediless
misery, show themselves not to be so. The Apostles will not encourage known
falsehood in the Speeches or Opinions of others, much less be the Authors of it,
and lead them into it; does the Apostle here pronounce their Case hopeless and
remediless, and tell them there is no Sacrifice for their sin but a fearful
looking for of Judgment, etc? and does he at the same time persuade People to
believe, that they were sanctified by the Blood of the Covenant, etc. if it
were not true? Even then when it openly discovers it self false or is
supposed so to do?

5. They say] if the Text be interpreted positively and according to the truth
of the thing it self in both parts thereof, viz.

1. That these of whom the Apostle speaks were truly sanctified.

2. That such may totally perish, then these two things will follow;

1. That faith and Sanctification is not the Fruit of Election.

2. That Believers may fall finally from Christ.

Answ. 1. These were truly sanctified, though not with that Sanctification
which is proper to the Elect and saved.

2. No doubt such may and do fall away and perish. He that denies this must
deny to believe Christ, who has expressly affirmed it in Mat. 13. That they in
whom the Word is not deeply rooted do believe for a while, and in the time of
temptation or persecution fall away. What else is our distinction between
Temporary Faith and saving?

3. When common Faith and Sanctification is antecedent to special Faith and
Sanctification, and so found in the Elect, it is then a Fruit of Election: But
when it is found in others, it is no Fruit of Election. And why should they
wonder at that, who deny it to be a Fruit of Satisfaction or Ransom, which is a
more Universal cause then Election is?

6. They further say [there is nothing in the Text to persuade that the Persons
here spoken of, must needs be truly justified and regenerated Believers, much
less that Christ died for them, etc.]

Answ. 1. That they were illuminated, and partakers of the Holy Ghost, and
sanctified by Christ's Blood the Text speaks without strained consequence: (with
Heb. 6. 6. But that they had true special saving Faith, Regeneration or
Sanctification, I affirm not. Yet was it true.

2. Is it a strained consequence to conclude,

1. That he who by Apostasy is fallen into that misery which he was never in
before, and other sinners are not in, that now there is no more Sacrifice for
his sin, had before a Sacrifice? And so have other sinners that be not fallen
so far as he is?

2. Or that he who is sanctified by the Blood of the Covenant, was one whose
sins caused that Blood? and for whom it was shed? If you had proved that it
sanctifies those for whom it was never shed, then you had done something; so
much for this Text. I had thought to have answered all the objections of the
contrary-minded which the Books at hand afford; but I shall do far less than I
thought to do in it, as finding that they are so disordered, wordy and weak, in
many, that I shall but fill Paper with needless Lines, and be tedious and
ungrateful to the judicious Readers.

The 8th. Text which I will insist on is Matthew. 22. 2, 3, 4, 12, 13. The
Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a certain King, which made a Marriage for his
Son, and sent forth his Servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding,
and they would not come: And he sent forth other Servants, saying, Tell them
that were bidden, saying, Behold, I have prepared my Dinner, My Oxen and my
Fatlings are killed, and all things are ready: Come unto the Marriage, etc.
Then said he to his Servants, the Wedding is ready, but they which were bidden
were not worthy, So 12. 13.

Here it is agreed on that God is the King: The Wedding feast, is Christ and
the benefits of his Death offered by the Gospel. The killing of the Fatling
most say, does intimate the killing of Christ that he may be to us the Bread of
Life, and his Flesh Meat indeed, and his Blood Drink indeed. The Messengers are
Preachers: The message is the Gospel Invitation or Offer. Hence therefore I
thus argue; If all the things are ready before hand which upon coming in to
Christ are to be received, yea and ready for those that refused to come, and
only their not coming, or not coming preparedly do hinder their participation,
then Christ was a Sacrifice made ready even for all that refused to come. But,
etc. Ergo, etc.

I mean not that Christ was appointed to save final refusers considered as
such: But he was a Sacrifice for all the Sins of the same Men, except their
final refusal, and thereby made ready for them all those saving benefits, which
upon coming in they were to receive. This message any Minister of the Gospel
may now deliver to unbelievers: Come in to Christ; accept him as a Redeemer,
Lord and Savior, and with him pardon and Salvation; for all this is ready: All
that is prerequisite to believing or coming in, is done by Christ, as far as
concerned him as a Sacrifice and a Donor of his Testamentory benefits; and as
far as unsatisfied Justice did require: All things that are requisite
objectively to your believing are ready. Now this could not be a truth; if
Christ had not been a Sacrifice for these Men's Sins: For how is all ready when
the very first and most needful thing is unready, that is, an expiatory
Sacrifice for sin? When satisfaction to justice is unready? Can they make this?
Or are they called to make it? Or would their coming in make it, which was not
before made? Or would coming in serve turn without satisfaction? Rather it
should be said to them (as to the Devils) come not, for nothing is ready. For
where Christ is not ready, and satisfaction for sin not ready, there nothing is
ready which a sinner is called to by the Gospel. The Cause being wanting, all
the Effects must needs be wanting.

Obj. All may be said to be ready, in that Christ's Death is sufficient for All.

Ans. That Is true; and I desire no more; if you understand it as Divines have
hitherto done, and as this Text proves it; that is, that it is a sufficient
Ransom, Sacrifice, Price, Satisfaction for all. But then this implies that it
is a Ransom, Sacrifice, etc. for All. But according to the new futile evasion,
it is false, viz. that Christ's Death was only sufficient to have been a
Sacrifice or Ransom for All, if God or Christ had so been willing: but indeed
was no Ransom for them at all. For is this making all ready? Is Christ any
readier for those he died not for, than for the Devils? or than if he had never
died at all? Will you send to a Prisoner and say, I have paid 1000 l. for thy
fellow Prisoner that owed but 500 l. the sum is sufficient to have discharged
thy debt too, if I had ever intended it, therefore come and receive a
discharge, for all is ready? Or will you bid your Servant go to all the Town
and say, I have killed and dressed meat enough for you all, resolving that some
of you shall never taste of it on any conditions, therefore come now and partake
of it all, for all things are ready? The Readiness that Christ speaks of here
is such, as supposes all things to be ready except receiving by Faith: nothing
but coming is wanting.

Obj. But Faith it self is not ready, therefore Christ died not for them.

Ans. A false consequence which yet bears the whole fabric of the opposers
Cause.

1. Does not the Text plainly distinguish here between Faith and all the
Benefits that by Faith we are partakers of? Does it not plainly say, that all
things (else) are ready; when yet Faith in them was unready, for they would
not? But the Invitation was come, for all things are ready* what a silly cavil
would men put into the mouths of the invited, teaching them to say, my coming
is not ready; therefore all things are not ready: nay nothing is made ready for
me. This Text expressly distinguishes between all other things, and coming: and
so shows, that when men will not come, yet all things were ready, and nothing
but Faith was wanting to their participation. And therefore Christ may be a
Sacrifice made ready for those, that have not Faith, and therefore receive him
not.

2. And you might see some of the reason of this in the Text: The King in one
Relation prepares the feast: and in a further invites his Guests: and in a
further compels them to come in; God and the Redeemer as preparer of the feast,
(which is 1. By satisfying Justice. 2. By enacting the New Law) have made all
things ready. But to give Faith belongs not to him in either of these
respects.

2. God and Christ as the Inviter of his Guests, does all things requisite to
the invited.

3. But God as one that resolves de Eventu, what particular persons shall be
compelled to come in, gives that Faith, or so compels them. Faith follows this
compelling (which, say Interpreters truly and generally, is an importunate
prevailing persuasion) Now may not God

1. Make Christ a Sacrifice for all, ready?

2. And by Legislation or conditional Donation, make a free gift of Christ to
all that will have him?

3. And invite multitudes that will refuse; and yet compel but his chosen only
to come in? Here it is that special differencing Grace begins, in the
execution; and it confounds men in the whole body of Theology when they will
needs suppose it to begin where it does not, that is, in Redemption by
Sacrifice. All men shall one day confess, all things were ready: if I would
have come in I had been saved: it was my own wilful refusal that deprived me.

Obj. But why does not God compel all to come in as well as some?

Ans. 1. O man! who art thou that disputest against God? May he not do with his
own as he list? He compels some from the superabundance of his Mercy: He
inviteth the rest in great mercy also.

2. This will be no excuse to the refusers: what if God had only invited all,
and compelled none? What if he had suffered all to perish in their wilfulness?
would that have been any ease to any? and if he compel some, is that any wrong
to the rest? will not Conscience say another day, I perish justly, that would
not be saved? must I need compulsion to accept of a Redeemer and Salvation with
him?

Obj. But it is not in my Power to come: I cannot.

Ans. There Is no man that would come that can say so: if you will you can; yea
you do come. If you will not, who will you blame but your self, you may come if
you will. As your will-not may be called a cannot, so it is true, you cannot:
your cannot and will-not is all one. As for those men that open their mouths
against the most High, and say, that [if God give not willingness and faith to
men, he does but delude them to tell them that Christ died for them, and to
give them Christ, if they will.] I entreat them to consider,

1. God has laid the cause of men's perdition on their own will, still in his
word, and will do at Judgment.

2. God has taught all men naturally to accuse themselves when their
wilfulness was the cause.

3. The light of Nature teaches all Nations under Heaven to lay the blame on
the wilful, and to make all their Laws, and execute all their Judgments on that
ground; acquitting men so far as they can be discovered to have been forced and
involuntary, excusing him that can say [I did it against my Will] condemning
those that did it willingly: Deny this therefore and you deny, 1. The Law of
God in Scripture. 2. The Law of natural Conscience. 3. And overthrow all Laws
of Nature and Nations, and all Churches and Commonwealths. Did ever any sober
Prince say, I will not condemn a man for wilful Murder, because he has not
free will, nor power to forbear it, except God give it him? Or did ever wise
Judge absolve an offender on that ground? If a VVhore-monger or Drunkard so
accustom themselves to those sins that they have contracted a habit, and cannot
forbear them, did ever any Lawgiver, Judge or Wise man, take that for an
excuse? Or rather for the most heinous aggravation of his fault? God and Nature
has taught all men, in their enquiries after the cause of sin, to stop at man's
Will and lay the blame there. In entreat wise godly men therefore, that they
would not shut the very eyes of Nature it self, and overthrow all order of
things for their by-conceits; and when they have done to fly in Gods Face with
such horrid desperate unreverence and presumption, as to say, God deceives and
deludes men, if he give a Ransom for them, and give them Christ and Pardon on
condition of their willingness, except he also make them willing. I have before
showed it (without any participation with Pelagius) that all men that perish do
suffer for abuse of Grace, sufficient to its immediate use and end: and if God
will not suffer all so to perish, but compel some to come in, when he does but
invite others; our Eye must not be evil because he is good. He deals mercifully
with all, but more mercifully with some: those therefore shall for ever
glorify his Mercy, and the rest be left without all just excuse, and be
speechless.

The 9th Text is Mat. 18. 27, 32, 34, 35. Then the Lord of that Servant was
moved with compassion and loosed him and forgave him the Debt. etc. Then his
Lord after that he had called him said unto him: O thou wicked Servant, I
forgave thee all that debt because thou desiredst me: should not thou also
have had compassion on thy fellow Servant, even as I had pity on thee? And his
Lord was wroth and delivered him to the Tormentors till he should pay all that
was due unto him. So likewise shall my Heavenly Father do also to you, if ye
from your hearts forgive not every one his Brother their trespasses. Here it is
plainly said by Christ himself, that the debt was forgiven him, who afterward
perished. Whence I argue ab offectu ad causam, therefore Christ died for him.
For without Blood there is no remission.

Two things are said against this. 1. That Theologia parabolica non est
Argumentativ^.

Ans. And I am sure that Christ's Theology is not delusory or false. If he
taught by Parables, then his Parables were and are teaching; and if teaching,
then we may argue from them. But consider, though it is certain that nothing in
Parables is to be stretched beyond the intent, yet this is the plain sense and
intent; Christ showing that those that have received mercy for their own sins,
must forgive others, or else they shall perish as ungrateful for what they had
received, and as unmerciful to others.

1. It is twice over expressly said that, [he forgave him the Debt.]

2. The effect followed, he loosed him, viz. from Prison.

3. It is the aggravation of his following sin, to be ungrateful for his own
pardon; and there is no ingratitude possible, if it had not been true that he
received that mercy himself.

4. Christ expressly opens and applies all this to his own Disciples, saying,
so also will my Heavenly Father do to you, if you from your Hearts forgive not,
etc. so that it is past doubt that this forgiveness was real.

2. The other objection is this: Those that are forgiven never fall away or
perish: and therefore this parable is not so to be understood.

Ans. The text says plainly, the debt was forgiven: and therefore it is
certainly true. There is a fourfold forgiveness of sin; which I desire may be
well observed. First, upon Christ's undertaking to suffer, and so his moral
satisfying, God the Father as the offended Legislator of the Law of Nature,
remitted his right of punishing and advantage of honoring his Justice, merely
on that ground, and in that Relation; suspending the obligation of that Law,
and delivering up the sinner and all his Debts into the full power or hands of
him that Redeemed him, giving him authority to give remission to whom he
pleased on terms of Grace: so that as Christ and not man did satisfy Justice;
so it seemed most meet to the Wisdom of God, that Christ and not man himself
should be the first receiver of the pardon and other benefits: but with this
difference.

1. Christ receives them eminenter in potestate conferendi, as he has power
to confer them on the Redeemed: But we receive them from Christ formaliter, in
themselves.

2. Christ receives them for our good; It is not the pardon of any sins of his
own that he receives. But we receive them for our own good. So that God has
given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son: and he that has the Son
has life: God has put a Pardon for us into Christ's hands, in giving him this
Power: and Christ must be the conveyer to us, in the exercise of his Power, For
as the Father Judges no man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son; so he
Absolveth no man, but has committed all Absolution to the Son: For Absolution
is one half of Judgment. That is, God as the Rector according to the mere Law
of Nature, and as mere Creator, on the first ground judges no man: But now he
judges all as Redeemer on terms of Mercy, by him that Redeemed us; and so
Absolveth.

So then the first pardon of sin, was in Potentia Remittendi, virtual, put into
the hand of Christ only, for his Sacrifice and Satisfaction; and not to the
sinner immediately himself.

2. The second Pardon, is by Christ thus Authorized: and it is by him as Donor,
Testator or Legislator of the new Law: and it is, [A Grant of Remission of sins
to All men, on condition, they will accept him and pardon with him] so that
this is Christ's first pardoning act and this is but a conditional pardon, and
therefore is not yet full, and actual.

3. The third Pardon of sin, Is Christ's actual Pardon upon the performance of
the condition: which is not by any new physical act, but by a new moral act of
the former Law or Grant; which till now was suspended, upon the nonperformance
of the condition: it being the Will of the Legislator or Donor, that his
Instrument should not act or remit sin till men believe.

4 The fourth Pardon and most full, is that by the absolving Sentence at
Judgment, by Christ as Judge when our sins shall be blotted out, when that time
of refreshing comes, as the Apostle speaks Act. 3. These four are several acts
tending to the full perfecting of our Pardon and Justification, and are all
called Pardon, and must all proceed in this order one after another.

Moreover the third of these, or the properest remission in this life, is of
diverse sorts or degrees, according to the Termini a quibus. the diverse sins or
penalties Remitted: As is the second also. From thence therefore we must next
distinguish of Remission, as we did before from the nature of the remitting
act: For the word [Remission] of sin, signifies the Dissolution of the
Obligation to Punishment; and so does constitutive Justification too: But the
term Justification respects more strongly [the obligation] dissolved; and the
word [Remission] more strongly respects [the Punishment] to which we were
obliged; not that Remission does only respect the Punishment (as some mistake)
and not the obligation at all; but it chiefly respects the Punishment. And
therefore it is both Obligationis Relaxatio vel Remissio, and Poenae Remissio,
but most properly and principally the last. And therefore it is a right
distribution of Remission, which is taken from the diversity of the Penalties
remitted.

Let us therefore First distinguish of Punishment that we may the better
distinguish of Remission. And before that let us define Punishment.

Punishment Actually taken, Punitio, is. The Action of a Governor depriving an
Inferior of some natural good, because of some fault by him committed (or
because of some Moral Evil.)

Punishment Passively taken, Poena is a privavation of some natural good,
Inflicted for the desert of some Moral Evil.

The Matter of Punishment is Natural Evil: and therefore the first thing
intended by the Inflicter is, ut noceat patienti; that it may hurt the
Sufferer, and so may have the Matter of Punishment. The form, is its Relation
to a fault, viz. that it be [because of some Moral Evil:] The end is [the
demonstration of Justice] this end enters the difinition of Punishment in
General, and is common to all Punishment. The other ends proper to each
Species, are to be fetched from the definition of that Species.

And first quoad Materiam Punishment is of two sorts.

1. Some Punishment is destructive to the sinner: and some is lesser,
consisting in the removal of such good, whose loss is tolerable.

2. Quoad finem, some punishment is for the Demonstration of Justice most
eminently and principally; and that is either

1. When there is all Justice in^utmost Rigor, and no remitting mercy.

2. Or when the remitting mercy is small comparatively, and Justice is most
eminently demonstrated.

2. Some Punishment is for the demonstration of Justice conjunct with a far
greater and more eminent demonstration of Mercy. This is commonly called
[Chastisement] yea, [Paternal Chastisement] because of tenderness and Love that
accompanies it; though indeed it is common to a Master, a Prince, or any
Rector to Chastise, as well as a Father. God punishes in this sort.

I. Rebels, or Unbelievers.

1. To Restrain them.

2. To Reclaim them.

1. From Total Rebellion.

2. From a seeming Religiousness, or half Christianity, to Sincerity.

3. From particular Sins.

II. True Believers, his Adopted Sons.

1. To weaken their Corrupt Inclinations, and strengthen their Holy
Inclinations.

2. To raise them from particular falls, and excite particular Graces into
lively exercise.

3. Remotely.

1. To fit them for great Works.

2. To fit them for greater Glory hereafter.

3. To Glorify his Power and Grace in their sustentation, and deliverance.

4. But still the end of Punishment as such, or of the Evil that is in it, is
the demonstration of Justice in some measure, however moderated and prevailed
over by Mercy; even Fathers Chastise their Children in Paternal Justice, but
with a prevailing Love; and Vindictive it is, though not in that rigorous
Sense, as the first mentioned sort of punishment is Vindictive.

And as Remission must be distinguished according to the diversity of the
penalty remitted, so also in respect of the sins remitted. (Though to remit
Sin, and to remit punishment is all one) for it is,

1. Either the whole general Mass of Sin past, and present, habitual, and
actual, (besides Original imputed Sin) which is remitted at once, (which is at
our first Repenting and Believing sincerely.) This is called Universal
Remission, or Justification: Or else

2. It is particular sins of Act, Omission, or Habit, that are remitted to one
who had all the sins of his Unregenerate State pardoned before, and was
disposed to this Actual, as being Habitually Penitent, and Believing. This is
commonly called Particular Remission, or Justification.

Also in regard of the obligation, dissolved remission must be distinguished:
For it is either the penalty of the Law of Works (which is remitted to all
Believers.)

2. Or the Penalty of the Law of Christ (which it obliges men to for
nonperformance of the Conditions of the Law,) which is remitted to no man;
some who say the Law of works is totally abrogated, do call this last [the
peremptory sentence of Christ's Law] as distinct from the former, which they
call [the remissible sentence of Christ's Law,] but all comes to one in sense.

Moreover, Remission must be distinguished quoad jus ipsum, or its very form
Into.

1. Inceptive, or Remission given at first.

2. And Continuate, or Remission confirmed and continued; (which requires a
continued moral action of the remitting Law or Grant, and more than the
continuance of our Faith, which was the Condition of inceptive Remission, viz.
The addition of sincere obedience, and the continuance thereof.

By all this it may appear that remission of sin is variously distinguishable,
and not to be taken in one and the same sense wherever we find the word in
Scripture.

And because I have run so far in distinguishing, I will add some Conclusions
in application of them.

Conclus. 1. In the first remitting act (wherein God so far remitteth sin as to
let go his Jus Puniendi, as Rector secundum legem operum merely, and gives up
all into the hands of the Redeemer, to give out remission as he please on terms
of Grace) in this act, I say God does remit all the sins of all mankind, as
they are against the Law of works. Of this are meant those Scriptures which say
[Christ having purged away our sins, ascended, etc.] Heb. 1. 3. And that he
took away the sins of the World, and that God was in Christ reconciling the
World to himself, not imputing to them their iniquities, etc. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.

Concl. 2. In the second remitting act (by which Christ first gives out pardon
according to the power given him) Christ the Redeemer and the Father by him,
does forgive conditionally all sins to all men, except what the very nature of
the Condition excepteth, viz. The Nonperformance of the said Condition.

Concl. 3. Neither of these Acts, or any following, do remit the proper, viz.
final nonperformance of the Conditions of remission.

Concl. 4. In the third act, Christ does actually remit to every true Believer
all the destructive Penalty of all his sins past or present, and all that
Penalty whatsoever which proceeds from the intention of demonstrating Justice
above Mercy, or prevailing or rigorous Justice, commonly called vindictive in a
more rigid restrained sense.

Concl. 5. It is not only the Eternal punishment, but all the temporal
punishment which is of the fore-described Nature, which Christ remitteth to
every Believer.

Concl. 6. At the same time he disposes him to the daily receiving of a daily
pardon for daily sins, both in that his former sins being all pardoned, his
person is Accepted and Adopted, and his Soul habituated to that Faith and
Repentance which is the Condition, and possessed of the Spirit, which
maintains these Graces.

Concl. 7. Yet are not his sins actually pardoned before they are committed.

Concl. 8. Inceptive Remission is actual, and equal to absolute (as to the
present possession of it) as soon as men believe; but as to the continuance of
it, both Universal and particular Remission, are still but Conditional till
death, and the Condition of Continuance (as is beforesaid) is more than the
Condition of our first obtaining.

Concl. 9. That Men lose not Justification or Remission, therefore comes not
from the Nature of the thing, nor the Tenor of the Remitting-Grant, which being
Conditional, supposes ever the possibility of the Nonperformance of the
Condition: (alas, more than possibility,) but it comes from the good pleasure
of God to maintain that Grace in his Elect which he has given them, so far as
to see infallibly that they perform the Condition of continued and renewed
Remission and Justification, by causing them to persevere, and overcome, and
therefore God as Legislator (in Precepts, Prohibitions, Threats, and Rewarding
Promises) does still deal with all Men as defectible, and supposes the
possibility of their falling away from Grace, and perishing. But God as Eternal
Elector, and Determiner* of Events by his Decrees, deals with all his Elect
as Men whom he resolves infallibly to Save, and whose Apostasy is, though
possible, yet non futura, a thing that never shall be; yea, in respect to the
power of any Enemy to deceive them by overcoming God's preserving grace; so the
deceiving or perverting of them is properly impossible, as well as not future
(as Christ himself tells us.)

Concl. 10. It is evident therefore that Remission and Justification are not
perfect in this lifie, both in that many sins are still behind to be remitted,
and from whose guilt a particular Justfication is necessary to be added; and
also because the very continuance of the Justification and Remission received
is but Conditional; and a Conditional Grant is not so perfect as an absolute,
or when the Condition is all performed.

Concl. 11. That punishment which man was sentenced to Genesis 3. after his fall,
and the Redeemer inflicteth in this Life on merciful terms (where there is a
greater demonstration of mercy, than vindictive Justice, which is commonly
called corrective punishment or chastisement,) is never wholly remitted to any,
even of the Elect themselves in this Life. All Men must eat their bread in
sorrow, and be sick and dye, and the Earth is still cursed with barrenness for
our sakes, and the remnants of God's frowns, and want of Communion with him,
and want of more Grace and Spirit from him, and of mortification of our Sins,
are all sad punishments which the Elect must here undergo. As for those that
say that none of these are punishments, I have elsewhere confuted them at large.

1. They contradict express Scripture.

2. And Orthodox Divines.

3. They understand not the definition of Punishment, else would they know that
Chastisement is a Species of it. Nor is it true that they say, that God has
taken away all the evil of Affliction, but only he has taken away the
Destructive Evil, and introduced or added a greater prevailing good, which yet
this Evil must (and that but by accident) produce. It is essentially quoad
materiam, malum natural still; and quoad formam it is propter malum morale. So
that quoad Receptionem peccatoris patientis, as to our Reception, Remission of
Sin is not omnibus numeris perfect in this Life, there being still some
unforgiven Punishment to be suffered here.

Hence you may see how to judge of the Controversy so much agitated between us
and the Papists, Utrum Remissd Culpa remaneat poena temporalis? Whether
Temporal Punishment remain when the Sin is forgiven: (And how indistinctly that
question is commonly handled; etiam per magni nominis Theologos (Detur Venia
censurae necessariae.)

As merciful corrective Punishment is not all remitted in this Life, to any of
the Elect, so Sin it self is to them so far unremitted, as the punishment is
unremitted. I weigh not the Clamours that some will make against this
Assertion, who use more zealously to assert the Dictates of their Leaders, than
the words of God; and to search and learn what the Orthodox say, than what God
says, or the Nature of the thing contains. Hear the Scripture, Lam. 3. 42. [
We have* transgressed, we have Rebelled, thou have not pardoned.] This was
spoken by the Prophet in his own name, and the name of all God's People, the
Jews, because of their Temporal Sufferings.

Abundance of the like importance might be cited from Scripture, but this is
not the place. Methinks those Antinomians should not be against this Doctrine,
who (falsely) teach, that that it is only Temporal Punishment or Chastisement
that Believers Pray against, when they daily Pray, forgive us our Trespasses
(as the most moderate of their Books do affirm.

Concl. 12. This imperfection in Remission of Sin here, comes not from any
deficiency in Gods Love, or Christ's satisfaction, but from God's Wisdom (in the
right giving out of his Mercies) and Man's State, and the nature of the work.
Yea, in sensu activo, in respect of God as mere Legislator of the Law of Works,
Remission may be said to be perfect; that is, quantum in se in illa Relatione,
he has perfectly pardoned it, by quitting all his right of punishing, into the
hands of the satisfier. From whom he receives, to him he delivers. But Christ
sees it meet to give it out to us on Conditions, and by Degrees; and we are
not at the highest Degree 'till the end of all, at Judgment; (even the
Remission it self, and not only the manifestation is thus given by Degrees.)
And so it may be longer coming to us, and be still passively imperfect through
our incapacity. As a King receiving a Ransom for a Prisoner, may agree when all
the Ransom is paid, that yet he shall be delivered but by Degrees, or upon
Conditions.

Concl. 13. Yet some and many Degrees of the foresaid Corrective Temporal
Punishment are remissible, and Christ has Conditionally promised to remit them
in this Life.

He having now the inflicting of all Punishment committed to him ( John 5. 22.)
has threatened more in his new Law to some (yet disobedient) than to others;
and promised more forbearance and tender dealing to some than to others.

Concl. 14. But this is not by so Universal and unreserved a promise, as the
Remission of Destructive punishment, and as Salvation is given by: But it is by
a Promise with Exception or Reserve: As if Christ should say, [Ordinarily you
may expect to smart most, when you sin most, and to be remitted and eased most,
( Consideratis Considerandis, taking one thing with another) when you please me
best: But yet I reserve my Jus Dominii, yea, and power of punishing even the
best, as shall seem meet to my wisdom, for public good, or prevention of Sin
not yet committed, or manifesting my Wisdom, or Power, or Goodness, etc.] So
that mark here;

1. That still this is punishment, and for Sin, (if we had nothing but Original
Sin) when it is absolutely considered, why God punishes the best; it is for
sin. But when it is asked comparatively, why he punishes Job more than
another, it is not for Sin, and therefore in the Comparative Sense, that is,
often rather to be called Affliction, Persecution, (as from Men) Tribulation,
etc. which in the Absolute sense, must still be called Chastisement, or
Punishment.

2. Mark that this Gospel Promise of Mercy, and remission of Temporal
Corrective Punishment in part, is properly a Conditional Promise as it
respects God's ordinary dealing with Men, but it is not an infallible
ascertaining Promise as to this or that particular Person, though they do
perform the Condition: because (as is said) it has, besides the Condition on
our part, certain Exceptions and Reserves on Christ's part; (from hence you may
see how to answer the Question, whether we must pray for temporal Deliverances,
Absolutely, or Conditionally.

Concl. 15. As all Punishments on the Elect before Conversion (while yet God
hates them as Workers of Iniquity, and they are Children of wrath) are not of
the first sort (in demonstration of prevailing Rigorous Justice) but most
commonly Merciful Chastisements, (for they are often the happy occasions of their
Conversion, yea, powerful means thereto:) So the like must be said of the
Non-Elect themselves, who are but in the same state, even they are the subjects
of tender Chastisement, and in a gracious sense God is often called their Father
in Scripture, though not in that special strictest sense as he is the Father of
the Adopted, as not giving them that special Grace, but common only. The Reason
is, because though God have unequal Intentions de eventu, in Chastising the
Elect, and the Non-Elect, yet

1. He does demonstrate more Mercy than Rigorous Vindictive Justice even in the
punishments of the Non-Elect, and therefore their Punishments are such
Chastisements.

(Proved 1. Else they should not be guilty and accusable for losing the Fruit
of merciful Corrections, when indeed it is a main mercy that they shall perish
for not improving.

2. Else God would not make it the matter of a threatening to correct them or
smite them no more (that is in that sort) because they revolt more and more,
which yet he does, Ergo, etc.

2. Punishment being the Action of a Rector as such, and not of Dominus
Absolutus, an Owner as such, (and so not formally and directly the act of God,
as determining of events by his secret Decrees,) therefore they are to be
specified and denominated from Rectoral ends, (which I call the ends of God's
Legislative Will) rather than from the ends of God's Secret Decrees de rerum
eventu.

Concl. 16. Hence it follows, that God may and does remit much Temporal
Punishment (both destructive and corrective,) even to the unregenerate (both
Elect, and Non-Elect) taking an easier way to give the same mercy, which else
he might have given in a sharper way; and so far he may be said to remit or
forgive their sins: Though yet the Destructive Eternal Punishment being not
forgiven, it is not fit in ordinary Speech to say, that such men's Sins are
forgiven, without a limiting restrictive explication, because they are forgiven
only secundum quid, and in the weakest Sense.

I have on occasion of this Text run quite beyond my first intentions in
opening the nature and sorts of remission, but yet I hope not unprofitably.

From all this now it may appear, that as there are several sorts of Remission,
so diverse of them are Reversible and common to those that perish for ever. And
now to the Text in hand.

1. It is apparent that this Text speaks of some of these sorts of Remission.

2. And that it speaks of a Remission reversible, or which may be conferred on
those that afterward perish. And though I presume not to determine which of
them it is that is here meant, yet

3. It is certain that which ever it be, it is the fruit of Christ's blood shed
for them to whom it is given, for without blood there is no Remission. The Law
of Works remitteth not, for it relaxeth not its own obligation. And God
relaxeth it not but upon satisfaction, as a valuable Consideration. And
therefore it is relaxed by the New Testament in the blood of Christ, for that
Testament is founded in his blood. But for the sense of the Text, I judge that
the Forgiveness there mentioned, is the second and third sort; that is, the
Conditional Universal Grant of Pardon by the New Covenant; (for the Covenant is
the same in its Tenor to Unbelievers, and Believers; there is no real change
in it when men believe, only the same instrument does then morally act, that
is, actually remit sin, which before it did not, because it was suspended on a
Condition which was not performed. But Christ has done his part as Testator,
Donor, and Legislator before in making the Grant.) And so it is applicable
differently to different Persons. To those that have only the Conditional
Remission, and have not yet performed the Condition; it tells them eventually
what shall be their miserable case if they do not perform it (which too often
comes to pass.) To them that do believe, and so are inceptively Justified and
Pardoned, Christ speaks as a Legislator and Teacher, supposing the possibility
o^ their not performing the Condition of the Continuance of Justification, and
tells them what will be their misery if they perform it not though yet he may,
as to the event, nevertheless Decree to cause them effectually and infallibly
to perform it.

Seeing I have spoken so much here of Forgiveness, I shall refer you to it,
when I come to speak of other Texts of the like sense.

I might here add (lest any upon any other Interpretation of this Text, should
think it of no weight) that other Scriptures do expressly assert some kind of
Remission to the Wicked, upon their half Repentance; as to Ahab, the Ninivites;
those Heb. 10. that were Sanctified by the Blood of the Covenant, i. e.
purified; and those Numb. 14. 20. [I have pardoned them according to thy word]
says God of the whole People of Israel.

Yea, forbearance of Punishment, with hope and means for Everlasting Escape, is
a sort of Remission. Those that say this Remission needed not the Sacrifice of
Christ's Blood to procure it, do say that which they will never be able to
prove.

The Tenth Text that I shall insist on is, ^ Tim. 4. 9, 10, 11. This is a
Faithful Saying, and worthy of all acceptance: For therefore we both la^^^ and
suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God, who is the Savior of all
Men, specially of those that believe: These things command and teach.

Davenant puts in the frontispiece of his Dissertations, these words of
Prosper on this Text, quae sententia si tranquillo consideretur intuitu, ^^um
controversiam dirimit. De vocat. Gent. li. 2. ^. 31.

Here its left past dispute, that by [all Men] ^^ meant more than believers,
for it is such an [all Men] as is contradistinct from believers, even as the
whole from a principal part. There is no room therefore left in this Text for
any cavil or exception but this one, viz. whether by (Savior) be not meant*
(God the Father as the common preserver of his Creature, or of Men's natural
lives)? Rather then Jesus Christ as Redeemer? This is commonly affirmed, and
upon this ground, because it is only said (we trust in the living God who is
the Savior) and therefore say they, this proves not that Christ is a Savior
of all by his Death.

Answ. 1. Whether it be the Father or Son that is here spoken of, is no whit
material, seeing God the Father Redeemeth and saves by his Son, as the Son
does by himself. If it be spoken of saving the Soul, and not only the Body,
then it is no matter which person it is spoken of: For God saves none, but by
the Death of his Son. Now that it is spoken de De^ Redemptore, and not only of
God as preserver o^ Men's Bodies, I prove.

1. The word (...), say then the generallity o^ Critics, signifies moren then
Servator, ye^ than salvator, and therefore Laurentius and Grotius turn it
sospitator, and Grotius says, that servator and salvator may be spoken of one
that preserves those that are safe and never were miserable, but so it is not
here.

2. The same word is applied to God in the same manner of Speech, twice before
in this same Epistle, and in both places is he called (a Savior) in respect to
Eternal Salvation, and not to Temporal only 1 Timothy 1. 1. [ Paul an Apostle of
Jesus Christ by the commandment of God our Savior, and Lord Jesus Christ our
Hope. [1 Timothy 2. 3] For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior; Who will have all Men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
Truth For there is ^^e God, and one Mediator between God and Man, ^^e Man Jesus
Christ, who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time.) He
that denies that the Apostle does in both these places ^^ll God a Savior, in
respect to Spiritual and Everlasting Salvation, is either very blind or
perverse. And is it not fit for us to understand the same phrase used in the
next Chapter save ^^e as in the same Sense? If one Scripture must interpret
another, sure it is. On 1 Timothy 1. 1. ^^scator himself can expound the same
Phrase ^^us [ observa nomen (...) servatoris etiam Patri ^^ribui. Is enim
servat nos per Filium: Quippe ^^m salutis nostrae causd misit, and per quem nos
sibi ^conciliavit, per quem etiam Spiritum Sanctum ^^ nos mittit. [And will not
an impartial Man ^^en expound the same Phrase here in the ^^me manner?
Specially there being no rea^^ to be brought from the Text to the contra^^.
Even so does Calvin expound 1 Timothy 1. 1. ^^d 2. 3. and generally all
interpreters that I have observed. Yea let every place in the New ^estament be
examined where God the Father ^^ called a Savior, and it will be found to have
^^ference to Everlasting Salvation, and not to ^^poral only. Tit 2. 10. That
they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things. For the ^^ce of
God that brings Salvation, has appeared ^^all Men; Tit. 3. 4. But after that
the kindness and love of God our Savior toward Man appeared not by works of
Righteousness, which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us by
the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; which he shed on
us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior. Luke 1. 47. My Soul does
magnify the Lord, and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. So Tit. 1. 3.
and Jud. 25. both in the same Sense: And I remember no more in the New
Testament. And I think no considerate Man will in this case refer us to the
Phrase o^ the Old Testament for exposition of the New who knows and has well
weighed, how seldom and darkly Eternal Salvation in Heaven i^ mentioned in the
Old Testament.

3. It seems manifest to me from the contex^ that Paul meant it not only of a
Temporal Salvation. For Paul makes this office of God, to be the reason of
Christians constancy in labor and in suffering reproach for godliness sake For
the Apostle often shows us that it was the hope of Glory and not of temporal
deliverance that caused him to labor and suffer, and therefore he trusted here
on God as a Savior Even lasting, and not so much as a Temporal Saveour. For he
professes that he knew that where ever he went, bonds and afflictions did abi^
him: Yet did he not regard this, nor accou^^ his Life dear, that he might
finish his cour^ with joy. And on this ground he persuade Christians to be
steadfast, unmovable, alwa^ abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmu^ as they
know that their labor was not in va^ in the Lord: When as if in this Life only
(...) had hope in Christ we were of all Men m^ miserable.

2. And indeed God is not a Savior of all Men's Bodies in danger, by any
obligation at all, that I know of. No, though they be wronged and suffer
injustly: He does what he does of this kind for unbelievers arbitrarily: Let
any Man show where God is engaged by any Covenant to save unbelievers from
bodily dangers. But their Souls he has redeemed by Christ, and so saved them
quoad pretium: And he has made a Deed of Gift of Christ and Eternal Life to
all, on condition they refuse it not. So that he may in respect of his
Covenant, and so in a fuller Sense, be called their Savior in Spiritual
respects than in temporal; for all that they are not eventually saved. The word
Savior here implies such a Relation as God has undertaken, and that Men may
assure themselves he will perform all that belongs to it: Or else it could not
be the ground of our confidence. But wicked Men have no promise for, or
assurance of an hours Life, or any outward deliverance whatsoever; no, not
though it were never so good for them: For God will not be in Covenant with
them for common things till they first accept of his Covenant of Grace in
Christ. But for Salvation, he has made them a conditional promise, as
aforesaid.

3. And it is less probable that the Apostle calls God a Savior here so
equivocally, as not to mean in the same kind of Salvation, when yet he
intimates no difference in the Text.

4. But let us suppose all this were as the opponents would have it, yet for
ought I can see the Text will fully prove the point in question. For even in
temporal respects God is the Savior of no Man but those whom Christ died for.
For all Men have forfeited all his Salvation, and are under his Curse: And he
can be no Savior to them according to the tenor of that cursing violated Law.
It must be therefore according to the New Law or Covenant, or not at all: And
the New Law is founded in the Blood of Christ, shed for those to whom it is
made. Indeed according to the first Law he may uphold the Life and Being of
Sinners: But it is only as he does the Devils, to make them capable of
punishment. But neither do we for that* call him the Savior of the Devils, nor
would it be any such great encouragement to Paul and all Christians in labor
and sufferings for godliness sake. So that even this Temporal Salvation, does
presuppose the Relaxation or Non Execution Plenary) of the Law of Works: And
that is done only by the remitting Law of Grace; and that presupposes Christ's
Blood shed, or undertaken to beshed for the sinners. I know nothing more that
needs to be spoken to, for vindicating this Text.

The 11th Text shall be 1 John 5. 9, 10. 11, [For this is the witness which he
has testified of his Son. He that believes on the Son of God has the witness
in himself. He that believes not God has made him a Liar, because he
believes not the Record that God gave of his Son: And this is the Record, that
God has given us Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son: He that has the
Son has Life, and he that has not the Son, has not Life.

Hence I thus argue: If Eternal Life in Christ be given to unbelievers (who
make God a Liar, and have not Christ or Life) then Christ was first given on
the Cross as a Sacrifice, for those unbelievers. But the Antecedent is true:
Therefore so is the Consequent. And consequently Christ died for more than the
Elect; and therefore for all.

1. I Suppose none that is not willing to be deceived will maintain that it is
only such unbelievers as afterward shall be converted, and are Elect, who are
here said to make God a Liar: For the Record which they are condemned here for
not believing, is the object propounded to Elect and not Elect without such
Distinction, as they are all considered in number of sinful Mankind.

2. As for the Minor, or Antecedent of the Major proposition, it is very plain
in the Text. If all men should believe (who hear the Gospel) that Eternal Life
in Christ is given them, and those that believe it not do make God a Liar, then
it is certain that Eternal Life in Christ is given to them all. But, etc. Ergo,
etc. There is nothing here to be questioned, but only who are meant in the term
[Us] when it is said [God has given [Us] Eternal Life.] And it is plain that
it is the same persons (included with others) who are charged with making God a
Liar.

1. Else their Unbelief should consist only in not believing that Life is given
to other men; and consequently the Faith required of them should consist only
in believing that God has given Life in Christ to others; without any
inclusion of themselves. But that is not true. Ergo, etc. The falsehood of this
consequent, is proved thus.

1. True saving Faith is of a Receiving or Applying nature, as it is the act of
the Will, and it is introductory thereto as it is the act of the Understanding.
But believing that God has given Life in Christ to other men, is not receptive
nor applicatory, nor introductory thereto. Ergo, etc. All our Divines against
the Papists do fully maintain the Major.

2. The Devils and the most despairing men have not saving Faith. But the
Devils and Despairing men do believe that God has given Eternal Life to
others: therefore to believe that God does give that Life to others is not
saving Faith.

3. True saving Faith is of greatest concernment to the Believer (as to the
object of it,) as being the means of his Salvation. But the believing merely
what God gives to other men, is of no such concernment to any, Ergo, etc.

Obj. It is not Saving Faith that is here mentioned; nor any act that is proper
to a true Believer; nor is it the want of that which is here condemned: But it
is the not believing the Truth of the Gospel, which is only a preparatory act,
and which the Devils themselves may have, who believe and tremble: For though
this mere assent will not save, yet the want of it will condemn.

Answ. 1. Saving Faith has two parts according to the Souls faculties, which
have each their several Offices about this saving object: the one is the assent
of the Understanding: the other is the consent of the Will, (and affiance
thence following) when ever Justifying Faith is mentioned in the Scripture, it
is usually by one of these acts alone; sometime one, and sometime another. And
when one only is expressed, the other is still implied. And so it is in this
Text.

2. Assent is true saving Faith, though not the whole of saving Faith.

3. It is not merely assent to this proposition in general [the Gospel is true]
that is here made the Record of God and object of Faith: nor yet assent to this
[Jesus is the Son of God, and Savior of Believers.] But it is this [God has
given us Eternal Life, and this life is in his Son:] so that it is to believe
that God has made such a Deed of Gift of Christ to us; that is, to Mankind,
including our selves. Now no Devils do believe this; nor can say [God has
given us Eternal Life]

3. And where it may be said that Wicked men may believe it.

I Answer, It is true, but not with that deep, intense, effectual, operative
Belief, which is savingly sincere when the Scripture requires believing, and
condemns for want of it, it always implies the necessary modification, even
that the Act be in some measure answerable to the nature of its object. It
still means [sincere, cordial believing] though it do not always express it;
(nor were it convenient so to do.) And so undeniably does this Text. And this
Assent no wicked man can have.

4. The Text plainly evinceth the falsehood of the objection, and shows that it
is a saving Faith that is here mentioned, and is opposed to the Unbelief here
condemned. For it says [He that Believes has the witness in himself] which
beyond dispute is the Holy Ghost, which is Christ's great witness in the World,
especially in the Souls of Believers. And it is the Holy Ghost in such a kind
as is common to all true Believers; or else the proposition were not
universally true; And this must needs be, if not only, yet chiefly, the Holy
Ghost illuminating and sanctifying. And to this is the condemned Unbelief
directly opposed in the next words, [He that Believes not God, has made him a
Liar.]

Here Amyraldus and Dallaeus coming forth stopped me.

CHAP. VIII. Arguments against Universal Satisfaction answered.
Argum. I. ALL those are certainly saved for whom Christ Satisfied: But all men
are not Saved: Therefore Christ Satisfied not for all men.

The Major is proved thus: It will not stand with Gods Justice to punish one
sin twice, or to punish twice for one sin; the first punishment being a full
satisfaction for that sin* God can require no more: But Christ's sufferings were
a full satisfaction for every sin of those persons for whom he suffered: Ergo,
etc. The Satisfaction was full.

1. In respect of the sins of the person; there being none unsatisfied for.

2. As to God who was offended; he being fully reconciled, or well-pleased,
with the Sinners for whom the Satisfaction was made, and not only conditionally
or in part.

Answ. This is the main Argument urged by Dr. Twiss and most others against
Universal Satisfaction; and which prevails most with those of that way, so
far as I can find: But it is grounded on an unhappy ignorance of the Nature of
Satisfaction, and a confounding of satisfaction and solution of the proper
Debt; and a sore mistake about Christ's undertaking and performance.

Solutio ipsius debiti, stricte sic dicta, the proper discharge of what was
due, was supplicium ipsius Delinquentis, and of any other in his stead (as I
have proved before:) The Law did neither Threaten the Innocent, nor make any
mention of a Surety. And therefore Christ did not fulfill the Law, in Suffering
as he did in Obeying; or the Law was not properly fulfilled on Christ in his
Suffering. Satisfaction is taken sometime generally, for the fulfilling of
another desire: and so a Believing, Repenting, Obedient person, may be truly
said to satisfy God himself. But this is not all the sense of the word as it is
now in question with us in the present case.

2. Sometimes it is taken specially, for a debtors satisfying his Creditor (not
by submission and deprecation, but) by such a sufficient way, as that the
Creditor shall be no loser by him. From a Creditor and Debtor it is by
translation applied to a Rector and Delinquent. In this special sense
Satisfaction is taken.

1. Sometime more loosely and largely for the Payment of the proper Debt: the
same with Solutio ipsius Debiti. Or,

2. More strictly and properly: For the Satisfying the Creditor by giving him
as good a thing, or taking such a course as that he shall be no loser, though
the Debt be not paid. And in this sense is the word Satisfaction ordinarily
used, as its proper strict sense, the former sense being one of them too
general, and the other improper and loose. And so Satisfaction is commonly by
Lawyers and Schoolmen defined to be Redditio aequivalentis, alias indebiti: or
solutio vel Redditio tantidem: and it is contradistinguished from solutio
stricte sumpta; which is ejusdem quod debetur. And so in Criminal Cases, the
Punishment of the Offender is the Ipsum Debitum, and not properly satisfaction
to the Comminatory part of the Law; (though all Punishment may be called a
satisfaction as to the Preceptive part of the Law, because it is not the ipsum
quod debetur, as to the Precept, but something to provide that the Law and
Lawgiver lose not by the delinquent:) But if any other sufficient means be
found which, without the Punishment of the offender, may provide for the
Indemnity of the Lawgiver, and the public good, and this both for what is
past by reparation, and for time to come by Prevention, that so the main ends
of the violated Law may yet be attained, this is satisfaction to the Lawgiver;
Satisfaction always supposes the non-payment of the Debt: And in Criminal Cases
(as ours is) satisfaction still supposes the Duty, or Punishment, or both to
be overpassed which the Law required. The Punishment of the Delinquent himself,
(which may be called a satisfaction to the Law) supposes that the Precept was
violated, by Omission or Commission. The punishing of another for us, or any
other such Satisfaction, supposes the Delinquent himself not to be punished.
So that it must needs be remembered by all true Christians, that Christ did not
only satisfy for our not obeying, but for our not suffering the Punishment
threatened by the Law, and so due to us for our disobedience: yea most directly
did he Suffer for our not Suffering, and so secondarily for our Sinning.
Further it must be remembered, that satisfactio est solutio Recusabilis; sed
solutio ejusdem est non recusabilis; The Creditor or Rector may choose to take
satisfaction, by receiving the value in another kind: But he cannot refuse the
proper Debt, unless by remitting it freely: He can require nothing else but the
Debt: Moreover, satisfaction being a refusable payment, the Creditor may take
it on his own terms, and there must intercede a New Agreement for the accepting
of it, and if the Satisfier will not come to the Creditors terms, he may refuse
it, as no satisfaction: whereas if the Debt it self be paid, he must ipso facto
acknowledge the Debtor acquit and to be no longer a Debtor: The like may be
said in the Punishment of a Delinquent. To apply all to the case in hand:
Christ was not the offender, therefore Christ's Sufferings (as is said before)
were not the fulfillin; of the Law; but satisfaction to the Lawgiver. His
Satisfaction supposes that no man was himself Punished when Christ satisfied
(morally by undertaking his natural suffering) nor ever was to be punished
merely on the old score; that is, merely for violating and incuring the penalty
of the first Law, by God as Rector according to that Law. God might have
refused to accept Christ's Sufferings as a Satisfaction for Sinners; much more,
to have freely provided it out of his own Treasure, as it were; when God
therefore did freely himself provide a Satisfaction, and freely Accept it, He
did both only on these terms; that [as Legislator of the strict Law of Works as
standing without remedy, he would punish no Man, but yet he would not actually
and absolutely discharge them, for they are still his Subjects; and now by a
double right and bond, viz both of Creation, and Redemption, and therefore must
still be governed by him, and therefore must still be Governed by Laws, and
therefore must still be under Precepts, Prohibitions, Promises, and
Threatenings, which are the Parts of the Law. For the Nature of Man is such, as
that it must be governed not merely by Commanding, but also per Praemia and
Poenas, (Experience tells us that of the best Men on Earth) as propounded to
them; therefore God in mercy would make a New Law, commanding all men to
repent, and (that hear the Gospel) to Believe; and giving to the Redeemed the
actual pardon of all their Sins on these Conditions, making Christ the Fountain
of our Life, and Head of all that shall be Saved, and Ordaining that Christ,
and with him Pardon and Adoption, and the Spirit, (for further Sanctification)
and Salvation, shall be given to all that will take Christ, and that those that
refuse him shall be unpardoned for all his Sacrifice and Satisfaction, and
shall moreover incur a far sorer punishment.

These are the terms on which God took Christ's Sufferings as satisfactory to
his Justice, which terms are well pleasing to the Son himself, nor did he ever
desire to ransom them on other terms, or to bring them into any other
Condition, than under this his own Government and Laws, nor to convey Pardon
and Glory (the Fruits of his Death) to any that refused him; (still supposing
his Everlasting secret Decree of procuring his chosen infallibly to perform the
Conditions, and partake of the benefits which belongs to another part of
Theology.)

Also it must be well observed (as the very Principal Point for avoiding the
common Errors in this business) that the satisfaction is made to God as
Legislator, and so Rector per Leges; and so has its main direct respect to his
Legislative Will. His Will de Eventu is naturally Antecedent to it, and the
Cause of it as Event: But his Law was the cause or occasion of it, as due or
morally necessary; and also there are no Acts of his Decretive Will de Eventu
caused by it, but there are Acts of his Laws (and so as to our manner of
conceiving of his Will de Debito) caused by it; and so it was not for Christ's
Death that God decreed to give Faith to any, and consequently to give actual
Pardon and Glory: But God Decreed to give these for Christ's death, when he so
gives them: And it is because of Christ's death that they are due; though not
immediately from his death, but mediante donatione Testamenti vel faderis,
Christ's death is the Cause of Faith, but not of the Decree to give it.

Again it must be understood, that it is not God as Legislator of the New Law,
that is satisfied for Sin by Christ's death, that were to dye to satisfy
himself, the Mediator, for the Non execution of his own remedying Law: But it
is God as Legislator of the Law of Works; constituting Everlasting Death the
due Penalty of every Sin: Or if any had rather say, that it is not formally the
Law of Works which is now in force, conjunct with the Law of Grace, but it is
become part of the Law of Grace; the matter comes all to one sense, though we
change the words: There is one Law that says [ He that Sins shall dye,]
call it what you will; this Law as to the end Christ has satisfied, i. e. he
has properly satisfied the Lawgiver: There is another Law (or as they call
it, the peremptory part of the New Law) which says [ He that believes shall
be Saved, and he that believes not shall be Damned;] Christ has not satisfied
the Justice of this Law by his Sufferings. The sense of the Commination is [ He
that in the time of this Life believes not shall be Damned.] This Law is ever
executed on all that are guilty, and by it obliged to Everlasting Death; that
is, on those that in their life time here, do not Repent and Believe. For the
violation of the precept of this Law, as it requires Belief, or other Duty at
the present time, Christ did dye, but not for the nonperformance of the
Condition which Death is threatened to.

Lastly, It is therefore certain that Christ dyed not for the Sin of Final
Impenitency (in a prevalent degree) and unbelief, or Final Rebellion against
himself, or his Father.

And therefore when I said before that he satisfied God as Legislator of the
Law of works, for sin as sin, it is to be understood of the Law of Works, as
contradistinct from the Law of Grace; and so all the sins peremptorily
Condemned by the Law of Grace, are excepted from the satisfaction: Not only
(nor at all) because they are the sins of such Persons, but because they are
such excepted sins, who ever the person be.

Now therefore to the Argument, and first to the Major, I deny it, and never
saw any fair color of proof of it; and therefore (having full plain Scripture
to the contrary) do confidently believe, that all those are not Saved that
Christ satisfied for; and to the Proof brought I answer*

1. It is untrue that Christ satisfied for every sin of every Man for whom he
satisfied; and it will never be proved. He has excepted all those Sins which
are comprised in the final nonperformance of the Condition of Salvation.

Object. None that he satisfied for are ever guilty of that, and that is the
Reason why he may not be said to dye for such Sins.

Answ. That Is denied, and to be better proved before it can be received, by
Sober Men. I have already proved that he dyed and satisfied for those that are
final Unbelievers, or Apostates, and so perish. And I now prove that the Reason
why Christ satisfied not for such sins (as final Impenitency, Infidelity, or
Rebellion) is not accidental from the state of the Redeemed, viz. because none
of them are guilty of such; but it is directly from the Nature of the sin,
without respect to this person more than that.

If Christ have expressly excepted the final nonperformance of the Gospel
Conditions from among the number of those sins which he has satisfied for, and
that even in the New Law which he has enacted for all (Elect, or Non-Elect,)
then it is not only accidentally, or because it is not found in those he
suffered for, but it is directly a volunt ate Dei Redemptoris and ^ Natura
peccati, because God would not accept, nor Christ give any satisfaction for
that kind of Sin, (or for any sin so qualified or circumstantiated,) but the
Antecedent is certain, therefore I prove the Antecedent thus: It is the very
Nature of every Condition added to any Donation, Condonation, Premiant Law,
etc. that it be or contain an exception of the Nonperformance of that
Condition from among the (...) of those things that are given, forgiven,
constituted, due, etc. (Because the Condition is to suspend the Gift 'till it
be performed.) But the New Law or Testament as made to all (Elect, or
Non-Elect) does constitute this its Condition, viz. That all that will be
Justified, Repent, and Believe, and take Christ affectionately, and thankfully
for their only Lord and Savior; and that all that will be Saved do persevere
herein, and in adding further sincere Obedience to God's Laws: Therefore by
making these the Conditions, the Law excepteth the nonperformance thereof from
among the number of those things that are given, forgiven, or granted thereby.
And Consequently these sins are excepted from among the sins that Christ bore
on the Cross, or satisfied for: For whatsoever kind of sin he has satified
for, he bestows the Pardon of it, Conditionally at least, (and that in his
Law to them to whom his Law is made,) so far is he from making an express
exception of that from among the number of pardonable sins: But these he
excepteth from among that number.

If a Man by Legacy give you 1000l. per annum, on Condition you pay his Heir
out of it an 100l. per annum, Rent: Here this 100l. per annum is expressly
excepted from the Sum given, because the payment of it is required as the
Condition of enjoying the rest.

If a Man to whom you owe 1000l. make you an Acquittance and Discharge, on
Condition you pay him a Penny in token of thankfulness, here that Penny is
plainly excepted from among the number, or from the Sum given, or forgiven.

If a King pass an Act for the pardoning of all Offenses committed against him,
on Condition Men will thankfully acknowledge his Clemency; here the not
acknowledging it thankfully is plainly excepted from among the number of Faults
Pardoned.

2. Moreover this Law being thus constituted for all, (Elect as well as others)
it is undoubted, that if we may suppose an Elect man to be guilty of final
unbelief, or impenitency, it would be to him an unpardonable sin, and
consequently Christ dyed not for it..

If you say, this is not to be supposed, I Answer,

1. It is supponendum, though not ponendum.

2. The Holy Ghost supposes it possible ( etsi non futurum) in that the Law is
made to them as well as others; and in that he expressly requires them so often to
take heed lest they fall, and come short of the Promised Rest, through
unbelief, etc.

And therefore we also may put such a Supposition. Do not those that oppose us
in this, use so to Expound such Scriptures, frequently, both about Redemption,
and when they Dispute against the Apostasy of the Saints; and say it is
supposed only; but Suppositio nil ponit in esse: Moreover the Scripture makes
it plain, that these Sins of Total Apostasy, and other unpardonable (because
uncurable) Sins, are in them for whom Christ dyed: For they bring on themselves
swift Destruction, by denying the Lord that bought them: They tread under foot
the Blood by which they were Sanctified, and do despite to the Spirit of Grace;
and so there remains no more Sacrifice for (their) Sin, but a fearful looking
for of Judgment. So that is is plain that Christ dyed not for all the Sins of
all Men for whom he dyed, excepting by his new Law, the final Nonperformance
of the Conditions of the Promise, in whomsoever without exception. Yea,
Christ's real giving all Men under his hand the Pardon of all their Sins, on
Condition they Repent and Believe; shows beyond all doubt, that he bore on the
Cross all their other Sins, but bore no Man's final Impenitency, or Unbelief.

2. And the other Principle, which is supposed in this Argument of Christ's
satisfying God to a full Reconciliation) is as false as the former, and in the
best Sense needs cautelous explication.

1. It is certain that no Man is actually reconciled to God, Pardoned or
Justified 'till he believe, (or others Believe for him, as Infants at least so
far as is revealed,) God still hates all the workers of Iniquity, and we are
all by Nature the Children of Wrath. By receiving Christ, we receive power to
become the Sons of God, and by Faith only are we justified, and not before we
believe: And who but the Antinomians will say the contrary?

2. The end to which God (as Legislator of the Old Law) accepted satisfaction,
was that the impediments of Remission being taken out of the way, he might
(without any derogation from the honor of himself, or his Law, and without
frustration of the ends of that Law) give out in a New Law, a Free Pardon and
Salvation with Christ to all that will accept them. So that the end of
satisfaction as such, and not any accidental or collateral effect must direct
us to judge of its extent and sufficiency.

3. To this end Christ has made full satisfaction to God's Justice, and Men's
After-Sufferings, are not from any defect in Christ's satisfaction. God has
granted a Pardon under his hand to all that will accept it in and with Christ,
and for Men's final rejecting of Christ and Mercy he received no satisfaction.
God may not be said properly to be conditionally satisfied: He is satisfied
actually and absolutely, as far as ever he required satisfaction. But the
Benefits of that satisfaction are only conditionally given out to the Ransomed,
and not absolutely. If it be objected that God is so far satisfied as to give
Faith it self, which is the Condition to all for whom he is satisfied.

I answ. 1. It is untrue: and never was proved, nor ever will be.

2. Faith is a remote effect of Satisfaction, and not the proper direct effect:
It flows not from Satisfaction as Satisfaction; but from Satisfaction as
connexed with Election, as I shall anon more fully open, and therefore desire
the Reader, to peruse what we shall purposely write of that point by it self.

I deny therefore their great Medium, that [God cannot in Justice punish one
sin twice] that is [for one sin] (for it is not the sin that is punished, but
the man for the sin.) Though I easily grant that if the violated Law be once
fully executed, it cannot be again or in a double measure executed (for that is
impossible as being a contradiction: for it is no execution of the Law, which
goes beyond the sense of the Law.)

But consider 1. The Law was not executed on Christ in his sufferings; and
therefore may well be executed on all Unbelievers in their own damnation.
Christ did by his Sufferings only pay, as it were that which is a valuable
consideration, for the non-execution of the Law as to all that will perform the
conditions of the Gospel or New Law.

Obj. Did not Christ bear the Curse of the Law for us, that he might Redeem
them that were under the Law?

Answ. Yes, he bore the Curse of the Law Materially; that is, that Cursed Death
which the Law threatened; But he bore it not ex formali Legis obligatione, sed
tantum ex obligatione sponsionis propriae, and precepti paterni; The Law
obliged us to punishment, but it never obliged Christ to Punishment; only its
obliging us to it, was the occasion of Christ's Obligation, because it
occasioned him to Oblige himself by his own voluntary sponsion, that he might
free us. But still it was only his own sponsion that obliged him (together with
that peculiar will of his Father, that he should undertake and discharge our
debt;) so that you see the Law is but once executed, even on the Damned (as to
full execution, for man's mortality and sufferings here, are a small part of the
Execution which Christ saw it not meet to take off.) And so the ipsum Debitum
is paid but once; Christ's Sufferings being not solutio ejusdem, sed
satisfactio, i. e. solutio aequivalentis alias indebiti.

2. Nay, consider further, that the equivalency lay not in the proportion of
Punishment (pain or loss) equal to that which was due to all or to the Elect;
but in the sufficient aptitude of that Degree or Punishment, which Christ bore
(becoming a public spectacle of shame, for the demonstration of Justice, etc.)
from the exceeding Dignity of the person, to be a means to Gods obtaining the
remote ends of his Law, ( viz. the demonstration of Justice, and right
governing the Creature, and preserving the Authority of the Lawgiver) though
the nearest ends of that Law were not attained ( viz. the personal obedience of
man, and for want of that, his personal suffering.) Many Learned Divines have
written largeiy to prove that Christ did not properly suffer the pains of Hell
on his Soul; I will not meddle much with that question; But doubtless it was a
very great part of our punishment which Christ was incapable of undergoing;
much less may any dare to affirm that his Sufferings Materially were as great
as All the Sufferings of All that he died for should have been. The Death due
to us was Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal. The Temporal Death is so much the
least, that many Divines will not be persuaded that it has now to the Godly
any nature of Punishment, but is only materially a suffering. The Spiritual
Death, so far as it consisted in the loss of Gods Image, and privation of
Holiness, and Dominion of Sin and Slavery to Satan, Christ bore not at all. Nor
yet as it lay in any Torments or Gripes of Conscience, which are the fruits
only of personal proper guilt, in the remembrance of the Folly, or Wilfulness,
or Negligence, or Unkindness, or the like Evils manifested in Sinning. Christ
had no sin of his own to look on to torment him: and other men's Sins could not
procure to him the gripes of a Guilty Conscience. Nor yet was his Soul or Body
so deprived of Gods Love as are the wicked, nor so hated by God, nor at all
disunited from God: For upon the loss of Union with God, and Spiritual
Communion with him, would have followed, the loss of Grace, and depravation of
the Soul, and prevalency of sin: nor yet were any of Christ's sufferings
Eternal. Yet did he endure that debasedness and public shame, and that
forsaking of God by the denial of Spiritual Comforts, and by giving him up to
the Will of his Enemies, and by an inward sense of Gods displeasure, in trouble
of Soul, which was a full satisfaction to Justice, or a Sacrifice sufficient
for God to do what he did, upon the reception of it. But you see that quoad
Materiale poenae there was much difference between Christ's Sufferings and the
Damneds in Hell.

3. Consider Christ's sufferings being not solutio ipsius Debiti but
satisfactio; as is before explained, therefore it was solutio recusabilis, God
might have chosen to accept it; and there must intercede, as it were, a new
agreement for its acceptance. Now God did accept it, and Christ suffer it only
on these terms, that none should for all that have the Pardon of his sins, till
he accepted Christ as his Lord Redeemer and Repented of his sins: and this is
the true reason why Christ's Satisfaction, is no hinderance to the punishment of
those that reject him and his favors.

4. The Satisfaction of Christ is sufficient and perfect ad suum finem, to all
its own ends, but not ad omnem finem, to every use and end: and it was not its
use and end to acquit ipso facto any sinner, but only to acquit all on
condition of Repenting and Believing, (it being also the full intent of God to
give that condition to all his Elect, as shall be anon opened.) Some very Wise,
Godly, and Learned men that I have spoke with, wish that the Word
[Satisfaction] had been never here used, but instead of it the terms of [an
Expiatory or Propitiatory Sacrifice:] because the last is the Scripture phrase
and the first is not: But yet Satisfaction is no such unfit term but that it
may well be used, though still Scripture phrase I confess is better.

5. As Christ has satisfied the Father, so the Father has satisfied Christ
(in the larger sense, i. e. he has fulfilled his desire.) It was not man
himself that satisfied, but Christ for man; nor did Christ satisfy in our
person, as a delegate pays a Debt in the Debtors name, so as in Lawsense
Civiliter, it is the Debtor himself that pays it; For then it should have been
Solutio not Satisfactio; There being no Vicarius Poenae allowed by the Law, it
is indeed impossible, for such a solution to be made; For it should be the Idem
and not the Idem quod debetur, quia non naturaliter per eundem, and
consequently not civiliter per eundem. Yet a satisfaction may be made by
suffering alterius loco; and so Christ did. But as Christ suffered in his own
person, viz. Sponsoris, and not our selves; so the effect that he desired was,
that he might himself be the first Recipient of the fruits of that satisfaction
(in that sense as he is capable of receiving them) that he might be the Head
and the public Treasury of all the Mercy procured by his Death; and being made
Lord of all, might give them out to whom, and when, and how he pleased; and in
special, that he might make a general Deed of Gift of himself, and Pardon and
Salvation to All that would accept it, and might send forth the Spirit and Word
to bring in men to himself in what measure he please; and in particular in an
infallible prevalency to his chosen: And that none might perish merely on the
old score, or be judged merely by the Old Law; but all stand or fall according
to their improvement or abuse of recovering Mercy. And all this God has
hereupon granted to his Son: And so he has satisfaction for his satisfaction;
though many that he has satisfied for do perish.

6. Besides consider, though men be punished for the same sins that Christ
suffered for, yet as to God, the same do become new sins, and so men suffer for
them as it were, as for new sins: For,

1. The old Obligation was so far made void or disabled, that of it self it
could never more bind them to punishment, by reason of the addition of a
remedying grant.

2. God did quantum in se as Legislator of the old Law, forgive them all the
debt, (except the sins of nonperformance of the Gospel conditions, which God
still excepted and Christ never suffered for) for God has delivered the
obligation out of his own hand (as standing in that first Relation of Rector
secundum Legem Naturae s^lum) and given it up into the hand of the Redeemer, to
give Remission to whom he please. He has also made a free Deed of Gift of an
Universal Pardon, to all that will accept it. So that though men be not
actually pardoned, yet God may conveniently be said to have pardoned them, in
that he did his part as Rector secundum Leges. As he says to Israel, I have
healed thee and thou art not healed. When a true Believer is actually Pardoned,
God does put forth no new act to Pardon him, but does it by the general Grant
or Act of Oblivion, whereby he Pardoned All men conditionally as well as them.
The Law, says a man, has done a thing or given a benefit when he has done
his part, though the effect follow not, and the Work be yet undone: For Moral
Causes may do all their part, and ^et the effect not follow, for want of the
performance of conditions in the receiver, or because con-causes do not their
part. And therefore if the effect follow not, the Law enquires, Who it is long
of? Whose fault was it? if of the Patient or Receiver, then the Donor or Agent
is said to have done the thing, though yet it be not done. For as to him
moraliter vel Civiliter it is done: There being no default on his part. If any
say that God follows not the Rules of Humane Laws. I answer, God is the
Fountain of all right Laws, and Reason, and Justice, and I speak not of any
unjust or mistaking Laws. This is an ill pretense for men to judge their Maker
by; when they will not allow him that reasonable apology, nor make that
construction of his ways according to common undeniable equity, as they will do
of the ways of men. Right Reason, and the Laws made thereby, are a beam of Gods
perfect Wisdom and Justice. If any say that God does not Totum quod ad se
attinet, all his part, in making a Deed of Gift of Christ and Pardon, and
Glory, to all that will accept it, unless he also give Faith which is the
acceptance it self. I shall now only say this much (till we come to the point
by it self) that God does Totum quod ad se attinet ut Legislatorem vel Rectorem
juxta Leges, all that belongs to him as Rector according to Laws; (though not
all that belongs to him as absolute Lord and Disposer of events and all
Creatures.) And it is in that Respect, sub (...) Rectoris that Christ made
satisfaction to him, and not in the (...) the Relation of an Eternal-Elector or
Absolute Proprietary and Disposer of all.

So that you see now that quoad Deum all men are pardoned all their sins
(except those excepted in the conditions of the Grant,) though quoad
delinquentis Receptionem they are still unpardoned. They may have Christ and
Pardon if they will. And when they are deprived of the Gift merely because they
will not have it, no Reason can say, God did not give it, or Christ did not
procure it, or that God is unjust in that they are without it. So that it is
not now merely the obligation of the first Law, as unremedied that binds them
over to punishment, nor as it is in the Hands of God as Creator or Rector
secundum Legem operum; but it is the Obligation of the new Law primarily (He
that believes not shall not be forgiven nor be saved) and consequently of the
Old Law, as the obligation is in the Redeemers hands to be charged only on the
Rejecters of Grace. It is not primarily for sin as sin, according to this Law;
[Whosoever sins shall dye,] but it is primarily for Rejecting the Remedy,
and then that sin, by necessary consequence remains unpardoned: so that it is
not directly because they were guilty of Death by the first Law, but propter
rejectam Remissionem for despising the Remission of that guilt. So that quoad
Deum it may be called the return of Sin or Guilt Remitted, and so to be more
properly ex novd obligatione from the New Obligation of the Law of Christ,
binding all their sins again upon them; though as to them and their reception
it is both from the New Obligation and the old. And therefore Jude calls
such, twice dead, and plucked up by the Roots. If an hundred Traitors be
condemned, and the Prince Ransom them all at a Price, agreeing in the payment
of it, that they shall now be all his own, and none of them be delivered for
all that, who will not thankfully own him and acknowledge his favor: Here it
is just that all the Refusers of Pardon yet perish: And their Death is directly
for the refusing of the Remedy, and secondarily from their old crime because
they would not have it remedied. So that though Materialiter they lose but one
Life, yet it may be said that the Life they now lose, Civiliter is not the same
that before they lost; but it is vitam de novo donatam, a Life newly given
them, for they were dead in Law, and the King gave them a new Life, Moraliter
etsi non Naturaliter. And it is the rejecting of the Gift by which they lose
their former Natural Life, and their New-given Mortal Life. And will any man be
so ill advised in this case as to say, that it is injustice in the King or
Prince to punish the same persons that were before Ransomed? Yea if it were not
by Money but by suffering public shame that the Prince had Ransomed them.

Having thus Explained the Case, and Answered the Argument, I will (looking at
Edification, and not the usual form of Disputing) go beyond the task of a mere
Respondent, and give you two or three Arguments to prove that it is no
injustice in God to punish those for whom Christ has satisfied, or for whose
sins he was a sacrifice.

And, 1. I argue thus; If it be no injustice in God to oblige men to punishment
for all Christ's satisfaction, then it is no injustice actually to punish men
for all Christ's satisfaction. But the former is true, therefore so is the
latter.

First, I will prove the consequence of the Major Proposition thus; from the
essential offices of the Law.

1. The Law is Juris constitutiva, vel saltem declarativa. It constituteth
Right, or at least declares right; (I put in the latter [declareth] not as my
own sense, but to prevent the quarrel of any that may think this or any Right
was constituted from Eternity before there was any Law, or at least before that
which we say obliges sinners to punishment: Though indeed the Law does
constitute before it declare.) And so the Law is Regula jussiti^; vel saltem
regula justa: And if so, then to execute such a Law can be no injustice.

2. The Law is Norma judicii; that is past question. I speak of a Law in force,
and as to the subjects to whom it is in force. And if so, then it can be no
injustice to execute it. But I think few sober men will deny the Major, and
therefore I leave that. And one would think none should doubt of the Minor:
Whether it be any injustice in God, by his Law to oblige to punishment those
that Christ Died for? But because the Antinomians deny it, let us prove it. If
God do de facto oblige to punishment those for whom Christ Died, then it is no
injustice so to do: But God does so actually, Ergo, etc.

I hope if we prove that God does it, none dare say it is unjust. If he be not
Just he is not God. And that God does it I prove thus.

1. Those that God Hates, and are Children of Wrath, and without Hope, and
without God in the World, and Strangers to the Covenant of Promises, and Aliens
to the Commonwealth of Israel, etc. are certainly obliged to punishment: But
such many have been and still are, for whom Christ Died, Ergo etc. God hates
all the workers of Iniquity, and they are all by Nature Children of Wrath, etc.
But many that Christ Died for, are before Regeneration workers of Iniquity,
Ergo, etc.

2. All that are under the Curse of the Law are obliged to punishment. But many
that Christ Died for, were under the Curse of the Law since his Death,
undertaken (when his satisfaction was in force) yea since his actual suffering;
Ergo. etc. Many Scriptures show both that we were under the Curse of the Law
when Christ actually suffered, and that all the Elect are under it still as
well as others, till their conversion. I am loath to trouble the Reader in
heaping up Testimonies.

3. All that are condemned already, and the Wrath of God abides on them, are
doubtless obliged to punishment. But such are many for whom Christ Died; (even
all the Elect as well as others, while they are unbelievers, John 3. 18.

4. All that are guilty are obliged to punishment: (Proved, Reatus est
obligatio ad poenam, they are all one thing) But some that Christ Died for are
Guilty. Ergo, etc. Even all before pardon, and that is all before Conversion
are guilty.

5. All those whose sins Christ does pardon were first guilty or obliged to
punishment. But, some that Christ Died for have their sins pardoned. Ergo, etc.

The Major is proved beyond all doubt from the formal Nature of Pardon, which
is the Remitting of Guilt, or the Dissolving of an Obligation to punishment;
therefore where is no such obligation there can be no Dissolution of it: For
that which is not, cannot be dissolved: And so there is no capacity for pardon;
no more than a living man can be raised from the Dead, or a Man cured of a
Disease, which he never had. The like may be said of Justification also. Our
Divines have fully proved against the Antinomians, that we are unpardoned, and
unjustified till we believe: We are Justified by Faith, and therefore were
unjustified before Faith.

6. If none be obliged to punishment for whom. Christ Died, then none such may
pray for Pardon, nor confess that they need any Pardon from Christ. (For Pardon
being the dissolving of an obligation to punishment, there can be no pardon,
where there is no obligation; and therefore no need of it, nor of prayer for
it) But the consequent is very wicked: We must daily pray, Forgive us our Debts
and Trespasses: Ergo, etc.

The Second Argument is this, If God do actually punish those for whom Christ
Died, then he may justly punish them. But God does actually punish such: Ergo,
etc.

The Major is unquestionable.

The Minor is fully proved thus.

1. The express words of Scripture show it, Lev. 26. 41, 43. Lam. 3 39. and 4.
6, 22. Amos 1. 3, 6, 9, 11, 13. and 2. 1, 4, 6. 2 Cor. 2. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 14. Jer.
44. 13. Ezra. 9. 13. Hos. 4. 9, 15. Jer. 9 25. Read the places.

2. The execution of that sentence, Genesis 3. 16, 17, 18 19. is certainly
punishment. [ I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy Conception, in sorrow
thou shall bring forth Children, etc. Cursed is the ground for thy sake* in
sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy Life, etc. Dust thou art, and
to Dust shall thou return.] But this sentence is executed on those that Christ
Died for, Ergo, etc.

3. Those whom God chastises he punishes: But he chastises those whom Christ
Died for* Ergo, etc.

The Major is undeniable to all that know what chastisement and punishment is:
Punishment is the Genus (being a Natural Evil, or the privation of a Natural
Good, inflicted for a Moral Evil, the privation of a Moral Good:) Rigorous
vindictive Punishment tending most to the ruin of the Sinner, is one species
of it, Chastisement is another species, which, by the hurt of a sinner tends
to his good. And though this be called Paternal, yet, 1. Chastisement is not
the proper act of Parents. Masters may Chastise Servants, and Princes their
Subjects. 2. It is Metaphorically called Paternal in one respect, as God
exercises it; when yet in other respects it is the act of God as Rector per
Leg^s, for so all Gods Chastisements are according to his Laws.

Object. All shall work together for good to them that Love God, to the Called,
etc. therefore nothing is Punishment.

Answ. 1. The best Interpreters (according to the plain truth) expound that
Text of Affliction only, and most of such Affliction as is suffered for Christ's
cause, or at least not for heinous sinning against God. And it is unlikely it
should be otherwise.

1. Because the defect of Love to God seems excepted in limiting it to them
that love God: But one that Christ Died for may be defective in love to God,
therefore that is not promised to work for good.

2. Every Man dies in some sin, and how that should do him good is hard to
discern.

3. If we had a Promise that sin and all should work for the best, then we had
no evil to fear, nor avoid, nor pray against, nor lament; but that is not true.

4. Such a Promise would be a dangerous encouragement to sin; if every
Christian knew by promise before hand that how much soever they sinned it
should be better for them than if they had not sinned.

5. The good of a Christian lies in the enjoyment of God, by knowledge, love,
joy, etc. therefore his want of knowledge, love, etc. is not that which is
Promised shall work for the best.

6. It is possible for a believer by Revolting to decline in Grace, and
consequently in Happiness; (else we need not fear declining nor lament it.) But
if sin should all work for the best to them, then it were impossible their
Happiness could decline: for nothing but sin, or so much as sin can cause it.

7. They that have least improved their Talents, and have least Grace, shall
have least Glory: God is enjoyed hereafter in various degrees according to men's
various capacities; therefore that defect of Grace, or that sin here which
caused their less degree of Glory did not work for their greater good. Yet I
confess, 1. That God may and often does make sin an occasion of good to his
People. 2. And always brings good out of it to his own Glory; But he has not
Promised that every believers sin shall work together for good to him.

8. The word [working together] expresses a causality, and a concausality with
God, which cannot be ascribed to sin, it being at the best but an occasion of
good.

2. If this Promise were so to be understood, it were nothing against what I
say: And if it do extend to all sufferings as well as those for Christ, yet it
is not against it. For it proves no more but that they are chastisements that
shall produce a greater good than the suffering is evil. But yet chastisements
are punishments, and the evil is still evil though it occasion good: It is evil
in it self or directly, it does us good but by accident. Or whatsoever you
conclude of chastisements in suffering, certainly it is a heavy Punishment when
God permits his People to sin (as he did David, Peter, etc.) yet such as
Christ has Died for do suffer this Punishment. Again, is not Original sin the
loss of Gods Image, and the pravity of Nature a Punishment for the first sin? I
mean Gods withdrawing his Grace, which is the Antecedent.

Lastly, If all this were nothing as to the Regenerate, yet who ever said that
God never punishes any of his Elect while they are Unregenerate? Are none of
their sins Original or Actual, nor any of their sufferings or disunion from
Christ and Alienation from God, punishments to them? It is beyond all dispute.
I conclude therefore that it is a point of undeniable evidence, that God does
actually punish some, yea all for whom Christ Died; and he does it justly. And
therefore it is not injustice to punish men that Christ Died for, (merely as if
God could not do it, lest he punish twice for one sin.

Object. But the great Punishment of everlasting Death, would be injustice,
though lesser be not.

Answ. Degrees here make but a gradual difference. If it be therefore injustice
to inflict punishment because Christ has satisfied for the sin, then a lesser
punishment would be a lesser injustice: But God is as incapable of the least
injustice as of the greatest.

3. The Third Argument; It is no injustice in God to make a Law to those that
Christ Died for, which threatens Punishment to them conditionally, and
commands them to fear it, and avoid it; therefore it is no injustice in God
to punish some for whom Christ Died. The Antecedent is doubtless because God
does actually make such Laws as threaten to all both Temporary and Everlasting
punishments. If it be said that [they threaten none but final Unbelievers; and
Christ Died for none such.] I answer, (to omit the begging of the Question in
this Objection) Gods new Law threatens Temporal Punishment to those that are
not such Unbelievers, and Eternal Punishment conditionally to All; viz. If they
believe not: And it threatens no man but conditionally, for the discovery of
absolute Non-election, and the certainty of the perishing of all the Non-elect,
is not properly a threatening but a Prediction; yet improperly may be called a
threatening: Even as the discovery of absolute Election, and of the certainty of
the Salvation of all the Elect, is improperly called a Covenant or Promise;
which is properly a Prediction de eventu only, not constitutive of any Right.
If the whole New Law ( He that believes shall be Saved, and he that believes
not shall be Damned) be made to all, Elect as well as others; and must be
preached or promulgate to every Creature, then the comminatory part is made to
all, Elect, as well as others: But the Antecedent is true, Ergo, etc.

2. For the Consequence of the Argument, I need not say much more than is said
already in the first Argument.

Object. But the Elect will all certainly Believe, and therefore God cannot
justly execute that threatening on them.

Answ. 1. But he may on others, for whom Christ satisfied.

2. The reason why he cannot on them, is not properly because they are
satisfied for, but because they believe, and so are not the proper subjects of
the penalty.

3. They will certainly believe; not merely or directly because Christ
satisfied for them; but because God has chosen them to Faith and Salvation,
and Christ in Dying for them had a peculiar intent of saving them infallibly,
and giving them Faith to that end; they being given him peculiarly by his
Father.

4. The Fourth Argument is the same that I have elsewhere handled, viz. If it
be injurious or unjust to punish the same man for whom Christ Died, then it is
injurious to some one: But it is injurious to no one; therefore it is not
unjust or injurious at all.

The Major is evident. All injury is an injury to some, and so is all injustice
injurious to some.

Object. It may be that injustice which is contrary to Virtue or Universal
Justice, though it be injurious to none.

Answ. That Is not so; for that Unrighteousness is injurious to God, and
perturbeth the order of Nature, and is injurious to our selves. But this God is
not to be conceived as capable of, seeing it consists in a disconformity to
his will.

And, 2. It Is apparent that it is Gods distributive Justice, as to men, and his
commutative Justice as to Christ, which is here pleaded by Divines to prove a
necessity of the Salvation of all that Christ Died for.

Let us therefore go to the proof of the Minor Proposition: And it is proved
thus.

If Gods punishing the same men that Christ Died for be injustice or injurious,
then it is either a wrong to God himself or to Christ the Redeemer, or else to
the Sinners that perish: But it is no wrong to God the Father, Christ the
Redeemer, nor the Sinner: Therefore it is no injustice nor wrong at all.

The Major consists of two parts, both which are beyond dispute.

1. That whatsoever is injurious, is injurious to some person or Society.

2. That the enumeration is sufficient in the present Case. None else can be
imagined to be wronged but God, or the Redeemer, or the Sinner.

And, 1. That it is no wrong to God himself is past doubt, for God cannot and
will not wrong himself.

Object. But it would be contrary to the goodness of his Nature, and so
contrary to himself, and to Universal Righteousness.

Answ. Not so: There can nothing in Gods Nature be manifested which should
necessitate or cause him certainly to save all that Christ Died for. Not his
Justice, for that requires him to give every Man his Right. But I shall show
you that this was never the Right of all that Christ Died for, nay, I have
showed already that all of them are after Christ's Dying for them actually
obliged to punishment; so that punishment was then their Right. Not his truth:
For he has no where promised it.

2. It is no injury to Christ that some should perish for whom he Died.

1. Because it is his own will: He never intended to save any that he Died for,
but only those that accept him and his benefits.

2. It is according to the contract (as we may improperly call it) between him
and the Father. God never required nor accepted satisfaction, nor did Christ
ever give it, but on these terms, that only those should be saved by it that
accept him and it. God has done what he promised to the Redeemer. He has
delivered up all men's Obligations into the hands ( i. e. the power and dispose)
of Christ; and so has remitted the Debt to all that will accept it: Christ may
now give pardon to whom he please. It was not we, but Christ that made the
satisfaction; and therefore it is not to us immediately that God has delivered
up the Obligation; but to Christ that satisfied. As it is usual among men, for
a friend that is surety for another to have his obligation delivered to him for
his own security. So has Christ, that if Sinners prove unthankful rejecters of
his kindness, he may punish them for it accordingly.

3. It is Christ's own doing to condemn those for whom he Died: And he will not
wrong himself. And he therefore does it, because they will not accept him and
his favor, nor thankfully acknowledge what he has done for them.

4. No man can show one word in Scripture where God has promised Christ to
save all that he Died for. I conclude therefore that God is no more bound to
save all that Christ Redeemed, than to save all that himself Created: And the
vulgar Argument of the Profane [God did not make us to Damn us] or [God made
us; therefore he will not Damn us] is as good as this [Christ Died for us;
therefore he will not Damn us.]

3. That it is no injury or injustice to the Damned themselves is as easily
manifested: (and yet here is all the show of injury that is.)

1. It is no wrong to give men their due: But Damnation is the due of all
Unbelievers; even those that Christ Died for: Therefore it is no wrong for God
to Damn them. The Major is past doubt. The Minor is as clear as any point that
I know in the Gospel. A single obligation makes it their due: but here is a
double obligation.

1. That of the Law of Works, obliging them to Death as Sinners: which is not
dissolved because they accepted not of Pardon in and with Christ: and so they
are condemned already: For none is pardoned till he Believes: and Punishment
remains due, till men be Pardoned.

2. The obligation of the new Law both binding their former guilt on them by a
peremptory irreversible Decree, and condemning them for contempt of recovering
Mercy, to a sorer Punishment: This last I mention as belonging only to final
Unbelievers. The first obligation lies on the Elect themselves till they
Believe: And moreover the New Law pronounces them all that time,
non-liberatos, unpardoned, and does not give them any remission; though it pass
not on them the peremptory irreversible Sentence.

Obj. If this be so, then God should do the Elect themselves no wrong if he did
damn them before they Believe.

Answ. None at all; nor dare any ^ober knowing man tell God, that he had
wronged him if he had so done: But on the contrary it is the use of all Godly
Orthodox men, Ministers or private persons (so far as ever I could observe) to
confess to God in their Prayers, that he might justly have cut them off before
their Regeneration, and have cast them into Hell; and that it was then their
due; yea, that he might have sent them to Damnation from the Womb: yet it
follows not that God might Damn the Elect: For he has Decreed the contrary:
But the Purpose or Decree of God does no more give them a Right to Pardon or
Salvation, than my Purpose to make such a man my Heir, or to give him 100 l.
does give him right to that 100 l. or to my Inheritance. So that God Damns not
any of his Elect: but the reason is not because that Damnation was not due to
them before they believed, or because God could not damn them in Justice, or
without wronging them; but because he cannot change his Purpose or Will; which
properly is to say, God will not Damn the Elect, rather than, He cannot.

Obj. But it would be a wrong to Christ: for they are given him to save
effectually, by the Covenant between God and Him.

Answ. I am indifferent how this is answered, seeing we are agreed in the
sense, that God never will condemn his Elect: But by [the Covenant between the
Father and Son] either they mean, somewhat from eternity, or before the Fall;
and this is but Gods Decree; and is no more a Covenant indeed, than any other
Decree of God is: Does God make Covenants with himself?

2. Or else they mean the Prophecies and Promises in the Old Testament (or
Scriptures before Christ's Incarnation) made to or of Christ as God-man to be
Incarnate: and these are more properly Predictions de suturo, as other
Prophecies are, (which God cannot but fulfill because he is immutable and
infallible) than the Divine Obligations, (which God must fulfill because he is
Just:) or if any will say, that they are strictly obligations (about which I
will not contend) yet the Elect are not named or individuals mentioned in them:
Or suppose that the Individuals names be implied, yet this is nothing to the
time before such promises were made* Or if they had been made in the beginning,
still this is nothing to the point in question. If God were obliged to Christ
to save all the Elect, yet he was never obliged to them, till they believed; (I
speak of Obligation in such an imperfect sense as it may be applied to God.)
Much less did he ever oblige himself to save all that Christ died for.

2. And that Christ's actual suffering gives no man right, appears from what was
said on the former Proposition, It was not man himself, that sinned who was the
sufferer or satisfier, either in sensu Naturali or Civili. And therefore he
cannot have the benefit till it be made over to him by some further conveyance.

3. And therefore it is no wrong to the sinner to suffer; because he suffers
but once, and suffers no more than he deserved. So much against the first
argument, as most forcibly managed.

The second Argument against Universal Satisfaction answered.
Arg. II. Christ has purchased Faith infallibly to be given to all that he
died (or satisfied) for: But Christ has not purchased Faith infallibly to be
given to all men, but only to the Elect, Therefore Christ died not for all men,
but only for the Elect.

The Major is thus proved. Christ has purchased all things necessary to the
Salvation of all he died for: But Faith infallibly to be given, is necessary to
their Salvation, Ergo, etc. The Major is thus proved, Christ is a perfect
Savior to all those to whom he is a Savior or Redeemer: Therefore he has
purchased for them all things necessary to their Salvation.

The Minor of the main Argument is proved by experience.

Ans. The Major is not true, nor can be proved from Scripture; but the contrary
may abundantly be proved. The argument by which they would prove the Major, is
sick of the same disease; viz. Its Major is false: and the Minor if not well
explained is false too. To the Major I say*

First, Christ has done all that belonged to him as a Redeemer by dying, or as
a Satisfier, or all that for which properly an expiatory Sacrifice was
required, for all those for whom he died: But I shall anon show that the thing
in question is not such.

Secondly, Christ did not purchase all things necessary to Salvation, for all
that he died for: I wait the proof of the affirmative. In the mean time I mind
the arguers, that themselves confess*

1. He did not purchase Predestination.

2. Nor that Love which caused God to send Christ.

3. Nor Creation and our Natural Being.

4. Nor his own Death and Merits: He purchased not these for any man.

For the Minor, if it mean, [Personal Faith] which it says is necessary to
Salvation; It is not true of Infants: If it mean the same Faith, which now is
necessary to our Justification (to believe that Jesus is the Christ, that he
Died, Rose, Ascended, etc.) this was not necessary to the Salvation of all
before Christ's Incarnation.

As to the Argument by which they would prove the Major, I answer to it.

I. To the Major, by distinguishing [Christ is called a perfect Saviour] in
several respects.

1. As to his plenary Power and Authority: so we confess he is a perfect
Savior.

2. As to the sufficiency of his Satisfaction, or expiatory Sacrifice, or of
whatsoever he was to do as satisfier of Justice: and so I confess he is a
perfect Savior. And do not all the opposers confess that Christ's Death was
sufficient for All men? and all till a few of late do confess that Christ died
for all men quoad sufficientiam pretii: And if it be sufficient for all men,
even for those that perish, then he is quoad satisfactionis vel pretii
sufficientiam a perfect Savior to all men: For they perish not through any
Imperfection or Insufficiency in Christ's Satisfaction or Sacrifice.

3. Or else it is in regard of the Application of his benefits, and conveyance
of the fruits of his Death, that he is said to be [a perfect Savior to all
that he died for.]

And so 1. Distinguish still of the term [Saviour] as it signifies [a
satisfier of Justice, or Redemptor per sacrificium expiatorium] Christ is
perfect quoad opus, as to his Work; and not only in himself and ability, and
the material sufficiency of his Sacrifice: but, this is not to the present
point.

2. A [a Saviour] signifies, an actual Deliverer, by personal application and
collation of his benefits; so again Christ is to be considered in a double
Relation.

1. As Dominus Absolutus ex novo Jure Redemptionis.

2. Ut Rector per leges ex eodem novo Jure: As he is become the Absolute Owner
or Proprietary of all: Or as he is become the Rector and so the Legislator,
(for under one of these two respects he makes over all his benefits.)

II. And accordingly you must distinguish of those benefits which Christ is to
convey as Rector per Leges; and those which he is to convey as Dominus
Absolutus, and as above or besides his Laws arbitrarily without pre-engagement.
And so I answer, that Christ does all that belongs to him as Legislator and
Recto^ according to the Tenor of the New Law and Covenant, perfectly to all,
as well as to the Elect: But he does not all that he may do, (and man's
necessity requires that he should do) as absolute Proprietary or Owner; either
to all, or equally to the Elect: yet is he not therefore an imperfect Savior:
For that belongs not to the making of him a perfect Savior, though it belong
to the perfection of the Sinners Salvation. And therefore the consequence of
this Enthymeme is denied on these grounds.

That these things may be yet more clear, I shall briefly open a little
further, the Nature of these distinctions, and the difference between these
several effects of Christ's Death; and so show you that he is a perfect Savior
though he give not Faith to all that he died for; having showed you in what
sense Christ may be said to have purchased for us the Habit or Act of Faith.
For I find that a good explication lets in more light into the understanding,
and prepares it more for the entertainment of Truth, than does the most subtle
Argumentation.

And 1. You must understand that the first main distribution of the Works of
Christ in our Redemption (comprizing the whole) is into the work which he did
for the satisfying of Gods Justice, in offering himself a Sacrifice for sin.

2. And those which were to be done hereupon, for the sake of this: and that,

I. By God the Father.

1. To Christ, (accepting his sacrifice, acquit^ing him, making him Owner and
Ruler.)

2. To us, Delivering us,

1. From our Legal necessity of Perishing.

2. To Christ as our Lord and Ruler, to be dealt with on terms that have a
tendency to our recovery.

II. By Christ the Redeemer, who being thus made both Owner and Rector of us
all, does according to these two respects give out all the following Fruits of
his death to Mankind.

So that Christ's first work of satisfaction which is terminated as it were on
God, is a perfect entire work of it self. And (as Dr. Ames. says in the place
before cited, Anti-Bellarm.) it is to the work of Grace, as Creation is to the
work of Nature.

And therefore as none can deny but the Non-Elect have common grace, as
Conditional Pardon, Illumination, the Holy Ghost, etc. (else how do they turn
grace into wantonness?) so none can well deny but they have it from the general
Fountain of Redemption.

Let us then consider what is the proper use of satisfaction as such, and what
it was that made satisfaction necessary.

And it is evident that it was the justice of God Creator, as Rector according
to the Law of Works, and the misery of Man that ha^ offended God by the breach
of that Law, and was become liable to the Penalty, which he could not bear
without his everlasting undoing These made satisfaction necessary.; God's
Justice required that either the Sinner must peris^ or satisfaction by an
Expiatory Sacrifice must b^ made, by which the remote and main ends ^^ the
violated Law might be as well attained ^ by the Sinners Damnation they would
have been; so that it was the death which was become due to Mankind which
required the death of Christ their Sacrifice, (as on Man's part;) and God's
Justice which would not remit sin but on a valuable consideration for the
demonstration of its self, and of God's Holiness, which required it on God's
part; so that you see, that on our part, which required a Sacrifice was guilt,
that is, obligation to everlasting punishment. And it does not belong to the
satisfier as such, to see that the guilt be actually done away quoad eventum,
or that the Damnation be actually escaped: but that a sufficient Sacrifice or
satisfaction be given, on consideration whereof Remission and Salvation may be
given on the terms as the Legislators and Redeemers Wisdom shall appoint.

How Christ does give out this Pardon we shall show you anon, de quadruplici
Remissione, so that it is apparent that the want of the act or habit of Faith,
or the want of the Holy Ghost to effect Faith, is not the thing that required
satisfaction to God's Justice directly; but that Faith is only a remote effect
of this satisfaction, and such an effect as has no such Natural Connection
with this Cause, but that the Cause (materially) may be and often is without that
effect in many; and the effect might have been without that cause from another,
if God had so pleased.

To manifest this (that it is not want of Faith that required satisfaction as
such; and that satisfaction may be made for those that shall never believe)
observe these things.

1. That Man's Suffering is not a thing pleasing to God in and for it self, but
for its end, viz. The Demonstration of Justice and Right Governing of the
World. God professes that he has no pleasure in the death of a Sinner, Ezekiel.
18. nor in the death of him that dies, Ezekiel. 33. but rather that he repent and
live. Much less has he pleasure in the death of the innocent, and least of all
in the death of his own Son. God is not blood-thirsty, who abhors the
blood-thirsty man.

2 It is not therefore for Christ's Sufferings as in themselves considered,
that God does give men either Faith or any Mercy. God does not sell his mercies
for blood, as if he would give the World Remission of Sins, on condition he
might put his Son to so much torment.

And therefore Faith is not the immediate effect of Christ's death in sensu
morali: It comes not from his death, as death or suffering; nor may it without
Blasphemy be conceived that ever God made such an agreement with his Son, as to
give Faith to Men merely on Condition that Christ would suffer death without
first considering somewhat else that required that suffering, and something
that put a value upon it.

3. So that the thing which did require Christ's Suffering was (as is said
before) the obligation to punishment, called guilt, on man's part, and
vindictive justice on God's part. Unbelief as Unbelief did not necessarily
require it, but the guilt of unbelief, or any other sin did require it, if ever
it be pardonable.

4. So that the following effects of Christ's death do all presuppose the
satisfaction of Justice, and hence Christ's death becomes so pleasing to God,
not as death, but as satisfaction, and so a means fitted to the attainment of
his ends.

And because this means so pleases him, he esteems Christ's satisfaction
meritorious of further benefits, (joined with his meritorious obedience) upon
which estimation and his own will (called the Covenant with Christ) he annexeth
further benefits thereto. For the end why he satisfied his justice by the
Sacrifice of his Son, was that he might honorably, wisely, and justly give out
the following benefits which he gives out hereupon. So that Christ's death is
as to God, first satisfactory, and then meritorious of further benefits. Now
Faith very remotely follows all this, as shall be shown.

5. The thing that God could not do without satisfaction, was the remitting of
sin, and freeing the delinquent from punishment: it was not directly, nor in
its self the bestowing of Faith.

6. For I would desire any Judicious Man to consider, whether if Christ had by
his death satisfied God's justice for man's guilt, and had not at all done any
more by his death for the meriting of Faith, might not God have given man Faith
at his own pleasure, without the least show of injustice, or any other
prohibiting inconvenience? though Christ de facto did merit more, yet we may
well in dispute for searching out the truth, separate in our thoughts guilt of
sin, and want of Faith in Christ; and we may suppose that Christ had done no
more by his death, than to satisfy God's justice for man's guilt, by bearing
that which was due to man.

Now I would fain know* this being once done, why God or the Redeemer might not
give Faith to whom he will: Is there a further necessity of any new death or
suffering to merit Faith for us? If there be, what is that necessity? It is no
injustice in God to do it: There is no Law standing in the way by which he is
obliged to the contrary.

Perhaps some will object, that the same may be said of Pardon and Salvation,
that there needs no new suffering to merit them, if once Justice be satisfied,
and yet Christ dyed for our Justification, and Salvation.

To which I answer, All this is true, but then observe the difference; separate
in your thoughts Remission, Justification, and Salvation on one side, from
Faith in Christ on the other side, (as we by supposition may well do in
disputation;) and you will find that God could not give Remission,
Justification, and Salvation from Punishment without Christ's satisfaction; but
he could have given Faith in Christ (if you will suppose it to go alone without
the former benefits) without satisfaction, I say, he could not give the former;
not by reason of any impotency or imperfection in God, but by reason of the
perfection of his Wisdom, Justice, and Holiness.

For them that deny this (as Twisse, and some others do, to the great hardening
of Socinians, and Infidels) at present I refer them to the Writings of Divines
that have proved it: As Voetius in Thesibus, Camero Passim; specially excellent
well by Mos. Amyraldus in Thesib. Salm^riens. Vol. 1. de satisfactione: and
Essenius, Joh. Junius, and most against the Socinians on that point, say
somewhat to it, and something I have elsewhere said my self, and therefore will
not now so far digress.

But on the other side, that God might have given Faith (separated from these
benefits) without satisfaction, is evident.

1. In that there is no injustice or other prohibiting inconvenience in it.

2. God does give the Devils a belief that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of
them that seek him diligently, and that Christ is the Son of God, and the
Savior of the World, and that he was Incarnate, dyed for Sin, Rose and
Ascended, and sits at the right hand of God, and shall come again to judge
the World, some to life, and some to death, and that all the Scripture is Gods
word, and all true, and that whosoever of Mankind believes shall be saved,
(for the Devil believes the connection between Faith and Salvation,) all this
Faith God gives to those that look to the nature of things more than to bare
words, and can see through the vail of metaphorical expressions, will not make
any question of this; especially if they have so far studied the Civil Law and
Politics as is requisite for the right understanding of the nature and extent
of these two relations. Indeed Christ is called a Father, but that signifies
but

1. His special propriety in us, as Fathers have in their Children (which is a
branch of propriety in general.)

2. And his Authority over us, as a Father has over his Children, which is
part of his Rectorship. And withal it signifies that special love of Christ to
those to whom he is thus related.

So he is called a Husband, which expressed the same special Propriety and
Rectorship with the singular love accompanying them. He is called a Prophet,
but that term expresses but the manner of his applying himself to men in the
exercise of his Dominion and Rule; for he that teaches them, does not teach
them as a private man, but with Authority, and as their rightful King, whether
they acknowledge him or no;) even as a King does offer mercy to Rebels, and
persuade them earnestly to accept it, showing them the danger of standing out
against him: Or as he teaches his Subjects their duty; you may call this Man a
Teacher, but the meaning only is this, he is a Teaching King, and so his
Teaching is part of his Ruling, or subordinate to it: It signifies but the
manner of his applying himself to them, so Christ's Prophetical Office in its
self belongs to his Rectorship: Not that all Teaching is Ruling, but in all
his Teaching he does it as their Ruler, in right at least, if not in exercise.
For that Teaching by which he converteth Sinners, is not properly an act of
moral ruling those Sinners; but yet it is the Act of a King persuading Rebels
to come in that they may be Ruled; and as their King does he persuade them.

And then the diversity of the degrees of Gospel Light and Motions, (some
having more, some less, some none,) is from Christ as absolute owner of all,
that may do with his own as his list.

It were easy to manifest how all his other Office-Titles and Relations are
reducible to these two, at least as he is signified in relation to the
Creature; For in his intercession he stands in a double relation.

The one is to God, with whom he intercedeth, and so he intercedeth as the Son
of his Love, who having satisfied his Justice, has all delivered up to him,
and therefore is Owner and Ruler of all.

The other Relation is to the Creature for whom he intercedeth; and that is as
their Owner and Ruler, and for his own chosen as their Owner and Ruler in a
stricter sense than the rest, even as they are his Jewels, and specially
beloved.

More is said of this in another place: peruse the Table of the effects of
Christ's death.

Now let us see how it is that Christ has purchased Faith, and how he gives
it, having satisfied God's Justice by dying for all Mankind, God gives up all
men to him as their Owner and Ruler by Redemption-Title (and gives up also
into his hands the former obligation, as is said,) hereupon Christ has full
power,

1. To alter the Law, or to make new Laws for them, and by these Laws to confer
Salvation, and other Benefits, by ordaining on what terms they shall be
obtained, and so giving right to them.

2. To give further mercies, over and above what he gives right to by that
Law, being absolute Lord, he may do with his own as he list; (still supposing
that his Fathers Will is his Will.)

Now Christ having received this Plenipotency, as Rector per Leges, he makes a
free Universal Conveyance or Grant of Pardon, Justification, Reconciliation,
Adoption, Sanctification, in the common Scripture sense) and Glorification to
all Men on Condition they Repent, and Believe.

But he has no where made any Conveyance of the first effectual Grace, or of
Faith to any Man. He has indeed prophesied or foretold us that he will
infallibly give it to his Chosen, but he has not named or described them by
any antecedent distinguishing Character; so that no man can beforehand say this
belongs to me, nor has he by this Prediction made over to them any right to
the thing, but only foretold that he will give them right hereafter.

Only he has prescribed certain means to all men, either for the immediate
obtaining of Grace to believe, or at least for the obtaining of Grace conducing
thereto, which may bring them into a nearer capacity, who before were further
off than the rest of the World. And he has given them sufficient encouragement
to use those means without despairing of success, even so much, as that no man
that has the use of Reason, can be named by the tongue of Man that did his
best in the use of means to get Faith, or to get nearer to Christ, and yet lost
his labor.

Yet has not Christ thought meet to engage or oblige himself to any Unbeliever
to give him Faith; but when he does it, he will do it as Dominus Absolutus, and
as not obliged; and indeed does it only to those whom he had an absolute
purpose to save, and were given him to be infallibly brought home to God.

So that Christ gives not Faith (the first Faith) as Rector per Leges, but as
Dominus Absolutus. Those Mercies (if special) that are thus given, are said by
some Divines to flow from Predestination alone, as did the gift of a Savior to
fallen Mankind; but no doubt, it is mediante Sanguine Christi, and in a remote
sense are fruits of Christ's death.

By what has been said it may appear that Faith is not the proper effect of
satisfaction as satisfaction, nor is it any near or inseparable effect of
satisfaction as it is meritorious. God did not give Christ Faith for his
bloodshed in exchange; the thing that God was to give the Son for his
satisfaction, was Dominion and Rule of the Redeemed Creature, and power therein
to use what means he saw fit for the bringing in of Souls to himself, even to
send forth so much of his word and Spirit as he pleased; both the Father and
Son resolving from Eternity to prevail infallibly with all the Elect. But never
did Christ desire at his Fathers hands, that all whom he satisfied for, should
be infallibly and irrisistibly brought to believe; nor did God ever grant or
promise any such thing. Jesus Christ as a Ransom dyed for all, and as Rector
per Leges, or Legislator he has conveyed the Fruits of his death to all; that
is, those Fruits which it appertained to him as Legislator to convey, which is
right to what his New Law or Covenant does promise. But those Mercies which he
gives as Dominus Absolutus, arbitrarily besides or above his engagement, he
neither gives nor ever intended to give to all that he dyed for; no nor to all
his Elect does he give all those fruits of his death, nor for ought I know to
any in the same degree; for these are but remotely the Fruits of Christ's
death, and not constant nor inseparable Fruits. Peruse the foresaid Table of
the Fruits of Christ's death, and it will show you which the mercies be that
Christ gives by Law, and which arbitrarily, as besides his engagement.

Is it not manifest then that it is a desperate charge against the Lord Christ
to say, that he is an imperfect Savior, if he do not perfectly save all that
he Died for; or convey to them all the fruits of his Death?

The Preaching of the Gospel expressly, is a fruit of Christ's Death: Some have
this in great power, clearness and constancy; some but weakly, darkly, or
seldom; and some not at all. Shall they that have been at one or two dark
Sermons of Christ in all their Lives say, That either Christ Died not for them,
or else was an imperfect Savior? Some are endowed with the gift of Prophecy,
Tongues, Miracles, as fruits of Christ's Death; shall all that receive not these
say, that Christ is an imperfect Savior, because he gave them none of these
fruits of his Death? Some are made Kings and Rulers, and some Apostles,
Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, etc. and all are fruits of Christ's Death: Yet
all are not Apostles, Pastors, Teachers, etc: Some have Learning and some none:
Some have good Parents, and good Education, and some bad: Some of the Elect
have Health of Body, and Helps, Opportunities and Advantages to to serve God,
which others want: Some are permitted to live long in sin, as Manasses: And
others converted in the morning of their Days: Some are preserved in a more
even and comfortable walking with God: And some are permitted to fall into most
heinous scandalous sins, to the great dishonor of God and their Profession,
and to walk sadly for it all their Days, Nay, some to suffer Death by the hands
of public justice; Shall all these say, Christ is an imperfect Savior to
them? Some are kept in vigor and growth in grace, and some remain Infants; and
some lose their first degree of Love, and grow more lukewarm, and Die in a
very low ebb of Grace, Comfort and Assurance. Some enjoy much fellowship with
the Father and Son in the Spirit: And others are almost wholly strangers to it.
Some are made instruments of doing God abundance of service and the Church much
good, and bringing home or building up many Souls, and that to the end of their
Lives: Others are kept without parts and gifts, next to useless, if not
burdensome. Some Distracted, and after a Godly Life fall into stark madness,
and so spend their days as being incapable of making use of their Affliction or
of any Mercy: And some are cut off in Infancy or in the Womb, before they did
ever believe or love God, or do him any service. And is Christ an imperfect
Savior to all these? Nay, and he has revealed to us, that according to this
diversity here in degrees of Grace, Holiness and Obedience; so will be the
diversity in the degrees of glory: One shall be Ruler of ten Cities, and
another but of two: For he will reward every Man according to his works. How
vast a difference then is there like to be between the Glory of an Infant, that
being born of a weak believer, Died from the Womb, and the Glory of Peter,
John, Paul, or those to whom it shall be given to sit on Christ's Right Hand and
Left Hand in his Kingdom. And yet all these are Elect. Where is it then that
the force of the Argument lies that would prove that all must needs have Faith
for whom Christ Died? If he be an imperfect Savior except he save all alike,
or give to all that he Died for, all the fruits of his Death, then such a
charge might as truly be grounded on his dealings with the Elect themselves as
with others.

Object. But he saves all the Elect, though not all alike: He brings them
all safe to Heaven at last; but so he does not others.

Answ. That Is true: But then,

1. It Is yielded that it belongs not to the perfection of Christ's Office or
Work to give all the fruits of his Death ( quoad speciem) to all that he Died
for.

2. It belongs as truly to his office of saving, to save men from sin, and to
give them a full degree of Grace and Glory, as to give men Faith: And yet it
belongs not to his office necessarily to give these to all that he Died for. No
doubt a greater measure of Glory is a greater good than that small measure
which some enjoy. (Specially if the joy of some saved Infants were no greater
than Nazianzene ( Orat. 40.) and other ancients did think the pain of some
condemned Infants would be.)

3. Some of these parts of Salvation which the Elect themselves do come short
of, are penally denied them, (and so are given by Christ as Legislator) being
propounded on a condition, and they not performing the condition; (to the
performance whereof Grace was necessary to assist them.) If then Christ may
give good things by a conditional grant (as Legislator) to his Elect, and yet
not give them that Grace which may cause them infallibly to perform the
condition, and so deny them the benefit conditionally given, for want of that
performance, what reason can be given, why he may not do so by the Non-Elect,
in respect of Salvation and Faith, and Repentance, the Conditions thereof?

So that all the weight of their Argument lies on this supposition, that
Christ bore not Punishment for any man's sins but those whom he intended
infallibly to bring to Heaven: which they have never yet proved, nor ever will
do, there being no Word of God that promises to save all that Christ died for.

Lay all this together and you will see the truth of these Conclusions.

1. That it was not the absence of Faith in Christ the Remedy, but the Old Laws
Obligation of us to Punishment, or the guilt of sin, which required Christ's
satisfaction to God's Justice.

2. That Christ by this satisfaction did not immediately merit Faith it self,
but only those intermediate causes, from whence the Faith of his Elect is
produced, that is, He purchased all men from the Legal necessity of perishing
that they were in, into his own Power, as their Owner and Ruler, that so he
might make over Reconciliation. Remission and Salvation to all, if they will
believe; and might send forth sufficient means and help of Grace to draw all
men toward him: resolving to draw his Elect Infallibly to him.

3. That it is therefore an improper and unfit phrase to say, that [Christ Died
to purchase us Faith] though rightly explained it has truth in it: But rather,
that [Faith is an effect or fruit of Christ's Death,] viz. where Faith is
given. For the former phrase would intimate as if Faith were the thing that God
was to give in requital of Christ for his Bloodshed, and that directly: and so
Faith should be given by God as Legislator of the Old Law: For the stipulation
supposed to be between the Father and Son, was made by the Father on his part,
not as Redeemer, or Legislator of the New Law; but as the offended Rector
according to the Law of Creation, now treating with the Mediator about man's
Recovery. Though these things spoken after our manner, do but signify Gods
Decrees, yet they show us in what Relation God stood toward Man and toward
the Redeemer, when he required and accepted of Satisfaction. Whereas the thing
given to Christ was Power of Dominion and Rectorship, and so the Redeemed
delivered to him (not all to one final end, nor with a like intent.) And so
Faith is procured by Christ only in this remote sense, in that he procured full
power to use the fittest means to draw men to him, in the season and degrees he
please; with a full resolution in his own mind to make all this effectual upon
his chosen, that he might attain the full end of his Bloodshed. So that Faith
is the effect of that degree of Grace which from his Plenipotency he gives,
lest his chosen should miss of the intended Salvation; and therefore is
improperly said to be purchased by Christ's Blood, though yet it be a remote
effect of his Blood to those that have it, and none could have had it without
the Intervention of his Blood, because there would have been no saving use of
Faith without that Blood: otherwise they might, if we look to Faith, but as
such an act considered without its object given.

4. And therefore the Scripture no where uses any such phrase, as to say, that
Christ Died to purchase us Faith: But ordinarily that he died to purge or put
away sin, etc. And in controverted cases it is safest to speak in Scripture
Language: Suppose a man pay 1000 l. to Ransom certain Prisoners that owed that
sum, and upon the Ransom it is agreed that they shall now be delivered up to
him, as his Ransomed ones, to dispose of at his pleasure; yet both parties
agree that only those shall be actually delivered into freedom who thankfully
accept the favor, and the Ransomer as their Lord: The Redeemer knows that
these are men of such stubborn hearts that they will refuse his offer: yet he
resolves to send them under his hand a conditional discharge, that all shall
come forth that will accept him and his offer; and to tell them, that all the
rest shall by him be still detained, and as his Prisoners suffer greater
misery: Yet out of a special love to some of them, he resolves to send a friend
who is so effectual an Orator, as will certainly prevail with them to lay by
their obstinacy and yield to his motion. Does it seem a proper phrase in this
case, to say, that this man paid 1000 l. to purchase for these men a yielding
Heart, or to purchase their consent to accept him and his kindness? Rather he
did it to purchase their Freedom from Prison; which he gives to all, as far as
belongs to him as Ransomer. But he sends this Orator with a resolution to
prevail, in another superadded relation, viz. as one that bears a special
love to those particular men above the rest; or as one at least that is
resolved to attain infallibly that fruit of his Ransom, even the actual
deliverance of those men. Nor can it therefore be concluded, that he paid not
the debt of any of the rest, because he will not as importunately solicit them
to accept of his offer.

5. We must therefore distinguish of mere Ransoming or Redemption by Sacrifice;
and the same Sacrifice or Redemption as it is conjoined with Election, and is
subordinate to it: Effectual Grace to work Faith infallibly, proceeds from
Redemption as it is accompanied with Election, or with a special absolute
resolution, of saving those particular persons: but it comes not from mere
Redemption by Sacrifice, as divided from Election; and therefore is common to
all the Elect, but not common to all the Redeemed. For God has means of two
different sorts for the accomplishing his Decree of Election, as to execution:
First general means, and secondly special means: and the general is the
Foundation on which he means to build the special.

Let us again remember Amesius's words, that Redemption is to the whole work of
Grace ( viz. both common and special) what Creation is to the work of Nature.
Nay, better we may say, what Creation was to Gods Governing Administrations
under the first Law, that is, Redemption to Gods Governing Administrations
under the Second or New Law. For in Creation God did two things.

1. He gave man his Being, that he might be a Subject fit for Government.

2. He gave him his Right Being Real and Relative; making him after his Image,
in his favor, and in a state of happiness: and in this state he made a Law
with him, (even with all mankind in Adam and Eve,) promising him further
everlasting life on condition of obedience. Now here Gods Creation of man in
his favor and in rectitude, was a common work; and so was his giving him that
Law: But so was not the fulfilling of its Promise, which implies the
Intervention of man's performance of the condition. Suppose now that man had
been multiplied by propagation before the fall of any, and then one half of
mankind had kept this Law of Works, and the other had broke it: Had it been fit
for any man to say, that God did not Create any of those that fell, in his
favor, or placed them not in happiness, or set them not in the way to a
further happiness, because he did not infallibly cause them to keep his Law,
which was the condition of further happiness? No more can it be truly said that
Christ did not Redeem them because he did not cause them infallibly to believe.
Indeed it may be said of both, that God in Creating or in Redeeming had not the
same Decree or Absolute Resolution to save them, as he had to save the Elect
whom he causes to perform the condition. And yet our Divines use commonly to
say, that God created all Mankind in Adam in a state of happiness, and to a
further happiness: that is, as Legislator, set them in a way to a further
happiness, and conditionally promised it to them (whether it were any greater
happiness, or only the perpetuation of the same, I will not now dispute.) And
so has Christ done all for men that pertains to a satisfier of Justice, and
sets them in a way to full deliverance from the misery that they were fallen
into, and conditionally promises it to them, with an additional happiness.

6. And Lastly, Besides all this let it be well considered, that if there be
any man on Earth (that has the use of Reason, of whom only actual Faith is
required) that does not actually Believe in Christ, it is their own fault, and
is not long of Christ: He will not condemn them merely for their sin against
that Law of works which says [obey perfectly, or dye] but for rejecting
recovering Grace, and that sufficient in its kind, and to its own work. I say
it again confidently, all men that perish (who have the use of reason) do
perish directly for rejecting sufficient Recovering Grace. By Grace I mean,
mercy contrary to merit: by recovering, I mean, such as tends in its own
nature toward their Recovery, and leads or helps them thereto. By
sufficient I mean, not sufficient directly to save them; (for such none of the
Elect have till they are saved) nor yet sufficient to give them Faith, or cause
them savingly to Believe: But it is sufficient to bring them nearer Christ than
they are, though not to put them into immediate possession of Christ by Union
with him, as Faith would do. It is an easy truth, that all men naturally are
far from Christ, and 2. That some by custom in sinning, for want of informing,
and restraining means, are much further from him than others (as the Heathens
are.) 3. And that it is not Gods usual way, (nor to be expected) to bring these
men to Christ at once by one act, or without any preparation, or first bringing
them nearer to him. It is a similitude used by some that oppose what I now say:
suppose a man in a lower room, and another in a room below him, and you stand
at the Stair head, and call them both up to you and offer them somewhat if they
will come: It is not your intent that they should leap up at one leap, but come
up step by step: nor do you mean that he in the lower room should go no more
steps than he in the middle room: He must go many steps before he come to be as
near you as the other is. Now suppose you offer to take them by the hand when
they come to the upper Stairs, and give them some other sufficient help to come
up the lower steps: If these men will not use the help given them to ascend the
first steps (though entreated) who can be blamed but themselves if they come
not to the top? It is not your fault but theirs that they have not your hand to
lift them up at the last step. So is our present case. Worldlings, and sensual
ignorant sinners, have many steps to ascend before they come to Justifying
Faith: and Heathens have many steps before they come as far as ungodly
Christians (as might easily be manifested by enumeration of several necessary
particulars.) Now if these will not use that sufficient help that Christ gives
them to come the first or second or third step, who is it long of that they
have not Faith?

Obj. But here you vent two points of Arminianism, one, that there is
sufficient Grace which is not effectual: The other, that God will give men
Spiritual Blessings on the good use of natural.

Answ. No Arminianism at all.

I. I say not that God gives all men sufficient Grace to Salvation, or to
Believe.

II. That there is such a thing in rerum natura, as sufficient Grace, not
effectual, as it is confessed by Dr. Twiss, so it is undeniably proved.

1. In the case of Adam, who had sufficient Grace to have stood (or else all
the sin and misery in the World must come principally from Gods denial of
sufficient Grace, before ever man did trespass.) Yet the event showed that hat
Grace was not effectual.

2. From the Case of the Godly, who have sufficient Grace to think, speak, and
do more good, and less evil than they do.

3. From the Case of the Wicked, who have sufficient Grace to enable them to do
less evil than they do, and use more means for the geting of Grace to
Salvation. They might pass by an Alehouse Door, and might go to a Sermon when
they go to a Whore: and might go among good company when they go to bad.

To the second point I answer.

I. I say not that God gives Spirituals, on our right use of Naturals: but that
God gives Special Grace, on our right use of Common Grace; Or rather that he
may most justly deny men special Grace, that will not make that use of Common
Grace as they might.

II. And I do not say, that God has any where promised to give men Special
Grace, if they will use well their Common Grace. For God has not thought meet
to make any such Covenant with Unbelievers; nor to engage himself to them, but
when he gives the first Special Grace for Repenting and Believing he does it
as not pre-engaged to do it; and therefore as Dominus Absolutus, and not per
legem premiantem. (And therefore the Papists in their Language say, the first
Grace is not of merit, at least of Condignity.)

Obj. Then they that come not the first step are excusable; for if they had
come to the step next Believing, they had no assurance that Christ would have
given them Faith.

Ans. No such matter: For though they had no assurance, they had both Gods
Command to seek more Grace, and sufficient encouragement thereto: They had such
as Mr. Cotton calls half promises, that is a discovery of a possibility, and
high degree of probability of obtaining; as Peter to Simon [Pray if perhaps the
thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven.]

They may think God will not appoint men vain means, and he has appointed some
means to all men to get more grace, and bring them nearer Christ than they are.
Yea, no man can name that man since the World was made, that did his best in
the use of these means, and lost his labor.

So that if all men have not Faith, it is their own fault; not only as
Originally Sinners, but as rejecting sufficient Grace to have brought them
nearer Christ than they were; for which it is that they justly perish (as is
more fully opened in the Dispute of sufficient Grace.

I think now I may fafely conclude, that there is no proof yet brought that
Christ will give Faith to all that he dyed for, but the contrary I have proved.

Argument 3. Against Universal Satisfaction.
Christ dyed not for those who were in Hell at the time of his Death, therefore
he dyed not for all.

Answ. I cannot discern any strong appearance of proof that can be brought for
the Antecedent, however it take with very many, as I confess in the time of my
ignorance it did with me.

1. Jesus Christ satisfied God's Justice.

1. Morally, at his first undertaking, interposing, or engagement (according to
our apprehension) presently upon man's fall.

2. By that Natural Suffering which he had before undertaken, and this was in
the fullness of time.

It is usual for moral effects to go before the natural part of the Cause, but
the Cause is in esse morali, in moral being. Many a man upon his word to pay so
much money such a day, or upon earnest given, has the thing bought delivered
to him, though he pay not the price till long after: So may a man redeem Slaves
by such an undertaking. So did Christ undertake to bear the punishment due to
the Sins of all; and this undertaking satisfied God, not without his suffering,
but by its respect to his future suffering, giving it a moral Being before
hand; so that when Christ's satisfaction was in its first moral being, no man
(of this World) was in Heaven, or in Hell.

2. It was necessary, for Christ having undertaken to suffer the punishment due
to their sins, before they were Condemned to perform his undertaking after they
are Condemned.

If you give earnest for the buying of Beasts, or Slaves, and take them into
your possession, and promise such a day to make payment, though they dye the
while, you must pay the price.

3. Christ had as much of his ends obtained in those that perished by Rejecting
Grace, before his death, as he has for those that perish for the same cause
since.

4. The Wicked that perished before Christ's death, had the same benefits by
it, as those that perish after his death, (allowing the difference that the
clear discovery of the mystery of Salvation now does cause;) they had mercy
offered them, and Remission and Salvation given them on Condition of repenting
and believing, and sufficient grace to have brought them nearer God than they
were, which if they had obeyed, they had a high probability of having more
added.

5. All this presupposes Christ then a sufficient Object for their Faith; that
is, Christ who had satisfied for them, as to his Undertaking, and must and
would do it afterward in performance, was then the Object propounded for them
to believe in; and therefore their Unbelief was Consequential, and not
Antecedent to Christ's moral satisfaction, and suffering for them; even as the
Faith of the Godly also was.

6. It is as good arguing, to say, some were in Heaven when Christ dyed,
therefore he dyed not for them, as to say, some were in Hell, therefore he dyed
not for them. For it may as wisely be said, those in Heaven were past all need
of satisfaction, as that those in Hell were past all hope and remedy.

The time was, when they had hope from that satisfaction set before them, and
when it was a sufficient remedy for them, and wanted nothing but their own
consent to make it fully effectual: As the time was when those now in Heaven
had need of it, and did accept it offered them.

Abraham saw Christ's day and rejoiced, and Moses counted the reproaches of
Christ greater Riches than the Treasures of Egypt: But the impenitent then
refused Christ, and his Government, and therefore were justly denied his
further Mercies.

7. Only this much may be concluded by this arguing; that Christ at the time of
his dying, did not intend the Saving of those that were then in Hell; and so it
is as true, that Christ at his death did not intend for the future to give
Regeneration, the first Reconciliation, Pardon, Adoption, Union with him, or
Glory to those in Heaven; for they had received them all long before, as the
Damned had lost them all before by their Rejection.

But it follows not hence, that therefore Christ bore not the punishment of all
men's sins, according to his first undertaking.

I know great dissimilitudes are pretended between the Cases of the Saved and
the Damned when Christ dyed, as to this Argument, but they are but pretended,
and none is showed; and I think it needless to strive against mere words.

But a forementioned Disputer undertaketh to show, that the Answer drawn from
the state of them that were Saved when Christ dyed, will not hold, and why?

1. He says. [Those that were saved, were saved on this ground, that Christ
should certainly suffer for them in due time, which suffering was as effectual
in the purpose and promise as in the execution and accomplishment, etc.

Answ. 1. And those that were Damned, had Pardon and Salvation given them
freely, if they would have accepted them on God's terms; and this was on the
same consideration, of Christ's future dying for them.

2. And consequently they who were then Damned for unbelief, were Damned for
rejecting a Christ that had undertaken to dye for them, and the mercy purchased
by his undertaken death.

2. This Author produces such a Simile as I mentioned even now, [of one that
undertaketh the ransom of Prisoners, and sends to them thereupon to come
forth, for he that detaineth them takes his word: Now if some come forth, and
the rest refuse, and be dead in Prison, and others hear not of that, and that
according to his appointment, and were dead long since; when the Ransomer comes
to pay the Debt or Ransom, does he intend it for them that dyed obstinately in
Prison? or only for those that came forth? doubtless only for these last.]

Answ. 1. (To answer as confidently) doubtless it is the Debt and Ransom
undertaken for all, and paid according to the undertaking.

2. Bring home the Similitude nearer the case, from payment of money, to
suffering of the punishment which they should have suffered, or some other ad
fines Rectoris equivalent, and doubtless then he suffered Loco omnium; instead
even of those that are dead in Prison, or else he is not a man of his word, if
his action answer not his undertaking: But he did not at his actual suffering
intend it for the further good of the dead, not in bonum ulterius omnium,
supposing what good they had before received by it, and might have received a
full deliverance if they would; (And to make them willing and reasonable might
belong to him in another respect to do if he pleased, but it did not belong to
him either as Ransomer or Ruler of them.

Nor did he at the time of his payment intend to them that were before gone out
of Prison at his command, any further good by his Ransom than what be gave to
the obstinate that dyed, so be it they would accept it.

3. The said Author argued thus; (If Christ dyed instead of all men, and made
satisfaction for their sins, then he did it for all their sins, or for some
only. If for some only, who then can be saved, etc?

Answ. 1. He dyed for all the sins not excepted by himself in his conditional
grant of pardon and life; [If thou believe and repent thou shall be justified
and saved.] That is, for all, except final impenitency, infidelity, or
rejecting Christ.

And yet for all this, all true Believers shall be saved; For he is become the
Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. He is able to
save to the utmost all that come to God by him, Heb. 7. 25.] He dyed for
temporary unbelief, that it may be done away by consequent Faith; but we may
say more of this in a fitter place.

Argument 4. Against Universal Satisfaction.
4. If Christ dyed for those that shall be Damned, and never receive that
Remission or Salvation, which he dyed to procure, then he suffered much in
vain, (or cast away his blood) but the consequent is false, Ergo, etc.

Answ. 1. This is a strange Objection for those Men to make, who say that
Christ suffered enough for all, or paid a Ransom sufficient for all, without
any intent that it should be loco omnium in their stead, or should satisfy
God's Justice for all.

They suppose Christ to have suffered or paid as much as we do affirm; we say
it was because all men's sins lay upon him, they say no, and give us no reason
why Christ should suffer enough for all, when he undertook to suffer only for
the sins of the Elect.

I should think that the Objection lay stronger against them, that they feign
Christ to suffer in vain; but how these same men can fairly object this to
others, who assign so many effects of Universal Satisfaction, I cannot yet
discern.

And let me add this much, lest I be mistaken in my tenth and eleventh
Arguments against them (most of which is ad homines,) that I do not think it
can be proved that the degree of Christ's pain was so punctually proportioned
to the number of sins or sinners for whom he died, that if there had been one
more sin or sinner he must have suffered more (or one 1000,) and if there had
been one less, he must have suffered less; (though yet I think it was necessary
that his suffering were so great and reproachful, as might be a full
demonstration of Gods Justice, and might serve to the attainment of the ends of
the Law: And not as the Friars say, that the least drop of Christ's blood might
have served to redeem a thousand Worlds.) I suppose it is clear that Christ did
give himself a ransom for Fallen Mankind in general, and that if it had been
but for a few persons, less might have satisfied God's Justice than Christ did
undergo: But that his Sufferings were so proportioned to the number of Sins or
Persons undertaken for, let them prove that can, for I cannot, or that believe
it, for I do not.

1. Because the principal Dignity of his sufferings which made them
satisfactory, and equivalent to all men's sufferings, was not the degree of the
pain, but the dignity of the sufferer; and next to that was the relative part,
even the public shame and infamy to which he condescended,

2. May we not think that as it was Christ as Man who suffered, so Christ as
Man knew what he suffered for. And is it not doubtful whether Christ as Man in
his suffering (before he was glorified) did know every Person, yea, or all the
Elect for whom he dyed.

In his Infancy he did not; and when he says, that the Son of man himself knew
not the day or hour of his coming to Judgment, may it not intimate that he knew
not just how long the World should last, and consequently that he knew not just
how many, or who should be born (Elect or others) before the End: But this I
will not insist on, as speaking with some fear of intruding too far into
unrevealed things, and not doubting but that Christ as God knew all men by
name. But it is most unquestionable that Christ as man intended his Sacrifice
in suffering to be in the stead and for the sins of Mankind in the general;
whether he so intended it with a nomination of each particular Person or not.

2. I further Answer to this Objection, That it is high arrogance and
presumption for us silly Bats and Moles to charge God with doing any thing in
vain, or to charge Christ as suffering in vain, merely because we cannot reach
to the knowledge of his ends. As if he might not have many glorious ends that
we know not of.

3. I further Answer, That it is most evidently discovered, that it is not in
vain, nor one drop of Christ's blood lost, though many that he dyed for do come
short of Salvation. For that which is the means to these ends following (which
Christ attaineth) is not in vain.

1. He has attained the effectual satisfaction of Justice for all, viz.
according to the First Law.

2. He has delivered the Sinner from the legal necessity of perishing that he
was then under.

3. He has laid the Foundation of his new right of Dominion, as owner of all
men: For to this end he both dyed, rose, and revived, that he might be Lord
both of the dead and the living, Romans 14. 9. And if this were his end, and this
end attained, then it was not in vain.

4. He has laid the Foundation of his new right of Rectorship, as the
forementioned Text more directly proves; (for (...) more respects him as
Rector than as Owner,) God being minded to change the Government of the World,
did lay the whole Foundation of the New Government in Christ's Universal
Redemption, even as he laid the Foundation of the Old Government, in the
Creation of Man after his Image.

Our Divines say, God Created Man to Life and Happiness, so be it he would
obey; and undoubtedly he Created him in a state of happiness, and put him in a
way to obtain either the enjoyment of a greater, or at least the perpetuation
of that which he did enjoy, and made him an implicit promise of it.

Now shall any man say, that because God foreknew or decreed that Adam would
sin, and never obtain that life to which he was so Created, or which was so
promised him, that therefore God made him capable of it in vain, or promised it
in vain, or prescribed him means to the attainment of it in vain? (for his
attaining Life after by Christ, is nothing against his losing it in the first
way?) Most certainly those that see not the glory of Christ's new Administration
in the Government of the World in general, (in Title, and so legislation,
judgment, and execution) as it differs from the Administration of the former
Government, they do rob God of a very great part of the glory of the work of
Redemption; and if they overlook so glorious an effect of this work (which
should be part of the matter of their weekly solemn Praises on the Lords days
in the Church Assemblies, for which the day was translated from the seventh,
which was for the commemoration of the Creation, as the cause of our being, and
ground of the former Government) no wonder if they speak and write again
Universal Redemption.

The whole World is now governed by Christ, and so by God, as he is God
Redeemer. And it is no small flaw or error in their Theology, that deny the
Foundation of the whole Government, and then cry out, that we make Christ to
dye in vain, if he bring not all infallibly to Heaven that he dyed for.

5. And also he has (in subordination hereto) attained this by his death, that
he has power to abrogate or alter the Law that was against us: And that men
before their believing, are now his Prisoners, and not the Fathers, as Rector
according to the first Law unremedied, and so they are Prisoners of hope, and
not of despair.

6. He gives them under his hand a Conditional Remission and grant of
Salvation: If they will have him, and Life with him they may, For this is the
Record (which men perish for not believing) that God has given us Eternal
Life, and this Life is in his Son: He that has the Son has Life, and he that
has not the Son (for all that gift) has not Life, 1 John 5. 10, 11, 12. This
end Christ attained, and therefore dyed not in vain.

7. He puts men in a way toward recovery, appointing them some means to be
used thereto, and giving them sufficient grace or help to that use of those
means which he first requires of them.

8. These men do actually partake of a multitude of mercies in this Life,
besides the forementioned: They enjoy a comfortable, healthful Life, with the
supply of their wants, being provided for with necessaries, and usually with
delightful abundance; having the service and use of all the Creatures. They are
kept from all cause of desparation, and the self-tormentings of Conscience
which are its inseparable concommitants; and which those that feel do often
call the torments of Hell within them. They are not only kept out of Hell it
self, but (as is said) have a possibility of everlasting escaping it; and if
they will not reject it, they shall certainly enjoy Eternal Life. All the
mercies (in one word) which ever they receive are from the Blood of Christ; and
therefore as to them, he Died not in vain. Their Lives indeed might have been
continued according to the tenor of the first violated Law, but it would only
have been as a fit subject of misery: It would not have been such a Life of
Hope, Delights, and Abundant Mercies.

9. They shall all have their Bodies raised up at the Resurrection Day, and
that by the power of Christ as the Redeemer.

10. They shall all be judged by Christ as their Lord-Redeemer, and so
acknowledge him before all the World.

11. They shall be judged according to the Talents of Mercy which they abused,
and the Grace which they rejected, after the tenor of the Redeemers Law; and
not according to the unremedied Law of works: And so shall be left without all
just excuse, even at the bar of Grace: To their greater shame, and the
Redeemers greater glory, than if they had been judged according to the mere Law
of works, by God-Creator, as the Legislator of that Law.

12. Lastly, They shall in their just everlasting Damnation bring double Glory
to Gods Justice, as Belilevers in their Salvation shall bring a double Glory to
his Mercy. As in our Salvation God will not be honored only as Creator and
Rector according to the first Law; but also as Redeemer and Rector according to
the New Law: So in the Damnation of Unbelievers, it is not only the Justice of
God as Creator and Rector according to the first Law, but it is specially the
supereminent Justice of Christ and God as Redeemer and Rector, according to the
new Law, which will be everlastingly glorified on the rejectors of Grace. They
will then fully acknowledge that Christ died for them and Redeemed them, and
that in mercy; and that for the undervaluing and rejecting of that mercy, they
do justly suffer: So that here will be a more glorious advantage for the
demonstration of Gods Justice, than ever could have been according to the
tenor of the first Law, and without Christ's satisfaction for the Sinners. And
I think if Christ attain his own and his Fathers Glory, he Dies not in vain,
and loses not the fruits of his Bloodshed. He knows how to manage the
business so as that he shall be no loser, let men prove as ungrateful and
obstinate as they please. All these ends Christ actually obtains, for they are
ends fully intended by himself. But then the very Salvation of all men, is
finis prescriptus and propositus, propounded to man to be intended, and Christ's
satisfaction is made a sufficient means thereto, in suo genere, and so this may
be called the end of Gods Legislative will, though he attain it not (as is said
before.)

Argument the Fifth against Universal Satisfaction.
5. All those for whom Christ Died (or satisfied) have the Gospel Preached to
them. But all men have not the Gospel Preached to them: Therefore Christ Died
not for all men.

The Major is proved thus:

1. Christ's Dying for men would be in vain, if it should never be revealed to
them that they might believe: But Christ does not Die for any in vain; Ergo,
etc.

2. For whomsoever Christ Died, for them did he procure Remission, Salvation,
and all means necessary thereto. But the Preaching of the Gospel is a means
necessary thereto, Ergo, etc. Proved in that the Preaching of the Gospel is a
necessary means to believing, and Faith is a necessary means of Remission and
Salvation.

The Minor of the main Argument is proved by experience.

Answ. 1. Let it be observed that this Argument makes nothing against the
Redemption of all men that hear the Gospel, Elect and Non-Elect; but only of
those Pagans or others that never hear it; And if they grant that Christ
satisfied for all that hear the Gospel, few will contend much with them about
others; as judging it partly so far beyond us, and partly so little to concern
us, as not to be worth much contention. Yet, for my part, I think the Argument
weak and the Conclusion untrue.

2. Davenant in his Dissertation of Universal Redemption, These. 4. Cap. 6. per
tot. page 65. ad. p. 87 has said so much to this pointt* hat I may well refer
the Reader thither for satisfaction, without adding any more.

3. Yet I shall first briefly Answer the Argument, and then more fully open the
truth about this point in certain conclusions.

And, 1. We must distinguish of several terms in the Arguments, and some other
necessary to be here considered.

1. Christ is said to Die for men, 1. Dying in their stead and for their sin,
as lying on him in the undertaken suffering:

2. Or else final it er in eorum bonum. Which is,

1. Common.

2. Or Special. And both.

1. Either given as Legislator quoad jus, by a conditional grant.

2. Or given as Dominus absolutus and the disposer of all things quoad eventus.

Prop. When I say Christ Died for all men, I mean not that he finally intended
as Dominus absolutus, eventually to save all by his Death: But that he Died in
the stead of all, suffering the punishment which by the Law of works was due to
all mankind: And how far he died in bonum ominum, for the good of all is showed
before, and shall be showed more anon.

Secondly, We must distinguish betwixt the [the Gospel as it signifies the
Covenant of Grace with its grounds and fruits fully expressed] and as it
signifies [only some particular Gospel truths, which go before the full
revelation of the said Covenant Grounds and Effects; as the Break of Day goes
before the Sun Rising: and the Revealing of some of the fruits of Christ's
Death, by which streams, men should be drawn to enquire after the Fountain] in
the later sense all have the Gospel; In the former, all have it not.

Thirdly, We must distinguish of [Preaching] which is either taken in general
for any way of Revelation; or specially for a Revelation by Writing or
Speaking. The former All have, the later not, (when I say [All men] I still
mean [All that have the use of their senses and reason] and not Infants, Mad
Men, Idiots, or Senseless, of whom more anon.) By this much you may see in what
sense we acknowledge or deny the Truth both of Major and Minor proposition of
the Argument. And hence also you may see how far I deny the Major of the next
subservient Argument if withal you distinguish.

3. Between, Frustra, being in vain, absolutely as to all ends and uses, (yea
Gods chiefest ends) or in vain to the particular end of the Sinners own
Salvation.

4. And, (as to the cause hereof) you must distinguish between [being in vain
through any defect of Christ's Satisfaction, or on his part] and [being in
vain, (as to their Salvation) merely through their own fault.] According to the
last members of these two distinctions we confess Christ's Death is in vain to
all that perish, but not according to either of the former.

5. We distinguish between [Christs procuring Remission and Salvation to be
made over to all by him as Legislator in the tenor of his Conditional Grant.]
And [being eventually conferred on all by God as the disposer of events.]

6. We must distinguish between [the extent of the new Law or Grant of it, as
to its own Tenor or Sense] and [the extent of it as to the Promulgation.]

7. Also between [promulgation initial, imperfect, and full and perfect.]

8. And between [means sufficient to the first Duties that Christ by Gospel
Truths calls men to] and [all means absolutely necessary or sufficient to Faith
and Salvation.] And so I answer to the second Prosyllogisme; that Christ did
not procure that all he died for should eventually receive Remission and
Salvation, or sufficient means thereto; nor yet that the Covenant of Grace
which conferreth Right to these should be, as to the Infallible event, fully
promulgate or revealed to all. But he has procured, not only that all men's
sins be made pardonable (in a nearer sense than they were before his
satisfaction) but also that, as to the tenor of his Law, or Covenant,
Remission, and Salvation be conferred on all so be it they will not reject it:
and also that some part of his Gospel Truth (and the effects of Christ's Death)
be revealed in some measure to all, and so some part of his New Law promulgate
to all; and all have sufficient means to help to perform the Duties which he
thus calls them first to perform.

9 We must distinguish between [Believing that God is, and that he is
reconciled to man so far as that he will reward them that diligently seek him]
and believing that Jesus Christ was Incarnate and satisfied by his Death.]

10. And between [Necessary to Salvation Necessitate Precepti] and [
Necessitate Medii] and so I answer to the last confirmation: that Faith in the
first sense is necessary to the Salvation of all that have the use of reason,
both necessitate precepti and medii: but faith in the last sense is neither
necessary to Idiots, Madmen, Infants, nor yet to those that never heard the
Gospel, necessitate precepti: And whether or no it be necessary necessitate
medii, etsi non prescripti, we shall say more to anon.

So much directly to the Argument.

Next I shall for the fuller opening of my Judgment on this point, lay down
what I conceive to be the truth in these following Propositions.

Proposition I. As Christ has born the sins of all, and done all for them
which pertains to the Ransomer by an expiatory Sacrifice; and has obtained
thereby a new Title of Lordship and Sovereignty over all, and all are delivered
to him accordingly; so does he faithfully perform the office of a Sovereign
Redeemer to all, governing them as his Ransomed ones, by such Laws and Ways of
undeserved Mercy, as have a natural tendency and conducibility to their
Salvation. Though still, as Absolute Lord, he gives out the Mercies which
belong to him to bestow in that Relation, with great diversity, to all the
World; but yet a great measure even of these does he give to all men.

Prop. II. Christ deals not with any Heathens on the mere terms of the Law of
works, as it was given to Adam, or stood without the connection of any Remedy:
These are not the full terms on which God deals with them [If you perfectly
obey (without any sin) you shall live: If you ever sin you shall dye.] This
will be proved in that which follows: and might easily be proved more largely
were it not so plain as to prohibit such vain endeavors.

Prop. III. Christ is not properly said to be in mutual Covenant with all that
he died for; and I think he is not so in Covenant with any Unbeliever, as to a
true mutual Covenanting, nor to any that never heard the Gospel, as to the
Legal promissory Covenant.

The Covenant of Christ is taken in several senses: Among others for the two
here mentioned.

1. For his New Law, Testament, Gospel Promise, or Conditional Gift of Pardon
and Life: (call it what you will.) By this he commands men to Repent and
Believe, and gives them his foresaid Benefits on condition they perform this:
laying a kind of engagement or obligation upon himself, which he cannot break;
For God cannot lie: and shall not the Judge of all the Earth do Righteously?
How else should God judge the World? And God in the relation of a Righteous
Judge will give the Crown of Righteousness at that day to all them that love
his appearing. Now I conceive that in a full proper sense, none that hear not
the Gospel ( i. e. that have not some Revelation of Christ Crucified) are in
this Covenant, nor God in Covenant thus with them: For the Preceptive part of
the New Law does not actually oblige them to the performance of the full
condition (of Believing in Jesus Christ Crucified;) nor does the promisory part
oblige Christ to give them the benefit in so full a sense as to those that have
this Covenant revealed to them; nor can Christ be said conditionally to give it
them, in so full a sense; because the Law or Deed of Gift is not Promulgate
fully to them, as it is to others. I shall open this more in the following
conclusions.

2. The Covenant of Christ is taken also for this same forementioned Covenant
when it is accepted by Believing, and so become a Mutual Covenant, when men
engage themselves to Christ as Christ first does to them, and so the Promise
comes into force for the actual conveying of Right to the thing promised. This
is the fullest sense in which it is called a Covenant according to our common
custom of speech: and the first is most properly called a Law, Testament,
Disposition, etc. yet is the word [Covenant] in Scripture used oftest in this
less proper sense. Now it is only Believers and their Seed that are in this
mutual full Covenant with Christ. But this belongs not so nearly to our present
enquiry, about the state of the Heathens as the former does.

Prop. IV. The New Law, Testament, Promise or Gift, which says, [Whosoever
Repents and Believes shall be saved; and whoever does not shall be Damned]
does, as to its Tenor, or extent of the sense of the words, belong to all men
in the World, even those that never heard the Gospel.

This is so ordinarily acknowledged, that I need not prove it: Nor does it need
any other proof than the recital of the Covenantterms. The Promise is
universal, and no man on Earth is excepted or excluded: so that Christ may be
said to have, [1. Obliged All men to Believe. 2. And constituted Faith a
condition of Salvation to all men. 3. And obliged himself to give them
Remission and Salvation if they do Believe;] quantum attinet ad merum
Legislatorem, as far as belongs to him as mere Legislator, or as to the mere
enacting of his new Law, Grant, Testament, which is constituted and perfected
with his Fiat: And of the three forementioned Acts, the last, which is the
obligation on Christ's part, is most full and irreversible: For though there
goes yet more to the actual obliging of the Subject to perform the condition,
and of Christ to give the benefit, when the condition is performed; yet to the
first conditional Obligation of Christ to give it, there is no more requisite
to make it real and irreversible, than this enacting, so that the New Law or
Covenant extends to all the World, as to its sense or tenor.

Prop. V. This New Law or Covenant does not actually oblige men (for all the
enacting of it) till it be Promulgate; that is, a rational sufficient
publication of it, made to the World.

It belongs to the Rector after the enacting of his Law, to promulgate it:
And though promulgation be not in the strictest sense (I think) a part of
Legislation (though many think otherwise I confess;) yet it is a necessarily
subsequent act of the Rector, without which his Law cannot actually oblige;
even as [Revelation] is a natural requisite, of our actual Believing any Truth
of God; though not (as I think) the ipsum formale objectum fidei, sed potius
(quod dicitur) vinculum inter formale and materiale. For it is the Sense and
Will of the Legislator, that his enacted Law do oblige those, and only those to
whom it is promulgate; (else it should be apparently unjust, as obliging to
natural Impossibilities.) And it cannot oblige beyond his Sense and Will.

And therefore though the Tenor of the New Law extend to all men in the World,
yet it cannot be said that any man is by it obliged to Believe in Jesus Christ
Crucified, further than this Law has been published or promulgate to him, with
a Rational sufficiency. It is therefore a vain objection that one makes ( J. G.
against Mr. Barlow, p. 47.) that if men be not obliged before the revelation of
the Gospel, then either they must remain disobliged when it is revealed, or
else God must make a new Law for them, or be changeable: (that is his sense.)
For it is sufficient that he make a Promulgation of that Law which before he
had enacted; and which was before an Instrument fit to oblige but wanted the
application by a Promulgation, without which it could not actually oblige.

By all this it appears, that if the Heathens may be said to be not-obliged to
Believe, or to be not under the New Law or Covenant, it must be only for want
of a sufficient Promulgation of that Law, and not for want of an Universal
Tenor; or from any exceptions against them in the Law it self. Let us
therefore next see how far the New Law is Promulgate to them.

Prop. VI. The Lord Jesus having enacted his New Law, did purposely ordain
Universal Officers to Promulgate his Universal Law; giving them this Commission
and Command, [ Go ye into all the World, Preach the Gospel to every Creature;
He that Believes and is Baptized shall be Saved, and he that Believes not
shall be Damned]

So that Christ has not been wanting quoad actus morales, as to the moral
part, (which consists in commanding and authorizing his Officers) for the
Universal Promulgation of his New Law. Yea, for my part, I doubt not, but this
work of publishing the Gospel to all Nations, and so carrying it to them that
have not heard it, does lie on some men to this day; and God would have such
Universal Ministers yet in the World; and so far the Apostolical Work is not
ceased: And I believe it is a most heinous sin of Christian Princes and States,
that they procure not able Ministers to be sent into all the Heathenish parts
of the World, as far as possibly they can: and that it is the sin of those
Ministers, who have ability, fitness and opportunity for this Work, that they
do not (how hazardous, and painful, and chargeable soever) set themselves
resolvedly to it. So that if Christ's Laws were well obeyed, there is no
likelihood that there would be any known part of the World where the Gospel
would not be published.

Prop. VII. So little know we of the History of those remote parts of the
World, that have not now the Gospel among them, that it is very hard for any
man to know that those Countries never had the Gospel in any measure revealed
to them. We may discern that now they want it, and that they know not
themselves that ever they had it: But how far their contempt of it may in many
places cause God to give them up to that Barbarism and Sottishness as may
obliterate all former Revelations, and bury them in oblivion; this we cannot
tell, the rather because that the Apostles (and many other Christians) of that
Age did travel so far in execution of their Office, and the Gospel is then said
to be Preached to all Nations, and the sound of it to have gone to the ends of
the Earth, and through all the World: and because there has been so much
intercourse between some Christians or other, and most of these Nations since
then, yet is it most probable that there are many savage parts where the name
of Christ was never revealed with a competent sufficiency, yea, or at all.

Prop. VIII. The Heathens that never heard the Name of Jesus, have yet
sufficient means afforded them to know (among many others) these following
Truths.

1. That there is a God, and only one God.

2. That this God is Infinite in Being, Immense and Eternal, and Infinite in
Wisdom (Omniscient) Goodness and Power, (and so Omnipotent.

3. That he is the Maker, Preserver, and Governor of all, and therefore that
all men do by the strongest obligations owe him the most perfect obedience.

4. That he being Ruler must needs give us a Law, that is, some sign of his
Will, constituting our duty, and determining what shall be our reward and
punishment.

5. That God being perfectly Holy and Just, he must needs make a wide
difference between the Righteous and the Wicked; and cause Malum Passionis vel
Physicum, ordinarily to follow Malum Morale vel Actionis, vel Omissionis: ut
been tandem sit bonis and male malis. And that the same Cause which was for the
enacting of his Penal Laws, requires the execution of them ordinarily, at
least in as high a measure, as Worldly Princes are engaged to execute all their
Laws.

6. That the Soul of Man shall in another World everlastingly partake of
exceeding misery or happiness, according to what they have done in this World.

7. That therefore it should be every man's chief care to provide for his
Everlasting Salvation, and to escape everlasting Damnation or Misery; and that
all things in this World are vanity, and will not satisfy the Soul, or make
men happy; and therefore that our care and labor for this World, and our Love
of it should be nothing in comparison of our love to that to come, and of our
care and labor for it, and that no man can be too diligent in seeking after
his Everlasting Happiness.

8. That God is to be loved, honored, obeyed, trusted, feared, and that above
all Creatures whatsoever; and that he is the most happy man that is most in his
favor; and that we should Worship him frequently, reverently, and heartily,
and that according to his own will, and that we should honor our Superiors,
and love our Equals also, and do no wrong to any man, in Soul, Body, Friends,
Name, State, or Chastity; but do as we would be done by.

9. That all men are Sinners, and every man for himself may know by experience,
not only that he has broke these Laws, but often and heinously broke them,
yea, breaks them every day.

10. That a very grievous punishment is due to them for these sins.

11. That God being the Righteous Judge and Governor of the World, it
beseems him to do Justice on those that so offend him, and to adjudge them to
their deserved misery, except on some valuable Consideration he forgive them.

12. That it is past their reach to discover of themselves what such a valuable
Consideration may be, or what God will accept of as sufficient to be a ground
for Remission of this Sin and Punishment.

13. That it is past their own power to make any satisfaction, seeing all that
they can do which is good, is but the remainder of their duty, (which yet is
depraved by the daily mixture of Sin,) and all that they can suffer here, is
but part of their desert.

All this the light of Nature may show them, as is evident by the clear
deductions and inferences of Reason, and all this is Antecedent to any thing
Evangelical.

But besides all this, God's Providential dealings may teach them some things
of another Nature, even concerning God's mercy, and their own Recovery. As
particularly.

1. That God does not deal with Mankind in general, or themselves in particular
according to their desert. This they may find by his patience, and the
multitude of mercies that they enjoy.

2. Nay, that he deals with them so much contrary to their desert, as to give
them abundance of precious mercies through all their lives, when they had
deserved the greatest misery.

3. That therefore God has found out some sufficient means, grounds or terms
on which he both may and does actually dispense with the rigor of exact
Justice.

4. That therefore their case is not utterly desperate, and remediless.

5. That they cannot of themselves discover what those satisfactory grounds
are, on which God so suspendeth the rigor of Justice, and deals with them so
contrary to their deserving.

6. That therefore they should use all possible means and industry for the
fuller knowing of these great things, and therefore send to enquire of all
others in the World, as far as is possible, who are likely to know more of them
than they.

7. That they should for the time to come repent unfeignedly of all their sins,
not only as they are hurtful to themselves, but as against the public Ruler of
the World to whom they were so many ways obliged; and that for the time to come
they should to the utmost of their power sin no more.

8. That they ought frequently and fervently to pray to God, both to reveal to
them fully their Case, and his Will concerning their Recovery and Duty, and
importunately day by day to beg mercy at his hands.

9. That all this must not be done in desperation, but as a means to their own
deliverance, and God is to be sought and worshipped by them as a merciful God,
as having proved him so to be, and that the use of his means is not like to be
in vain.

10. That ^ careful seeking, and diligent obedience they should continue to the
death, against all Temptations to the contrary.

All these Truths may those come to know, by the use of Reason, from the
Creatures, and Providence, and specially their own experiences, who never
heard of Christ or Scripture. And how much Socrates, Aristotle, Plato,
Plotinus, Seneca, Cicero, Plutarch, etc. did know, may partly be seen in the
Monuments of their Knowledge.

Prop. IX. All this Revelation is some part of the Law of Jesus Christ, and so
these Truths are discovered, and this light sent by him as the Lord Redeemer of
the World, or as Rector upon his Redemption Title. For all things being now
delivered into his hands, and the whole frame of Government being laid on his
shoulders, and built on his Redemption, even on Christ the head Corner Stone;
the very moral Law now is his Law, and its obligation to obedience is his
obligation; yea, the very Law of Works obliges to punishment now, not as it
was at first given, and remains in the hands of an offended unsatisfied
Creator, but as it is suspended and delivered up into the hands of the
Satisfier or Redeemer, to remit wholly, or execute only, conditionally, as men
shall receive or reject the grace of Redemption; so that as God rules among
those blindest of Heathens that yet know him not, so does Christ Rule among
them that know not him.

Prop. X. The Ten last Particulars before mentioned, which these men may know,
are properly Gospel Truths, for the Law of Works shows nothing of Mercy
contrary to desert, nor of any hope of Recovery.

Object. But how can the mere light of Nature discern Gospel Truths, without a
supernatural Revelation?

Answ. The Light of Nature is either Reason it self, which is the Souls vi^ive
faculty.

2. Or the External Light which in the nature of things shines forth.

3. Or the Species and Knowledge received by Reason through the mediation of
this External Light. Also supernatural Revelation is,

1. Either the Rectitude of the Soul as a Recipient Power or Faculty, which was
natural to Adam, and may be called supernatural to us, because it is not born
with us, and because it is not wrought but by a supernatural efficient, though
it be most natural to us, as a thing congruous to our Natures welfare, as
health is to our Bodies.

2. Or it is the Objective Extrinsical Revelation by a supernatural way, and
that either as distinct from that which should have been according to the Tenor
of the first Law, or from that which is ordinary by common Causes, though beyond
the former.

3. Lastly, it is taken for the actual efficient impressing of the Species on
the Intellect by a supernatural Assisting Power.

On these distinctions I Answer.

1. Natural Reason, or the Intellectual faculty is the recipient of all
Revelations, natural, or supernatural.

2. There are many Objective Revelations supernatural, as being such as
according to the first Law of Nature would never have been manifested, which
yet are not supernatural as Miracles are in opposition to a natural Causality
in the way of Revealing. And so Rain, and Fruitful Seasons, Health, Wealth,
Deliverances, etc. are Mercies that come in a natural way of Causality, and yet
they may teach a Sinner those Truths which the mere Law of Nature never taught
him; Mercies and such Mercies given to those that deserve Misery, and are
obliged to extremity of Punishment by Law, do teach us that there is Remission
of Sin, and a way found out for the Relaxing the obligation that men's deserts
do not fall upon them. These Providence therefore are so far supernatural, as
being the clear effects of the Law of Grace, which relaxeth the obligation of
the Law of Nature.

Prop. XI. It is not proper or fit to say, that [the Gospel is Preached to
these Heathens that never heard of Christ,] because that the word [Gospel] most
properly signifies the main heart and substance of it: viz The discovery of
Christ's Incarnation, Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Dignity, Office, and
the full New Covenant. But yet it may truly be said, that some Gospel Truths,
and so some small part of the Gospel is revealed to these men; viz. the ten
particulars forementioned. No doubt Paul Preached part of the Gospel to the
Heathens at Lystra, Acts 14. 7, 15. etc. when he mentioned Jesus Christ, ver.
23. Heb. 4. 2, 3. It is said that the Gospel was Preached to the Jews in the
Wilderness, who yet had little of that which now is the substance of our Creed
about Christ.

Prop. XII. That Repentance which God requirerh now of all men (even them that
never heard the Gospel) is not a Hellish, Judas-like despairing Repentance;
(such as was due according to the violated Law of works:) but it is a
Repentance that is appointed as means toward recovery, and therefore has a
tendency to Salvation. Gods mercies lead to Repentance, but not to a despairing
Repentance; for they contradict that. All the precepts of Repentance prove
this, and the course of Gods dealings. And indeed, else all the remnants of
Religion would be banished out of the World. For despairing men will not
Worship God, nor seek to please him, nor forbear sinning; but will hate God and
live like Devils, and sin while they may, without voluntary restraint. All the
Sacrifices that the Heathens offered, and all their Prayers and Conscience of
Sinning showed that they apprehended God merciful and placable, and their case
remediable. Hope did keep up all that remnant of Religion which all Nations of
the World have maintained, which else had been extinguished long ago, and Earth
been like Hell.

Prop. XIII. These Heathens do all of them receive some Grace which was
purchased by the Blood of Christ, and there is a Natural aptitude in it as in
other effects, to lead the enquirer to the knowledge of the cause and fountain,
caeteris concurrentibus; Grace is Mercy contrary to Merit. Heathens have much
Mercy contrary to Merit, therefore they have some Grace.

Now all such Grace is inseparable from some Revelation of Gospel Truths: Nay,
indeed it is a Revelation there of it self.

Prop. XIV. Though Christ gives not to these Heathens sufficient Grace to
believe in his name, yet he gives them sufficient Grace, or merciful aid to
receive and obey those (or some of those) Truths forementioned which he does
reveal to them, and so to come nearer to Christ than before they were. I have
before showed, that all men are far from Christ Naturally, and that they must
be brought diverse steps or degrees nearer him, before they are brought to the
very act of Faith which unites men to him; specially Heathens that are at the
remotest distance. Also I have showed that there is such a thing as sufficient
Grace, not effectual as to the event; and that both from the example, of Adam,
of the wicked now, and fot he Godly themselves. I shall therefore now suppose
what is already proved. I have showed also, that though God thought it not meet
to engage himself in Covenant with such, nor to make any thing short of true
Faith, to be the condition of his Promise, yet he has appointed means to
others that yet have not Faith, which they are bound to use toward the getting
of it; and he has given them sufficient encouragement to address themselves
cheerfully and vigorously to the use of those means, with hope to speed. So
that if they neglect them they are left without excuse.

Prop. XV. It belongs to Christ in drawing men toward Salvation by his
Rectorship, to reveal-oft times some of the forementioned Gospel Truths by way
of preparation, and to draw men nearer him, before he reveal the full substance
of his Covenant, or fully promulgate his Law. As the Sun sends forth some
light before it appears it self at its rising, which light yet comes from the
same Sun: So does the Gospel oft-times.

Prop. XVI. Those that have the forementioned truths revealed to them with
hearing the Gospel, are bound in all reason for the safety of their Souls, to
use all possible diligence to make a fuller discovery; which is not likely that
any Indians or others have done: Had they been as diligent in improving the
truth received till they had been civilized, and then in sending to all others
for information where there was a probability of receiving information even as
men are diligent in trading tedious Voyages for Merchandise and Worldly Gain,
it is like there is no Nation under Heaven but might have had the Gospel ere now.

Prop. XVII. If men will wilfully reject and abuse that measure of light and
help which they do enjoy, which was sufficient to that end whereto it was
given. (to have brought them nearer Christ than they were:) And if they will
not use the means for getting of the Gospel, which they have sufficient help to
use; then it is apparently just with Christ; even as Rector according to the
Law of Grace, to condemn such men after he has Died for them. And if his Death
prove in vain, as to their Salvation, the fault is only in themselves, and
themselves, shall they blame for ever. And this is the case of these men.

Prop. XVIII. Nay in this case the very Law of Grace, commanding Faith in
Christ Crucified does oblige these men remotely to the Duty, and to punishment
for neglect of the Duty. For though a Law not promulgate cannot oblige, yet the
Question is, Who it was long of? Or, Who was the faulty cause that it was not
Published? If the Lawgiver, then it cannot oblige: But if it were the subject,
then it does actually, though remotely oblige. For no man is to receive benefit
(says the Civil Law) by his own fault. Who knows not that among us if a Man
will lie in an Alehouse and never come to hear the word, God will judge him
guilty of being Ignorant of all the Truths which he might have there learnt?
And of neglecting all the Duties which he might have been informed of? And if a
man know some few preparatory Truths here, (as that he is a sinner, and
miserable, and ought to seek out for remedy, and should come to hear the word,
and forsake his known sin, and keep good company, etc.) and yet he despise or
disobey these, shall we say this Man was never bound to believe? I say, he is
bound [remotely] that is, first to do some other Duties which tend toward the
obtaining of the Gospel; and then to believe: For the obligation to both Duties
lies on him at once; but not an obligation to perform both Duties at once.

Object. But if they should improve their degree of Light and sufficient Grace,
they have no certainty ty (because no promise) that the Gospel shall be given
them.

Answ. That Is no excuse as long as they have so full encouragement, as is
before expressed. Should a man in danger of Death do nothing for his own safety
without a certainty of success? Should not the least hope of probability (much
more so high a probability) be enough to excite men to seek the saving of their
own lives? Suppose a King having past an Act of Oblivion (upon a ransom to that
end) for a whole Nation of Traitors (as Ireland,) should send his Herald to
proclaim it to all: But to some of them he sends before hand some inferior
messenger, telling them in the Kings Name, that he is placable, and their case
remediable, and he requires them to use certain means (as Submission, Petition,
Laying down Arms, etc.) and try what the King will do? If these men reject
unthankfully this favor, and abuse the messenger, and persist in Rebellion, is
it not just with the King to forbid the Herald, that he proclaim not to them
the act of oblivion? And is it not long of themselves if they never hear it,
nor have any benefit by it? so is it in the present case. By the abuse of
sufficient Grace to have come nearer Christ, do the Pagans forfeit all other
fruits of his blood. So that Christ may truly be said to have done his part
even as Legislator; and to have promulgated his new Law among them, in that he
did his part, and so it is promulgate moraliter vel Reputative, though it was
not actualiter and perfect through their own fault. It is not long of Christ
but of themselves that it was not done fully, in that they ungratefully
rejected his Precursors or Harbingers that came before the Gospel. Seeing they
would not make use of the Twilight or Daybreak, Christ justly denies them the
Sunrising.

Prop. XIX. It seems most probable that it was not only Adams first sin that is
imputable to his Posterity, but that we are all still guilty of all our Parents
sin to this Day; and that therefore God may justly deprive a whole Nation of
the light of the Gospel for their Progenitors sins, and that not only according
to the Law of Works, but even according to the Law of Grace.

I will not stand now on the proof of this, any further than to tell you;

1. That the same solid Arguments which prove the imputableness of Adams sin,
seem to me to prove this; and by denying this we overthrow the grounds of the
Doctrine of the said Imputation.

2. And that the Second Commandment, with all those Examples of Gods destroying
the Children with the Parents, and for their sin, do seem fully to prove it;
together with the practice of Godly men to humble themselves for their Fathers
Sins. Yet understand me thus, that though according to the Law of Works we are
guilty of all our Parents Sins; yet the Law of Grace Promises that no man
shall be destroyed for them, who disowneth them by true Repentance and taking a
contrary course (in obedience) when he comes to Age. (This is the sense of
Ezekiel. 33. and 18.) And so the guilt is cut off, and the Child by the Covenant
of Grace taken in with its Parents, and so is looked on as in his immediate
Parents, and the sin of former Parents forgiven him; though yet that guilt will
return if when he comes to Age he ungratefully reject the mercy by renouncing
the Covenant of Grace.

I do but propound this to Divines to consider: For certainly if we prove all
guilty of all our Parents Sins; it is sad that the Church has no better
understood it, and that we have none almost that ever bewailed* acknowledged,
or prayed for Remission of such a Guilt; nor any Ministers that ever acquainted
them with it (yet Ursine and some few I find make it doubtful) yet here is no
ground for their objection, who say, that then for the Sin of Cain or Cham, God
may destroy all their present Posterity.

To which I Answer.

1. According to the Law of Works, he may.

2. According to the Law of Grace, if there have been no Godly intermediate
Progenitors. (which is false or improbable.)

3. Or if the Children prove wicked and rebellious themselves, God may bring on
that Generation the Evlis deserved by the foregoing. Yet is there a great
difference in degree between guilt from Progenitors, and guilt from our own
Personal voluntary Actions; and therefore God never imputes the former where
men are personally obedient and penitent; but lays it as an addition to their
personal guilt, on the Impenitent and Disobedient.

Prop. XX. I cannot find in Scripture where it is clearly revealed to us, on
what terms God will Judge those that heard not of Christ. In general we find
that he will judge them according to their usage of the Talents of Mercy
received, and not according to the rigor of the Law of works as it stands
alone; but particularly how God will proceed with them, or whether any Heathen
be ever saved? I cannot find that he has revealed. For indeed it does not
concern us to know it. I dare not say that any of them ( Socrates, Seneca,
Plato, etc.) are saved: Nor dare I say that I am certain they are not: They
that are certain let them be thankful for their knowledge, and not be angry
with me for confessing my Ignorance. And I hope they will distinguish between
Ignorance and Error, and therefore not charge me with Error in this. It seems
to me that these men being not under any conditional Promise of Life, (for
Faith is the condition) therefore they cannot lay claim to Salvation by the
Tenor of the Covenant. (Though some think that the Promise of Pardon and Life
to them that Repent may give them an interest:) But yet God is not engaged to
the contrary, but deals Arbitrarily with them, and therefore we cannot know
his dealings particularly and fully herein.

Prop. XXI. Those Scriptures that speak of the necessity of Christ to man's
Salvation (for satisfying Justice) do plainly extend it to all men in the
World, but those that speak of the necessity of believing seem to limit it to
them that hear the Gospel, or might have heard it but for their own fault. It
is true of all men, that there is no other name given under Heaven by which
they can be saved, but the Name of Jesus: There is no Remission but by his
Blood, nor Acceptance with God but for the sake of his Satisfaction and Merits.
But it may be observed from the Context, that when it is said [He that
believes not shall be Damned] it is plainly fore-implyed, that they are such
as are called to believe. It has the Nature of a threatening and therefore
presupposes the sin of Unbelief, and that it be not mere Negative Unbelief,
but Privative; and that supposes the duty of believing, and that supposes the
command constituting the Duty, and that supposes Natural Power* in Man,
(though not Moral) and the Natural possibility of obeying. Peruse each
particular Text of this Nature and you will find this true.

Prop. XXII. Personal Believing was never commanded to Infants or Idiots, nor
required as necessary to their Salvation.

Prop. XXIII. The same Faith which is now among us of absolute necessity to our
Justification and Salvation, was not so to those before Christ; therefore it is
not per se of absolute necessity to Justification by Christ: Therefore if God
so please, those that hear not the Gospel may be Justified without that Faith
which to us is necessary. If we believe not that Jesus is the Christ we shall
Die in our sins. But this was not necessary to the Jews before Christ's coming:
Nay, it appears by diverse passages in the Gospel, that Christ's own Twelve
Apostles after they had long heard his Teaching, and seen his Miracles* did not
believe that Christ should be put to Death, and be made a Sacrifice for Sin;
much less his Resurrection, etc. And how unlikely is it then that all the true
believers of the World long before should believe this? (However some Prophets
might discern much of it.) Do but well peruse every example of believing in,
Heb. 11. and see what Faith it was that then saved them. Yet to think that the
same would save us now, were a desperate mistake.

Prop. XXIV. God can if he please pardon and save men for the sake of Christ's
satisfaction, without letting them once know that Christ satisfied for them,
else he cannot save an Infant or an Idiot. Some Divines (as Twisse, etc.) are
so bold as to say, that God could have pardoned Sin without Christ's
satisfaction: I dare not say so: But methinks the same men should never make
man's knowledge or belief of Christ's satisfaction, to be absolutely necessary to
Salvation, if the satisfaction it self be not: Dare any say, [My own Faith was
more necessary than Christ's Death? I could have been saved without Christ, but*
not without Faith.] God could have forgiven men absolutely if he would, or else
have made some other condition, when once his Justice was satisfied: And
therefore we cannot conclude that this is the condition to any further than
Scripture says so.

Prop. XXV. Yet is Repentance, Belief in God, Love to him, and sincere
Obedience, of Natural necessity. For God cannot be enjoyed in Glory but by
these Graces; nor as a Just Rector can he save them that love him not, and that
Rebel against him.

Prop. XXVI. Those who think it possible for a Socrates, Seneca, etc. to be
saved, (or one that never heard the Gospel) do not hereby equal Heathenism with
Christianity, nor make our Religion needless: For they,

1. Make their Salvation less certain, and ours most certain.

2. And their Salvation most difficult (as for a man to hit a narrow way in the
dark;) and ours incomparably more easy (as for a man to hit the right way by
daylight.)

3. And that therefore they are very few of them that are Saved; but Multitudes
with us.

4. That their Glory shall be lesser (as his that improved the two Talents;)
and ours greater, (as his that improved the ten:) Besides many more differences.

Prop. XXVII. If all the Heathen be Damned, though their loss will be
materially equal with ours, yet formally as a privation (for they were never in
our capacity of Glory;) and their poena sensus, will not be near equal to ours
either materially or formally. For their Consciences will never torment them
for the refusal of Christ revealed, and Heaven offered to them, or any other
sins which they were not capable of committing. Nay, if it were true that some
teach, that they had no Gospel Mercy or Grace given or offered to them, nor any
satisfaction ever made for them by Christ, then should they escape all the
sorer punishment of the new Law, and never suffer at all for Abuse of that
mercy, or rejecting a Redeemer, or any fruit of his satisfaction which he made
for them. And this would be an easy Hell in comparison of theirs that refuse
Christ offered them.

Prop. XXVIII. We must in all our Controversies try the Minus nota pro notiora
and minus certa per certiora, and non contra: We must reduce uncertainties to
certainties, and dark points, to clear ones; and not certainties to
uncertainties. Seeing therefore it has pleased God to leave his final dealing
with Pagans (that hear not the Gospel,) Idiots and Infants, so uncertain and
dark, the Controversy of Universal Redemption is not to be tried hereby, nor
all the plain Scripture for it, to be reduced to the uncertainties herein.

So much to this Argument.

Let the Reader note, that since the writing of this, I am clearer than I was
then in the assurance of this Truth, that the Covenant or Law of Grace, as it
is the Rule of Duty and Retribution; was made with all Mankind in the first
Edition, in Adam and Noah; and is not repealed to any that have not the second
Edition (in the Gospel) but the rest of the World are still under it.

When I had gone thus far, Dalleus's Defense of Universal Redemption, and Grace
came out with Blondels Preface, where are so great a number of Witnesses cited
of all Ages, that I not only stopped my work but cast away a multitude of
Testimonies which I had collected, even of English Anti-Arminians; such as
Davenant, Ward, Hall, Carlton, Rob. Abbots Bishop of Salisbury, Dr. Preston,
Whately, Will. Fenner, Ezekiel. Culverwel, and many such.

DISPUTATION OF Special Redemption;
Whether Christ Died with a Special Intention of bringing Infallibly,
Immutably, and Insuperably certain Chosen Persons to Saving Faith,
Justification, and Salvation?

THE Question is so cautelously and clearly expressed, that I need not say much
for the explication of it, but shall directly determine it Affirmatively, only
in brief take notice of these things, as the Reasons of the Terms.

First, We mean here the Intention of Christ [ as God;] for so he knew all
things, and Willed all the Good which he knew. But whether as Man, he that knew
not the day nor hour of his own coming to Judgment did know the number and
names of his own Elect that ever were and should be, and consequently, whether
he had a special Intention concerning the Salvation of each of them in
particular; this I shall purposely leave undetermined.

Secondly, It is therefore implied by us, that the Father and Holy Ghost had
the same Intention which we affirm Christ to have had.

Thirdly, By the word [ Intention] we mean that Act of Christ's Will, which is
resembled by Intention in mere man, and so is Analogically called Intention.
And we confine it not to the Will alone, but take it as comprehending that
Counsel of the Understanding, or that simple Knowledge, which the act of the
Will supposes: Nor do we take it in the strict sense, as it is terminated only
on the End, and so Intentio Finis is distinct from Election of the means: but
more largely as it may comprehend either of these, for that which we commonly
call a Purpose or Resolution.

Fourthly, We call it [ a Special Intention; because it is about a Special
Object, and is not General or Common to all.

Fifthly, We call it an Intention of [ Bringing] men to Faith, etc. because it
is Christ's own Work to give these things which he Intends, and so we
difference it, both from his Intention to Permit (if such there be) in case of
Sin; and from that imagined Intention of a Partial Causation, and of a Concurse
determinable by the Will of Man, But though it be an intention of Effecting, that
we mention, yet the Manner of this effecting, or bringing men to Believe, we
here meddle not with.

Sixthly, It is an [ Infallible] effecting of this that we mention, thereby
differencing it from a mere Velleity, or a conditional willing, so as that the
very act of willing, should depend upon some uncertain condition: as distinct
from this we may call it Absolute. And in the word [ Infallible,] which
respects the act of the Divine Understanding, we imply also [ Immutable]
which respects Gods Will: and Invincible as to his operation: and had we one
word that comprehended these, it would contain our full sense. It is the same
thing which our Divines mean by the word [ Irresistible] or Insuperable.

Seventhly, It is [ Certain Persons or Individuals,] that are the objects of
this Purpose: which we mention as against the Arminian Conceit, that it is only
Believers in General, or All men Conditionally if they will Believe, that
Christ Decreed to Justify and Save, without determining infallibly of any
certain Individuals till he foresaw that themselves would make the difference
by Believing.

Eighthly, We call them [ Chosen] Persons: not a Posteriore, upon the foresight
of their Faith: but a priore before and without any moving cause or condition
in themselves: It is the same act which we here call [ Chusing] as considered
in Eternity, determining of the future difference of Persons; and which we
before call [ Special Intention,] there considering it as respecting the time
of Christ's Death.

Ninthly, The Intended effect is,

1. [ Saving Faith] such as is not common to the Unjustified. This we express
against the Pelagian Conceit, that gives Justification and Salvation on
condition of Faith, but not Faith it self, or at least not Certainly and
Infallibly to any: we say, both that God Decrees us to Faith as well as to
Salvation by Faith, and that Christ dying did purpose Infallibly to bring his
chosen to Believe, and this as a fruit of his Death.

2. When we speak of [ Justification] as the second Intended effect, we take it
in Connection with the foregoing Faith, and subsequent Salvation; meaning that
all the Elect that are at Age and Believe, and they only, have that
Justification which follows their personal Faith. We own not their opinion that
think that many persons that were never Elected to Salvation, were yet Elected
to Faith and Justification, and do fall from these at last and perish: Though yet
we reverence many that have maintained or owned this opinion, as precious
Servants of God: and think not so hardly of their opinion, as of their's who
maintain the Apostasy of the Elect, if now there be any such. Austin himself
seems fully to go that way, who yet maintains the perseverance of all the
Elect: And so does Musculus and some others among the Reformed Divines called
Calvinists: But for the Justification of Infants which has no such connection
to a personal Faith of their own, whether it may cease when they come to the
use of Reason for want of personal faith to continue it (which was the Judgment
of Davenant, Dr. Ward, Amyraldus, and many of our own) this I intend not here
to determine or meddle with.

3. We anumerate Salvation, that is, Glorification, to these intended effects
of Christ's Death for his chosen, this being the End of all the former, and
therefore we imply that Perseverance in Faith, and a State of Justification was
intended infallibly and certainly to be given them.

Tenthly, Observe that we do not here enquire after the present immediate
effects of Christ's Death as a satisfaction to Justice: For I doubt not but the
sins of the Non-Elect did lie upon him, as the pro meritorious Cause of his
Suffering as well as the sins of the Elect, and consequently that he made
Satisfaction for them to God, and purchased them by his Blood.

Eleventh and Lastly, Observe, that in affirming this Infallible, Immutable,
purpose of God, to save his Elect and them only, we do not deny his Purpose of
giving Pardon and Life in Christ Conditionally to those that are not Elect: For
that which he has done in Time, he Purposed before Time (and so did Christ at
his Death.) But in Time he has made such a general Conditional Grant or Gift
of Christ and Life, (as is legible in the Gospel beyond all exceptions,) Ergo,
etc. And therefore according to his ( Legislative Will, antecedently, God would
have all men to be saved; though consequently considering many as finally
Impenitent Unbelievers, he Wills as a Righteous Judge, their Damnation. Nor
will I dispute, whether as we ascribe a Volition to God as the cause of his
Effectual Grace; so we may ascribe a Velleity to him (as Lud. Crocius and other
of our Divines do) as the cause of that Grace which proves not-effectual: in
both, speaking of him from the manner of man.

Upon this very cursory explication, I proceed to prove the Thesis, thus,

Argum. I. If Christ Died with a Special Intention to bring his chosen
Infallibly to Believe, and to give them Justification and Glorification on
condition of believing, then he died with a special Intention of bringing
infallibly certain chosen persons, to Faith, Justification and Salvation. But
the Antecedent is true, therefore so is the consequent.

That which we have to prove therefore is, that he had a Special Intent to give
Faith to some Infallibly, and then there will be no more question of
Justification and Glorification. And that I prove thus.

Whatever Grace Christ gives absolutely and infallibly, that he purposed
before to give absolutely and infallibly. But Christ gives the Grace of Faith
(and Repentance) to his chosen (and them only) absolutely and infallibly. Ergo,
etc.

By [ giving] in this Argument I mean, the actual Causation or Collation of
faith it self, and not merely a Legal giving a right to it, of which anon.

The Major I think, no sober Christian will deny. For how can the Omniscient,
Immutable God, be suddenly surprised with a new purpose which never came into
his mind before our being Believers?

The Minor is proved 1. From the visible Event. 2. From Scripture.

1. We see und^niably that some men have Faith, and others have not: therefore
we know that God gives it absolutely and infallibly to those only.

Obj God gave it to all alike, but the rest refused it.

Answ. I. If that were true of God's Moral Civil way of giving, yet it cannot
be true of his Physical gift or operation which we now speak of: for that
giving is ever connexed with receiving: As God never gives a Soul to any Body,
nor health to any Sick man, but those that receive them, so he never thus gives
Faith, Repentance, a New-heart, to any but those that receive them.

Obj. He offers Christ and Grace to believe in him to All: and offering is
conditional giving: and he does no more to any, but on supposition of their
Reception, or performance of the Condition.

Answ. I. It Is false, that he actually offers Christ to all, though as to the
tenor of the Gift he does, which without the Promulgation (which extends not
to Millions of Heathens) is no actual offer.

II. Much less, or as little, does he offer them Faith.

III. It Is false, that he does no more but offer Faith conditionally to his
chosen: For he effects it absolutely. To [ offer Conditionally] is a Civil
act, and we are speaking of a Physical Causing: This objection therefore flatly
denies that God is the Author of any man's Faith.

We therefore prove it out of Scripture, Ephesians. 2. 8. By Grace ye are saved
through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. The
Expositors that are most against the Doctrine which I defend, do confess that
it is Faith, (and not Salvatiin only) that is here called, the Gift of God; but
they say, God gives it, by giving the object, Christ and the Gospel. Answ.
That is somewhat toward the giving of Faith, but that is not the giving of
Faith, if there be no more. Do these men think that the unrenewed faculty has
need of no Grace but an object or persuasion from without, to cause it to
believe? Many have the Gospel that have not Faith: therefore God has not
caused such to believe.

1 Pet. 1. 5. Who are kept by the Power of God, through Faith unto Salvation.
God's Power is exercised in keeping us in Faith as the means to Salvation the
end: And he that by his mighty Power keeps us in Faith, no doubt did cause it.

2 Pet. 1. 3. According as his Divine Power has given to us all things that
pertain to Life and Godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called us
to Glory and Virtue. If he give us all things pertaining to Life, then he gives
us Faith.

Obj. Faith is expressly excepted, in the Words [through the knowledge of him
that has called us] that is, through our own believing.

Answ. I. It is distinguished from the rest, as a Gift which is a means to the
other gifts, but not excepted.

II. Our following acts of Faith seem to be included in the [ All things] here
mentioned, viz. Through our first believing God gives us Christ, the Spirit,
and all following Grace. And if the following acts of Faith are the gifts of
God, then no doubt the first was so, which was required of us when we were less
able of our selves to perform it, then when we are Sanctified.

Heb. 12. 2. Jesus is the Author and Finisher of our Faith.

Obj. That Is meant of the Doctrine of our belief, and Objects of Faith; the
Christian Religion.

Answ. I. Then to be the Finisher and to be the Author would be all one. For as
soon as Christ was the Author of Christian Doctrine, he was the Finisher: but
not so about our own Faith.

II. If it were so, yet may it be meant of Faith as it contains both, even the
whole work of our Christianity and Salvation.

Phil. 1. 29. For to you it is given on the behalf of Christ not only to
believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. From this Text Grotius himself
confesses that it is proved that Faith is the gift of God.

Joh. 3. 27. A man can receive nothing except it be given him from Heaven.

If nothing, then not Faith. If they say, they received it not, the Apostles
question may shame them. What have thou which thou have not received?

Obj. That Is meant of gifts that were for Edification.

Answ. I. Much more of Faith, which is a special Grace.

II. It is General, implying that we have nothing that we received not, that
thence he might conclude [ Therefore not such Gifts.]

Joh. 6. 44. No man can come to me except the Father which has sent me draw
him, ver. 65. Therefore said I unto you, No man can come unto me except it were
given to him of my Father.

Obj. God drawing Morally those that will not follow him.

Answ. I. The Drawing here mentioned is the same with [ giving to come to him.]

II. It is given as the Reason why some Believed not, because none can come
except it be given them, and they be drawn. Those that believed not had your
Moral drawing which was uneffectual, but it is evident, they had not the
drawing which Christ mentions.

Luke 17. 5. Lord increase our Faith. Therefore he must give it.

Obj. That is a Faith of Miracles.

Answ. Saving Faith is as much Gods Gift as that: and the Soul as unapt to it
till he give it.

Mark 9. 24. Lord I believe: help thou mine Unbelief. He that must Help our
Unbelief, that is, give us more Faith, must help our total Unbelief, by giving
us our first Faith, which we are most unable to perform of our selves.

Gal. 5. 22. The fruit of the Spirit is Love, Faith, etc.

Obj. That Is meant of Fidelity.

Answ. I. That Is unproved; that it is only meant of that.

II. If common fidelity must be wrought by the Spirit, much more Saving Faith
in Christ.

To all these it is further objected, that God gives Faith equally to All, that
is, his help to Believe: but it is only the Materia Disposita that receives
it, and the reason why some have it not, is because they are not disposed or
prepared.

Ans. 1. If this be so, that this is the Reason of his denying faith to some,
yet the contrary disposition is not the Reason of his giving faith to others.
And therefore the Undisposedness is only a Reason sufficient to Justify God's
denial of Grace, but not Disabling him to give it, or necessitating him to deny
it. Else all men should perish, who are undisposed unless they dispose
themselves. And this is plain Semi-Polagianism, that Grace is tied to such
Dispositions of our own.

2. Prove if you can that ever God has made a Promise of Faith, to men on
condition of any prerequisite Dispositions. I find no such thing in the Word.

3. Are those Dispositions Gods Gifts or not? If not, then all is ultimately
resolved into man's will, and we have something that we have not received. If
they be, then they are given Absolutely or Conditionally. If Absolutely, then
they are not so given to All, else All should have them and so Believe. If
Conditionally;

1. What is the Condition? They say our Nonresistance: But our Resistance is
either Habitual or Actual. The Actual is our Actual Ni^ing; The Habitual is our
Habitual Unwillingness, Deadness, etc. Must we cure all this of our selves,
before God will give us Faith? I will not say as Dr. Twisse, that
Non-resistance is Credere, that is, Faith it self that is the contrary to this
Resistance or Unwillingness; because you may tell me, that to be unwilling of
Christ as offered, and to be Unwilling that God should make me willing of
Christ, or give me Faith, by the means of my hearing, is not all one. But this
I say, that the best did resist and were unwilling both of Christ and Faith,
till God did overcome their Resistance. And that God has not promised Faith on
condition of man's Non-resistance that I know of.

2. Is this Non-resistance or Willingness to Believe the Gift of God or not? If
not, then we have somewhat which we did not receive, and then all Grace still
is ultimately resolved (with the Pelagians) into man's will; and man makes
himself to differ, which I disproved in the last days Exercise. If it be Gods
Gift, then either Absolute (and so proper to some:) Or Conditional, and then
that must have a Condition; and so in infinitum, till you stop in some Absolute
Gift not common to all.

Object. God is not the total, but partial Cause, and therefore he does quantum
in se give Faith to all, and that some are yet without it, is long of
themselves.

Answ. I. I confess that it is long of themselves that any are Unbelievers.

II. Though man believe, yet it seems to me that God is not to be called Causa
partialis, but totalis in that Supreme Causality which he exercises.

III. That God does quantum in se give all men Faith, may be understood either.

1. Quantum in se quoad potentiam, as much as ^e can: But that is Blasphemy.

2. Quantum in se quoad Decentiam, as much as is meet for him to do. But who
dare say that it is unmeet for God to give men such effectual grace as shall
Infallibly cause them to Believe? He gives such to his Elect, and therein does
not any thing that is unmeet.

3. Or else it is meant, that God gives so much help to unbelievers, as leaves
all the blame of their unbelief upon themselves, and justifies him from being
the culpable deficient or efficient Cause: And this I grant, but this is no
advantage to the Adversary. But I have been too long on this first Argument.

Arg. II. Jesus Christ dying intended the Infallible Glorification of Gods free
grace in the certain Regeneration, Justification and Glorification of certain
men, therefore he intended the infallible certain Regeneration (or Faith) and
Justification and Glorification of those men

That Christ came into the World with a certain intention to accomplish the
glorifying of God as his end; is undoubted. For to say either that he undertook
so great a work without an end, or that the glory of Gods grace and love was
not that end, are both impious. And as certain is it that it was the glory of
Gods grace in the certain Salvation of some men that was intended. For as there
is no other way of this full glorification of Gods grace, manifested to us, but
only by man's Salvation, so the Scripture most frequently tells us that this is
the way, and this was God's design, and therefore Christ is styled the Savior,
which certainly implies that he has some infallibly to save, and that he came
to seek and to save that which was lost. And if it were not the Salvation of
Determinate Persons that God intended to glorify himself in, then was it not in
the Salvation of any man at all: for all Salvation is some ones Salvation.
Accidents exist not without a Subject. And if it were not a certain obtaining
of this end by this means that Christ intended, then Christ came upon an
uncertain errand into the World, and intended not the certain attainment of
Gods glory herein, which is unreasonable to imagine. So admirably was this
design of Redemption laid, such a wondrous Mystery is it to Angels and Men,
that it is apparent God intended infallibly the attaining of his blessed ends
thereby. And so precious was the blood of Jesus Christ, that it is impious to
imagine that he had no certain end in the sheding of it, or that it might have
been lost as to the glory of Gods grace, and the Salvation of any persons, for
any thing that he intended to the contrary.

Arg. III. What Christ intended from all Eternity, that he intended in dying
(which was yet future) but Christ did from all Eternity intend the certain
justification and glorification of his Chosen, and giving them faith to that
end, therefore he intended it on the Cross, and at his undertaking.

This Argument divolves the whole Controversy to the point of Predestination,
where it is plain that it lies, which because our Divines have fully
vindicated, I will now pass by.

Arg. IV. God has made an ab olute Promise that he will infallibly Convert,
Pardon and save some, viz. his Chosen,) which he has not made concerning
others, therefore he intended the certain Conversion, Remission, and Salvation
of those some, and not of others (in giving Christ, and so did Christ in giving
his Life.)

Jer. 31. 33. This is my Covenant, etc. I will put my Law in their minds, and
write it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my People.
So I will take the hard heart out of their body, and give them an heart of
flesh, a new heart, one heart, etc. And I will put my fear into their hearts
that they shall not depart from me. Such Promises are not to all, nor
Conditional: If they are, what is the Condition? Now what God Promises, ^he
Performs, and intended to Perform.

Arg. V. If Christ intended not the certain Conversion, Justification, and
Glorification of his Chosen, more than of others, then those in Heaven are no
more beholden to his intention or his death, than those in Hell, nor the
Regenerate, than the Unregenerate. But the Consequent is intolerable,
therefore so is the Antecedent. At least it will follow that they are no more
beholden to him for their Faith, than they that never had it.

Arg. VI. Either God Purposed (in giving his Son, and Christ in dying) the
certain Salvation (and so Conversion) of All, of None, or of Some only. Not of
All, for then All should be Saved. Not of None, for then either None should be
Saved, or else they should be Saved without or against Gods Purpose. Not
against it, as will be acknowledged. Not without it, for,

1. He who Saves them in Time, Purposed it from Eternity, for he works all
things after the counsel of his own Will.

2. He whose Providence extends to the falling of a Sparrow, and the
clothing of the Grass, does sure provide and regard the Salvation of Mankind,
and saves not man without his own purpose to save him.

3. If it be a Performed Act, and not a Purposed Act, for God to Convert and
Save, then it would be either an Irrational Act which had no end, or else that
purpose must be new in him, which was not at Christ's dying; both which are
intolerable.

If they say that he purposed it Conditionally, or quantum in se, determining
nothing Absolutely of the Event, I have answered enough to that before.

Arg. VII. Ad hominem: The Adversaries grant in effect the substance of our
Conclusion; for,

1. They grant, That God Infallibly decreed to Save all that would believe, etc.

2. That God knew from Eternity who would Believe, and who not, and that Christ
knew this at his undertaking to dye, and at his death.

3. They grant that he does not absolutely purpose the saving of any other.

4. They grant, That as Christ dyed not from Eternity, so we are to look on him
as undertaking to dye for us, and entering upon the Mediatory work, not from
Eternity (upon his mere decree,) but presently upon Man's fall, when the Promise
was made: for the Relation and Extrinsic a Denomination might then begin, though
no new Act of Gods Will.

Lay all this together, that God resolved to save all Believers, and knew each
of them by name that would believe, and who would not* and intended to save no
other than Believers, and that after this Christ undertook and performed the
satisfaction by his death; and I think, the main that we plead for is granted,
as to the Intent of Christ infallibly to justify, and save some determinate
Persons only. Nor can they deny this with any modesty, in consistency with
their concessions.

But then its true, that they yield not that he Intended the giving of Faith
infallibly and Absolutely to some only, because they say, he intended not so to
give it to any, but only offer them sufficient help to believe, and leave it to
their own wills whether to make it effectual or to frustrate it: And withal
they say, that it was upon the foresight that some would Believe, and others
not, that he intended the Salvation of some determinate Persons, and
condemnation of others.

But having spoke to this already, I only now add,

1. Yet still this grants that Christ dyed with a special intent of saving
those determinate Persons and them only, though they suppose this Intent to be
upon a foresight of their own Faith, or Unbelief.

2. I demand whether God could not without wrong to any of his Attributes, have
caused those to Believe, whom he foresaw would be Unbelievers, and so having
decreed to cause them to believe as well as others, have foreseen that they
would Believe. They that dare say, God could not have given any such Unbeliever
Grace to Believe (infallibly,) do most audaciously abuse Gods power, goodness,
and wisdom.

3. And does not God do more for Peter, than for Judas, for the Elect than the
Reprobate, antecedently to their Faith? all the Arminians are not bold enough
to deny it.

4. Arminius himself grants, that after the abuse and rejecting of grace* God
gives up some, as Pharaoh, Ahab etc. to fill up the measure of their sin, and
penally forsakes them; and I think they will grant that some others as bad are
not so forsaken nor given up, but Converted, as Manasseh.

And if God show this undeserved Mercy to a Manasseh, which he denies to a
Pharaoh, is it not his free grace that makes Manasseh to differ? And if God may
do so in one, why not in others?

Lastly, The Schoolmen, and most Papists will acknowledge, that Christ dyed for
all men as to the sufficiency of his death, and for some men only efficiently;
that is, to effect some men's Salvation.

And does not this grant that he dyed not for all alike, and that he had a
special intent of Saving some, which he had not as to others.

We easily grant that he has effected satisfaction for all, but he that
intended only the Saving of Believers, could not intend to save those Persons
actually by his death, who he knew would not believe, but perish in unbelief.

From these Reasons we proceed to some from particular Texts of Scripture.

First, John 17. 2. As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should
give Eternal Life to as many as thou have given him. Here Christ's Authority as
Redeemer is said to be over all flesh, and so all are his purchased ones; but
the purpose of giving actually Eternal Life, is expressly restrained to those
that are specially given him by the Father.

Object. By Giving is not meant absolute Electing from Eternity, but giving
them by Vocation to Christ as true Disciples.

Answ. Suppose that be so:

1. That Giving them to be true Disciples, can import no less than God's making
them Disciples, that is, Believers: And so it is not Man that gives himself to
Christ primarily, or makes himself a Believer: And God makes not all Disciples,
which he could do if he pleased.

2. And if God give men to Christ by effectual Vocation in time, then no doubt
he decreed so to do from Eternity.

Secondly, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. And has put all things under his feet, and gave him
to be the head over all things to the Church.

Here the intent of God in giving Christ, is expressed to be, that he might be
the head over all, but not the Head of All, but of the Church only. And it is
he that makes his Church, and not the Church itself principally.

Thirdly, John 10. 15. I lay down my Life for the sheep, which implies that it
is laid down with a special intent for them, more than for others.

Object. The Sheep are Believers, undeterminate as to Individuals.

Answ. 1. Men are Believers before Christ's Pardoning of them, but not before
Christ's laying down his Life for them; nor so considered; else the Act of
Faith should be before, and without its Object.

2. It Is confessed that God knew who the Persons were that would believe;
therefore his purpose was of determinate Individuals.

Fourthly, Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar People, zealous of good works.

1. If he did not intend to purify every man, and make them zealous of good
works (eventually,) then he intended this much more to his chosen than to
others. But, etc. Ergo, etc.

2. If he intended the separating of some as a peculiar people, from others,
then he dyed not with equal Intentions to all. But, etc Ergo, etc.

Fifthly, John 11. 51, 52. He Prophesied that Jesus should dye for that Nation,
and not for that Nation only, but that also he should gather together in one,
the Children of God that were scattered abroad. Here is expressed a peculiar
intention of gathering God's Children, which was not of others.

Object. God's Children are Believers.

Answ. 1. It seems rather, that they are called Children, because they are
decreed to be actually Children, and will be such: (and not as Grotius of them,
and of the Sheep, Joh. 10. 16. as if it were from some disposition of mind,
antecedent to Faith.)

2. However still it is Determinate Individuals, else it were indeed none at
all.

Sixthly, Acts 13. 48 And as many as were ordained to Eternal Life believed.
The wriglings and shiftings of those that would pervert this Text, and their
new devised strained expositions of the word [ Ordained] I shall not now stand
to detect and confute.

Seventhly, The instances of the Conversion of Manasseh, Paul, the Thief on the
Cross, and other particular Sinners, do plainly tell us that Faith and
Conversion proceeds from God's differencing grace, Acts 26. 16. and 22. 14.
Paul was called, because first chosen. So Romans 8. 30. Whom he predestined,
them he called, etc.

But in the Conclusion, I must say, that even in this point of notable
difference between the Remonstrants, and the Contra-remonstrants, the
difference is not so great as some imagine or pretend. It is confessed by the
understanding sort on both sides, that Christ at his death had a special
intention to bring certain individual persons to a state of Justification and
Salvation. But then they say that this was only upon the foresight of their
believing: yea, some of them say that God purposed to give the grace of Faith
to some individuals only, but they say that it was upon the foresight of their
non-resistance, or of their voluntary disposedness to receive it, or of their
right use of former preparing grace; so that the same decree, as to these
gifts, is confessed on both sides; and it cannot be denied but that the
foresight which they presuppose is from Eternity, and therefore Man's fall, or
Christ's Mediatorship; and that there is no priority or posteriority of Time
between the foreknowledge and the Decree, but only in Nature: And then it is
commonly confessed that though Knowledge and Will in Man are two things, yet in
God they are but one; and are only distinguished denominatione extrinseca by
Man for the accommodation of his narrow imperfect apprehension. Therefore
(though) I confess that a difference still remains, yet let it not be thought
to be greater than it is.

Yea more, not only many, yea, most of the Schoolmen confess an Absolute
Election to Faith, and so to Salvation, and so hold in this the same that we
do; but also many of the Jesuits, and Moderate Lutherans and Arminians hold
the same, (though not an Absolute Reprobation) which was also Augustine's,
Prosper's, and Fulgentius's Opinion. And I have elsewhere yet more contracted
this Controversy.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for John Salisbury at the Rising-Sun in Cornhil.
THe End of Doctrinal Controversies which have lately troubled the Churches by
reconciling explication without much Disputing.

The Certainty of the Worlds of Spirits, fully Evinced by unquestionable
Histories of Apparitions and Witchcrafts, Operations, Voices, etc. proving the
Immortality of Souls, the malice and misery of the Devils, and Damned, and the
blessedness of the Justified; both by Mr. Richard Baxter.

The Protestant Religion truly stated and justified by the Late Reverend Divine
Mr. Richard Baxter. Whereunto is added by way of an Epistle some account of the
Learned Author, never before published; by Mr. Matthew Sylvester, and Mr.
Daniel Williams.

The Christians Converse with God, or the insufficiency and uncertainty of
Human Friendship, and the improvement of Solitude in Converse with God; with
some of the Authors Breathings after him; by Mr. Richard Baxter, Recommended to
the Readers serious thoughts when at the House of Mourning and Retirement; by
Mr. Matthew Sylvester.

A Plea for Scripture Ordination, or, Ten Arguments from Scripture and
Antiquity, proving Ordination by Presbyters without Bishops to be valid* by J.
Owen, Minister of the Gospel.

To which is prefixed an Epistle by the Reverend Mr. Daniel Williams.

The Harmony of the Divine Attributes in the contrivance and accomplishment of
Man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ; or Discourses, wherein is showed how
the Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power, and Truth of God are glorified in
that great and blessed work; by William Bates, D. D.

The Christian Laver, or a Discourse opening the Nature of Participation with,
and Demonstrating the Necessity of Purification by Christ, by T. Cruso --

The Duty and Blessing of a Tender Conscience plainly stated, and earnestly
recommended to all that regard acceptance with God, and the prosperity of their
Souls, by the same Author.

Four Sermons on various Occasions, by the same Author.

Some Passages of the Life and Death of the Right Honorable John Earl of
Roch^ster, written by his own direction on his Deathbed; by Gilbert Lord
Bishop of Sarum.

Practical Reflections on the late Earthquakes in Jamaica, England, Sicily,
Malta, etc. Anno 1692. with a particular Historical Account of those and diverse
other Earthquakes; by John S^ower.

Earthquakes explained, and practically improved, occasioned by the Earthquake
on September the 8th, 1692. in London, many other parts in England, and
Beyond Sea; by Thomas Doolittle, M. A.

A Practical Discourse of Silence and Submission, showing that good Men should
possess their Souls in patience under the severest Providence, and
particularly in the loss of Dear Relations; Preached at St. Thoma's Hospital
Southwark, by William Hughes, Hospitaler there.

The Changeableness of this World, with respect to Nations, Families, and
particular Persons, with a practical Application thereof to the various
Conditions of this Mortal Life, in a Funeral Discourse occasioned by the Death
of Mr. Edmond Hill, who dyed April 16. 1692. by Timothy Rogers, M. A.

The Mourners Memorial in two Sermons on the death of the truly Pious Mrs.
Susanna Soame, late Wife of Bartholomew Soame of Thurlow, Esquire, who Deceased
February the 14th, 1691/2. With some account of her Life and Death, by Timothy
Wright, and Robert Fleming, Ministers of the Gospel.

Mr. William Oughtred's Key of the Mathematics, newly Translated from the best
Edition, with Notes rendering it easy and intelligible to less skillful
Readers; in which also some Problems left unanswered by the Author are
Resolved; absolutely necessary for all Gaugers, Surveyors, Gunners, Military
Officers, Mariners, etc. Recommended by Mr. E. Halley, Fellow of the Royal
Society.

Barbarian Cruelty, being a true History of the Distressed Condition of the
Christian Captives, under the Tyranny of Mully Ishmael Emperor of Morocco, etc.
by Francis Brooks.

ERRATA.
PAge 43. l. 3. r. violated. p. 45. l. 4. r. as. p. 129. l. 8. r. foreknown or.
p. 139. l. 15. r. to do so. p. 157. l. 17. del. not. p. 160. l. 5. r. lovingly.
p. 171. l. 18. r. per. p. 198. l. 7. del. the paid. p. 203. l. 29. r. summus.
p. 224. l. 33. r. conversion [convesiron.] p. 234. l. 20. r. objecto
[objectio.] p. 254. l. 6. r. I am. l. 21. del. but. and l. 22. r. But the
punishment, etc. p. 303. l. 29. r. sense are. p. 331. l. 24. r. (...). p. 338.
l. 28. r. effectum. p. 470. l. 2. r. and of the. p. 479. l. 23. r. per.


