A TRUE AND Faithful Warning UNTO The People and Inhabitants of BRISTOL, AND
Unto the Rulers, Priests and People of England, in general, that they might
prepare to meet the Lord, whose Judgments are even pouring out upon the Head of
the Transgressour.

Also some QUERIES which deeply concern all who are in Authority in the Nation,
to consider of.

With a brief Account of some Trials and sufferings, which the Author hereof
has suffered and sustained at the hands of unreasonable men in his Travel and
Pilgrimage since his youth up, until this day: Whereunto is added, a
Declaration, briefly treating of his Travels and sufferings in Rome, and the
Popes Dominions, in and for the Truth of God; which may be both seasonable and
profitable unto the unprejudiced Reader, who simply desires to know the Truth,
from the lies and slanders which are cast upon us who are called Quakers, as
having been falsely accused of being Romanists, or popishly affected.

Given forth in Newgate Prison of Bristol, by a sufferer for the Truth of God,
called CHARLES BAILY.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1663.

TO THE Upright-hearted and unprejudiced READER, In any place where this may
come.
FRIEND,
THE occasion of my writing of this which ensues is this: I being a man of
sufferings, bonds and afflictions attending me on every hand, these several
years, as one who turns not his back from the smiter, nor his check from him
that plucketh off the hair, having indeed learned of the Father, how to be a
Companion and fellow sufferer with the man of sorrow, who was well acquainted
with griefs, as being rejected of all (that was and is of this world); I say it
being so that the Lord has separated me from my mothers womb, and has made me
like minded unto the Son of his love, by revealing him in me, though few there
be which know it, which is the very cause why I have been so reproached, and
rejected on every side, some saying one thing of me, and some another; and for
the most part, the Cry of the blind worldlings and Priests is, that I am a
Jesuit, or a Popish Priest, though it is not unknown unto many thousands (in
this Nation) how that I have been a deep sufferer in Rome (my self) by the
hands of that Idolatrous Crew, who earnestly sought my life, and not only mine,
but those also who were of my persuasion; and had not the Lord stopped and
limited their bloody minds, and intents, we had never escaped their hands, for
as far as they were suffered to act they did not spare, but did hang one of
my Dear Brethren (whose name was called John Luffe), who was a
fellow-traveller with John Parrot, whom they also did use very cruelly, not
beseeming modesty to utter; the substance of which I know that the King, and
and many of the Nobles of this Nation (so called) are not ignorant of, and of
his long Imprisonment, which was near the space of 3 Years, wanting but some
few Days; for whose sake (in the bowels of Gods Everlasting love) I was drawn
from the Indies, where I was a sojourner near 14 Years, and being drawn from
thence (as I said) in the bowels of Gods Love, I had not rest in my spirit
(night nor day) until I arrived at Rome, where I was made willing to tender my
life for his, though I had never seen his face with my natural eyes; for which
cause I was (by reason of my importunity in that business to the Cardinal)
cast into prison in their Inquisition house, where I was securely kept, and
strictly examined, concerning the ground and cause of my coming there, and also
of our Practices and Principles, unto which I did give answer (in great
simplicity of heart) which would be too long here to repeat: They much
questioned who was our head, and who was the first that preached our Religion?
and whether we had any thing as from Calvin and Luthe? and how long our
Religion had been? I answered, nay, we held not, nor had not our Religion from
them, but Christ was our only teacher and head, and we are all Brethren: As for
the antiquity of our Religion, I said it was since Abel, the first that
suffered in innocence; though one of the Jesuits was so blind as to say that
Abel was before Christ, (in his answer to me before many witnesses) for which I
reproved him. This is but little, as a touch in brief, of what passed between
us, for I do believe that it took up the writing of several sheets of paper:
And when they saw that they could not ensnare me, then they went to their old
murdering question (about their Sacrament): I told them that in the Scripture
there was no such word truly translated: And when they saw how that I saw
their deceit in it, they proceeded no further (in that particular): And it
being so that this writing may happen to come into the hands of those deluded
people, I may here in brief show their deceit in that thing, it being the thing
for which many simple in heart have been barbarously murdered and massacred:
And here this bloody generation ground their deceit in this particular thing in
the Scripture, Where the word (Mystery) is spoken, they translate it Sacrament;
and when I questioned them about it, they said how that Mystery signified a
holy thing, which I proved to be false for I told them there was the Mystery of
Iniquity, which was neither Sacrament, nor holy. And after they had tried me
many ways (in that bloody City; in which time I was kept for the most part
with so little of their natural sustenance, that much notice was taken of it;
for it was so, that after I was removed from the Inquisition to the hospital of
mad men, I was put in the public view of all scorners and Jeerers, as one who
was mocked and derided of all, as they said I was a strange kind of man, come
out of England, of the Sect of the Tremolantes, that was as much as to say, of
the Sect of the Quakers, which people I did with a Cheerful heart there
acknowledge to be the only people of the Lord, which thing I can never dissent
from, whether in life or death, though reproachfully called by the name of
Sectarians (as of old the true Christians were). And after I was thus publicly
viewed and known by means of the many people that came to that place to see the
distracted men, amongst whom I was also held in Chains, I say, after this the
Lord required me to fast, as a witness against their murdering of my Brother;
for after they had murdered him they said he starved himself to death; for as
they themselves said he did, and dyed, even so the Lord caused me to do, and
live, which thing for ever stands written in the book of Heaven as a witness
against them, and all that bloody Generation wherever they are, and also
against their hypocritical Fastings (for whilst they pretend to fast, they
feast themselves with the choycest and best of the creation) which in obedience
to the Lord, I continued in about 20 days, without any natural sustenance
(except water), which did so amaze them that they themselves could not but
confess it to be more than a natural thing, seeing I was well and in good
health every way at the end of the time, which thing was so taken notice of
(amongst them) that they could not endure to detain us longer after, insomuch
that the Lord making way for us, we were released, and we took our journey
toward France, where, in the Power and Authority of God, I was drawn forth to
warn both Rulers, Priests, and People (in Town, City, and Country) until I came
through the Nation, and being ready to take shipping for England, I spoke unto
two Priests of the Popish Order, unto whom I declared (as I had done unto many
more) destruction and a final end of all Idol Priests, Idols, and Idolaters,
for which Cause I violently was halled away and committed to prison, in a Court
called Bucke De Ault, which was between Deap and Abbuilly, about 20 Leagues
from Dover, where I continued about the space of 2 Months; and after public
Examination and Trial, the Prison doors were set open, from whence I passed
to Callis, continuing still to warn the People, for which Cause I was had
before the Magistrates, and being examined by them, they let me pass away
toward Graveling, where I was at the English Nunnery, where I warned them,
though they would not let me see their face; and after some threatening I had
from their Priest, I departed from thence toward Dunkirk, where I was presently
taken up (by the Governor's Officers) and by him retained as Prisoner in his
own house until the next day he sent me away in a Friggot of the Kings for
England, alleging for his so doing, that it was because he feared I would
make a disturbance amongst the Papists, saying to this purpose, that there was
Articles of agreement betwixt them, and that they were not to be disturbed,
which thing he feared I would do; and I being landed at Deal, I passed toward
Dover, to visit my friends after this my sore trial and travel amongst the
Papists, and e're I was in that Town 24 hours, I was by the Mayor of the Town
taken from a friends house of mine, and committed to prison, for a Jesuit,
where I remained about 7 Months; and after my release from thence, I took my
journey toward London, where I had not been long, but I was apprehended by the
Magistrates of the City as they were sitting at a Court in the Old Bailey, who
espied me only as a beholder of other transactions against my Dear friends (who
are called Quakers) for which they sent for me and tendered me the Oath, making
that the same snare to ensnare me, as their manner was and is still to do to
the innocent; and from thence I was Committed to Newgate, where I was with
many more of my Brethren kept about the space of 4 Months, until I was so
weak, that I was carried out in a Chair: And upon my recovery from this
weakness, I went unto one of our public Meeting-places (near Alders-gate in
London) where I was taken again, with the Lords innocent People, under the
pretense of Plotters, which thing we were wholly clear of, for the thing then
intended or pretended against us, was a plot, which was afterward found to be
intended by a people contrary-minded unto us, both in their lives, practices,
and principles, for which some of them suffered death, who were wholly
strangers unto us, and woe unto such kind of plotters? Notwithstanding, many of
us suffered imprisonment until death, in, and about London for this Cause,
amongst whom I was a deep sufferer, until the last, though the King himself
did confess to mine and our innocence. And all this, as for mine own
particular, I could have buried in oblivion, and never have made mention of it
more, were it not for the clearing of the innocence of that Truth of God, which
I profess and live in, from the scandalous reproaches of Ishmael's stock, at
whose hands I have suffered such things, as would be both long and hard to
utter, it now being the sixth time I have been committed to Prison by the hands
of unreasonable men (since I have returned from Rome); once at Dover, and four
times at London: All which sufferings and imprisonments, nothing was, or ever
could be proved against me, as the breach of any Law, save that by which men's
Consciences are restrained from worshipping of God, according to the persuasion
of his Spirit (in their own Consciences), and also because I would not break
Christ's Commands, who says, Swear not at all, to obey the Commands of men (to
swear): And though for those two things I have so suffered, I have this day a
Conscience void of offense toward all men, who are of honest hearts, and am
clear also in the sight of God concerning them both, and am at this instant
Justified in his sight; and he knows how that I seek the good of all men,
though an open enemy to all deceitful works, hireling Priests, and Deceivers,
upon the face of the Earth, whether in Pope or Prelate, or what sort, degree,
or denomination soever.

I had not been 3 Weeks released out of London Prison of Bridewell before I
was committed here: In which Prison I was committed by Richard Brown, only for
speaking a few words in the street, because they did hinder me and my friends
of going into our hired house, I being committed to the Counter but the Week
before, for the same Cause, and released about the middle of the week by
Robinson, then Mayor of London, and but 3 days before that, I was released out
of Newgate upon the death of Dear E. B. with whom I was a prisoner several
Months (as both in one Prison) though not in one Room, but a little time
before his death, in which the Lord did Everlastingly Crown him with Glory,
Honor, and blessing: For this I shall leave upon record concerning him, that
as he was honorable in his life, so he was in death, and his seed shall praise
his noble Acts for ever, in which he was Renowned.

And now upon my release in London, I took my journey toward this City, where
I had been but a short time, to the number of two or three days, before I was
cast in Bonds here, only for speaking to two Priests of this City, telling them
the blind led the blind, and both would fall into the ditch; and as it happened
one of them was blind, which was more than I know, for I had never seen their
faces before: but these men being guilty inwardly of the Charge, soon proved
it by their fruits and actions, who presently caused me by reason of their
complaints, to be had before their Rulers, who being willing and ready to
satisfy their malicious desires, did soon tender me the Oath, as there being
not any seeming just cause in the other to cast me into Prison, where I am at
present a sufferer in the patience and good will of God.

And thus with as much brevity as I could, have I declared something of the
hard measure which I have sustained and received at the hands of unreasonable
men (in, and about 3 years time since I Landed at this City), upon my return
from Virginia, after my sore Captivity there; and truly had it not been by
reason of the many and various reports which are concerning me (amongst many),
I know I should have been still willing to have concealed the grief of all this
within my own bowels, yea, and notwithstanding all these things (besides the
Lord alone, which might have induced me to this matter) I should certainly have
concealed it. And now after all this, in which, and through which the Lord has
tried my poor soul by the common enemy, if he should try me at or by the hands
of dearest friends, as Job was, shall I be angry with him, or repine at it? God
forbid; in whose good will I rest, until he arise and plead my Cause.

Charles Bailey.
Written in Newgate Prison in Bristol the 13 of the 3 Month, 1663
A true and faithful Relation of some of the sufferings, trials, sorrows, and
travels of the Seed and Spirit of God for the creature, and now of the
creature, in with the same Seed and Spirit (manifest through an earthen vessel)
known by name C.B.
SUrely had I the Tongue of the Eloquent, and the Pen of a ready Writer, it
would be hard for me to declare the grievousness of my hard travels and sorrow,
which I have undergone, since I was but 12 or 13 years of Age, in which time my
deep travel and sorrow began; it being so that in my tender years I had been
tenderly brought up (about the Court of England), my natural Parents belonging
thereunto, who were Roman Catholics, in which Religion they carefully brought
me up, sparing neither cost nor pains, for any thing which might tend unto my
edification, and bringing me up in that way: But my God intending to make me an
instrument in his hand, for his own work, did raise up something in my soul (of
a child) which was of himself, which caused a secret dislike (in my heart) of
that Idolatrous way of worship, in so much that I could never heartily embrace
the same; which thing has caused tears to be shed for me (by my own friends,
then, who dearly and tenderly loved me according unto the love as Parents bear
unto their Children;) and it being so, it raised a great discontent sometimes
in them to arise toward me, which was the first ground and original cause of
my sorrow, though I did not know what that was in my self, which caused me for
to dislike it, both in way and worship, which since I found to be the light and
gift of Gods grace in my soul, which was nigh me, and in me, at all times, and
places, a sure and living Witness against all sin and evil whatsoever.

And from that time forwards, I was ever seeking for to separate my self from
my natural Parents; and the wars coming on in England, did enlarge my
opportunity, for to fulfill my intended purpose, it being so that most of the
Court Officers were dismissed of their outward beings (in and about London,)
where I had my natural birth and bringing up, until about the Age before
mentioned; and it being so, I did begin to wander about, not being kept at
School, nor at Board, as formerly I had been: But my Parents being willing to
have me to their own natural Country (which was France,) I passed thither with
one who was Extraordinary Ambassador sent from the King of France (called the
Prince Deicourt,) who loved me, and kept me by him some time for his
Interpreter, whilst he was in England; but still something there was in me,
which could not be satisfied to feed at the Table of Princes, nor to be in
their love and favor (without the love and favor of God), which made me still
in a restless condition, which caused me for to return out of France, without
the consent and knowledge of my outward friends, or relations: And coming to
England, at Graves-end, as I was intending to pass for London, I met with one
Brad-street, who was commonly called a Spirit, for he was one of those who did
entice Children and People away for Virginia; he fell into discourse with me,
and I being tender in years, he did cunningly get me on Board of a Ship, which
was then there riding ready for to go to those parts, and I being once on
Board, could never get on Shore, until I came to America, where I was sold as
a bond-slave for seven years, in which time it would be too hard for me to
show (in every particular) the hardship and misery that I did undergo (in that
time of hunger, cold, and nakedness, beatings, whippings, and the like;) for
many times was I stripped naked, and tied up by the hand, and whipped; and made
to go barefoot, and bare-legged in cold and frosty weather, and hardly clothes
to cover my nakedness, besides the soar and grievous labor which I was
continually kept at, during which time my poor soul would be often bemoaning it
self (every way) concerning my soar captivity and misery; and something I can
indeed say did in secret answer and refresh my tender soul; in the feeling of
which, I could in truth of heart say, I did forgive my then persecutors: And
when grief would be ready to swallow me up, I would consider how that that
which did then befall me, was surely for my good; and would rather judge my
self than others, believing that I indeed did deserve it, and much more for my
disobedience, though of a truth it was very grievous and hard for me to beat,
as to the very natural, what I did, and surely had not the secret hand of Gods
love upheld me, I could never have supported my burden, there being such an
alteration with me, when I came to eat my bread in the Ash heap, whenas before
I had been in the presence of Princes; and also the alteration both of food and
every thing else; for instead of a well stringed Lute in my hand, I had hard
labor, and my daily exerci e was beyond the common manner of Slaves, for mine
was often night and day: I say, had it not been the very hand and love of God
which had supported me, my very outward man would have been laid in the dust,
as several of my then fellow Laborers were, in a most sad and deplorable
condition, which thing I desire may not be laid to their charge, who were the
Authors of it; I say, the Lord forgive them for that which they did to them and
me, for I am sure the poor creatures had better have been hanged, than to have
suffered the death and misery they did; which thing I should not in this place
have spoken, were it not so, but that some of these Papers might come to the
hands of those who may in like manner be inflictors of such misery upon others,
that so if there be but any remorse, or place of repentance left in them, that
they may yet repent of their evil, for it is very great; for though the man
whom I served was approved, and received a Member of an Independent Church, in
those parts, yet he was unconverted, as to the Lord; which showed their light
and discerning but little worth; for indeed, I never saw any change or
alteration in the man at all. But I shall return unto the thing intended by me,
which is to speak of the goodness and love of God unto my soul, that so all
those who might be like-minded with me, might not come to despair in any
condition whatsoever they may fall into; if they do but love and fear the Lord,
he will bring them out of the sixth trouble, and also the seventh in the end:
For when I was out or this hard servitude, I could not for all that return to,
or own that dark and devilish worship, whatever did become of me; for then I
was come to a riper understanding, and growth, both in years and knowledge, in
which I saw and confessed unto a hand of Divine Justice against that people,
and also to a hand of Divine providence in bringing me there, where I heard and
understood both outward and inward, that the Sword of the Lord was drawn
against the wicked, in this Nation of England; and also I did observe in that
day, how that the Parliament party did, and would most of all prevail, because
that there was something raised up in them, against the gross Popery and
Idolatry, and wickedness which was then on soot in the Nation, which thing was
the cause I did indeed mostly affect them then, beyond any other people, though
they were called Puritans in derision. But in a short time the chiefest of
those people, who were amongst us, lost their first integrity, soon especially,
when the Lords hand had given their Brethren great rest and victory from their
enemies, and so soon turned that little liberty they had gotten to a wrong end,
and made use of it as an occasion to the flesh, by which means they became as
much in bondage as ever, every one seeking his own, and not another good;
which thing I did in that day observe, though few knew that it was so with me,
but outwardly I did in that day frequent, and indeed loved those most who were
the most honest amongst men: But it being so in the main, that nothing but
rioting, drinking, singing, and dancing was amongst the best of men, I knew not
what to do, but to be one of them, which I judged better of the two, than to
return unto the Romish stuff, for my very soul did abhor it; therefore I did
rather choose to labor with my hands, and so get my bread with painfulnesse,
than to return or make my self known unto my nearest relations any way, for I
said in my heart, their sorrow is over concerning me. But in the midst of all
this, my soul in secret did mourn after a holy life of love, but could not see
it born up in any living, amongst whom I did converse, or had any thing to do
with. And as in relation to my own condition, I did often lament it, in secret,
and would often say unto the Lord, Have thou created me thus to destroy me? for
I saw how that I was still ingrievous bondage unto sin, and lead thereunto at
the Devils will, and I felt in my self how that the wages of sin was death,
because of the terrors of the Lord that came upon my soul, by the reason of
it, and whilst that I was in this state, my grief was more than could be
uttered, or indeed seen by any; for I would often seem to do away sorrow with
laughter, lightness and vanity; yet still in the very midst of all this, I
continued seeking in my heart a man of love, or a people in whom one might put
confidence, which thing I was drawn unto, (by the good, which was of God in my
own heart;) and as God did raise it me, so in the end he did answer it to me
outwardly, by sending one of his dear servants into those parts, whose name was
Elizabeth Harris, who soon answered that which was breathing after God in me;
by which means I came with many more, to be informed in the way and truth of
God, having a seal in my heart and soul of the truth of her message, which
indeed I had long waited for: And then when I had found this beloved life and
people, I was like a man over-joyed in my heart; not only because that I heard
that God had raised up such a people in England, but also because I saw the
sudden fruits and effects of it, both in my own heart, and in others, insomuch
that in a short time we became all to be as one entire family of love, and were
drawn together in his life, (which was his light in us) to wait upon him in the
stillnesse and quietness of our spirits, like so many people which desired
nothing but the pure teachings of Gods Spirit, in which we were often refreshed
together, and one in another: And when this I had found, and clearly
understood, how that that which judged me, and condemned my soul for sin, from
my youth up until that day, I say, when I came to see that this was the very
way to God, I was as a man that had found that which his soul loved; and then
had I had ten thousand Crowns, I could have laid them all down at the feet of
them, who then went forth to declare such good and glad tidings of peace, and
good will, which was freely extended unto all the Sons of men; then happy man
was I, if that I could but have served, or have been any way serviceable unto
such of those who went forth to declare, who were ministering servants in the
hand of the Lord to us, whose pure life I loved and honored in them above all;
and then I was not only made willing to have forsaken father, or mother, and
all outward Inheritance and favor of men, but also to have laid down my life
for the Lords sake; such was the love that was raised in me, that I had rather
have been a Prisoner with the deepest sufferer in the greatest sorrow, and
counted it more happiness so to be, than with the Princes of this world in
their greatest joy and dignity: And this was of the Lords own begetting in me,
though few saw it then. And this I can tell thee Reader (whoever thou art) by
true experience, that if thou find but such a thing in thee, which brings a
remorse upon thee by reason of sin, and draws thy heart into tenderness and
pity unto the oppression and captivity which is upon all creatures, which they
lie under by reason of sin, in which, and by which men are degenerated from
God; I say, that if thou find and feel but such a thing in thee, prize it above
all, for it is of the very life and restorer of all things, by which Moses was
acted in the days of old, when he did forsake the pleasure of sin for a
season, and chose rather to partake of the suffering and afflictions of the
afflicted, than to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter; for it was that in
which he wrought the wonders of God, and will also do the like in thee, if thou
obey love and follow it, it will be thy guide, leader, and preserver, and
teacher, in all states and conditions whatsoever, through which, and in which
thy immortal soul will come to be saved, and so satisfied; for I will tell thee
plainly, that except man comes to be acquainted with something in himself,
which is more glorious than all visible and transitory things without him, he
can never come to forsake all for the Lords sake: For this I have seen and
experienced through deep travail and sorrow, how that if I had not had
something in my own self, which was more desirable and amiable than all
things, I could never have been made willing to have forsaken all things else
besides it; but enjoying the life and presence of my Creator, in my own
particular, all was well enough without me, though in hunger, in cold, and in
nakedness, or prisons, or bannishment, or travails, both by Sea or Land, I did
still find satisfaction and refreshment in the enjoyment of Gods presence; and
this I say not because another has said it, but because my soul has found it
so in the time of need, even since the time that my God separated me outwardly
from my Brethren in Virginia, who were more near and dear to me than all my
outward kindred, because they were such as did the will of my father; since
which time something of my travail may be seen in my following discourse, very
briefly of my travels outward, but of my travels and sorrow inward, in all
those travels and prisons, I shall leave it to the upright in heart to feel;
for truly I may in the truth of God say, how that the days of my sorrow and
fastings, passed the number of my remembrance: Besides the many assaults which
the cursed Popish spirit of Enchantments, Sorcery, Witchcraft, did make against
me, to destroy me, cannot be given to be understood by Tongue, Pen, Ink, nor
Paper, but by those who have undergone the like trial with me; for this I
testify in the Lord, and shall leave upon record, under my hand, how that a
deeper spirit of Necromancy and deceit, is not upon the face of the whole earth
to be found, so deep in working in the mystery of iniquity, as it is amongst
them; and this is the testimony which I give for the Lord God of life against
them, which shall stand for ever. For as to my very outward, they have sought
my death and destruction by this means; and I have been almost strangled in the
night and day season, by that cursed spirit of Witchcraft, which has sought to
stop my mouth, thereby to have deprived me of my natural breath, which thing
they would certainly have done, had not the Lord preserved me, and rebuked
them; for they have often come into my Prison, with many hundred sorts of
shapes and likenesses, and have sought every way of Enchantment against me, and
had it been so, that it had been possible for them to have prospered against
me, to the utter destruction of me; they would have done it; but when the Lord
had suffered them every way to try me, then he wholly rebuked them, and sent
his ministering Angels to comfort me every way, as those poisoning spirits had
every way assaulted me; in which day of his everlasting love, he sealed up my
soul in his everlasting Covenant of love for ever, for which cause I cannot
forsake the Lord, whatever betides me. Now though trials remain yet on every
hand, yet my God knows I can never leave him, nor forsake him, nor decline
from his living testimony in my heart, neither in life, nor death, but must and
shall say unto all, love, fear, dread, and honor, and obey the Lord above all,
who is worthy to have for ever, all the glory, honor, and praise, even him who
is God over all, blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

And this is the end why my God separated me from my fathers house, in the time
of my infancy, that I should be a true and faithful witness against that
spirit of persecution, murder, and envy, in whomsoever it be. And seeing the
Lord has thus long preserved me out of many eminent dangers, I know he will do
the like for ever, as he has spoken it unto my soul, that he will never suffer
his faithfulness to fail concerning me; therefore I shall never be moved; and
if it were not so, my soul would long ere now have sunk under the floods of
deep sorrow, which yet come upon me without ceasing, rolling over my head; the
Lord rebuke them, as I know he will do, for his name sake, even he who has
heard me out of the Whales belly, and answered my request once and again in the
day of need, for which, I say, my soul magnify, bless, and praise his holy
name for ever.

Charles Bailey.
Written in Newgate Prison in Bristol, the first of the third Month. 1663.
AND now the Magistrates of this Nation (through whose hands I have passed thus
from Prison to Prison) may see what they have done, if it be so they are not
yet quite heartblind, in the persecuting of a man so unreasonably as they have
done, who has been so far drawn forth as in relation to the very natural part,
as to render his life and body for one of their natural Country men, who had
been in long captivity in Rome, out of their Nation (even one, who was not
himself a natural English man) though born in it; I say, surely following
Generations might well say, the Heathen in America would not have thus rewarded
a man, upon the return of such a service as this done for any one of their
Nation, I am sure they would not have done it: And what right can any man
expect to have at, or of the hands of such men, who are thus lead by a spirit
of wrong judgment, as for to persecute in such a nature their friend, in the
stead of their enemy, especially such a man as has in this sort jeoparded his
life, to witness against the Popish Religion, and not only so, but has
undergone all and much more than the aforesaid miseries, rather than to embrace
and own it. Of these things, and concerning these things, I shall in the
uprightness of my heart, leave it and commit it unto God, the judge of all,
for to judge of this matter between us.

A true and faithful Warning unto the Inhabitants of Bristol; as a loving
visitation of Gods tender love unto them, that thereby they may take warning,
and turn from the evil of their ways, and repent with speed.
FOr the Sword of the Lord is already drawn over the City, and is made ready
for the shedding of much blood, and for hewing of the mighty in pieces. And
this is the Word of the Lord unto you all, both Rulers, Priests, and People, of
what sort or degree soever; and if it were so, that Abraham, Lot, Job, and
Noah, were in the City, yet should not they deliver it from the fierce stroke
of the Almighty, which is ready to come upon it by reason of sin and
transgression, so much the more, says the Lord God of vengeance, because my
glorious truth has been so much declared in it, above and beyond any other of
its neighboring places; for thus says the Lord God of Hosts, the mighty and
terrible one, If the mighty works had been done in Sodom and Gomorrah, which
have been done in thee, O Bristot, they might surely have repented. But ye have
surely slighted it, and counted it as a thing of naught; you are even fled as
it were upon Horses into your dark Egyptian bondage, and relics of idolatry
and confusion, and there as it were settled your selves upon the old lees of
Popery, which my hand is stretched out against, and shall never more be
withdrawn, until I have cut off, and quite rooted it out of all Nations, both
root and branch; and they who go about to hold it up, or any part or parcel
thereof, such shall be the object of my fierce anger, that both them and it
shall surely fall together, says the Lord of Hosts. And forasmuch as ye do
with outstretched necks, resist my truth, and say in your heart, we will not
that this thing rule over us; therefore shall the sword of my anger bring you
down, if you continue still in your gainsayings against me; and whatever is
high and exalted in this City, shall be bowed down; the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it, and it shall shortly come to pass, who will not that any thing
reign but his son alone, whom all the Angels must worship, and every knee be
made to bow, and every tongue to confess unto him for ever, and own his
righteous judgments, which shall come upon the high, lofty, and proud, and
rebellious, who forget God.

Therefore haste, haste, haste, with speed, and repent, and remember Nineveh,
who repented at the preaching of Jonas; and a greater than Jonas is here, and
has been here in many Prophets, to warn thee, and as sure as God lives, if ye
take not warning hereby, and repent, ye shall shortly know, unto your sorrow,
that a Prophet has been amongst you sent of the Lord, who sought not yours but
you, that your immortal souls might come to be saved from the wrath,
tribulation, and anguish, which is ready to come down from the righteous Judge
of all, upon you.

O People Consider whilst you have time, what a sad deplorable thing will it
be, when ye shall be likened to a generation of Vipers and dead Adders, saying,
We have piped unto you, and yet have not danced, we have mourned unto you, and
you have no lamented; as those who would not hearken to the voice of the
Charmer, though he charms never so wisely: For assuredly, if ye still slight
Gods tender visitation of love unto you, many may take up a lamentation for
you, but none will be able to help you: As the Lamb of God, who came to lay
down his life for the sins of the whole world; yet because his love was
rejected, slighted, and not received; the day came that he took up a
lamentation over that place, people and City, which he would have gathered up
into his arms of love, whose tender bowels of pity and compassion, was moved
for them, saying, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee,
as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not. Because they
had slighted the day of small things, and would have none of his reproofs;
therefore was the things which belonged to their everlasting peace hid from
their eyes: So likewise will it be with you, oh Inhabitants of Bristol; many in
thee whose loves are unfeigned in the lowly life of the Lamb, and desired
nothing but thy everlasting peace and welfare; such I say in like manner will
come to take up a Lamentation in thee, and for thee, saying, Oh foolish and
unwise people, had you but understood the things which belonged to your
everlasting peace, before they came thus to be hid from your eyes, surely ye
would have been a blessed people for ever; but now instead of it, weeping and
howling will for ever be your portion. Oh people for ever consider this thing
before it come upon you, whilst yet the door of mercy is set open for you, and
a hand freely stretched forth out of the tender bosom of God, to gather you up
into his bosom, which is ready open to receive you; but if ye refuse his
loving kindness and his mercies, then hell fire will open her mouth wide for
you, into which you will all be cast with all the workers of iniquity, there to
be tormented with the Devil and his Angels for evermore: And this will be your
portion on eithe hand; if ye cleave unto the good which God by his Son has
placed by his own Light in your hearts, then everlastingly happy will ye be,
and all those who come to witness an inheritance with the Saints in light:

But if you hate the good, and love the evil, which the Prince of darkness
has put in you, then ye choose unto your selves death instead of life, and the
Prince of the power of the Air will be your God and King, instead of the Prince
of peace, and so sad and lamentable will be your condition, who have had as
much, if not more of the loving Visitation of Gods love in his dear and
precious Servants, than any people or Nation whatsoever; for have ye not had
line upon line, and precept upon precept? the Lord sending his Prophets rising
up early; yea it might be said early, forasmuch that the Lords love reached
unto you, as it were in the very morning and breaking forth of his glorious Sun
of righteousness, after this long and dark woeful night of Apostasy and
confusion, which has over-shadowed all Nations and people of the earth, which
shall never set more until it has exspelled all the darkness forevermore never
to rise; and sending yet still, and yet for all this you yet remain in your
sins, even you who are again turned to your old hireling Priests, which the
Land had as it were vomited up long ago, because of their unprofitableness;
for in simplicity of heart consider, were not they unprofitable unto you, and
all people over whom they were? and did they not find you in your sins, and did
they not leave you there? and now upon their return have they not found you the
same still? And what think you of this? is it not high time for you to be
awakened and look about you, seeing the day is so far spent of your lives, and
you know not how soon the Lord may call for your breath out of your nostrils?
and what can ye in righteousness think will become of you, seeing the Scripture
says, As the Tree falls, so it lies: and There is no Repentance in the Grave:
and If ye dye in your sins, where I go ye cannot come, says Christ? And if ye
do but confess him to be a man of truth, and these sayings true, then ye may
soon pass the sentence of eternal condemnation in your selves, seeing that
tribulation and anguish is to come upon every soul of man that does evil, even
to Jew as well as Gentile. And the Apostle in plain words, without wresting,
says, Nothing that works abomination, or makes a lie, must enter into the
holy City. And Paul says, Let no man deceive you with vain words, for such as
ye sow, such shall ye reap. Now see if your Priests be not the very men, who
are deceiving you with vain words, who tell you that you can never be freed
from sin, yet say, it shall go well with you. They call you good Christians,
though ye do bring forth the Devils work: Or which of you in or amongst you,
will deny to partake of that which they call the Seal of the Covenant, though
they are never so wicked and ungodly in all their words and actions: Surely,
surely, the Lord is highly displeased with these things. Therefore is this
Warning sent amongst you that you may come away from such a devilish
Priesthood, as preaches up sin unto you for term of life, that is till ye can
sin no longer: Surely, they who made a Covenant with Hell and Death in the
days of old, were never more lead into the Mystery of iniquity, than these.

And thus the Devil has his Kingdom by consent both of Priests and people.
Oh, horrid wickedness is this, that ever men should thus sell themselves unto
the Devil for dishonest gain, and filthy lucres sake, to preach up sin unto
people; these are they who trample upon the Blood of the Covenant, and say in
effect that its uneffectual and unsufficient to purge the creature from all sin
and uncleanness; but such, people, ye must cease from; for they who were real
and true Ministers of Christ, said, The wages of sin is death, therefore
labored to bring people therefrom; whose Ministry was powerful and effectual
enough in that work to accomplish the same: For Paul when he writ to the
Romans, amongst whom he had labored to turn them from darkness to light, and
such came to be turned from Satan's power to Gods, by whose power they came to
be redeemed and made free from sin, and so became Gods children: And this was
the fruits and effects of those who were sent of God, and were not hirelings,
for such run and are not sent; therefore, says the Prophet, they profit not
the people at all, no more than yours do now; for I say, as you love and prize
the salvation and redemption of your immortal souls, consider these things: Is
the wicked man returned from his naughtiness amongst you? is not a Liar a Liar
still, a Swearer a Swearer still, and so likewise all others whatsoever? And if
any should go to your Priests to be eased of his burden, which come upon him by
reason of sin, what ease can he have seeing his Priest is a sinner as well as
himself, if not a worse, and in effect will tell him he cannot be without sin
while he is in the body of flesh; and so by this means, as you were born and
conceived in sin, so ye live, and so ye dye. And this is the fruits of your
Ministry, and yet you have the liberty of the reading of the Scriptures, which
says and shows how that the true Christians are to be redeemed from their
vain conversations, and did witness a purging and redemption therefrom, not
with the blood of Bulls and Goats, but with the Blood of the Lamb of God, which
takes away the sins of the World: Mark that, people, and see if ye are not
wholly strangers to this thing, and to the very end and coming of Christ, who
was made manifest in flesh, to the end that the righteousness of the Law might
be fulfilled in all those who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit,
and to such there is no condemnation: But unto you who are following your blind
guides, and are strangers unto this thing, condemnation from the righteous God
the Judge of all, will for evermore be seated upon your heads, except ye repent,
even on you who are strangers unto the Spirit of God, and are walking in the
flesh, and are fulfilling the lusts thereof, and are resolved so to do until
your dying day; in which thing I warn you to repent in Gods pure power and
dread, and turn unto the Lord God by forsaking the evil of your ways; which if
you do not, as sure as God has set Sodom for an example of his eternal wrath
and Judgment, so sure will this come upon you if you slight this the day of
your visitation, which is now over your heads, I say, repent before it fall
upon you, and the night overtake you, in which no man can work. And this is a
true and faithful warning unto you all from the Lord God of love, who desires
not the death of a sinner, but that he would turn from his evil ways and live;
and if you do this, then blessed will you be for ever, but if ye refuse, then
will you be left without excuse, and I shall be clear of your blood before the
Lord, who required this of me to do, and to say unto you; which in faithfulness
I have done without respect unto persons, time or place, as the free Spirit of
God has given me utterance thereunto, without hatred or dissimulation at all:
Therefore live or dye, my peace is and will be with the Lord for ever.

And now if any should say amongst you, What shall I do to be saved? Why unto
such I say in the tender bowels of Gods love, turn unto the Light of Gods own
son, which shines in your darkness, even in your dark hearts, and receive it,
love it, follow it, and obey it with all your soul, with all your mind, and
with all your strength, and then power will be ministered unto you, whereby ye
will become the Sons of God, and to be born of him, which birth sins not;
but in it there is power over the man of sin, which has born rule in the first
birth, which was according to the flesh, in which none can please God,
forasmuch as it lusts against the Spirit continually, and will do until it be
wholly crucified with the lusts and affections thereof: If ye come to receive
the Gift of Gods Grace and Spirit in your own hearts, a measure of which is
given every one to profit withal; walking in it, and dwelling in it, ye will
come to be led into all truth, and will come to deny all that is of the Devil
and his works; which is the other of your sad states and conditions, ever
saying, as you are indeed, unprofitable servants, leaving undone those things
which you ought to have done, and doing those things which you ought not to do;
which is a state far different from a true Christian state, even as far as
light is from darkness; for the true Christians they followed Christ, heard his
voice, and kept his Commandments, because they loved him, and not their own
lives.

And again, if any should say, I would willingly do this, that my soul might be
saved from eternal condemnation, which I do believe will come upon all those
who live in their sins and dye in them; but alas I have not power to do it, I
am overcome and accustomed unto evil. Unto such in much tenderness of heart, I
say, if thou love the Light, and take up thy daily cross therein, thou will
assuredly find power given thee to do the Will of God, in the doing of which
thy soul will come to be sanctified, and thy body purified and made fit for the
Masters use, who will come in and live with thee, and make his abode there for
ever; but if thou take not up the daily cross, thou can not be a Disciple of
Christ, profess what thou will.

But then if thou should not mind the Light of Christ, which condemns thee
for sin, and has so done from thy youth up, and should enter into the
reasoning part with flesh and blood, and say, what must I now forsake all my
worldly delights, and run the hazard also of forsaking my familiar friends,
kinsfolks, and acquaintance, and all my Parish Priests, and be mocked and
denied of all? and such like things as these I know will get into thy fleshly
mind, all which I shall in a few words and in simplicity of heart answer: And
first, as concerning thy forsaking of all, which is manifest to be the very way
and first step onwards toward thy souls peace and rest, for He that forsakes
not all, and hates not all, even to the very life, he can never purchase unto
himself the pearl which Christ speaks of, which was hid in the field. And as
for the worldly delights, thereby the innocent (which should give thee life and
strength against sin) comes to be crucified; but as I said, if the cross thou
come to know, the world and its delights will come to be crucified unto thee,
and thee unto it all, and so the Resurrection of the Just will come to be
witnessed, which before in thee was crucified by reason of thy worldly
delights, sins, lusts and transgressions. And as for the forsaking of thy
Parish Priests, it is high time for thee to forsake them, seeing that little
profit thou have had by them; for if thou come to the Law of God in thy own
heart, then thou will come to know the Lord, who will teach thee to profit, and
to walk in the way of peace and holiness, which the hireling Priests know not,
seeing they say that men cannot live without sin, and yet say, it shall go well
with them, contrary unto the Prophet of God, who said, There is no peace to the
wicked.

Finally, I say unto you all who in any measure desire salvation to your
immortal souls, and to be disentangled from the Devils snares, father and
mother, house and land, wife and children, thou must not at all count loss;
for if thou should loose them for the Lords sake, thou shall come to receive
an hundredfold in this life, and in the world to come life everlasting. And
this will be the portion of all those that follow the Lamb through many
tribulations, into the everlasting Kingdom, peace, joy, holiness, and rest
for ever; and such know the vanity and emptiness of your water-dippings of
Infants, Bells, Organs, and Surplices, and such foolish Popish Inventions, to be
but the mere Cheats and Traditions of men; and also such will come to know the
true spiritual Faith, Hope, and Baptism of Christ, which washes, purges, and
makes clean the soul, and gives Victory over Sin, Hell, Death, and the Grave,
and him to be the only Lord in all, and over all, blessed for ever, in God the
Father and Fountain of all good, with a sincere heart to be kept and preserved
in God, the Life and Father of all good, who is blessed, feared and honored of
all who keep in the word of his patience, and sit down in the Lambs Throne of
life and comfort for ever, world without end. Amen.

Given forth through a sufferer for the truth of God in Newgate Prison of
Bristol, the 30. of the 3. Month. 1663. Charles Baily.

A seasonable Word of Exhortation (by way of Advice) to all the National
Priests (in this Kingdom of England), but most especially to them in and of
Bristol; wherein their unjust proceedings and violence (under a pretense of
Ministry of Christ) is sharply reproved, yet in a mild and moderate frame and
temper of spirit. Also, That they may come to a further trial of their
standing, they are required to answer those Queries following (to Magistrates
and People.)
YOU Priests of Bristol and England, the word of the Lord is to you, and his
Controversy is against you, and the Rod of his anger shall bring you down;
weeping and howling shall be heard in your Assemblies, and Satyrs shall
possess your High Places, and the skreeking of Night birds shall be heard
there: Your Prayers and your Oaths are alike unto the Lord; and your Fasts and
your Gluttony is all one in his sight; ye cause the people to err by your
lies, and by your lightness; and following your steps, they are led into
confusion, who like a bird are taken in your crafty snares of deceitfulness:
The word of the Lord you have not to preach to the people, but the conceptions
of your own minds and imaginations, gathered out of that which other men have
said; some of which was spoken by the Spirit of the Lord, and some is but the
ill-shapen brats of your own minds, and of others who were of your own
Generation, who stole the word from their neighbor, and then brought it forth
in a confused mixture and wisdom, all which you compound together, and mix
with your own deceit, to fill up an hours talk with, and then like a company of
Blasphemers, ye come out into your public Marketplaces, where (by the means
of your instigations) most of the people are constrained to come, and buy this
your ware; and then you say unto the people, Hear the word of the Lord, whereas
ye, nor your hearers do not know him, but have in your vain imaginations
limited him above the Skies, like an old man. -- O ye deceivers, and
blasphemers, the Lord will arise like a man of War, and bring you down, and
will cast you headlong into Tophet, where the breath of his nostrils shall for
ever kindle up the unquenchable fire of your endless torments, except ye
repent with speed; the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, and it shall surely
and shortly come to pass, in a time and hour when you shall not be aware of
it; for as the lightning comes from the East, and swiftly passes unto the
West, so shall the day of your destruction be, except you amend: Amend
therefore, and cease preaching unto others, until you come your selves to be
converted, and changed from that corrupt cursed nature of wickedness, which
lodges within you. O ye hypocrites, are you not, or at least may you not be
ashamed to get into a high place amongst people, and speak against sin and
iniquity, seeing you your selves are not purged from it? May not that saying be
justly turned upon you, which the Apostle Paul spoke, saying, Inexcusable art
thou O man, whosoever thou art, that judges, seeing that no man was to judge
another, whilst he himself was guilty of the same thing. O ye deceitful
workers, first pluck out the beam out of your own eyes, and then may you come
for to see the clearer in others conditions: Until then this is a sure and
certain warning unto you all, to cease from the evil of your ways, and repent;
for as sure as God lives, if you go on in your stiff-neckednesse, and
hard-heartednesse against him, his righteous Judgments will assuredly overtake
you. And this I have written as one that fears the Lord, and trembles at his
word; in which I cannot respect the persons of any, but must reprove the sins
of all, whether in Kings, Princes, Rulers, or Judges, Priests or people, (of
what sort or condition soever) that thereby they may take warning, and repent.

O England, England, many have been thy Warnings, and precious have been thy
Visitations, to those who have prized them; and glorious has been the day of
Gods love, unto those Who have believed our report, and to whom the Arm of the
Lord has been revealed; which has led them out of darkness into his
marvelous light, therein to live and to walk safe, out of the snare of the
crafty Fowler, hireling Priest, and deceivers, which thou, O England, have
embraced as it were anew (after thy long day of blood, sorrow, and anguish.) O
consider this, O ye Heads of the Nation; to what end and purpose did the Lord
empty the power of this Nation, from vessel to vessel, and from man to man? was
it, think ye, that it should settle again in this bogg and relics of confused
Popery? nay, surely nay, this was not the end of the Lord concerning thee; but
his end and purpose concerning thee, was and is, that the Son of his own bosom
should be raised over all (in thee to Reign) as he has appointed and decreed,
which decree is impossible to be altered or changed, but shall and must be
accomplished, not only in this Nation, but over all Nations; and in all Nations
and people of the earth, shall this his glorious work be completely finished;
for he has sworn by himself, saying, it shall be so, that he shall reign over
all the Kingdoms of the world, forasmuch as I have appointed him to be heir of
all things, both in Heaven and Earth; They that have an ear, let them hear; and
blessed will be that eye which sees, and that heart which understands the
things which belong to their everlasting peace, before they be hid from their
eyes, and there be no place found for their Repentance.

And this I shall further say (in the Spirit of the Lord) concerning thee O
England; what the Lord intended should be thy lot, 'twas that thou should be
the first fruit unto God in this latter day, that so thou might become a
glorious example unto other Nations, giving light unto them who yet sat in
darkness, and in the Region and shadow of death, that such, I say, might have
received light from the glorious Sun of righteousness, which the Lord raised
in the midst of thee (in thousands); and this the Lord has already in measure
done, Glory be to him for ever.

O! might not my soul take up a Lamentation over a foolish people, saying, O
how are your hearts become blind, O inhabitants of England? in whom the voice of
the Turtle is plentifully heard, as in the Spring time, after this dry long
Winter, which has been in thee (amongst whom it is on every hand said and
confessed, that the Lord lives, who has brought his Seed out of the North,
and caused the beauty of its life to appear, surpassing the glory and beauty of
this present world): And plentifully has the word of his own life been
declared, and is still spoken forth in thee; and yet for all this, like an
enchanted people, ye turn your backs upon it, and fly unto your hireling
Priests, whereas thou might have received the word of the Lord plentifully
and freely, at the hands of his precious Servants; then would thou have no
need of the teachings of men, nor to have gone into the Idol Masse-houses,
there to have taken the words of David and others, to have sung; but in the
Spirit of the Lord ye would have all been gathered by it, through which ye
would have been ever praising the Lord (in the land of the living): Neither
would you have needed to have gone to your Priests, to have taken bread and
wine at their polluted hands, which feeds but the natural, and will corrupt;
but you would have been come to the High Priest, and Shepherd of your souls,
and have received living bread at his hands, as your daily food and
nourishment. O England, might not well my soul say, that thou have changed
beauty for ashes, and have chosen chaff instead of wheat? so that instead of
well set hair, thou have baldness, for if it were not so, thou neededst not to
have gone to the Idol-houses now, for to hear a compounded parcel of words,
called Common Prayer, read by a wicked man; but instead thereof thou had been
filled with the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication, which the Lord would have
showred down upon thee without measure, which thing, some few, who are despised
in thee, do witness, to the everlasting comfort of their immortal souls: And
also thou might have had a free Ministry, instead of hirelings; even you who
might have fed on living bread at the Table of the Lord, instead of taking it
at your Communion-Tables, which the Popes ordained for you; who might have been
baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, by which ye would have been
cleansed; who might have walked in the light of the Lord, instead of walking in
the dim sparks of your own kindling; who might have been satisfied with Gods
presence, instead of being enquiring in your minds, where, and what God is; who
might have been purged, washed and made clean from sin by the blood of the
Lamb, instead of a vain hope, as you are in now, that ye shall be freed, but
you know not when; who might have come to have witnessed your bodies to have
been the Temples of God, instead of seeking, as ye do now, in the Temples made
with hands. O ye foolish, and unwise people, what might my soul say unto you of
these things? Ye have refused the teachings of God, and seek after the
teachings of men; ye have slighted the true Shepherd, who has laid down his
life for his Sheep, and have followed the false Shepherd, whose the Sheep are
not, but an hireling he is, and flees (because he is an hireling) when the
wolf and florm comes.

For has not this been manifestly seen in thee, O England, that when the
forcible powers of the Earth was for them, then they cried, woe, woe unto us if
we preach not the Gospel; and we preach not for hire, as we are falsely accused
(by these reproachful Quakers,) but a necessity is on us, so to do, and if we
had not any thing for so doing, yet we could not hold our peace; but seeing the
Law of the Nation gives us yearly maintenance, we take it as our due; and
though it be a Popish constitution, we take no notice of it, seeing the
Property of the thing is changed, as being taken from them, who were no
Ministers of the Gospel, and given unto us who are truly so, unto whom not
only the Tenths of all things belongs, but all things should be laid down at
our feet, (as it was in the Primitive time); and this has been the general cry
of your Priests, unto whom you give ear, and not unto us who told you the truth
in that day, as we do in this day, saying take away but their compelled
maintenance, and cease putting into their mouths, and they will soon prepare
war against you, if the Powers of the earth will but help them, if not, then
their God they will trust no longer, and soon their necessity of preaching will
be taken off them, and they will fly into their holes, like Dragons, wishing
for another nights season, that so they might come out upon their prey afresh.
And in this which is here said, there is no wrong done unto them; your bypast
Priests have themselves by their words and actions, largely proved the truth of
this matter.

And now unto you Priests, unto whom I was made to speak the word of the Lord,
woe and misery will assuredly be your Portion, if you slight Gods tender love
unto your souls: For that which I now speak, and that which I formerly spoke
unto you, is not, God knows, in contempt, nor in any way to divide you, but in
tender love to warn you from the evil of your ways, that so by turning from the
evil, and cleaving to the good, ye may come to escape the dreadful Judgments of
God, which are nigh to overtake you. And that you are, and were manifest to be
such as I said you to be, is true, (to wit) That you were blind guides, leaders
of the blind, inasmuch as ye are hireling Priests made by the will of men, who
forces a people by a Law, for to take your stuff, which makes you worse than a
common hireling; who are far from being Ministers of Christ Jesus, called by
him to his own work, for such minister freely as they received freely of their
Lord and Master. And so, as Christ said, By their fruits ye shall know them; so
do we know you, who have nothing you have, freely given, neither can you freely
give; nay you have not so much as the Sheeps clothing, but you are out wardly
and inwardly ravened, and gone into the Wolfs nature (of tearing and devouring,
and persecuting, like the Pope, your chief head, and leader in this work);
though some of you are ignorantly blind, yet many of you are wilfully blind,
which will not serve your turns: Awake, awake, and consider, do you think it
shall serve any of your turns, to cry out against Popery in words, and in
nature to be found all one, in Persecution, Malice, and Envy? as one of you
told me, I should not have liberty to speak (after he had accused me openly
before the people); and the other of you told me, he did forgive me, after he
had delivered me into the hands of men, and I was to be sent to prison: O shame
will come upon you for these things, and the dreadful rod of Gods anger will
overtake you for it. And tell me what you have at best to give to the people,
(for your yearly maintenance which you have of them,) but what is already made
ready to your hands of other men's lines, partly by the Pope and his Adherents,
who steal the words of Apostles and holy men of God, and mix them with their
own inventions; and this is made a platform for you to pray and preach by: and
at the best this is your stuff, which you confidently force upon the people, to
say and to speak after you, for which they must give many hundred pounds unto
you and your Generations of hirelings, even for this which profits them not
at all, but people under your teachings live and die in their sins, whilst
their Priests preach unto them for hire, and they love to have it so: This is
their very end, and the very end of these things; and while people are giving
ear unto you, it will never be otherwise: For its thus; the Papists they steal
the words of the Prophets and Apostles, and of Jerome, and Ambrose, Augustine,
and the like, and you steal it from them, and the people from you, and so what
they have of you, is at the third and fourth hand, though in another misformed
and disguised shane, whenas in the ground it is but the Bastard of the same
whore, which the Roman Catholics so dandle upon the lap of the Beast, as
though he were the true born heir of the Kingdom of God, whenas he is no more
like him, than light is like darkness, or Christ like Belial: And if people
must needs be so in love with this (which you so cry up amongst them), they
need not go to the Pope, nor come unto you for it, but at an easier rate than
they give unto you, they may have as good of their own; but freely they may
have of the Lord that which is quick, living, and powerful, and will abide for
ever.

Therefore this is the advice and counsel of the Spirit of God unto all people
whatsoever, for to come unto Christ the light of the world, who has
enlightened them with his true light, which makes manifest sin and evil in
their own hearts, to the end that thereby they might be taught, led, and
directed in the way of God, which is the way of true peace and holiness, which
is none of the hirelings ways, for they say men cannot tread out of
uncleanness all the days of their lives. And so from the Lord, this is a
warning and tender Visitation of love unto you all in this City, or elsewhere,
where this may come, who are not yet disentangled from this cursed yoke of soar
bondage, which men of corrupt minds have laid upon your necks, for filthy
lucres sake, and dishonest gain, with whom you will suddenly be cut off, if you
repent not with speed.

AND now you who are the Magistrates of this City of Bristol, is it not a
heart-resenting matter unto the upright soul, for to see and seriously consider
the sad event, which this imposing of Oaths has wrought in this Nation,
insomuch that few there be in it who have had any considerable name, or respect
therein, either in Civil or Ecclesiastic affairs, but have been (for the most
part of them) perjured men? yea, few there are in this Nation, of one sort or
other, but are so, except it be a few people (who are called Quakers) who stand
as your only mark to shoot at, and whom you are seeking every way to ensnare in
this thing (in matter of swearing) though most of you are not ignorant, how
that for conscience sake they cannot swear at all, because they durst not break
Christ's command, nor the Apostles Doctrine, which was according unto it, who
said, above all things, my Brethren, swear not at all, (as well he might,
because his Lord and Master forbad it); and though it is so, that both by word
and conversation, it has been showed often to you by us, yet you cease not
daily to seek to ensnare us thereby (so often as opportunity comes into your
hands for that purpose): And now let me tell you concerning this spirit that
does thus unto us, it is but the same which was in the Marian time, in which
they were made to suffer death, rather than to defile their consciences, (to
the uttermost as to what they knew, and was made manifest in that day unto
them); for when their bloody adversaries could answer them no way, or at least,
when they would make short work with them, presently they would question them
concerning the Sacrament of the Altar, as you do unto us concerning the Oath of
Alleginnce and Supremacy, all which, in the ground, is but one and the same
spirit (that acted against us and them), though under several prerences; for
which God did plead with them, and brought them down suddenly out of their
bloody Prelatical Seats; which I desire may be a warning unto you, for I did
never see the Lord acquit the guilty and condemn the innocent, for he is just
and righteous altogether. And surely, I do believe ye cannot be so blind, as
not to see the Prelatical Lordly spirit intruding it self amongst you, when
your high Priest stands fast in your Hall before you and all the people, laid
hold on me with his own hands, and said, I should not have liberty to speak
there. You may see by this, whether he that is so devoted to a Surplice, would
not also come to wear a Cardinals Cap, and so would turn black into red (if
that way were but made for him), let the upright in heart, and unprejudiced
Reader judge.

And now I shall in the fear of the Lord propound some few Queries unto you,
and shall leave and recommend them to Gods witness in you all to judge, and
also to answer the truth of them.

1. And first, seeing Christ says, The Tree may be known by its fruit, whether
or no this has not been an evil fruit, brought forth by an evil Tree, (to
wit) the imposing of Oaths upon a people or Nation, seeing that few that be in
this Nation did ever keep them; by which means they come to be worse than the
Pharisees of old, who are reputed only to be sayers, and not doers; but these
swear, and do not, by this means they become, not only false sayers, but
swearers also, against whom the Lords hand is.

2. Whether this be not another Branch, springing forth of the same cursed
Root, That honest upright men should be in danger of losing their Estates, by
the Oaths of them, who matter little, where, and what they say or swear? and
whether many more have not been wronged by this way of proceeding, than have
been righted otherwise, let Gods pure witness in all judge, seeing the evidence
of such as will but swear, though a common swearer (in Whore-houses and
Taverns, and in his familiar communication) will sooner be taken, than the
Testimony of him who fears an Oath, because he fears the Lord, and keeps to yea
and nay, in all his communication.

4. And seeing that so many have sworn for and against the King and others in
Authority in this Nation, how can you put confidence in such, seeing it has
bound men so little, as this Nation above all other Nations has seen, to their
sad experience?

And it being so, as the Apostle Paul says, That an Oath was amongst men for
the ending of strife, whether then it does not plainly betoken a people not to
be out of strife, who are found in that practice, and so consequently no
Christians? for they love him, and keep his Commandments, who says, Swear not
at all; and if any man sue thee at the Law for thy Cloak, give him thy Coat
also: And if all were come to live in this Christ-like life, and Doctrine, what
need would there be of swearing, seeing that evil is not to be overcome, but by
this good and patient life, in which, if one be smitten on the Cheek, there is
readiness to turn the other also?

And lastly, I query this of you all, Whether or no it be not an evil in all
those, who willingly go to ensnare any upon this account, seeing and knowing
beforehand that they cannot swear?

To you who are Bishops, Archbishops, Prebens, Priests, or others, who are
counted as the Heads and Teachers of the people now in England, I shall in the
fear of the Lord propound unto you a few Queries for you to answer, how, where,
and when you can, that so the people might come to understand, how, and by what
means you are set to be their Teachers, and your Commission thereunto.
Quest. 1.
FIrst I query of you, why, and wherefore ye seem to make such a difference
between the Pope, and his Ministry, and yours, seeing that both your Call and
Maintenance are one in the ground, that is to say, made by the will of man, and
maintained both by one Law and manner of maintenance? and if it be not so,
prove the contrary, and you will put and remove doubts out of the minds of
people, and will also satisfy many concerning you.

2. Show us who are your Authors for these things you now practice in your
Churches, if the Pope was not, (to wit) your Childrens Baptisms, Sacraments,
Bells, Surplice, Organs, and for your singing David's Psalms? answer plainly,
without any evasion, seeing you say, that men's salvation depends thereon; and
also concerning your Letany, Collects, and your dividing the Scriptures in
pieces and parcels, to be read at such and such times; I say, if they come not
from the Roman Catholic, show us from whence then these distinctions of
Parishes, Churchyards, and Churches, show us, I say, from whence had you your
foundation, and others, for these things? and if the Popes were not, prove it
otherwise, and in so doing you will satisfy many, for many of the people in
this Nation are jealous, as well they may, how that the Popes and their
Counsels, were the first Coustituters and Ordainers of these things.

3. Whether or no you do own such a thing, as that God will teach his people
himself? if so, then why do not you let the people alone unto the Lord, to be
taught of him, and cease taking these great sums of money, under a pretense of
doing that which only and properly belongs unto the Lord? Give in your answers
in plainness, hat so thereby we may prove whether you are approved Ministers of
Christ; but if you cannot prove your selves so to be, then it will be time,
yea, and high time for people to draw off from you, and cease giving their
money for that which is not bread, and spending their time any longer about you.

4. Seeing that the Scripture says, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, then,
whether or no, ye do not sin, and cause the people to sin, by going about to
compel them by a Law, to conform unto that, which they are not persuaded in the
Faith to be according to the mind of God; for if they were persuaded in their
own hearts, (as the Apostle said they should be) then what need would there be
of your compelling of them? and whether or no (it being so) it will not be your
great sin, thus to go about for to make the people sin by a Law, seeing that it
is so, that though one man should be required to do a thing by the express
command and movings of God, if another should go about to do the like, and not
be required of the Lord to do it, it would be sin unto him? (I speak in
relation to the worship of God) and if it be not so, prove the contrary by
plain Scripture, without wresting, if you can.

5. Whether, according to the Scriptures, ye own, that every one has the
manifestation of the Spirit given them to profit withal? If you say you do,
then tell me, why do ye, or indeed how durst ye go about as ye do, to limit the
same in people, and to appoint them how much they shall hear, and how long you
shall pray and speak unto them (as you do by an hourglass)? and tell me
whether there can be blasphemy in a higher nature than this, for to limit the
Spirit of God to so many words spoken (in such and such a form, time, and
place.) O blush and be ashamed for these things, and repent (if you cannot
clear your selves from being the very men who are guilty of these things, as I
know you cannot at all.)

6. Whether or no you your selves would not have the free liberty and exercise
of your Consciences toward God, freely to do what you in your selves are
persuaded for to be of God in your own hearts? why will ye not allow the same
liberty unto others, seeing that the Scripture says, that every one must give
an account of themselves to the Lord, and every man must dye for his own
iniquity? and whether or no it can truly be said, a man is a Christian indeed,
until he come unto this life, (to wit) to do unto all men, as he would all
should do unto him? and whether the contrary may not be said unto all who are
contrary minded, that is to say, no Christians, whether it be found in you, or
any other (whatsoever they profess themselves to be) upon the face of the earth?

7. And if it be so, that you cannot at all clear your selves from the guilt of
these things, which are here queryed of you, but are found guilty of them,
then, whether or no a man may not in the Spirit of sound judgment (without
offense to God, or just men) call you hireling Priests, false Prophets, blind
Leaders of the blind, and say, you that are leaders, and those that are led by
you, will all fall into the pit of Perdition, if you continue to go on in the
pernicious way you are going in: And whether or no one may not justly charge
you to be Ministers of the Letter, and not of the Spirit, seeing that ye can
limit your selves to so many words, made ready unto your hands of other men's
lines? which was not, nor is not the way or manner of the Ministers of the free
Spirit of God, which cannot be limited unto times, words, manners, persons, nor
places; but in whom he will, when he will, and where he will, he speaks as
long as it pleases him that sends it.

8. An Answer of these things will be exspected from some of you, being I am
made an offender by some of you for speaking something of these latter queries,
and remain still in the Prison of Bristol, a sufferer for the Truth of God, and
a witness against all false Teachers, and hireling Priests, for ever; and so I
shall conclude with this Query, Whether or no it may not be properly said,
that such who take Tithes (under a pretense of a Gospel Ministry) hold neither
a Law, nor Gospel, seeing that the Gospel maintenance was to be free; and as
under the Law Levy only was to have a maintenance out of it for his service,
and the rest was for the maintenance of the father less, and widows, and
strangers, which you Priests in England are so far from, that you take it all
your selves, and much more, where ye can get it, which is a great evil in you,
seeing that Tithes properly belonged unto the Lord (in the time when they were
required of the Jews); but the Law being changed, the commandment must needs
be disanulled, and I am sure you cannot find a new one for it since, unless it
be the Popes.

Charles Baily.

THE END.
The Postscript.
THe Servant of the Lord is gentle, and does not strive and wrestle with flesh
and blood (about outward things, and outward Observations), but has the
wisdom from above, that is first pure, and then peaceable, and easy to be
entreated; and when he has given forth his Testimony for God, he leaves it to
the witness in all consciences, by that to be believed; and until that be
raised in the Conscience for him, he is content to lie down in the suffering
life, having learned of the Lamb of God, that pleads not his own cause, but
commits it to God: But men of strife will have Oaths and Protestations to
bind and confirm their power and Authority (over the Conscience), because they
are wrestling with flesh and blood, and with carnal weapons, and their strength
of binding is only by the power of the Law, which Christ, the Oath and
Covenant, of God has put an end to (in them that believe in his name) that was
made a Priest by the Oath of God, that could not swear by a greater than
himself (as men verily swear by the greater), and by the word or voice of the
Oath is the blessing confirmed, in him that promised it to Abraham and his
Seed, saying, surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will
multiply thee; which in the changeable Priesthood could not be, in that they
could not continue by reason of death; but by the two immutable things (wherein
it is impossible for God to lie) the change might rest on him, that was not
made a Priest after the Law of a carnal Commandment, but the power of an
endless life, where the Priesthood being changed, the Law is also changed:
therefore says Christ, Swear not at all, etc. Let him that reads understand.

R. B.


