The Right METHOD For a settled PEACE Of Conscience, and Spiritual COMFORT.

In 32 DIRECTIONS.

Written for the use of a troubled friend: and now published

By Richard Baxter, Teacher of the Church at Kederminster in Worcestershire.

1 John 4.16. God is Love.

Luke 14.17. Mat. 22.4. Come, for all things are now Ready.

London, Printed for T. Underhill, F. Tyton, and W. R^ybould, and are to be sold
at the Anchor, and at the Unicorn in Paul's Churchyard, and at the three
Daggers in Fleetstreet. 1653.

MAT. 11.28. COme unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
give you Rest: Take my Yoke upon you, and Learn of me: for I am meek and Lowly
in heart, and ye shall find Rest unto your souls: For my Yoke is easy, and my
burden is light.

GAL. 5.17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do
the things that ye would.

ROMANS 6.16. Know ye not that to whom ye Yield your selves servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey? whether of sin unto Death, or of Obedience
unto Righteousness?

ROMANS 13.14. Make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.

ROMANS 8.13. For if ye Live after the flesh, ye shall dye* But if ye through the
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall live.

2 PET. 2.19. While they promise them Liberty, they themselves are the Servants
of Corruption: for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in
bondage.

EZEKIEL. 33.10, 11. Thus you speak, saying, If our transgressions and our sins be
upon us, and we pine away in them, how should we then live? Say unto them, As I
live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but
that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil
ways; for why will ye dye, O house of Israel?

2 COR. 2.20. Now then, we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be reconciled to God.

PSALM. 37.3, 4. Trust in the Lord, and do good, etc. Delight thy self also in
the Lord, and he shall give thee the Desires of thine heart.

Sound Doctrine makes a sound Judgment, a sound Heart, a sound Conversation,
and a sound Conscience.

To my much valued, beloved, and honored friends, Col. John Bridges, with Mrs
Margaret Bridges his Wife, and Mr. Thomas Foley, with Mrs Anne Foley his Wife.
THough in publishing our Writings, we intend them for the good of all; yet
custom (not without reason) does teach us, sometimes to direct them more
especially to some. Though one only had the original interest in these papers,
yet do I now direct them to you all, as not knowing how in this to separate
you. You dwell together in my Estimation and Affection: One of you a Member of
the Church, which I must Teach; and legally the Patron of its Maintenance and
Minister: The other, a special branch of that family, which I was first
indebted to in this County. You lately joined in presenting to the Parliament,
the Petition of this County for the Gospel and a faithful Ministry: When I only
told you of my intention, of sending some poor Scholars to the University, you
freely and jointly offered your considerable Annual allowance thereto, and that
for the continuance of my life, or their necessities there. I will tell the
world of this, whether you will or no: not for your applause, but for their
imitation; and the shame of many of far greater estates, that will not be drawn
to do the like. The season somewhat aggravates the Goodness of your Works. When
Satan has a design to burn up those Nurseries, you are watering Gods plants:
when the greedy mouth of Sacrilege is gaping for their Maintenance, you are
voluntarily adding for the supply of its defect. Who knows how many souls they
may win to Christ (if God shall send them forth into his harvest) whom you have
thus assisted? and what an addition to your comfort this may be? When the
Gospel is so undermined, and the Ministry so maligned, and their maintenance so
envied, you have, as the mouth of this County, appeared for them all. What God
will yet do with us, we cannot tell; but if he will continue his Gospel to us,
you may have the greater comfort in it; If he will remove it, and forsake a
proud unworthy false hearted People; yet may you have the comfort of your
sincere endeavors: you (with the rest that sincerely furthered it) may escape
the gnawings of Conscience, and the public curse and reproach, which the
History of this age may fasten upon them, who after all their Engagements in
blood and Covenants, would either in ignorant fury, or malicious subtilty, or
base temporizing cowardice, oppugn or undermine the Gospel, or in perfidious
silence, look on, whilst its destroyed. But because it is not the work of a
flatterer, that I am doing, but of a friend; I must second these commendations
with some caution and counsel; and tell your selves of your danger and duty, as
I tell others of your exemplary Deeds. Truly the sad experiences of these
times, have much abased my confidence in man, and caused me to have lower
thoughts of the best, then sometime I have had. I confess I look on man, as
such a distempered, slippery and unconstant thing, and of such a natural
mutability of Apprehensions and Affections, that as I shall never more call any
man on earth, My friend, but with a supposition that he may possibly become
mine enemy; So I shall never be so confident of any man's Fidelity to Christ,
as not withal to suspect that he may possibly forsake him: nor shall I boast of
any man's service for the Gospel, but with a jealousy that he may be drawn to
do as much against it (though God who knows the heart, and knows his own
decrees, may know his sincerity, and foreknow his perseverance.) Let me
therefore remember you, that had you expended your whole estates, and the blood
of your hearts for Christ and his Gospel, he will not take himself beholden to
you. He owes you no Thanks for your deepest engagements, highest adventures,
greatest cost, or utmost endeavors. You are sure beforehand that you shall be
no losers by him: your seeming hazards increase your security: Your losses are
your gain; your giving is your receiving; your expenses are your revenues:
Christ returns the largest usury. The more you do and suffer for him, the more
you are beholden to him. I must also remember you, that you may possibly live
to see the day, when it will cost you dearer to show your selves faithful ^o
the Gospel, Ordinances and Ministers of Christ, then now it does: and that many
have shrunk in greater trials, that past through lesser with resolution and
honor. Your defection at the last, would be the loss of all your works and
hopes. If any man draw back, Christ says, his soul shall have no pleasure in
him. Even those that have endured the great fight of Affliction, being
reproached and made a gazing-stock, and that have taken joyfully the spoiling
of their goods, in assurance of a better and enduring substance, have yet need
to be warned that they cast not away their confidence, and draw not back to
perdition, and lose not the Reward for want of Patience and Perseverance, Heb.
10.22. to the end. That you may escape this danger, and be happy for ever, take
this advice. 1. Look carefully to the sincerity of your hearts, in their
Covenant-closure with Christ. See that you take him with the happiness he has
promised for your All. Take heed of looking after another felicity; (...)
cherishing other Hopes; or esteeming too highly any thing below. Be jealous,
and very jealous, lest your hearts should close deceitfully with Christ,
maintaining any secret Reserve for your bodily safety: either resolving not to
follow him, or not resolving to follow him through the most desolate distressed
condition that he shall lead you in. Count what it may cost you to get the
Crown; study well his precepts of Mortification and Self-denial. There is no
true hopes of the Glory to come, if you cannot cast overboard all worldly
hopes, when the storm is such that you must hazard the one. O how many have
thought that Christ was most dear to them, and that the hopes of heaven were
their chiefest hopes, who have left Christ, though with sorrow, when he bid
them let go all? 2. Every day renew your apprehensions of the Truth and Worth
of the Promised Felicity; and of the Delusory Vanity of all things here below:
Let not Heaven lose with you its Attractive force, through your forgetfulness
or unbelief. He is the best Christian, that knows best why he is a Christian;
and he will most faithfully seek and suffer, that best knows for what he does
it. Value not Wealth and Honor above that rate which the wisest and best
experienced have put upon them: and allow them no more of your affections then
they deserve. A mean wit may easily discover their emptiness. Look on all
present actions and conditions with a remembrance of their end. Desire not a
share in their prosperity, who must pay as dear for it as the loss of their
souls: Be not ambitious of that honor which must end in Confusion; nor of the
Favor of those that God will call enemies. How speedily will they come down,
and be levelled in the dust, and be laid in the chains of darkness, that now
seem so happy to the pur-blinde world, that cannot see the things to come? Fear
not that man that must shortly tremble before that God whom all must fear. 3.
Be more solicitous for the securing of your Consciences and Salvation, then of
your honors or estates: In every thing that you are put upon, consult first
with God and Conscience; and not with flesh and blood. It is your daily and
most serious care and watchfulness that is requisite to maintain your
integrity; and not a few careless thoughts or purposes, conjunct with a minding
of earthly things. 4 Deal faithfully with every truth which you receive. Take
heed of subjecting it to carnal interests: If once you have affections that can
master your Understandings, you are lost, and know it not. For when you have a
Resolution to cast off any d^ty, you will first Believe it is no duty: and when
you must change your judgment for carnal advantages, you will make the change
seem reasonable and right: and evil shall be proved good when you have a mind
to follow it. 5. Make Gospel Truths your own, by daily humble studies, arising
to such a soundness of Judgment, that you may not need to take too much upon
trust; lest if your guides should miscarry, you miscarry with them. Deliver not
up your understanding in Captivity to any. 6. Yet do not overvalue your own
Understandings. This Pride has done that in Church and State, which all
discerning men are lamenting. They that know but little, see not what they
want, as well as what they have; nor that imperfection in their knowledge which
should humble them, nor that difficulty in things, which should make them
diligent and modest. 7. Apprehend the necessity and Usefulness of Christ's
Officers, Order and Ordinances for the prosperity of his Church: Pastors must
guide you, though not seduce you, or lead you blindefold. But choose (if you
may) such as are judicious, and not ignorant, not rash but sober, not formal
but serious and spiritual, not of carnal but heavenly conversations; especially
avoid them that divide and follow par^^es, and seek to draw Disciples to
themselves, and can sacrifice the Churches Unity and Peace to their proud
humors or carnal interests. Watch carefully that no weaknesses of the Minister
do draw you to a dis-esteem of the Ordinances of God: nor any of the sad
miscarriages of Professors should cause you to set less by Truth or Godliness.
Wrong not Christ more, because other men have so wronged him. Quarrel more with
your own unfitness and unworthiness in Ordinances, then with other men's. It is
the frame of your own heart that does more to help or hinder your Comforts,
then the quality of those you join with. To these few Directions added to the
rest in this Book, I shall subjoyn my hearty Prayers, that you may receive from
that Gospel and Ministry which you have owned, such stability in the faith,
such victory over the flesh and the world, such apprehensions of the Love of
God in Christ, such direction in every strait and duty, that you Live
uprightly, Dye peaceably, and Reign Gloriously. Amen.

May 9. 1653. Your servant in the Faith and Gospel of Christ. Rich. Baxter.

To the Poor in Spirit.
MY dearly Beloved Fellow Christians, whose souls are taken up with the careful
thoughts of attaining and maintaining Peace with God: who are vile in your own
eyes, and value the Blood and Spirit and Word of your Redeemer, and the Hope of
the Saints in their approaching Blessedness, before all the Pomp and Vanities
of this world, and Resolve to give up your selves to his Conduct, who is become
the Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him: For You do I Publish
these following Directions: and to You it is that I direct this Preface. The
only Glorious and Infinite God, who made the Worlds, and upholdeth them by his
Word, who is attended with Millions of his Glorious Angels, and Praised
continually by his Heavenly hosts: who pulls down the Mighty from their
seats, and scatters the Proud in the Imaginations of their hearts, and makes
his Enemies lick the dust: to whom the Kings and Conquerors of the Earth are as
the silliest worms, and the whole world is Nothing, and lighter then Vanity,
which he will shortly turn into flames before your eyes: This God has sent me
to you, with that Joyful Message, which needs no more but your believing
entertainment, to make it sufficient to raise you from the dust, and banish
those terrors and troubles from your hearts, and help you to live like the
Sons of God. He commands me to tell you, that he takes notice of your
sorrows: he stands by when you see him not and say He has forsaken you: he
minds you with greatest tenderness when you say He has forgotten you: He
numbreth your sighs: he bottles up your tears: the groans of your hearts do
reach his own. He takes it unkindly, that you are so suspicious of him: and
that all that he has done for you in the work of Redemption, and all the
gracious workings of his Spirit on your souls, and all your own peculiar
experiences of his Goodness, can raise you to no higher apprehensions of his
Love! Shall not Love be acknowledged to be Love, when its grown to a Miracle?
when it surpasses Comprehension! Must the Lord set up Love and Mercy in the
work of Redemption, to be equally admired with his Omnipotency manifested in
the Creation? and call forth the World to this sweet employment, that in Secret
and in Public it might be the business of our lives? and yet shall it be so
overlookt or questioned, as if you lived without Love and Mercy in the World?
Providence does its part, by heaping up Mountains of daily Mercies, and these
it sets before your eyes: The Gospel has eminently done its part by clear
describing them, and fully assuring them: and this is proclaimed frequently in
your ears: And yet is there so little in your hearts and mouths? Do you see,
and hear, and feel, and taste Mercy and Love? do you Live wholly on it? and yet
do you still doubt of it? and think so meanly of it, and so hardly acknowledge
it? God takes not this well: but yet he considers your frailty, and takes you
not at the worst. He knows that flesh will play its part, and the Remnants of
Corruption will not be idle: and the Serpent will be suggesting false thoughts
of God, and will be still striving most to obscure that part of his Glory which
is dearest to him, and especially which is most conjoined with the Happiness of
Man. He knows also, that sin will breed sorrows and fears: and that man's
Understanding is shallow, and all his Conceivings of God are exceeding low: and
that we are so far from God as Creatures, and so much further as sinners, and
especially as Conscious of the abuse of his Grace, that there must needs follow
such a strangeness, as will damp and dull our apprehensions of his Love: and
such an abatement of our Confidence, as will make us draw back, and look at God
afar off. Seeing therefore that at this distance no full apprehensions of Love
can be expected: It is the Pleasure of our Redeemer shortly to Return, with ten
thousands of his Saints, with the noble Army of his Martyrs, and the attendance
of his Angels: and to give you such a Convincing Demonstration of his Love, as
shall leave no room for one more Doubt. Your Comforts are now but a Taste, they
shall be then a Feast: They are now but Intermittent, they shall be then
Continual* How soon now do your Conquered fears return? and what an unconstancy
and unevenness is there in our Peace? But then our Peace must needs be Perfect
and Permanent, when we shall please God and Enjoy him in Perfection to
Perpetuity. Certainly, Christians, your Comforts should be now more abundant,
but that they are not ripe: It is that, and not this, that is your harvest: I
have told you in another Book the mistake and danger of expecting too much
here, and the Necessity of Looking and Longing for that Rest, if we will have
Peace indeed! But, alas, how hard is this lesson learned? Unbelievers would
have Happiness: but how fain would they have it in the Creature, rather then in
God! Believers would rather have their Happiness in God then in the Creature:
But how fain would they have it without Dying? And no wonder: for when Sin
brought in Death, even Grace it self cannot Love it, though it may submit to
it: But though Churlish Death do stand in our way, why look we not at the Souls
admittance into Rest! and the Bodies Resurrection that must shortly follow?
Doubtless that Faith by which we are Justified and Saved, as it sits down on
the word of Truth as the present ground of its confident repose, so does it
thence look with one eye backward on the Cross, and with the other forward on
the Crown: And if we well observe the Scripture Descriptions of that Faith, we
shall find them as frequently magnifying it, and describing it from the latter
as from the former. As it is the duty and glory of faith to look back with
Thankful Acknowledgement to a Crucified Christ, and his payment of our Ransom:
so is it the Duty and Glory of that same Justifying Saving Faith to Look
forward with Desire and Hope to the Return of King Jesus, and the Glorious
Celebration of the Marriage of the Lamb, and the Sentencial Justification, and
the Glorification of his Saints: To Believe these things unfeignedly which we
never saw, (nor ever spoke with man that did see) and to Hope for them so
Really as to let go all present forbidden pleasures, and all worldly hopes and
seeming happiness, rather then to hazard the loss of them: this is an eminent
part of that Faith by which the Just do live, and which the Scripture does own
as Justifying and Saving: (For it never distinguishes between Justifying Faith
and Saving Faith, as to their nature.) It is therefore a great mistake of some
to look only at that one eye of Justifying Faith which looks back upon the
Cross, and a great mistake of them on the other hand that look only at that
eye of it which beholds the Crown: Both Christ Crucified, and Christ
Interceding, and Christ Returning to Justify and Glorify, are the objects
even of Justifying Saving Faith, most strictly so called. The Scripture often
expresses the one only: but then it still implies the other. The Socinians
erroniously therefore from Heb. 11. (where the Examples and Elogies of Faith
are set forth) do exclude Christ Crucified, or the respect to his Satisfaction,
from Justifying Faith, and place it in a mere Expectation of Glory: and others
do as ungroundedly affirm, that it is not the Justifying Act of Faith which
Heb. 11. describes, because they find not the Cross of Christ there mentioned.
For as Believing in Christ's Blood Comprehends the End, even the Expectation
of Remission and Glory merited by that blood: so the Believing of that Glory
does always imply that we Believe and Expect it as the fruit of Christ's
Ransom. It is for health and life that we Accept and Trust upon our Physician:
And it is for Justification and Salvation that we Accept and Trust on Christ.
The Salvation of our Souls is the End of our Faith. They that question whether
we may Believe and Obey for our own Salvation, do question whether we may go to
the Physician, and follow his advice for Health and Life. Why then do you that
are Believers, so much forget the End of your Faith? and that for which it is
that you Believe? Believing in Christ for present Mercies only, be they
temporal or spiritual, is not the true Believing. They are dangerously mistaken
that think the thoughts of Heaven to be so accidental to the nature and work of
Faith, as that they tend only to our Comfort, and are not necessary to
Salvation it self. It is upon your apprehensions and expectations of that
unseen felicity that both your Peace and Safety do depend. How contrary
therefore is it to the nature of a Believer, to forget the Place of his Rest
and Consolation! and to Look for so much of these from Creatures, in this our
present Pilgrimage and Prison, as, alas, too commonly we do! Thus do we kill
our Comforts, and then complain for want of them. How should you have any Life
or Constancy of Consolations, that are so seldom, so slight, so unbelieving and
so heartless in your thoughts of Heaven! You know what a folly it is to expect
any Peace, which shall not come from Christ as the Fountain: And you must learn
as well to understand what a folly it is to expect any solid Joys, or stable
Peace, which is not fetched from Heaven, as from the End. O that Christians were
careful to live with one eye still on Christ Crucified, and with the other on
Christ coming in Glory! If the Everlasting Joys were more in your believing
thoughts, Spiritual Joys would more abound at present in your hearts. It Is no
more wonder that you are Comfortless when Heaven is forgotten, or doubtingly
remembered, then that you are faint when you eat not, or cold when you stir not,
or when you have not fire or clothes.

But when Christians do not only let fall their expectations of the things
Unseen, but also heighten their expectations from the Creature: then do they
most infallibly prepare for their fears, and troubles, and estrangedness from
God, and with both hands draw calamities on their souls. Who ever meets with a
distressed complaining soul, where one or both of these is not apparent? their
Low expectations from God hereafter, or their high expectations from the
Creature now? What does keep us under such trouble and disquietness, but that
we will not Expect what God has Promised, or we will needs Expect what he
Promised not? And then we complain when we miss of those Expectations which we
foolishly and ungroundedly raised to our selves! We are grieved for Crosses,
for Losses, for wrongs from our Enemies, for unkind or unfaithful dealings of
our Friends, for sickness, for contempt and dis-esteem in the World! But who
bid you look for any better? Was it Prosperity, and Riches, and Credit, and
Friends, that God called you to Believe for? or that you became Christians for,
or that you had an absolute promise of in the Word? If you will make Promises
to your self, and then your own Promises deceive you, whom should you blame for
that? Nay do we not, as it were, necessitate God hereby, to embitter all our
Comforts below, and to make every Creature as a Scorpion to us, because we will
needs make them our petty Deities? We have less Comfort in them then else we
might have, because we must needs have more then we should have. You might have
more faithfulness from your Friends, more Reputation in the World, more
sweetness in all your present enjoyments, if you looked for Less. Why is it that
you can scarce name a Creature near you, that is not a scourge to you, but
because you can scarce name one that is not your Idol? or, at least, which you
do not expect more from, then you ought? Nay (which is one of the saddest
Considerations of this kind that can be imagined) God is fain to scourge us
most even by the highest Professors of Religion, because we have most Idolized
them, and had such excessive^ ^^pectations from them. One wo^^ (...) thought it
next to an impossibili^^ (...) such men, and so many of they, (...) ever have
been drawn to do that against the Church, against that Gospel Ministry, and
Ordinances of God (which once seemed dearer to them then their lives) which
has since been done, and which yet we fear! But a believing eye can discern
the reason of this sad providence (in part:) Never men were more Idolized: and
therefore no wonder if we were never so afflicted by any. Alas, when will we
learn by Scripture and Providence so to know God and the Creature, as to look
for More from him, and less from them! We have looked for Wonders from
Scotland, and what is come of it? We looked that War should have even satisfied
our desires, and when it had removed all visible Impediments, we thought we
should have had such a glorious Reformation as the World never knew! And now
behold, a Babel, and a mangled Deformation! What high Expectations had we from
an Assembly! what Expectations from a Parliament! and where are they now! O
hear the Word of the Lord, ye low-spirited People! [Cease ye from man, whose
breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is he to be accounted of? Isa. 2.22.]
[Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose
heart departs from the Lord: For he shall be like the Heath in the Desert,
and shall not see when Good comes. Blessed is the man that trusts in the
Lord, and whose Hope the Lord is: For he shall be as a Tree planted by the
Waters, etc. Jer. 17.5, 6, 7, 8.] [Surely men of Low degree are Vanity, and men
of High degree are a Lie: to be laid in the balance they are altogether
lighter then Vanity, Psalm. 62.9.] Let me warn you all, Christians, for the time
to come, Take the Creature as a Creature: remember its frailty: look for no
more from it then its part: If you have the nearest, dearest, godly friends,
expect to feel the sting of their Corruptions, as well as to taste the sweetness
of their Grace: And they must expect the like from you.

If you ask me why I speak so much of these things here? It is, 1. Because I
find that much of the trouble of ordinary Christians comes from their Crosses
in the Creature, and the frustration of these their sinful Expectations. 2. And
because I have said so little of it in the following Directions, they being
intended for the cure of another kind of Trouble: therefore I have said this
much here of this.

Having premised this advice, I take my self bound to add one thing more: that
is, An Apology for the Publication of this Imperfect Piece: whether just or
insufficient, other men must judge. I confess I am so apprehensive of the
Luxuriant Fertility, or Licenciousness of the Press of late, as being a design
of the Enemy to bury and overwhelm in a crowd those Judicious, Pious, Excellent
Writings that before were so commonly read by the People, that I think few men
should now print without an Apology: much less such as I; who has more
lamented this inundation of impertinencies! or more accused the Ignorance and
Pride of others that must needs disgorge themselves of all their Crudities, as
if they were such pre^ious Conceptions, proceeding from the Holy Ghost, that
the World might not, without very great injury, be deprived of: and it were
pity that all men should not be made partakers of them? And how come I to go on
in the same fault my self? Truly I have no Excuse or Argument but those of the
Times, Necessity and Providence: which how far they may Justify me, I must
leave to the Judge. Being in company with a troubled complaining Friend, I
perceived that it must be some standing Counsel which might be frequently
perused, that must satisfactorily answer the Complaints that I heard, and not a
transient Speech, which would quickly slip away: Being therefore obliged as a
Pastor, and as a Friend, and as a Christian, to tender my best assistance for
relief, I was suddenly (in the moment of speaking) moved to promise one sheet
of Paper, which might be useful to that End. Which promise when I attempted to
perform, the one sheet lengthened to thirty, and my one days (intended) work
was drawn out to a just month, I went on far before I had the least thought to
let any eye behold it, except the Party for whom I wrote it: But at last I
perceived an impossibility of contracting, and I was presently possessed with
confident apprehensions, that a Copy of those Directions might be useful to
many other of my poor Neighbors and Friends that needed them ^s much: Upon
which apprehension I presently permitted my Pen to run more at large, and to
deviate from the case of the Party that I wrote for: and to take in the common
case of most troubled doubting souls. By that time I had finished it, I
received Letters from several parts, from Learned and Judicious Divines,
importuning me to print more (having understood my Intentions to desist, as
having done too much already, even at first:) I confess I was not much moved by
their Importunity, till they seconded it with their Arguments: whereof one was,
The Experience of the success of former Writings, which might assure me it was
not displeasing to God. I had many that urged me: I had no one but my self to
draw me back. I apprehended that a writing of this nature might be useful to
the many weak perplexed Christians through the Land. Two reasons did at first
come in against it. The first was, That if there were no more written on this
Subject then Doctor Sibs's Bruised Reed, and Souls Conflict, and Mr Jos.
Symonds Deserted Souls Case and Cure, there need no more: Especially there
being also Doctor Prestons Works, and many of Perkins, to this use: and Mr.
Ball and Mr. Culverwel of Faith, and diverse the like. To this my own Judgment
answered, That yet these brief Directions might add somewhat that might be
useful to the weak, as to the Method of their proceedings, if not to the
matter: And my Brethren stopped my mouth by telling me, that others had written
before me of Heaven and Baptism: and yet my labors were not lost. Next this, I
thought the Crudity and weakness of the Writing was such, as should prohibit
the publication, it being unfit to thrust upon the World, the hasty undigested
lines that were written for the use of one person. To this my thoughts replied,
That 1. For all that, it might be useful to poor Women, and Country people, who
most commonly prove the troubled spirits for whose sakes I wrote it. Had I writ
for the use of Learned men, I would have tried to make it fitter for their use:
and if I could not, I would have suppressed it. 2. It was my Pride that
nourished this scruple, which moved me not to appear so homely to the World,
and therefore I cast it by. One thing more I confess did much prevail with me
to make these Papers public: and that is, the Antinomians common, confident
obtrusion of their Anti-Evangelical doctrines and methods for comforting
troubled souls. They are the most notorious Mountebanks in this Art, the
highest pretenders, and unhappiest performers, that most of the Reformed
Churches ever knew. And none usually are readier to receive their doctrines,
then such weak women or unskilful people, that being in Trouble, are like a
sick man in great pain, who is glad to hear what all can say, and to make trial
of every thing by which he has any hope of ease. And then there is so much
Opium in these Mountebanks Nepenthes, or Antidote of Rest: so many principles
of carnal security and presumption, which tend to the present case of the
Patient, (whatever follow) that it is no wonder if some well-meaning Christians
do quickly swallow the bait, and proclaim the rare effects of this Medicament,
and the admirable skill of this unskilful Sect, to the ensnaring of others,
especially that are in the like distress. Especially when they meet with some
Divines of our own, who do deliver to them some Master-points of this Systeme
of Mistakes, which are so necessarily concatenated to the rest, that they may
easily see, if they have one, they must have all, unless they will hold
Contradictions. As to instance in the Doctrine of Justification before Faith:
or the dissolving the Obligation to Punishment (which is nothing but Remission
of sin) before Faith: So that nothing remains since Christ's death (as some) or
since Gods Decree (as others) but only to have our Pardon manifested, or to be
Justified in Conscience, or (as some phrase it) to have that Justification
which is terminated in Conscience. There is a very Judicious man, Mr. Benjamin
Woodbridge of Newbury has written so excellent well against this Error, and
in so small room, being but one Sermon, that I would advise all private
Christians to get one of them, and peruse it, as one of the best, easiest,
cheapest Preservatives against the contagion of this part of Antinomianism.

I had not troubled the Reader with this Apology, had I thought so well of
this Writing as to be a sufficient Apology for it self: or had I not taken it
for a heinous Crime to speak Idly in Print.

For the Doctrine here contained, it is of a Middle strain, between (I think)
the Extremes of some others. I have labored so to build up Peace, as not
thereby to fortify Presumption. And perhaps in some Points you may see my
meaning more plainly, which through the obscurity of former Writings I was
mis-understood in. As for the Manner of this Writing, I must desire them that
expect Learning or Exactness, to turn away their eyes: and know, that I wrote
it not for such as they. I use not to speak any thing b^^ plain English to that
Sex, or to that Us^ and End for which I wrote these Lines I wrote to the utmost
verge of my Paper before I thought to make it public, an^ so had no room for
Marginal Quotations* (nor time to transcribe that Copy that might have room)
nor indeed much min^ of them, if I had had both room and time.

As in all the Removes of my Life ^ have been still led to that place or state
which was furthest from my own thoughts, and never designed or contrived by my
self: so all the Writings that yet I have published are such as have been by
some sudden unexpected occasion extorted from me, while those that I most
affected have been stifled in the Conception: and those that I have most
labored in, must lie buried in the dust: that I may know it is God that is the
Disposer of all. Experience persuades me to think, that God, who has
compelled me hereto, intends to make this hasty writing a means for the
calming of some Troubled Souls: Which if he do, I have my End. If I can do
nothing to the ^hurches public Peace, either through my own unskilfulness and
unworthiness, or through the prevalency of the Malady: yet will it be my
comfort to further the Peace of the poorest Christian. (Though to the former
also I shall contribute my best endeavors: and am with this sending to the
Press some few sheets to that end, with our Worcestershire Agreement.) The full
accomplishment of both: the subduing of the Prince of Darkness, Confusion and
Contention: the destroying of that Pride, self-esteem, self-seeking, and
carnal-mindedness, which remaining even in the best, are the disturbers of all
Peace: the fuller discovery of the sinfulness of impeaceable Principles,
Dispositions and Practices: the nearer closure of all true Believers, and the
hastening of the Churches Everlasting Peace: These are his daily Prayers, who is

May 7. 1653. A zealous desirer of the Peace of the Church, and of every
faithful soul, RICHARD BAXTER*

The CONTENTS.
THE Case to be Resolved. page 1. DIRECTION I. Discover the true Cause of your
Trouble. 4 The continued necessity of a standing Ministry. 6 DIRECTION II.
Discover well how much of your trouble is from Melancholy, or from outward
Crosses, and apply the Remedy accordingly. 7 DIRECTION III. Lay first in your
understanding sound and deep apprehensions of Gods nature. 17 The Benefits that
arise from the Apprehensions of Gods Goodness. 18 DIRECTION IV. Get deep
Apprehensions of the Gracious Nature and Office of the Mediator. 28 DIRECTION.
V. Believe and consider the full sufficiency of Christ's Sacrifice and Ransom
for all. 32 DIRECTION VI. Apprehend the Freeness, Fullness and Universality of
the Law of Grace, or Conditional Grant of Pardon and Salvation to all men, if
they will Repent and Believe. 33 DIRECTION VII. Understand the difference
between General Grace and Special, and between the Possibility, Probability,
Conditional Certainty, and Absolute Certainty of your Salvation, and so between
the several Degrees of Comfort that these Severals may afford* 35 How much
Comfort the unconverted may receive from General Grace. 39 DIRECTION VIII.
Understand rightly the true nature of saving Faith. 49 DIRECTION IX. Next
perform the Condition by Actual Believing. 55 Object. I am not able to Believe:
Answered 56 Direction how to get Faith. 59 How far the prayers of the wicked
are acceptable. 60 DIRECTION X. Next Review your own Believing, and thence
gather Assurance. 66 The Witness of the Spirit, and Spirit of Adoption, what
they are. 68, 71 Whether it be a Legal departing from Christ, or any sinful
trusting in our own Righteousness, to gather Peace, Comfort or Assurance from
signs within us? 74 Twenty Arguments proving it lawfvl to gather Comfort or
Assurance from Gods Graces in us* 75 DIRECTION XI. Make use in Trial of none
but infallible signs. 86 Five certain signs, together comprizing the
Description of a true Christian. 88 Twenty observable explicatory points for
the right understanding of these signs. 91 DIRECTION XII. Know, that Assurance
of Justification, or right to Salvation, cannot be gathered from the least
degree of saving Grace. 119 Proved from the many exceeding Difficulties that
must be overcome by all that will have Assurance in ordinary ways: and from
other Reasons. 120 DIRECTION XIII. The first time of our Receiving or Acting
saving Grace, and so of our Justification and Adoption, cannot ordinarily be
known. 136 To affirm that saving sincerity of Grace lies but in a Gradual
Natural-difference is no diminution of the Glory of Grace. 142 DIRECTION XIV.
Know that Assurance is not the lot of the ordinary sort of true Christians, but
only of a few of the strongest, most active, watchful and obedient, Proved.
145 The observation of the Confessions of the Godly in this. 151 DIRECTION XV.
Know that even many of the stronger and more obedient who have Assurance of
their Conversion, are yet unassured of their Salvation, for want of Assurance
to persevere. 160 The Authors free Confession of his own state, and Judgment
herein. 162 DIRECTION XVI. There are many grounds to discover a Probability of
saving Grace, where we cannot yet discern a Certainty: And you must learn, next
to the Comforts of General Grace, to receive the Comforts of the Probability of
Special Grace, before you expect or are ripe for the Comforts of Assurance* 170
Proved that a Christian may live a Joyful Life without Assurance. 178 DIRECTION
XVII. Improve your own and others Experiences to strengthen your Probabilities.
179 DIRECTION XVIII. Know that God has not commanded you to Believe that you
do Believe, nor that you are Justified, or shall be saved (but only
Conditionally) and therefore your Assurance is not a Certainty properly of
Divine Faith. 189 It is not Unbelief or Desperation in Christians which is
commonly called so. 193 DIRECTION XIX. Know that those few that do attain to
Assurance, have it not constantly. 209 DIRECTION XX. Never expect so much
Assurance on Earth as shall set you above all Possibility of the loss of
Heaven, and above all apprehensions of real danger. 211 The usefulness of
Apprehension of danger opened. 214 DIRECTION XXI. Be glad of a settled Peace,
and look not too much after raptures and strong feelings of Comfort: And if you
have such, expect not a constancy of them. 227 DIRECTION XXII. Spend more time
and care about your Duty then your Comforts, and to get and exercise and
increase Grace, then to discern the certainty of it. 232 DIRECTION XXIII. Think
not that those Doubts and Troubles which are caused and continued by wilful
Disobedience, will ever be well healed but by the healing of that Disobedience,
or that such can be cured by the same means, as obedient doubting Christians
may. 246 How far a Christian can or cannot do the Good he would. 251 Three
sorts of sins of Infirmity, or so called, opened. 256 The state of a Christian
under gross sin, doubtful. 265 Proved, that Assurance depends much on careful
Obedience; And that when all is done, the most obedient Believer will
ordinarily have most and best Assurance of his sincerity and salvation. 270 The
Use of the former Direction. 280 The Doubtings of most Christians that have the
free use of Reason, are fed by some sin. ibid. The sins which Troubled
Christians should most search after, are 1. Contrary carnal Interest
encroaching on Christ's Interest. 1. In the Understanding, enumerated as against
each Person in the Trinity. 2. In the Will and Affections. 1. Pride. 2.
Covetousness. 3. Voluptuousness.

These are considered here as against God himself, and so as against the first
Commandment. 286 2. Actual sins against the other Commandments. Especially
suspect 1. Unmercifulness and rigid censoriousness of others. 2.
Unpeaceableness in Family, Neighborhood, Church, etc. 301
DIRECTION XXIV. Content not your self with a cheap Religiousness, and to serve
God with that which cost you little or nothing: And take every Call to costly
duty or suffering for Christ as a prize put into your hand for advancing your
Comforts. 313 Remember this; 1. In preventing sin. 2. In rising from sin. 3. In
performance of Duty. 325
DIRECTION XXV. Study the great art of Doing Good, and let it be your
every-days contrivance, care and business, how to lay out all your Talents to
the greatest advantage. 332 Applied to our Rulers, and to Rich men. 337
DIRECTION XXVI. Trouble not your soul with needless scruples: Nor make your
self more work then God has made you, by feigning that unlawful which God has
not forbidden; or by placing your Religion in Will Worship, or overmuch rigor
to your body, etc. 346 What it is to be Righteous Overmuch? The Question
Answered, Whether all Virtue be in the middle? And Whether we can love or serve
God too much? 347 All Over-doing in Gods work is Un-doing. The Devil is most
zealous in Over-doing. A sad instance how much the Devil has got by
Over-doing. 1. In Doctrine, against Heretics, by adding to the Creed, and
forsaking Scripture Phrase. 2. In Discipline. 3. In Government or Church Power.
4. In Worship. 5. In Reformation, especially of late. The Devil goes beyond
Christ in all these, when he once falls to work. 354
DIRECTION XXVII. When God has discovered your sincerity to you, fix it in
your Memory that it may be useful for the time to come; and leave not your soul
open to new Apprehensions: Except in case of notable declinings, or gross
sinning. 376 Proved, that in these excepted cases even the Justified may
question their sincerity and Justification. 377 DIRECTION XXVIII. Beware of
perplexing mis-interpretations of 1. Scriptures. 2. Providence. 3. Sermons.
And be willing that Ministers should preach most searchingly and rouzingly for
the good of others, without mis-applying it to your self. 387 DIRECTION XXIX.
Distinguish carefully between causes of Doubting, and causes of mere
Humiliation and Amendment: God calls you very often to Humiliation when he
calls you not to Doubting. 403 Twenty ordinary DOUBTS Resolved. 1. About
knowing the time and manner of Conversion. 406 2. About Humiliation. 411 3. Of
receiving Religion by Education. 417 4. About Deadness, Hard-heartedness, and
not weeping for sin. 423 5. About Backwardness to Duty, and not Delighting in
it. 434 6. About doing all out of slavish fear. 439 7. Not able to Believe. 443
8. Strangeness to the Witness of the Spirit, Joy in the Holy Ghost, and
Communion with God. 444. 9. Want of the Spirit of Prayer. 446 10.
Unprofitableness through want of Gifts. 450 11. Greatness of sin and
unworthiness. 452 A twofold Worthiness and Righteousness. 453 12. Want of a
deep Hatred to sin: Fear lest stronger Temptation would overthrow us. 456 13.
Fear of committing the unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost. 459 14. Lest it
be too late, and the time of Grace be past* Time of Grace past in a double
sense. 461 15. Sinning since Profession against Conscience, on Deliberation.
465 16. Not overcoming Corruptions, and not Growing in Grace. 469 17.
Blasphemous and Unbelieving thoughts. 476 18. Fears of Death. 481 19. Heavy
Afflictions. 483 20. Not being Afflicted. 484
DIRECTION XXX. Carefully discern whether your Doubts are such as must be cured
by the consideration of General or of Special Grace* And be sure that when you
lose the sight of Certain Evidence, that you let not go Probabilities: Or at
the worst when you are beaten from both, and judge your self. Graceless, yet
lose not the Comforts of General Grace. 489 DIRECTION XXXI. In all pressing
Necessities take the advice of your Pastors. 1. Keep it not secret. 2. In what
Cases to seek advice. 3. To what Ends. 4. Of what sort of Ministers, and whom
to avoid. 5. In what manner to open your Case. Objections answered against
confessing sin to Pastors. Reasons why Ministers have not fully acquainted
their People with the great duty of confessing and opening their Case to them.
499
DIRECTION XXXII. Understand that the height of Christian Life, and the
greatest part of your Duty, lies in A loving Delight in God, and a Thankful
and Cheerful Obedience to his Will: which you must be still endeavoring; and
subordinate all other duties to these. 523 Ministers and Christians should keep
the Lords day as a day of Thanksgiving for the work of Redemption, and spend
more of it in Praises, Psalms, Hymns, etc. and less in Confessing, etc. 533 How
Christians wrong Christ and Religion, and contradict the main design of Grace
by their sad dejected lives. 536 Stand not Complaining and Doubting, but
Cheerfully Amend and Obey. 537
ERRATA.
Page 16. lin. 3. for quit r. quiet. p. 44. l. 22. before arise put or. p. 67.
l. 26, 27. for define put explain. p. 164. l. 5. after bad make a stop. p. 174.
l. 2. for given r. even. p. 186. l. 10. for their r. the. p. 204. l. 21. for
and r. are. p. 259. l. 23. for nobility r. mobility. p. 455. l. 17. for our
faith r. one says. p. 482. l. 28. between the two its put as. p. 526. l. 27.
r. Thankfully.

THE RIGHT METHOD For a settled PEACE OF CONSCIENCE and Spiritual COMFORT. In
XXXII. DIRECTIONS.
IT must be understood, that the Case here to be resolved is not, How an
unhumbled profane sinner that never was Convinced of Sin and Misery, should be
brought to a settled Peace of Conscience. Their Carnal Peace must first be
broken, and they must be so far humbled, as to find the want and worth of
Mercy, that Christ and his Consolations may not seem contemptible in their
eyes. It is none of my business now, to give any advice for the furthering of
this Conviction or Humiliation. But the Case in hand is; How a Sinner may
attain to a settled Peace of Conscience, and some competent measure of the Joy
of the holy Ghost, who has been convinced of Sin and Misery, and long made a
Profession of Holiness, but lives in continual doubtings of their sincerity,
and fears of Gods wrath, because of an exceeding Deadness of spirit, and a want
of that Love to God, and Delight in him, and sweetness in Duty, and witness of
the Spirit, and Communion with God, and other the like Evidences which are
found in the Saints. How far the party is right or wrong in the Discovery of
these Wants, I now meddle not. Whether they Judge rightly or wrongly the
Directions may be Useful to them. And though I purposely meddle not with the
unhumbled that feel not the want of Christ and Mercy, yet most that falls may
be useful to all that profess the Christian faith. For I shall study so to
avoid the extremes in my doctrinall Directions, as may conduce to your
escaping the desperate extremes, of Ungrounded Comforts, and Causless Terrors,
in your own spirit.

Of my Directions the first shall be only General, and the rest more
particular* And in all of them I must entreat you 1. To observe the Order and
Method as well as the Matter; and that you would practice them in the same
order as I place them. 2. And to remember that it is not only Comfortable
words, but it is Directions for your own practice which here I prescribe you:
And therefore that it is not the bare Reading of them that will Cure you; but
if you mean to have the benefit of them, you must bestow more time in
Practicing them then I have done in Penning them: yea you must make it the work
of your life. And let not that startle you or seem tedious to you; for it will
be no more grievous a work to a well tempered soul, then eating, or drinking,
or sleep, or recreation is to a healthful Body; and then it is to an honest
woman to Love and Delight in her Husband and her Children: which is no grievous
task.

DIRECTION I.
1. Get as clear a discovery as you can of the true Cause of your Doubts and
Troubles: for if you should mistake in the Cause, it would much frustrate the
most excellent means for the Cure.

THe very same Doubts and Complaints may come from several Causes in several
Persons, and therefore admit not of the same way of Cure: sometime the Cause
begins in the body, and thence proceeds to the mind: sometime it begins in
the mind, and thence distempereth the body: sometime in the mind, it is most
or first from worldly crosses and thence proceeds to spiritual things: And
of spiritual matters, sometimes it begins upon scruples or differences in
Religion, or points of Doctrine: sometimes and most commonly, from the ^ense of
our own Infirmities: sometimes it is only from ordinary Infirmities: sometimes
from some extraordinary decays of inward Grace: sometime from the neglects of
some weighty duty: and sometimes from the deep wounds of some heinous secret,
or scandalous sin: And sometimes it is merely from the fresh discovery of that
which before we never did discern: And sometimes from the violent assault of
extraordinary Temptations: which of these is your own Case, you must be
careful to find out, and to apply the means for Cure accordingly. Even of
true Christians, the same means will not fit all. The difference of Natures as
well as of actual Cases must be considered. One has need of that tender
handling which would undo another: and he again has need of that rowsing which
another cannot bear. And therefore understand that when I have given you all
the Directions that I can, I must (in the end hereof) advise you to take the
Counsel of a skillful Minister in applying and making use of them: For it is in
this, as in the Case of Physic: When we have written the best Books of
Receipts, or for Methodicall Cures, yet we must advise people to take heed how
they use them without the advice of a learned and faithful Physician. For
Medicines must not be only fitted to Diseases but to Bodies. That Medicine will
kill one man, which will cure another of the same distemper: such difference
there may be in their age, strength, complexion and other things. So is it much
in our present Case. And therefore as when all the Physic Books in the world
are written, and all Receipts known, yet will there be still a Necessity of
Physicians; so when all Discoveries and Directions are made in Divinity, there
will still be a Necessity of a constant standing Ministry. And as ignorant
Women and Emprikes do kill often times more then they Cure, though they have the
best Receipts, for want of Judgment and experience to use them aright: so do
ignorant Teachers and Guides by men's souls, though they can say the same words
as a Judicious Pastor, and repeat the same Texts of Scripture. Not that I mean,
that such can do no good: Yes, much no doubt, if they will humbly,
compassionately and faithfully improve their Talents, within the verge of their
own Calling: which if they go beyond, ordinarily a remarkable Judgment
follows their best labors; both to the Churches and particular souls that
make use of them. And therefore because (if my conjectural prognisticks fail
not, as I daily pray they may) we are like to be more tried and plagued this
way, then ever were any of our forefathers since Adams days till now, and
seeing this is the hour of our Temptation, wherein God is purposely separating
the chaff, and discovering to the world, the dangers of injudicious misguided
Zeal; I shall therefore both first and last advise you, as ever you would have
a settled Peace of Conscience, keep out of the hand of vagrant and seducing
Mountebanks, under what Names, or Titles, or pretenses soever they may assault
you. Especially suspect all that bestow as much pains to win you to their
party, as to win you to Christ.

DIRECTION II.
2. Make as full a Discovery as you can, how much of the trouble of your mind
does arise from your Melancholy, and bodily distempers, and how much from
discontenting afflictions in your worldly Estate, or Friends, or Name. And
according to your Discovery make use of the Remedy.

I Put these two Causes of trouble here together in the beginning, because I
will presently dismiss them, and apply the rest of these Directions only to
those Troubles that are raised from sins and wants in Grace.

1. For Melancholy, I have by long experience found it to have so great and
common a hand in the fears and troubles of mind, that I meet not with one of
many that live in great Troubles and fears for any long time together, but
Melancholy is the main seat of them: Though they feel nothing in their body,
but all in their Mind. I would have such persons make use of some able godly
Physician, and he will help them to discern how much of their Trouble comes
from Melancholy. Where this is the Cause, usually the party is Fearful of
almost every thing: a word, or a sudden thought will disquiet them: Sometime
they are sad and scarce know why: all Comforts are of no continuance with them:
but as soon as you have done comforting them, and they be never so well
satisfied, yet the trouble returns in a few days or hours, as soon as the dark
and troubled spirits return to their former force: They are still addicted to
musing and solitariness, and thoughts will run in their minds, that they
cannot lay them by: If it go any thing far; they are almost always assaulted
with Temptations to Blasphemy, to doubt whether there be a God, or a Christ, or
the Scriptures be true; or whether there be a Heaven or a Hell: and often tempted
to speak some blasphemous words against God; and this with such importunity
that they can hardly forbear: and often times they are tempted to make away
themselves. When it goes so far, they are next to the loss of the use of
reason, if it be not prevented.

Now to those that find that Melancholy is the Cause of their Troubles I would
give this advice. 1. Expect not that Rational, Spiritual Remedies should
suffice for this Cure: For you may as well expect that a good Sermon or
comfortable words should cure the falling Sickness, or Palsy, or a broken
head, as to be a sufficient Cure to your Melancholy fears. For this is as real
a bodily disease as the other: Only because it works on the spirits and
fantasy, on which words of advice do also work, therefore such words, and
Scripture, and Reason, may somewhat resist it, and may palliate or allay some
of the effects at the present: but as soon as time has worn off the force and
effects of these Reasons, the distemper presently returns.

For the Humor has the advantage 1. Of continual presence, 2. Of a more
necessary, natural and sensible way of working. As if a man be in an easy
Lethargy; you may awake him so long as you are calling on him aloud, but as
soon as you cease, he is asleep again: Such is the case of the Melancholy in
their sorrows: For it is as natural for Melancholy to cause fears and
disquietness of mind, as for Phlegm in a Lethargy to cause sleep.

Do not therefore lay the blame on your Books, Friends, Counsels, Instructions
(no nor all on your Soul,) if these Troubles be not cured by words. But labor
to discern truly how much of your Trouble comes this way, and then fix it in
your mind in all your Enquiries, Reading and Hearing, that it is the other
part of your Trouble which is truly Rational, and not this part of it which is
from Melancholy, that these means were ordained to remove (though God may also
bless them extraordinarily to do both.) Only constant importunate Prayer, is a
fit and special means for the Curing of all.

2. When you have truly found out, how much of your Disquietness proceeds from
Melancholy, acquit your soul from that part of it: Still remember in all your
self-examinations, self-judgings and reflections on your heart, that it is not
directly to be charged with those sorrows that come from your Spleen: save
only remotely, as all other Diseases are the fruits of sin: as a Lethargick
dullness is the deserved fruit of sin; but he that should charge it immediately
on his soul, should wrong himself, and he that would attempt the Cure must do
it on the Body.

3. If you would have these fears and troubles removed, apply your self to the
proper Cure of Melancholy. 1. Avoid all passions of sorrow, fear and anger as
much as you can; and all occasions of discontent and grief. 2. Avoid much
solitariness, and be most commonly in some cheerful company: Not that I would
have you do as the foolish sinners of the world do, to drink away Melancholy,
and keep company with sensual, vain and unprofitable persons that will draw you
deeper into sin, and so make your wound greater instead of healing it, and
multiply your Troubles when you are forced to look back on your sinful loss of
time: But keep company with the more cheerful sort of the Godly: There Is no
mirth like the mirth of Believers, which faith does fetch from the blood of
Christ, and from the Promises of the Word, and from experiences of Mercy, and
from the serious fore-apprehensions of our everlasting Blessedness. Converse
with men of strongest faith that have this heavenly mirth, and can speak
experimentally of the Joy of the holy Ghost; and these will be a great help to
the reviving of your spirit, and changing your Melancholy habit, so far as
without out a Physician it may be expected. Yet sometimes it may not be amiss
to confer with some that are in your own Case, that you may see that your
Condition is not singular: For Melancholy people in such distresses are ready
to think, that never any was in the Case as they are in, or at least, never any
that were truly godly: when you hear people of the most upright lives and that
truly fear God, to have the very same complaints as you have your self, it may
give you some hopes that it is not so bad as you before did imagine. However be
sure that you avoid solitariness as much as you well can. 3. Also take heed of
too deep, fixed, musing thoughts: studying and serious meditating be not duties
for the deeply-Melancholy (as I shall show more in the following Directions:)
You must let those alone till you are better able to perform them; lest by
attempting those duties which you cannot perform, you shall utterly disable
your self from all: Therefore I would advise you, by all means to shake and
rowse your self out of such musings, and suddenly to turn your thoughts away to
something else. 4. To this end, be sure that you avoid Idleness and want of
employment: which as it is a life not pleasing to God, so is it the opportunity
for Melancholy thoughts to be working, and the chiefest season for Satan to
tempt you. Never let the Devil find you unimployed: but see that you go
cheerfully about the works of your Calling, and follow it with diligence; and
that time which you redeem for spiritual exercises, let it be most spent in
Thanksgiving, and Praises, and heavenly Conference.

These things may do much for prevention, and abating your disease if it be not
gone too far: but if it be, you were best have recourse to the Physician, and
expect Gods blessing in the use of means: and you will find when your Body is
once cured, the disquietness of your Mind will vanish of it self.

2. The second part of this Direction was, That you take notice how much of
your disquietness may proceed from outward Crosses: for it is ordinary for
these to lie at the root and bring the heart into a disquiet and discontent,
and then trouble for sin does follow after. Alas, how often have I seen that
verified of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.10. The sorrow of the world works death.
How many even godly people have I known, that through crosses in children or
friends, or losses in their estates, or wrongs from men, or perplexities that
through some unadvisedness they were cast into, or the like, have fallen into
mortal Diseases, or into such a fixed Melancholy, that some of them have gone
besides themselves, and others have lived in fears and doubting ever after, by
the removal of the disquietness to their consciences? How sad a thing is it,
that we should thus add to our own Afflictions? and the heavier we judge the
burden, the more we lay on! As if God had not done enough, or would not
sufficiently afflict us? We may more comfortably bear that which God lays on
us, then that which we immediately lay upon our selves! Crosses are not great
or small according to the bulk of the matter, but according chiefly to the
mind of the sufferer. Or else how could holy men rejoice in Tribulation, and
be exceeding glad that they are accounted worthy to suffer for Christ?
Reproaches, wrongs, losses are all without you: unless you open them the door
wilfully your self, they cannot come in to the heart. God has not put the Joy
or Grief of your Heart in any other man's power, but in your own. It is you
therefore that do your selves the greatest mischief. God afflicts your body, or
men wrong you in your state of name (a small hurt if it go on further;) and
therefore you will afflict your soul! But a sadder thing yet is it to consider
of, that men fearing God should so highly value the things of the world. They
who in their Convenants with Christ are engaged, to renounce the world, the
flesh and the devil! They that have taken God in Christ for their Portion, for
their All! and have resigned themselves and all that they have to Christ's
dispose! whose very business in this world, and their Christian life,
consists so much in resisting the devil, mortifying the flesh, and overcoming
the world: and it is Gods business in his inward works of Grace, and his
outward teachings, and sharp afflictions, and examples of others, to convince
them of the vanity and vexation of the world, and thoroughly to wean them from
it: And yet that it should be so high in their estimation, and sit so close to
their hearts, that they cannot bear the loss of it without such discontent,
disquiet and distraction of mind: Yea though when all is gone, they have their
God left them, they have their Christ still, whom they took for their Treasure,
they have opportunities for their souls, they have the sure promise of Glory,
yea and a promise, that all things shall work together for their good; yea and
for that one thing that is taken from them, they have yet a hundred outward
Mercies remaining; that yet even Believers should have so much unbelief! and
have their Faith to seek when they should use it and live by it! and that God
should seem so small in their eyes as not to satisfy or quit them, unless they
have the world with him; and that the world should still seem so Amiable, when
God has done so much to bring it into contempt! Truly this (and more) shows
that the work of Mortification is very imperfect in professors, and that we
bend not the force of our daily strivings and endeavors that way. If
Christians did bestow but as much time and pains, in Mortifying the flesh, and
getting down the Interest of it in the soul, that Christ's Interest may be
advanced, as they do about Controversies, external duties, formalities, tasks
of devotion, and self tormenting fears, O what excellent Christians should we
then be! and how happily would most of our disquiet be removed! Alas, if we are
so unfit to part with one outward comfort now, upon the disposal of our fathers
providence, how should we forsake all for Christ? or what shall we do at death
when all must be parted with. As ever therefore you would live in true
Christian Peace, set more by Christ, and less by the world, and all things in
it; and hold all that you possess, so loosely, that it may not be grievous to
you when you must leave them.

So much for the Troubles that arise from your Body and outward state: All the
rest shall be directed for the Curing of those Troubles that arise immediately
from more Spiritual Causes.

DIRECTION III.
3. Be sure that you first lay sound apprehensions of Gods nature, in your
understanding: and lay them deeply.

THis is the first Article of your Creed, and the first part of Life Eternal,
to know God! His substance is quite past humane understanding; therefore never
make any attempt to reach the knowledge of it, or to have any positive
conceivings of it, for they will be all but Idols, or false conceptions: but
his Attributes are manifested to our understandings. Well, consider, that even
under the terrible Law, when God proclaims to Moses his own Name, and therein
his Nature, Exodus 34.6, 7. the first and greatest part is, The Lord, God,
Merciful and Gracious, long suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth,
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin. And he
has sworn that he has no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather that
he return and live. Think not therefore of Gods Mercifulness, with diminishing,
extenuating thoughts, nor limit it by the bounds of our frail understandings;
for the heavens are not so far above the earth, as his thoughts and ways are
above ours. Still remember that you must have no low thoughts of Gods Goodness;
but apprehend it as bearing proportion with his Power. As it is blasphemy to
limit his Power, so it is to limit his Goodness. The advantages that your soul
will get by this right knowledge and estimation of Gods Goodness, will be these.

1. This will make God appear more Amiable in your eyes; and then you will Love
him more readily and abundantly. And Love 1. Is effectually consolatory in the
very working: so much Love, usually so much Comfort (I mean this Love of
Complacency: for a Love of Desire there may be without comfort.) 2. It will
breed persuasions of Gods Love to you again, and so Comfort. 3. It will be an
unquestionable evidence of true Grace, and so Comfort.

The Affections follow the Understandings conceptions. If you think of God as
one that is glad of all advantages against you, and delights in his Creatures
misery, it is impossible you should Love him. The Love of our selves is so
deeply rooted in nature, that we cannot lay it by, nor Love any thing that is
Absolutely and directly against us. We conceive of the devil as an Absolute
Enemy to God and man, and one that seeks our destruction, and therefore we
cannot Love him: And the great Cause why troubled souls do Love God no more, is
because they represent him to themselves in an ugly, odious shape: To think of
God, as one that seeks and delights in man's ruin, is to make him as the
devil; and then what wonder if in stead of Loving him, and Delighting in him,
you tremble at the thoughts of him, and fly from him! As I have observed
Children, when they have seen the devil painted on a wall, in an ugly shape,
they have partly feared, and partly hated it: If you do so by God in your
fancy, it is not putting the Name of [God] on him when you have done, that will
reconcile your Affections to him, as long as you strip him of his Divine
Nature. Remember the holy Ghost's description of God, 1 John 4.16. God is Love.
Write these words deep in your Understanding.

2. Hereby you will have this Advantage also, that your thoughts of God will be
more sweet and delightful to you: For as Glorious and beautiful sights to
your eyes, and melodious sounds to your ears, and sweet smells, tastes, etc. are
all delightful: when things deformed, stinking, etc. are all loathsome: and we
turn away from one with abhorrency, but for the other, we would often see,
taste, etc. and enjoy them: So is it with the objects of our mind; God has
given no command for Duty, but what most perfectly agrees with the nature of
the object. He has therefore bid us, Love God and Delight in him above all,
because he is above all in Goodness, even infinitely and unconceivably Good:
else we could not Love him above all, nor would he ever command us so to do:
The object is ever as exactly fitted to its part (as to draw out the Love and
Delight of our hearts) as the Precept is on its part (to oblige us to it.) And
indeed the Nature of things is a precept to Duty, and it which we call, The Law
of Nature.

3. Hereupon will follow this further Advantage, that your Thoughts will be
both easilyer drawn toward God, and more frequent and constant on him. For
delightful objects draw the heart to them, as the Loadstone does the Iron: How
gladly, and freely, and frequently do you think of your dearest friends? And if
you did firmly conceive of God, as one that is ten thousand times more
Gracious, Loving and Amiable then any friend that you have in the world, it
would make you not only to Love him above all friends, but also more freely,
delightfully and unweariedly to think of him.

4. And then you would hence have this further Advantage, that you would have
less backwardness to any Duty, and less weariness in Duty: you would find
more delight in Prayer, Meditation and speech of God, when once God himself
were more Lovely and delightful in your eyes.

5. All these Advantages would produce a further, that is, The growth of all
your Graces: For its impossible but this growth of Love, and frequent
delightful thoughts of God and addresses to him, should cause an increase of
all the rest.

6. Hereupon your Evidences would be more clear and discernable: For Grace in
strength and action would be easily found: and would not this resolve all your
doubts at once?

7. Yea the very exercise of these several Graces would be comfortable.

8. And hereupon you would have more humble familiarity and communion with God:
For Love, Delight and frequent addresses would overcome strangeness and
disacquaintance, which make us fly from God, as a Fish, or Bird, or wild beast
will from the face of a man, and would give us access with boldness and
confidence. And this would banish sadness and terror, as the Sun dispelleth
darkness and cold.

9. At least you would hence have this advantage, That the fixed apprehension
of Gods Goodness and merciful nature, would cause a fixed apprehension of the
Probability of your Happiness, as long as you are willing to be Happy in Gods
way. For reason will tell you, that he who is Love it self, and whose Goodness
is equal to his Almightiness, and who has sworn, that he has no pleasure in
the death of a sinner, but rather that he repent and live, will not destroy a
poor soul that lies in submission at his feet, and is so far from resolved
rebellion against him, that it grieveth that it is no better and can please him
no more.

10. However, these right apprehensions of God, would overcome those terrors
which are raised only by false apprehensions of him: And doubtless a very great
part of men's causeless troubles, are raised from such misapprehensions of God.
For Satan knows that if he can Bring you to think of God as a cruel Tyrant, and
bloudthirsty man-hater, then he can drive you from him in terror, and turn all
your Love and cheerful obedience into hatred and slavish fear. I say therefore
again, Do not only get, but also fix deep in your understanding, the highest
thoughts of Gods natural Goodness and Graciousness that possibly you can raise:
for when they are at the highest, they come short ten thousand fold.

Object. But, Gods Goodness lies not in Mercy to men, as I have read in great
Divines: he may be perfectly Good, though he should for ever torment the most
innocent creatures?

Answ. These are ignorant presumptuous intrusions into that which is
unsearchable. Where does Scripture say as you say? Judge of God as he reveals
himself, or you will but delude your self and abuse him. All his works
represent him merciful: for his Mercy is over all his works, and legible in
them all. His word says, He is Good and does Good, Psalm. 119.68. and 145.9.
How himself does proclaim his own Name, Exodus 34.6, 7. I told you before. The
most merciful men are his liveliest Image: and therefore he plants Mercy in
them in their conversion, as a principal part of their new nature: and commands
of mercifulness are a great part of his Law; and he bids us, Be merciful as
our heavenly Father is merciful, Luke 6.36. Now if this were none of his
Nature, how could he be the pattern of our new nature herein? and if he were
not infinitely Merciful himself, how could we be required to be Merciful as
he is? Who dare say, I am more Merciful then God?

Object. But God is Just as well as Merciful: and for all his Merciful
nature, he will damn most of the world for ever in hell.

Answ. 1. But James says, Mercy rejoiceth against Judgment, Jam. 2.13. 2. God
is necessarily the Governor of the world (while there is a world) and
therefore must govern it in Justice, and so must not suffer his Mercy to be
perpetually abused by wicked, wilful, contemptuous sinners. But then consider
two things; 1. That he destroys not humble souls that lie at his feet, and
are willing to have Mercy on his easy terms; but only the stubborn despisers
of his Mercy: He damneth none but those that will not be saved in his way; that
is, that will not accept of Christ and salvation freely given them (I speak of
those that hear the Gospel: for others their case is more unknown to us:) And
is it any diminution to his infinite Mercy, that he will not save those that
will not be entreated to accept of salvation? 2. And consider how long he uses
to wait on sinners, and even beseech them to be reconciled to him, before he
destroys them: and that he heapeth multitudes of Mercies on them, even in
their rebellion, to draw them to Repentance and so to Life? and is it
unmercifulness yet if such men perish?

Object. But if God were so infinite in Mercy, as you say, Why does he not make
all these men willing, that so they may be saved?

Answ. God having created the world and all things in it, at first, did make
them in a certain nature and order, and so stablish them, as by a fixed Law:
and he thereupon is their Governor, to govern every thing according to its
nature. Now man's Nature was to be Principled with an Inclination to his own
Happiness, and to be lead to it by objects in a Moral way, and in the choice
of means to be a free agent, and the Guider of himself under God. As Governor
of the Rational creature, God does continue that same course of Ruling them by
Laws, and drawing them by ends and objects, as their natures do require: And in
this way he is not wanting to them: His Laws are now Laws of Grace, and
universal in the tenor of the free Gift and Promise: for he has there given
life in Christ to all that will have it: and the objects propounded are
sufficient in their kind, to work even the most wonderful effects on men's
souls; for they are, God himself, and Christ, and glory: Besides, God gives
men natural faculties, that they may have the use of reason; and there is
nothing more unreasonable then to refuse this offered Mercy. He gives inducing
Arguments in the written Word and Sermons; and adds such Mercies and
Afflictions that one would think should bow the hardest heart. Besides, the
strivings and motions of his Spirit within, which are more then we can give an
account of. Now is not this as much as belongs to God as Governor of the
Creature according to its Nature? And for the Giving of a New nature, and
Creating New hearts in men, after all their rebellious rejecting of Grace, this
is a certain Miracle of Mercy, and belongs to God in another Relation (even as
the free chooser of his Elect,) and not directly as the Governor of the
universe. This is from his special Providence, and the former from his General.
Now special Providence are not to be as common as the General, nor to subvert
Gods ordinary established* Course of Government. If God please to stop Jordan,
and dry up the Red Sea for the passage of the Israelites, and to cause the Sun
to stand still for Joshua, must he do so still for every man in the world, or
else be accounted unmercifull? The sense of this Objection is plainly this: God
is not so rich in Mercy, except he will New make all the World, or Govern it
above its Nature. Suppose a King know his subjects to be so wicked, that they
have every one a full design to famish or kill themselves, or poison themselves
with something which is enticing by its sweetness. The King not only makes a
Law, strictly charging them all to forbear to touch that poison, but he sends
special Messengers to entreat them to it, and tell them the danger? If these
men will not hear him, but wilfully poison themselves, is he therefore
unmercifull? But suppose that he has three or four of his sons that are
infected with the same wickedness, and he will not only command and entreat
them, but he will also lock them up, or keep the poison from them, or will feed
them by violence with bitter food? is he unmercifull unless he will do so by
all the rest of his Kingdom?

Lastly, If all this will not satisfy you; Consider, 1. That it is most
certain that God is Love, and infinite in Mercy, and has no pleasure in the
death of sinners. 2. But it is utterly uncertain to us, how God works on man's
will inwardly by his Spirit. 3. Or yet what intolerable inconvenience there
may be, if God should work in other ways, therefore we must not upon such
uncertainties, deny certainties; nor from some unreasonable scruples about the
manner of Gods working Grace, deny the blessed Nature of God, which himself
has most evidently proclaimed to the world.

I have said the more of this, because I find Satan harp so much on this
string, with many troubled souls, especially on the advantage of some common
doctrines. For false doctrine still tends to the overthrow of solid Peace and
Comfort. Remember therefore before all other thoughts for the obtaining of
Peace, to get high thoughts of the Gracious and Lovely Nature of God.

DIRECTION IV.
4. Next this, Be sure that you deeply apprehend the Gracious Nature,
Disposition and Office of the Mediator JESUS CHRIST.

THough there can no more be said of the Gracious Nature of the Son, then of
the Father's, even, that his Goodness is Infinite; yet these two advantages
this Consideration will add unto the former. 1. You will see here Goodness and
Mercy in its condescension, and nearer to you then in the Divine Nature alone
it was. Our thoughts of God are necessarily more strange, because of our
Infinite distance from the Godhead: and therefore our apprehensions of Gods
Goodness will be the less working, because less familiar. But in Christ God
is come down into our Nature, and so Infinite Goodness and Mercy is incarnate.
The man Christ Jesus is able now to save to the utmost all that come to God by
him. We have a Merciful High Priest that is acquainted with our Infirmities.
2. Herein we see the Will of God putting forth it self for our help in the most
astonishing way that could be imagined. Here is more then merely a Gracious
inclination. Its an Office of saving and showing Mercy also that Christ has
undertaken; even to seek and to save that which was lost: to bring home
straying souls to God: to be the great Peacemaker between God and man: to
Reconcile God to man and man to God: and so to be the Head and Husband of his
people. Certainly the Devil strangely wrongeth poor troubled souls in this
point; that he can bring them to have such hard suspicious thoughts of Christ,
and so much to overlook the Glory of Mercy which so shines in the face of the
Son of Mercy it self. How can we more contradict the Nature of Christ, and the
Gospel-description of him, then to think him a destroying hater of his
creatures, and one that watches for our halting, and has more mind to hurt us
then to help us? How could he have manifested more willingness to save? and
more tender compassion to the souls of men, then he has fully manifested? That
the Godhead should condescend to assume our Nature, is a thing so wonderful
even to astonishment, that it puts faith to it to apprehend it: For it is ten
thousand times more condescension, then for the greatest King to become a Fly
or a Toad to save such creatures. And shall we ever have low and suspicious
thoughts of the Gracious and Merciful Nature of Christ after so strange and
full a discovery of it? If twenty were ready to drown in the sea, and if one
that were able to swim and fetch them all out, should cast himself into the
water, and offer them his help, were it not foolish ingratitude for any to say,
I know not yet whether he be willing to help me, or not; and so to have Jealous
thoughts of his good will; and so perish in refusing his help? How tenderly did
Christ deal with all sorts of sinners? He professed that he came not into the
world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved. Did
he weep over a rejected unbeleeving people, and was he desirous of their
desolation? How often would he have gathered them as a Hen gathers her Chickens
under her wings (mark, that he would have done this for them that he cast off)
and they would not? When his Disciples would have had fire come down from*
Heaven to consume those that refused him, he reproves them, and tells them,
They kn^w not of what spirit they were of (the common case of them that
miscarry, by suffering their zeal to overrun their Christian Wisdom and
meekness.) Yea he prays for his crucifyers, and that on the Cross, not
forgetting them in the heat of his sufferings: Thus he does by the wicked: But
to those that follow him his tenderness is unspeakable, as you would have said
your self if you had but stood by and seen him washing his Disciples feet, and
wiping them; or bidding Thomas put his fingers into his side, and be not
faithless but believing. Alas that the Lord Jesus should come from Heaven to
earth, from Glory into humane flesh, and pass through a life of misery to a
Cross, and from the Cross to the grave, to manifest openly to the world the
abundance of his Love, and the tenderness of his heart to sinners, and that
after all this we should suspect him of cruelty, or hardheartedness and
unwillingness to show mercy, and that the devil can so far delude us, as to
make us think of the Lamb of God, as if he were a Tiger or devourer!

But I-will say no more of this, because Dr Sibbs in his Bruised Reed has said
so much already: Only remember, that if you would methodically proceed to the
attaining of solid Comfort, this is the next stone that must be laid; You must
be deeply possessed with apprehensions of the most Gracious Nature and Office
of the Redeemer, and the exceeding tenderness of his heart to lost sinners.

DIRECTION V.
5. The next step in right order to Comfort is this: You must believe and
consider, the full sufficiency of Christ's Sacrifice and Ransom, for All.

THe Controversies about this you need not be troubled at: for as almost all
confess this sufficiency, so the Scripture it self, by the plainness and
fullness of its expression makes it as clear as the light, that Christ died for
All. The fuller proof of this I have given you in public, and shall do yet
more publicly, if God will. If Satan would persuade you either that no Ransom
or Sacaifice was ever given for you, or that therefore you have no Redeemer to
trust in, and no Savior to believe in, and no Sanctuary to fly to from the
wrath of God; he must first prove you either to be no lost sinner, or to be a
final-impenitent unbeleever, that is, that you are dead already; or else he
must delude your understanding, to make you think that Christ died not for All;
and then I confess he has a sore advantage against your faith and comfort.

DIRECTION VI.
6. The next thing in order to be done is this: Get clear apprehensions of the
freeness, fullness, and universality of the New Covenant or Law of Grace.

I Mean, the Promise of Remission, Justification, Adoption and Salvation to
All, so they will believe. No man on earth is excluded in the tenor of this
covenant: and therefore certainly you are not excluded: and if not excluded,
then you must needs be included. Show where you are excluded if you can! You
will say, But for all this, All men are not Justified and saved: Ans. True:
because they Will not be persuaded to Accept the Mercy that is freely given
them.

The use that I would have you make of this, I will show in the next.

DIRECTION VII.
7. You must get the right understanding of the difference between General
Grace and Special: and between the Possibility, Probability, Conditional
certainty, and Absolute certainty of your Salvation: and so between the Comfort
on the former ground, and on the later.

ANd here I shall open to you a rich mine of Consolation.

Understand therefore that as every particular part of the house is built on
the foundation, so is every part of Special Grace built on General Grace.
Understand also, that all the four last mentioned particulars do belong to this
General Grace: As also, that though no man can have Absolute Certainty of
Salvation, from the consideration of this General Grace alone, yet may it
afford abundance of relief to distressed souls, yea much true Consolation.
Lastly, Understand, that All that hear the Gospel may take part in this
Consolation, though they have no Assurance of their Salvation at all, no nor
any special Saving Grace.

Now when you understand these things well, this is the Use that I would have
you make of them.

1. Do not begin the way to your Spiritual Peace, by enquiring after the
sincerity of your Graces, and trying your selves by Signs: Do not seek out for
Assurance of Salvation in the first place; nor do not look and study after the
special Comforts which come from certainty of Special Grace, before you have
learned 1. To perform the Duty, 2. And to Receive the Comforts which General
Grace affords. Such immethodical disorderly proceedings, keeps thousands of
poor ignorant Christians in darkness and trouble almost all their days. Let
the first thing you do, be to obey the voice of the Gospel, which calls you
to Accept of Christ and special Mercy: This is the Record that God has given
us eternal Life, and this life is in his Son: He that has the Son has life.
Fix this deep in your mind; that the nature of the Gospel is first to declare
to our Understandings, the most gracious Nature, undertakings and performances
of Christ for us (which must be believed to be true:) And 2. To Offer this
Christ with all his special Mercy to every man to whom this Gospel comes, and
to Entreat them to Accept Christ and Life, which is freely given and offered to
them. Remember then, You are a lost sinner: for certain Christ and Life in him
is given and offered to you. Now your first work is, Presently to accept it:
not to make an unseasonable enquiry, Whether Christ be yours? but to Take him
that he may be yours. If you were Condemned, and a Pardon were freely Given
you, on Condition you would Thankfully Take it, and it were offered to you and
you entreated to take it; what would you do in this Case? would you spend your
time and thoughts in searching whether this Pardon be already yours? or would
you not presently Take it that it may be yours? Or if you were ready to famish,
and food were offered you; would you stand asking first, How shall I know that
it is mine? or rather Take and Eat it, when you are sure it may be yours if you
will. Let me entreat you therefore, when the devil clamours in your ears
[Christ and Salvation is none of thine,] suppose that this voice of God in the
Gospel were still in your ears, yea let it be still in your memory [O Take
Christ, and Life in him, that thou may be saved:] still think that you hear
Paul following you with these words [ We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though
God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be Reconciled to God.]
Will you but remember this, when you are on your knees in sorrow; and when you
would fain have Christ and Life, and you are afraid that God will not give them
to you? I say, Remember then, God stands by Beseeching you to Accept the same
thing which you are Beseeching him to give. God is the first suitor and
solicitor: God Prays you to Take Christ, and you Pray him to give you Christ:
what have you now to do, but to Take him? And here understand, that this Taking
is no Impossible business; it is no more but your hearty Consenting, as I shall
tell you more anon. If you did but well understand and consider, that Believing
is the great Duty that God calls you to perform, and promises to save you if
you do truly perform it; and that this Believing is to Take, or Consent to have
the same Mercy which you pray for, and are troubled for fear least you shall
miss of it, even Christ and life in him; this would presently draw forth your
Consent, and that in so open and express a way, as you could not but discover
it, and have the comfort of it. Remember this then, That your first work is to
Believe, or Accept an offered Savior.

2. You must learn (as I told you,) to Receive the Comforts of Universal or
General Grace, before you search after the Comforts of Special Grace. (I here
suppose you so far sound in the doctrine of the Gospel, as neither with some on
one hand, to look so much at Special Grace, as to deny that General Grace which
is the Ground of it, or presupposed to it: nor with others, so far to look at
universal Mercy as to deny Special.) Satan will tell you, that all your Duties
have been done in hypocrisy, and you are unsound at the heart, and have not a
drop of saving Grace: You are apt to entertain this, and conclude that all this
is true: If I had any Grace, I should have more Life, and Love and Delight in
God; more tenderness of heart, more growth in Grace: I should not carry about
such a Rock in my breast; such a stupid, dull, insensible soul, etc.

At the present let us suppose that all this be true: yet see what a world of
Comfort you may gather from Universal or General Mercy. I have before opened to
you four parts of it in the Cause of your Happiness, and three in the Effect,
which may each of them afford much relief to your troubled soul.

1. Suppose you are yet Graceless, is it nothing to you that it is a God of
Infinite Mercy that you have to do with? whose Compassions are ten thousand
times greater then your dearest friends or your own husbands.

Object. O but yet he will not save the Graceless?

Answ. True: but he is the more ready to give Grace, that you may be saved. If
any of you (mark, any of you) do lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, who
gives to all men liberally (without desert) and upbraideth not (with our
unworthiness or former faults) and it shall be given him, Jam. 1.4. If you that
are evil can give good gifts to your children, how much more shall your
heavenly Father give his holy Spirit to them that ask it, Luke 11.13. Suppose
your life were in the hands of your own husband, or your childrens life in your
hands, would it not exceedingly comfort you or them, to consider, whose hands
they are in? though yet you had no further Assurance how you should be used? It
may be you will say, But God is no Father to the Graceless? I answer: He is not
their Father in so near and strict a sense as he is the Father of Believers:
but yet a Father he is even to the wicked: and to convince men of his Fatherly
Mercy to them, he often so styles himself. He says by Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.6. to a
wicked generation, whose spot was not the spot of his children, Do ye thus
requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy Father that bought
thee? has he not made thee and established thee? And the Prodigal could call
him Father for his encouragement, before he returned to him, Luke 15.16, 17,
18. For my own part, I must needs profess, that my soul has more frequent
support from the consideration of Gods Gracious and Merciful nature, then from
the Promise it self.

2. Furthermore. Suppose you were Graceless at the present; yet is it not an
exceeding Comfort, that there is one of such Infinite Compassions as the Lord
Christ, who has assumed our Nature, and is come down to seek and save that
which was lost; and is more tender hearted to poor sinners, then we can
possibly conceive? yea who has made it his Office to Heal, and Relieve, and
Restore, and Reconcile: Yea that has himself endured such temptations as many
of ours: For we have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are,
without sin: Let us therefore (says the holy Ghost) come boldly unto the
throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of
need, Heb. 4.15, 16. Forasmuch as the children were partakers of flesh and
blood, he also himself likewise took part with them, that he might destroy
through death, him that had the power of death, that is, the devil; and deliver
them who through fear of death, were all their lifetime subject to bondage. For
verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of
Abraham: Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
Brethren, that he might be a Merciful and faithful High Priest in things
pertaining to God, to make Reconciliation for the sins of the people: For in
that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that
are tempted, Heb. 2.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Have you discountenance from men?
Christ had much more. Does God seem to forsake you? so he did by Christ. Are
you fain to lie on your knees crying for Mercy? why Christ in the days of his
flesh, was fain to offer up strong cries and tears, to him that was able to
save him* and was heard in that he feared. It seems that Christ had distressing
fears as well as you, though not sinful fears. Have you horrid temptations? why
Christ was tempted to cast himself headlong, and to worship the Devil, for
worldly preferment: Yea the devil had power to carry his body up and down, to
the pinnacle of the Temple, and the top of a mountain. If he had such power of
you, would you not think your self certainly his slave? I conclude therefore,
as it is an exceeding ground of comfort to all the sick people in a City, to
know that there is a most merciful and skilful Physician, that is easily able
to cure them, and has undertaken to do it freely for all that will take him
for their Physician: so is it a ground of exceeding comfort to the worst of
sinners, to all sinners (that are yet alive, and have not blasphemed the holy
Ghost,) to know what a Merciful and sufficient Savior has undertaken the work
of man's Redemption.

3. Also, Suppose yet that you are Graceless: Is it nothing that a sufficient
Sacrifice and Ransom is given for you? This is the very foundation of all
solid Peace. I think this is a great comfort, to know that God looks now for no
satisfaction at your hand: and that the Number or Greatness of your sins, as
such, cannot now be your ruin. For certainly, no man shall perish for want of
the payment of his Ransom, or of an expiatory Sacrifice for sin: but only for
want of a willing heart to Accept him that has freely Ransomed them.

4. Also, Suppose you are Graceless; Is it nothing that God has under his hand
and seal made a full and free Deed of Gift, to you and all sinners, of Christ,
and with him of pardon and salvation? and all this on Condition of your
Acceptance or Consent? I know the Despisers of Christ shall be miserable for
all this: But for you that would fain have Christ, is it no comfort to know
that you shall have him if you will? and to find this to be the sum of the
Gospel? I know you have often read those free offers, Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will,
let him take of the water of life freely: Hoe every one that thirsts, come,
and drink, etc. Almost all that I have hitherto said to you, is comprised in
that one text, Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
Life.

And as I have showed it you in the Causes (what Comfort even General Mercy
may afford) so let me a little show it you in the Effects. I mean, not only in
that God is now satisfied; but as to your self and every sinner, these three
things are produced hereby.

1. There is now a Possibility of Salvation to you. And certainly even that
should be a very great Comfort. I know you will meet with some Divines, who
will tell you that this is no effect of Christ's death; and that else Christ
should die for God, if he procured him a Power to save which he had not before:
But this is no better then a Reproaching of our Redeemer. Suppose that a
Traitor have so abused a King, that it will neither stand with his own Honor,
nor Justice, nor Laws to pardon him: If his Compassion were so great that his
own Son shall suffer for him, that so the King might be capable of pardoning
him, without any diminution of his Honor or Justice; were it not a vile
reproach, if this Traitor should tell the Prince that suffered for him [It was
for your Father that you suffered to procure him a Power of pardoning: it was
not for me.] Its true, the King could not pardon him, without satisfaction to
his Honor and Justice. But this was not through any Impotency: but because the
thing was not fit to be done: and so was Morally Impossible. For in Law we say,
Dishonest things are Impossible. And it had been no loss to the King if the
Traitor had not been pardoned. So is it in our Case. And therefore Christ's
sufferings could not be more eminently for us, then by enabling the offended
Majesty to forgive us; and so taking the greatest impediment out of the way:
for when impediments are once removed, Gods Nature is so Gracious and prone to
Mercy, that he would soon pardon us when once it is fit to be done, and so
Morally possible in the fullest sense: only men's own Unwillingness now stands
in the way, and makes it to be not fully fit to be yet done. Its true, in a
Remote sense, the Pardon of sin was always Possible; but in the nearest sense it
was Impossible, till Christ made it Possible by his Satisfaction.

2. Nay, though you were yet Graceless, you have now this Comfort, that your
Salvation is Probable as well as Possible. You are very fair for it. The terms
be not hard in themselves, on which it is tendered. For Christ's yoke is easy
and his burden light, and his Commands are not grievous. The word is nigh you,
even the offer of Grace: you need not say, who shall ascend to Heaven, or go
down to hell? Romans 10. But this will appear in the next.

3. Yea, this exceeding Comfort there is, even for them that are Graceless,
that their Salvation is Conditionally Certain, and the Condition is but their
own willingness. They may all have Christ and Life if they will. Now I desire
you in all your Doubts, that you will well consider and improve this one Truth
and Ground of Comfort. Would you, in the midst of your groans, and complaints,
and fears, take it for a small mercy, to be certain that you shall have Christ
if you will? when you are praying for Christ in fear and anguish of spirit, if
an Angel or voice from Heaven should say to you [It shall be unto thee
according to thy will: If thou will have Christ and Life in him, thou shall:]
would this be no Comfort to you? would it not revive you, and overcome your
fears?

By this time I hope you see what abundance of Comfort General Mercy or Grace
may afford the soul, before it perceive (yea or receive,) any special Grace
(though few of those that receive not Special Grace can make much use of
General, yet it is propounded to them as well as others.)

1. All the terrifying Temptations which are grounded on misrepresentations of
God (as if he were a cruel destroyer to be fled from,) are dispelled by the due
consideration of his Goodness, and the deep settled apprehensions of his
Gracious, Merciful, Lovely Nature (which indeed is the first work of true
Religion, and the very master Radical Act of true Grace, and the chief
maintainer of Spiritual Life and Motion.)

2. All these Temptations are yet more effectually dispelled by considering
this Merciful Divine Nature dwelling in flesh, becoming man, by condescending
to the Assumption of our humane Nature; and so come near us, and assuming the
Office of being the Mediator, the Redeemer, the Savior of the world.

3. All your doubts and fears that proceed from your former sins, whether of
youth or of age, of ignorance or of knowledge; and those which proceed from
your Legal unworthiness; have all a present Remedy in the fullness and
sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction, even for all the world: so that no sin
(except the excepted sin) is so great, but it is fully satisfied for: and
though you are unworthy, yet Christ is worthy; and he came into the world to
save only the unworthy (in the strict and Legal sense.)

4. All your doubts and fears that arise from an apprehension of Gods
unwillingness to show you Mercy, and to give you Christ and Life in him, arise
from the misapprehension of Christ's unwillingness to be yours; or at least from
the uncertainty of his willingness; these have all a sufficient Remedy in the
general extent and tenor of the New Covenant. Can you doubt whether God be
willing to give you Christ and Life, when he has given them already? even by a
Deed of Gift under his hand, and by a Law of Grace, 1 John 5.10, 11, 12.

Object. But yet all are not Pardoned, nor possessed of Christ, and so saved.

Answ. I told you, that is because they will not: so that (I pray you mark it
well) God has in these four Means before mentioned, given even to the
Graceless so much Ground of Comfort, that nothing but [their unwillingness to
have Christ,] is left to be their terror. For though sin be not Actually
Remitted to them, yet is it Conditionally Remitted, viz. if they will but
accept of Christ offered them. Will you remember this, when your doubts are
greatest, and you conclude that certainly Christ's is not yours, because you
have no true Grace: Suppose it be true: Yet still know that Christ may be yours
if you will, and when you will. This Comfort you may have when you can find no
Evidences of true Grace in your self. So much for that Direction.

DIRECTION VIII.
8. The next thing that you have to do, for building up a stable Comfort, and
settling your Conscience in a solid Peace, is this; Be sure to get and keep a
right Understanding of the Nature of Saving Faith.

AS you must have right thoughts of the Covenant of Grace (of which before,)
the want whereof does puzzle and confound very many Christians; so you must be
sure to have right thoughts of the Condition of the Covenant. For indeed that
Grace which causes you to perform this Condition, is your first special saving
Grace, which you may take as a certain evidence of your Justification: And this
Condition is the very link which conjoyneth all the General foregoing Grace to
all the rest of the following special Grace. The Scripture is so full and plain
in Assuring pardon and salvation to all true Believers, that if you can but be
sure that you are a Believer, you need not make any doubt of your interest in
Christ and your salvation. Seeing therefore that all the question will be,
Whether you have true Faith? Whether you do perform the Condition of the new
Covenant? (For all other doubts God has given you sufficient ground to
resolve, as is said,) how much then does it concern you to have a right
understanding of the Nature of this Faith? Which that you may have let me tell
you briefly what it is. Man's soul has two faculties, Understanding and Will:
Accordingly the Objects of man's soul (all Beings which it is to Receive) have
two Modifications; Truth and Goodness (as those to be Avoided are Evil.)
Accordingly Gods Word or Gospel has two parts; the Revelation of Truth, and
the Offer and Promise of some Good. This offered Good is principally and
immediately Christ himself, to be joined to us by Covenant as our head and
husband: The secondary consequential Good, is Pardon, Justification,
Reconciliation, Adoption, further Sanctification and Glorification, which are
all offered with Christ. By this you may see what saving Faith is: It is first
a Believing that the Gospel is True; and then an Accepting of Christ therein
offered to us, with his benefits: or a consenting that he be ours and we be
his; which is nothing but a true willingness to have an offered Christ.
Remember this well; that you may make use of it, when you are in doubt of the
truth of your Faith. Thousands of poor souls have been in the dark, and unable
to see themselves to be Believers, merely for want of knowing what saving Faith
is. And, it is a truth that cannot be hid, that Divines who should have taught
them better, have been the great cause of their error; not well and clearly
understanding this themselves. It is a shameful confession: but the world
knows it already. The Papists place almost all in the mere Assent of the
Understanding. Our great Reformers made it to be either an Assurance of the
pardon of our own sins; or a strong persuasion of their pardon, excluding
doubting; or (the moderatest) a persuasion of our particular pardon, though
mixed with some doubting: The Antinomians strike in with them, and say the same:
Hence even the greatest of our Divines ( Chamier, Polanus, Twisse, etc.)
conclude, that Justification and Remission go before faith (a desperate error)
because the Act does always suppose its object: For they thought that Remission
already past, was the object of Justifying Faith: supposing faith to be nothing
else but a Belief that we are pardoned: Yea ordinarily, it has been taught in
the writings of our greatest refuters of the Papists, That this Belief is
properly a Divine faith, or the Belief of a Divine Testimony, as is the
Believing of any Proposition written in the Scriture (a foul error which I have
confuted in my book of Rest, Part. 3. Chap. 7.) Most of late have come nearer
the truth, and affirmed Justifying Faith to consist in Affiance, or Recumbency,
or Resting on Christ for salvation. No doubt this is one Act of Justifying
faith; but not that which a poor troubled soul should first search after and
try it self by (except by Affiance, any should mean as Amesius does, Election
of Christ: and then it is the same act which I am asserting; but very unfitly
expressed.) For 1. Affiance is not the Principal act, nor that wherein the very
life of Justifying faith does consist: but only an imperate following act, and
an effect of the vital act (which is Consent, or Willing, or Accepting Christ
offered:) for it lies mainly in that which we call the sensitive part, or the
Passions of the soul. 2. It is therefore less constant, and so unfitter to try
by: For many a poor soul that knows it self unfeignedly willing to have
Christ, yet feels not a Resting on him or Trusting in him, and therefore cries
out, O I cannot believe; and think they have no Faith. For Recumbency,
Affiance, or Resting on Christ, implies that easing of themselves, or casting
off their fears, or doubts, or cares, which true believers do not always
find. Many a poor soul complains, O I cannot rest on Christ; I cannot trust
him! who yet would have him to be their Lord and Savior, and can easily be
convinced of their willingness. 3. Besides, Affiance is not the Adequate act of
faith, suited to the object in that fullness as it must be Received: but
Willingness, or Acceptance, is, Christ is Rested on only for our selves as our
Deliverer: but he is Accepted also for Himself as our Lord and Master. The full
proof of these, I have performed in other Writings, and often in your hearing in
public, and therefore omit them now. Be sure then to fix this truth deep in
your mind. That Justifying faith is not an Assurance of our Justification, no
nor a persuasion or belief that we are Justified or pardoned, or that Christ
died more for us then for others; nor yet is Affiance or Resting on Christ the
vital, principal, certain, constant full act: but it is the Understandings
belief of the truth of the Gospel, and the Will's Acceptance of Christ and Life
offered to us therein: which Acceptance is but the hearty Consent or
Willingness that he be yours and you his. This is the Faith which must Justify
and save you.

Object. But 1. May not wicked men be Willing to have Christ? 2. And do not you
often tell us that Justifying faith comprehends Love to Christ and
Thankfulness, and that it receives him as a Lord to be obeyed, as well as a
Deliverer? and that Repentance and sincere Obedience, are parts of the
Condition of the new Covenant?

Answ. I will give as brief a touch now on these as may be, because I have
handled them in sitter places. 1. Wicked men are willing to have Remission,
Justification and freedom from hell (for no man can be willing to be unpardoned
or to be damned:) But they are not willing to have Christ himself in that
nature and office which he must be Accepted; that is, As a holy Head and
Husband, to save them both from the Guilt, and Power, and all defilement and
abode of sin, and to Rule them by his Law, and Guide them by his Spirit, and to
make them happy by bringing them to God, that being without sin, they may be
perfectly Pleasing and Amiable in his sight, and enjoy him forever. Thus is
Christ offered, and thus to be accepted of all that will be saved; and thus no
wicked man will accept him (but when he cease to be wicked.) 2. (To cut all
the rest short, in a word, I say, That) in this fore-described Willingness or
Acceptance, Repentance, Love, Thankfulness, Resolution to obey, are all
contained, or nearly employed, as I have elsewhere manifested; so that the Heart
of saving faith, is this Acceptance of Christ, or Willingness to have him to
Justify, Sanctify, Guide and Govern you. Find but this Willingness, and you
find all the rest, whether you expressly see them or not. So much for that
Direction.

DIRECTION IX.
9. Having thus far proceeded, in discovering and improving the General Grounds
of Comfort, and then in discovering the Nature of Faith, which gives you Right
to the special Mercies of the Covenant, following it; Your next work must be,
To perform this Condition by actual Believing.

YOur soul stands in extreme need of a Savior: God offers you a Savior in
the Gospel, what then have you next to do, but Accept him? Believe that this
offer is general, and therefore to you: and that Christ is not set to sale, nor
does God require you to bring a Price in your hand: but only heartily and
thankfully to Accept of what he freely gives you. This must be done before you
fall on trying your Graces to get Assurance: for you must have Grace, before
you can discover it: and this is the first proper special saving Grace (as it
comprizeth that knowledge and Assent which necessarily go before it.) This is
not only the method for those that yet never believed, but also for them that
have lost the sense of their faith, and so the sight of their evidence. Believe
again, that you may know you do believe; or at least may possess an Accepted
Savior. When God in the Gospel bids you, Take Jesus Christ, and beseeches you
to be reconciled to him; what will you say to him? If your heart answer, Lord I
am willing, I will Accept of Christ and be thankful; why, then the match is
made between Christ and you: and the marriage Covenant is truly entered, which
none can dissolve. If Christ were not first willing, he would not be the suitor
and make the motion: and if he be willing, and you be willing, what can break
the match? If you will say, I cannot believe, if you understand what you say,
either you mean that you cannot believe the Gospel is true; or else that you
cannot be willing that Christ should be yours. If it be the former, and you
speak truly, then you are a flat Infidel (yet many temptations to doubt of the
truth of Scripture, a true believer may have, yea and actual doubtings; but his
faith prevails and is victorious over them:) But if you really doubt whether
the Gospel be true, use Gods means for the discovery of its truth. Read what I
have written in the second part of my book of Rest: I will undertake now more
confidently then ever I did, to prove the truth of Scripture, by plain, full,
undeniable force of Reason. But I suppose this is none of your case. If
therefore when you say, that you cannot believe, you mean that you cannot
Accept an offered Christ, or be willing to have him: then I demand, 1. What is
your reason? the Will is lead by the Reason of the Understanding. If you be not
willing, there is something that persuades you to be unwilling. This Reason
must be from something real, or else upon a mistake, upon supposal of
something that is not in being. If it be upon mistake, either it is that you be
not convinced of Christ's willingness to be yours; and if you thought he did
consent, you would consent willingly: If this be it, you do truly believe while
you think you do not: for you do consent (and that is all on your part to make
the match) and Christ does certainly consent, though you do not understand it:
In this case it concerns you, to understand better the extent of the new
Covenant, and then you will be past doubt of the willingness of Christ, and see
that wherever the match breaks, it is only for want of consent in men; for
Christ is the first suitor, and has long ago in the Covenant proclaimed his
consent, to be the Head and Husband of every sinner, on condition they will but
consent to be his.

If your mistake be from any false apprehension of the Nature of Christ, as if
he were not a sufficient Savior, or were such an enemy to your comfort that he
would do you more hurt then good; if these mistakes are prevalent, then you do
not know Christ, and therefore must presently better study him in the Gospel,
till you have prevailed over such ignorant and blasphemous conceits (but none
of this I suppose is your case.)

If then the reason why you say, you cannot believe, be from any thing that is
really in Christ (and not upon mistake,) then it must be either from some
dislike of his saving work, by which he would pardon you, and save you from
damnation (but that is impossible; for you cannot be willing to be damned or
unpardoned, till you lose your Reason:) Or else it is from a dislike of his
work of sanctification, by which he would cleanse your heart and life, by
saving you from your sinful nature and actions: some grudgings against Christ's
holy and undefiled Laws and ways will be in the best, while there is that
flesh in them which lusts against the Spirit, so that they cannot do the
things they would: But if truly you have such a dislike of a sinless condition,
through the love of any sin or creature, that you cannot be willing to have
Christ to cure you and cleanse you from that sin, and make you holy, I say, if
this be true, in a prevailing degree, so that if Christ and Holiness were
offered you, you would not Accept them, then it is certain you have not true
faith. And in this case it is easy to discern, that your first work lies not
in getting Comfort or ease to your troubled mind, but in getting better
conceits of Christ and a holy state and life, that so you may be willing of
Christ as Christ is of you, and so become a true believer. And here I would not
leave you at that loss as some do, as if there were nothing for you the do for
the getting of faith: for certainly God has prescribed you Means for that end.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God preached, Romans 10.17.
1. Therefore see that you wait diligently on this Ordinance of God. Read the
Scriptures daily; and search them, to see whether you may not there find that
Holiness is better then sin. 2. And (however some seducers may tell you, that
wicked men ought not to pray, yet) be sure that you lie on your knees before
God, and importunately beg that he would open your eyes and change your heart,
and show you so far the evil of sin, and the want and worth of Christ and
holiness, that you may be unfainedly glad to Accept his offer.

Object* But the prayers of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord.

Answ. 1. You must distinguish between wicked men as actually wicked and going
on in the prosecution of their wickedness; and wicked men as they have some
good in them, or are doing some good, or are attempting a return to God. 2. You
must distinguish between real Prayer and seeming prayer. 3. You must
distinguish between full Acceptance of Prayer, when God delights in them, and
an Acceptance only to some particular end, not intimating the Acceptance of the
person with his prayer: And between Acceptance fully Promised (as certain) and
Acceptance but half-promised (as Probable:) And upon these distinctions I shall
answer your objection in the Conclusions.

1. When wicked men pray God to prosper them in their wickedness, yea or to
pardon them while they intend to go on in it, and so to give them an indulgence
in sin; or when they think with a few prayers for some Good which they can
endure, to put by that Holiness which they cannot endure, and so to make a
cloak for their rebellion, these prayers are all an abomination to the Lord.

2. When men use the words of a Prayer without the desire of the thing asked,
this is no Prayer, but equivocally so called, as a carcass is a man: and
therefore no wonder if God abhor that Prayer, which truly is no Prayer.

3. God has not made a full Promise, ascertaining any wicked man, while
wicked, that he will hear his Prayer: for all such Promises are made to
Believers.

4. God does never so hear an unbelievers Prayer, as to accept his person with
his Prayer, or to take a complacency in them. So much for the Negative.

Now for the Affirmative I add: 1. Prayer is a duty which God enjoined even
wicked men (I could prove it by a hundred Scripture texts.)

2. There may be some good desires in unbelievers, which they may express in
prayer, and these God may so far hear as to grant them, as he did in part to
Ahab.

3. An unbeliever may lie under preparing Grace, and be on his way in returning
toward God, though yet he be not come to saving faith; and in this state he
may have many good desires, and such Prayers as God will hear.

4. Though God have not flatly engaged himself to unbelievers, so as to give
them a certainty of hearing their prayers, and giving them true Grace on the
improvement of their naturals, yet he has not only appointed them this and
other means to get Grace, but also given them half promises, or strong
probabilities of speeding, so much as may be a sufficient encouragement to any
such sinner to call on God and use his Means. For as he appoints not any vain
Means to man, so no man can name that man who did improve his naturals to the
utmost, and in particular, sought God in prayer so far as a natural man may do,
who yet mist of Grace and was rejected (This is the true mean between
Pelagianisme and Antinomianisme in this point.)

5. When God calls unbelievers to Prayer, he withal calls them to Believe: and
when he works their heart to Prayer by that call, he usually withal works them
to Believe, or at least toward believing. If he that was unwilling to have
Christ, do pray God to make him willing, it is a beginning of willingness
already, and the way to get more willingness. In Prayer God uses to give in
the thing prayed for, of this kind.

6. Prayer is the souls motion Godward: and to say an unbeleever should not
pray, is to say he should not turn to God: who yet says to the wicked, Seek
the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near; Let the
wicked forsake his way, etc. Isa. 55.6, 7.

7. Prayer has two parts, Desire is the soul of it, and Expression is the
body: the soul can live separated from the body, but so cannot the body
separated from the soul: so can Desire without Expression, but not Expression
without Desire. When our blind Antinomians (the great subverters of the Gospel,
more then the Law) do rail against Ministers for persuading wicked men to Pray,
they are against us for persuading men to Desire that they pray for: Prayer
having Desire for its soul. And do not those men deserve to be exterminated the
Churches and societies of the Saints, who dare say to a wicked unbeliever,
Desire not Faith: Desire not to leave thy wickedness: Desire not Grace, or
Christ, or God: and that will proclaim abroad the world (as I have often heard
them with zealous reproaches,) that our Ministers are Legalists, Seducers,
Ignorant of the Mysteries of the Gospel, because they persuade poor sinners to
Pray for Faith, Grace, and Christ; that is, to Desire these, and to express
their Desires; which in effect is to persuade them to Repent, Believe and turn
to God. Indeed if these blind Seducers had ever heard our Ministers persuading
wicked men to Dissemble and lie to God, and ask Faith, Grace and Christ with
their tongues, but not Desire them in their hearts, then had they sufficient
grounds for their reviling language (but I have been too long on this.) I may
therefore boldly conclude, that they that find themselves unbelievers, that
is, unwilling to have Christ to deliver them from sin, must use this second
Means to get faith, even earnest frequent Prayer for it, to God.

3. Let such also see that they avoid wicked seducing company and occasions of
sin: and be sure that they keep company with men fearing God, especially
joining with them in their holy duties.

4. Lastly, Let such be sure that they use that Reason which God has given
them, to consider frequently, retiredly, seriously of the vanity of all those
things that steal away their hearts from Christ; and of the excellency of
Holiness, and how blessed a state it is, to have nothing in us in heart or life
that is displeasing to God, but to be such as he takes full delight in; also
of the certainty of the damnation of unbeleevers, and the intollerableness of
their torments; and of the certainty and unconceivable greatness of Believers
everlasting Happiness. If wicked unbelievers would but do what they can in
daily, serious, deep considering of these things and the like, they would have
no cause to despair of obtaining Faith and Sanctification. Believing is a
Rational Act: God bids you not to Believe any thing without Reason, nor to
Accept or Consent to any thing without full Reason to cause you to consent.
Think then often and soberly of those Reasons that should move you to Consent,
and of the vanity of these that hinder you from Consenting, and this is Gods
way for you to obtain Faith or Consent.

Remember then that when you have understood and improved General grounds of
Comfort (nay before you can come to any full improvement of them,) your next
business is to Believe: to Consent to the Match with Christ, and to Take him
for your Lord and Savior: And this Duty must be looked to and performed, before
you look after special Comfort. But I said somewhat of this before under the
sixth Head, and therefore will say no more now.

DIRECTION X.
10. When you have gone thus far, your Soul is safe and you are past your
greatest Dangers, though yet you are not past your Fears: Your next work
therefore for Peace and Comfort is this, To Review and take Notice of your own
Faith, and thence to gather Assurance of the Certainty of your Justification,
and Adoption, and right to Glory.

THe sum of this Direction lies in these things:

1. See that you do not content your self with the forementioned general
Comforts, without looking after Assurance and special Comforts. The folly of
this I have manifested in the third part of my book of Rest, about
self-examination.

2. See that you dream not of finding Assurance and special Comfort from mere
general Grounds: This is the delusion of many Antinomians, and of most of our
profane people (who I find are commonly of the Antinomian faith, naturally
withouth teaching.) For men to conclude that they shall certainly be saved,
merely because God is Merciful, or Christ is tenderhearted to sinners, and
would not that any should perish, but all should come to Repentance, or because
God delights not in the death of him that dies, but rather that he Repent and
live; or because Christ died for them; or because God has given Christ and
Life in the Gospel to all on Condition of believing; these are all but mere
delusions. Much Comfort, as I have showed you, may be gathered from these
Generals: but no Certainty of Salvation, or special Comfort can be gathered
from them alone.

3. See that you reject the Antinomian doctrine or dotage, which would teach
you to reject the trial and judging of your state by signs of Grace in your
self, and tell you that it is only the Spirit that must Assure, by witnessing
your Adoption. I will further define this Caution, when I have added the rest.

4. And on the other extreme, do not run to Marks unseasonably, but in the
order here laid down.

5. Nor do not trust to unsafe Marks.

6. And therefore do not look at too many; for the true ones, are but few. I do
but name these things to you, because I have fullyer handled them in my book of
Rest, whether I must refer you. And so I return to the third Caution.

I have in the forementioned Book told you, what the Office of the Spirit is in
Assuring us, and what the use of Marks are. The Spirit witnesses first
Objectively, and so the Spirit and Marks are all one. For it is the Spirit
dwelling in us that is the witness or proof that we are Gods sons: for he that
has not his Spirit is none of his: and the Spirit is not discerned by us in
its essence, but in its workings: and therefore, to discern these workings is
to discern the Spirit: and these workings are the Marks that we speak of: so
that the Spirit witnesses our sonship, as a reasonable soul witnesses that
you are a man and not a beast. You find by the Acts of Reason that you have a
Reasonable soul, and then you know that having a Reasonable soul, you are
certainly a man: So you find by the works or fruits of the Spirit, that you
have the Spirit, (that is, by Marks: and Paul enumerates the fruits of the
Spirit to that end) and then by finding that you have the Spirit, you may
certainly know that you are the child of God. 2. Also, as the Reasonable soul
is its own discerner by the help of the body (while it is in it) and so
witnesses our Humanity effectively as well as objectively (but first in order
objectively and next effectively:) so does the Spirit effectively discover it
self to the soul, by illuminating us to discern it, and exciting us to search,
and giving us that spiritual taste and feeling of its workings, and so of its
presence, by which it is best known. But still it witnesses objectively first;
and its effective witnessing, is but the causing us to discern its objective
witness. Or (to speak more plainly,) The Spirit witnesses first and
principally by giving us those Graces and workings which are our Marks; and
then secondly, by helping us to find and feel those workings or Marks in our
selves; and then lastly by raising Comforts in the soul upon that discovery.
Take heed therefore of expecting any such inward witness of the Spirit, as some
expect, viz. a discovery of your Adoption directly without first discovering
the signs of it within you; as if by an inward voice he should say to you,
Thou art a child of God, and thy sins are pardoned.

This that I described to you, is the true witness of the Spirit. This mistake
is so dangerous, that I had thought to have made it a peculiar Direction by it
self to warn you of it: but now I have gone so far I will dispatch it here. Two
dangerous consequents I find do follow this unwarrantable expectation of the
first immediate efficient Revelation that we are Adopted.

1. Some poor souls have languished in doubtings and trouble of mind almost
all their days, in expectation of such a kind of witness as the Spirit uses
not to give: when in the mean time they have other sufficient means of Comfort,
and knew not how to improve them; yea they had the true witness of the Spirit
in his inhabitation and holy workings, and did not know it; but run as Samuel
did to Eli, not knowing the voice of God: and look for the Spirits testimony
when they had it, as the Jews for Elias and the Messiah.

2. Others do more dangerously err, by taking the strong conceit of their own
fantasy for the witness of the Spirit. As soon as they do but entertain the
opinion that it must be such a witness of the Spirit, without the use of Marks,
that must Assure men of their Adoption, presently they are confident that they
have that witness themselves. It is scarce likely to be Gods Spirit that is so
ready upon the mere change of an opinion: The devil uses to do as much to
cherish presumption, as to destroy true faith and Assurance. It is a shrewd
sign that our persuasions of our truth of Grace is a delusion, when we find
the devil a friend to it, and helping it on: and it is a probable sign it is a
good persuasion, when we find the devil an enemy to it, and still troubling
us, and endeavoring our disquiet.

And here I remember the scruple that troubles some about the spirit of
bondage, and the spirit of Adoption. But you must understand that by the spirit
of bondage, is meant, that spirit, and those operations on the soul which the
Law of Works did naturally beget in those that were under it; which was, to be
partly in bondage to a task of Ceremonious duties, and partly to the Curse, and
obligation to Punishment for disobedience, without any Power to Justify: They
were said therefore to be in bondage to the Law; and the Law was said to be a
Yoke which neither they nor their fathers were able to bear, Acts 15.

And by the spirit of Adoption is meant, 1. That spirit, or those
qualifications and workings in their souls, which by the Gospel God gives only
to his sons: 2. And which raise in us some child-like affections to God,
enclining us in all our wants to run to him in Prayer as to a Father, and to
make our moan to him, and open our griefs, and cry for redress, and look to him
and depend on him as a child on the father. This spirit of Adoption you may
have, and yet not be certain of Gods special Love to you. The knowledge only of
his general Goodness and Mercy, may be a means to raise in you true childlike
affections. You may know God to have fatherly inclinations to you, and yet
doubt whether he will use you as a child, for want of Assurance of your own
sincerity. And you may hope God is your father, when yet you may apprehend him
to be a displeased angry father, and so he may be more your terror then your
comfort. Are not you ready in most of your fears, and doubts, and troubles, to
go to God before all other for relief? and does not your heart sigh and groan
to him when you can scarcely speak? Does not your troubled spirit there find
its first vent? and say, Lord, kill me not: forsake me not: my life is in thy
hands: O soften this hard heart, make this carnal mind more spiritual! O be
not such a stranger to my soul* Woe to me that I am so ignorant of thee! so
disaffected to thee! so backward and disinclined to holy communion with thee!
Woe to me that I can take no more pleasure in thee! and am s^ mindless and
disregardfull of thee! O that thou would stir up in me more lively desires,
and workings of my soul toward thee! and suffer me not to lie at such a
distance from thee. Are not such as these the breathings of your spirit* why
these are child-like breathings after God! this is crying Abba, Father. This is
the work of the spirit of Adoption, even when you fear God will cast you off.
You much mistake (and those that tell you so,) if you think that the spirit of
Adoption lies only in a persuasion that you are Gods child, or that you may
not have the spirit of Adoption without such a persuasion of Gods Adopting you.
For God may Adopt you, and give you that spirit which he gives only to his
children, and possess you with true filial affections toward him, before ever
you know your self to be Adopted; much more, though you may have frequent
returning doubts of your Adoption.

Having thus showed you how far you may expect the Witness of the Spirit, and
how far you may and must make use of Marks, and Qualifications or Actions of
your own, for the obtaining of Assurance and settled Peace; I shall add an
Answer to the Principal Objections of the Antinomians against this.

Object. (They say) This is to draw men from Christ to themselves, and from the
Gospel to the Law: to lay their Comforts and build their Peace upon any thing
in themselves, is to forsake Christ and make themselves their own Saviors: and
those Teachers that persuade them to this, are Teachers of the Law, and false
Prophets, who draw men from Christ to themselves. All our own Righteousness is
as a menstruous cloth, and our best works are sin, and therefore we may not
take up our Assurance or Comforts from them. We shall be always at
uncertainties, and at a loss, or unconstant, up and down in our Comforts, as
long as we take them from any signs in our selves. Also our own Graces are
Imperfect, and therefore unfit to be the Evidences for our Assurance.

Answ. Because I am not now purposely confuting the Antinomians, but only
forearming you against their assaults; I shall no^ therefore give you half that
I should otherwise say, for the Explication of this Point, and the Confutation
of their Errors; but only so much as is necessary to your preservation* Which I
do, because they pretend to be the only Preachers of free Grace, and the onl^
right Comforters of troubled Consciences; and because they have written so many
books to that end, which if they fall into your hand may seem so specious, as
that you may nee^ some preservative. I suppose you remember what I have taught
you so often, concerning the difference of the Law of Works, and the Law or
Covenant of Grace, with their different Conditions. Upon which supposition I
explicate the point thus. 1. No man may look at his own Graces or Duties as his
Legal Righteousness; that is, such as for which the Law of Works will pronounce
him Righteous. 2. Nor yet may he take them for part of his Legal Righteousness,
in conjunction with Christ's Righteousness, as the other part: but here we must
go wholly out of our selves, and deny and disclaim all such Righteousness of
our own. We have no Works, which make the Reward to be not of Grace but of
Debt, 3. We must not once think that our Graces, Duties or sufferings, can make
satisfaction to Gods Justice for our sin and unrighteousness: nor yet that they
are any part of that satisfaction. Here we ascribe all ^o Christ who is the
only Sacrifice and Ransom. 4. Nor must we think that our Duties or Graces are
properly Meritorious: this ^lso is to be left as the sole honor of Christ. ^.
Yet that we may and must raise our As^urance and Comforts from our own Gra^es
and Duties, shall appear in these clear Reasons following, which show also the
Grounds on which we may do it.

1. Pardon, Justification and Adoption, and Salvation, are all Given to us in
the Gospel only Conditionally (if we believe:) and the Condition is an act, or
rather several acts of our own. Now till the Condition be performed, no man can
have any Certainty that the Benefit shall be his: nor can he by any other means
(ordinarily) be certain of the Benefit, but by that which ascertaineth him that
he has performed the Condition. God says, He that Believes shall be saved:
No man can know then that he shall be saved till he first know that he
Believes. Else he should know either contrary to that which is written, or
more then that which is written: And Justification and Adoption should be given
some other way then by the Gospel Promise (for that Promise gives them only
Conditionally, and so suspendeth the actual right, upon the performance of the
Condition:) But if any can show any other way by which God makes over pardon
and Adoption, besides the Gospel promise, let them do it; but I will not
promise suddenly to believe them; for it was never yet showed as I know of.
Also, if men must not look a^ their own performance of the Condition, to prove
their right to the benefit, then either all or none must believe that they have
tha^ right. For the Promise says, He that Believet^ shall be saved. And this
is a promise of Lif^ conditionally to all. If all must believe that they shall
be saved, then most of the world must believe a lie. If the true believer may
not therefore conclude that he shall be saved, because he performs the
condition of the promise, then no man may believe it. And for that absolute
Promise of the new Heart, no man can, or may believe that it is his, till he
have that new heart which it promises; that is, till it be fulfilled: For
there is no Mark by which a man can know whether that Promise belong to him or
no, beforehand: and if all should believe that it belongs to them, most would
find it false.

2. God has not Redeemed us by his Son to be Lawless: To be without Law is to
be without Government. We are without the Law (that is, of Works, or of Moses,)
but not without Law; Jesus Christ is our Ruler, and he has made us a Law of
Grace; an easy yoke, and commands that are not grievous. This Law has
Precepts, Promises and threats: it must needs be either obeyed or disobeyed:
and so the paenalty must be due or not due; and the Reward due or not due. He
that performs the condition, and so to whom the reward is due and not the
paenalty, is Righteous in the sense of this Law. As when we are accused to be
sinners against the Law of Works, and so to deserve the paenalty of that Law,
we must confess all, and plead the Righteousness of Christ's satisfaction, for
our Justification: so when we are accused to be final unbelievers or
impenitent, and so not to have performed the conditions of the new Covenant, we
must be Justified by our own Faith and Repentance, the performance of that
condition; and must plead, Not guilty: And so far our own Acts are our
Evangelical Righteousness; and that of such necessity, that without it no man
can have part in Christ's Righteousness, nor be saved. I would desire any man
else to tell me, what else he will plead at Judgment, when the Accuse^
charge him (or if he do so charge him) with final unbelief: will he confess
it, and say, Christ has Believed and Repented for me that is as much as to
say, Christ was a Believer for Infidels, that he might save Infidels* All
false. If he will not say thus (and lying will do no good) then must he plead
his own Believing and Repenting as his Righteousness in opposition to that
Accusation* And if it be of such use then, and be called a hundred times in
Scripture, our Righteousness, and we Righteous for it, then doubtless we may
accordingly try by it now, whether we shall then be able to come off and be
Justified, or no; and so may build our comfort on it.

3. Conscience is a Witness and Judge within us; and does as under God Accuse
and Condemn, or Excuse and Acquit: Now if Conscience must absolve us only so
far as we are Innocent, or do well, or are qualified with Grace; then it is
impossible but these our Qualifications and Actions should be some ground of
our Comfort. See Acts 24.16. and 23.1. Romans 2.15, 16.

4. Those which are our Graces and Works, as we are the Subjects and Agents,
are the Graces and Works of God, of Christ, of the holy Ghost dwelling in us.
If therefore we may not Rejoice in our own Works, or Graces, then we may not
Rejoice in the Works or Gifts of God, Christ or the holy Ghost. And

5. Our Graces are the spiritual Life or Health of the soul, and our holy
actions are the vital operations. Now Life and Health are necessary Rejoicing,
delighting things of themselves: and vital Actions, are necessarily pleasant
and delectable.

6. Our Graces and holy Actions must needs Rejoice us in respect of their
Objects. For the object of our Love, Trust, Hope, Meditation, Prayer,
Conference, etc. is God himself, and the Lord Jesus, and the Joys of Heaven.
And how can such Actions choose but Rejoice us!

7. Yea Rejoicing it self, and Delighting our selves in God, is not only one
part of our Duty, but that great Duty wherein lies the height of our
Christianity: And how vain a speech is it, to say, that we may not take up our
Comforts from our own works, nor Rejoice in any thing of our own; when even
Rejoicing it self, and Delighting, and Comforting our selves is one part of our
Duty?

8. As God in Christ is the chief object and ground of our Comfort (so that we
must Rejoice in nothing but God, and the Cross of Christ, in that kind, or in
coordination with them,) so it is the office of every Grace and holy Work, and
Ordinance, and Means, to be subservient to Christ, either for the attaining of
Christ, or applying his merits, or they are the effects of his merits. Now if
we must Love and Rejoice in Christ principally, then must we needs Love and
Rejoice in all those things that stand in a necessary subordination to him, in
their places. And therefore to say, We must Rejoice in Christ only and
therefore not in any Graces or Duties of our own; is as wife as if a wife
should cast her husbands clothes and meat out of doors, and say, You charged
me to admit none into my chamber but your self: Or as if a Physician, having
told his patients, I will cure you, if you will trust me only for the cure;
thereupon the Patients should cast away his Medicines, and shut the doors
against his servants and Apothecary and say, We must trust none but the
Physician.

9. All the failings of our Duties are pardoned, and they Accepted in Christ;
and therefore we may Rejoice in them.

10. Our Duties have a double tendency to our salvation: 1. As the Condition to
which God has promised it as the Crown and Reward (in a hundred texts of
Scripture;) And may we not Comfort our selves in that which God promises
Heaven to? 2. As a Natural means to our obedience, and further perfection (as
Watchfulness, Meditation, etc. tend to destroy sin:) as Paul says to Timothy,
Take heed to thy self and to thy Doctrine, and in so doing thou shall both save
thy self and them that hear the^, 1 Timothy 4.16. And may we not take Comfort in
that which tends to save our own and our brethrens souls?

11. We shall be Judged according to our Works: therefore we must judge our
selves according to our Works; and so must judge our state good or bad
according to our works: for can man judge by a righter way then God will? At
least is it not lawful for man to judge as God does?

12. We must judge of others in probability according to their external works,
even the tree by the fruits: therefore we must judge of our selves in certainty
according to our internal and external works together (which we may certainly
know.)

13. If we may not Rejoice in any of our Graces, then we may not be Thankful
for them: for Thanks is accompanied with Joy: but we must be Thankful.

14. If we may not Rejoice in our Duties, we may not Repent or sorrow for the
neglect of them; and if we may not Rejoice in our Graces, we may not lament the
want of them (for these are as the two ends of the balance, that one goes down
when the other goes up; or as day and night, light and darkness.) But the
consequent is intolerable.

15. This would overthrow all Religion. For what a man cannot Rejoice in, he
cannot Love, he cannot esteem, regard, be careful to obtain, be fearful of
losing, etc.

16. God delights in our Graces and holy Duties, and is well pleased with
them: and therefore it is lawful and needful that we do as God does, Jer.
9.24. Heb. 11.5. Abels sacrifice by faith obtained testimony that he pleased
God, Heb. 13.16. To do good and to communicate forget not, for with such
sacrifice God is well pleased.

17. The Saints of God have not only tried themselves by their Graces and
Duties, and commanded others to try by them, but have Gloried and Rejoiced in
their Duties and sufferings, 2 Cor. 1.12. This is our Rejoicing, the Testimony
of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity we have had our
conversation among you. Acts 5.41. They gloried that they were counted worthy
to suffer for Christ, Romans 15.17. I have therefore whereof I may glory in Jesus
Christ, in those things which pertain to God. Romans 5.3. We glory in
tribulation, etc. 2 Cor. 12.6, 9. Though I should desire to glory, I should not
be a fool: I glory in mine infirmities. Jer. 9.24. Let him that glories glory
in this, that he understands and knows me. 1 Cor. 9.15. I had rather die
then any should make my glorying void. Gal. 6.4. Let every man prove his own
work* so shall he have Rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another.

18. Scripture names many of our own Graces and Duties, as the certain Marks
of our Justification and right to Glory: Even Christ with his own mouth gives
us many: Matthew. 6.21. Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
Joh. 3.20. He that does evil hates the light, etc. but he that does good
comes to the light, that, etc. Mat. 5. is full of such. Blessed are the poor
in spirit, the pure in heart, etc.

19. We may Rejoice in other men's good Works and Graces (and do, if we be true
Christians,) therefore in our own.

20. We may Rejoice in Gods outward Mercies; therefore much more in inward, and
such as accompany salvation. All these Arguments prove that we may take up our
Comfort from our own Gracious Qualifications and Actions (not in opposition to
Christ, but in subordination to him:) and most of them prove that we may fetch
our Assurance of salvation from them, as undoubted Evidences thereof.

I have said the more in Answer to these Objections, 1. Because never any came
with fairer pretenses of exalting Christ, and maintaining the honor of his
Righteousness and free Grace, and of denying our selves and our own
Righteousness. 2. And yet few Doctrines more dishonor Christ, and destroy the
very substance of all Religion. Even as if a man should cry down him that would
Praise and commend Obedience to the King, and say, You must Praise nothing but
the King: so do these cry down our looking at and Rejoicing in our Love to
Christ, and our Thankfulness to him, and our Obedience, and all under pretense
of honoring him. Nay they will not have us Rejoice in one part of Christ's
salvation (his saving us from the power of sin, and his sanctifying us,) under
pretense that we dishonor the other part of his salvation (his Justifying us.)
If ever Satan transformed himself into an Angel of Light, and his Ministers
into Ministers of Light, it is in the mistakes of the Antinomians: and no
people in the world (except carnal Libertines, whom this doctrine fits to a
hair) are in more danger of them, then poor doubting Christians under trouble
of Conscience: specially if they be not judicious, and skilled in the Doctrine
of Christ. For the very pretense of extolling Christ and free Grace will take
much with such: and any New-way will sometime seem to give them Comfort, upon
the very novelty and sudden change.

Having thus proved that you may and must fetch your special Comfort and
Assurance from Evidences, and that your first Evidence is your Faith, I shall
open this fullier under the next Direction.

DIRECTION XI.
11. In the Trial of your State, Be sure that you make use of Infallible signs
of Sincerity, and take not those for certain which are not.

ANd to that end remember what I said before, that you must well understand
wherein the Nature of saving Faith, and so of all saving Grace does consist.
And when you understand this, write it down in two or three lines: and both at
your first trial, and afterward when ever any doubts do drive you to a Review
of your Evidences, still have recourse only to those Signs. and try by them.
What these Signs are, I have showed you so fully in the forecited place in my
book of Rest, that I shall say but little now. Remember that Infallible signs
are very few; and that whatsoever is made the condition of salvation, that is
the most Infallible evidence of our salvation, and therefore the fittest Mark
to try by: And therefore Faith in God the Father and the Redeemer, is the main
Evidence. But because I have elsewhere showed you, that this Faith is
comprehensive of Love, Gratitude, Resolution to Obey and Repentance; let me
more particularly open it to help you in the Trial. To prove any Grace to be
saving, it is necessary that you prove that salvation is fully promised to him
that has it. Now if you will know what it is that has this promise; I will
tell you, 1. As to the Object. 2. The Act. 3. The degree or modification of the
Act. For all these three must be enquired after if you will get Assurance. 1.
The Object is principally God and the Redeemer Christ: And secondarily the
Benefits given by Christ: and under that, the means to attain the principal
Benefits, etc. 2. The Act has many Names drawn from Respective and Modall
differences in the Object; as Faith, Desire, Love, choosing, Accepting,
Receiving, Consenting, etc. But properly all are comprised in one word,
Willing. The Understandings high estimation of God, and Christ, and Grace, is a
Principal part of true saving Grace; but yet it is difficult and scarce
possible to judge of your self by it rightly, but only as it discovers it self
by prevailing with the Will. 3. The Degree of this Act must be such, as
ordinarily prevails against its contrary: I mean, both the contrary Object,
and the contrary Act to the same Object. But because I doubt School-termes do
obscure my meaning to you (though they are necessary for exactness) I will
express the nature of saving Grace in two or three Marks as plain as I can.

1. Are you heartily willing to take God for your Portion, and had you rather
Live with him in Glory, in his favor and fullest Love, with a soul perfectly
cleansed from all sin, and never more to offend him, Rejoicing with his Saints
in his everlasting praises; than to enjoy the delights of the flesh on earth,
in a way of sin, and without the favor of God?

2. Are you heartily willing to take Jesus Christ as he is offered in the
Gospel? that is, to be your only Savior and Lord, to give you pardon by his
bloodshed, and to sanctify you by his Word and Spirit, and to govern you by
his Laws?

(Because this General contains and implies several Particulars, I will
express them distinctly.)

Here it is supposed that you know this much following of the nature of his
Laws: For to be Willing to be Ruled by his Laws in General, and utterly
Unwilling when it comes to particulars, is no true Willingness or subjection.
1. You must know that his Laws reach both to heart and outward actions. 2. That
they command a holy, spiritual, heavenly life. 3. That they command things so
cross and unpleasing to the flesh, that the flesh will be still murmuring and
striving against obedience: Particularly 1. They command things quite cross to
the inclinations of the flesh: as to forgive Wrongs, to Love Enemies, to
forbear Malice and Revenge, to restrain and mortify Lust and Passion; to abhor
and mortify Pride, and be low in our own eyes, and humble and meek in spirit.
2. They command things that cross the interest of the flesh and its inclination
both together: I mean, which will deprive it of its enjoyments, and bring it to
some suffering: As, to perform Duties even when they lay us open to disgrace,
and shame, and reproach in the world; and to deny our credit, rather then
forsake Christ or our duty: to obey Christ in doing what he commands us,
though it would hazard or certainly lose our wealth, friends, liberty and life
it self; forsaking all, rather then to forsake him: to give to the poor, and
other good uses, and that liberally according to our abilities: to deny the
flesh all forbidden pleasures, and make not provision to satisfy its lusts,
but to crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof: and in this
combat to hold on to the end and to overcome. These are the Laws of Christ;
which you must know, before you can determine whether you are indeed
unfeignedly willing to obey them. Put therefore these further questions to your
self, for the trial of your willingness to be ruled by Christ according to his
Laws.

3. Are you heartily willing to live in the performance of those holy and
spiritual Duties of heart and life, which God has absolutely commanded you?
and are you heartily sorry that you perform them no better? with no more
cheerfulness, delight, success and constancy?

4. Are you so thoroughly convinced of the worth of everlasting Happiness, and
the intollerableness of everlasting misery, and the truth of both, and of the
sovereignty of God the Father and Christ the Redeemer, and your many
engagements to him, and of the necessity and good of obeying, and the evil of
sinning; that you are truly willing, that is, have a settled resolution, to
cleave t^ Christ and obey him, in the dearest, most disgraceful, painful,
hazardous, flesh-displeasing Duties; even though it should cost you the loss of
all your worldly enjoyments, and your life?

5. Does this willingness or resolution already so far prevail in your heart
and life, against all the Interest and Temptations of the world, the devil and
your flesh, that you do ordinarily practice, the most strict and holy, the most
self-denying, costly and hazardous duties that you know God requires of you,
and do heartily strive against all known sin and overcome all gross sins, and
when you fall under any prevailing temptation, do rise again by Repentance, and
begging pardon of God through the blood of Christ, do resolve to watch and
resist more carefully for the time to come.

In these five Marks is expressed the Gospel-description of a true Christian.

Having laid down these Marks, I must needs add a few words for the explaining
of some things in them, least you mistake the meaning and so lose the benefit
of them.

1. Observe that it is your willingness which is the very Point to be tried.
And therefore 1. Judge not by your bare knowledge. 2. Judge not by the
stirrings or passionate workings of your Affections. ^ pray you forget not this
Rule in any of your self-examinings: It is the heart that God requires; My
son, give me thy heart, Prove. 23.26. If he has the Will he has the heart. He
may have much of our Knowledge and not our heart: but when we Know him so
thoroughly as to Will him unfeignedly, then he has our heart. Affectionate
workings of soul to God in Christ, are sweet things, and high and noble Duties,
and such as all Christians should strive for: But they are not the safest Marks
to try our states by: 1. Because there may be a solid, sincere intention and
choice in and of the Will, when there is little stirring perceived in the
Affections. 2. Because the Will is the Master, Commanding Faculty of the
Rational soul; and so if it be right that man is upright and safe. 3. Because
the Passions and Affections are so mutable and uncertain: The Will can command
them but imperfectly; it cannot perfectly Restrain them from vanities: much
less can it perfectly raise them to that height, as is suitable to the
excellency of our heavenly objects. But the object it self, with its sensible
manner of apprehension moves them more then all the Command of the Will. And so
we find by experience, that a godly man when with his utmost private endeavor
he cannot command one stirring pang of divine Love or Joy in his soul, yet upon
the hearing of some moving Sermon, or the sudden receiving of some
extraordinary Mercy, or the reading of some quickening book, he shall feel
perhaps some stirring of that Affection. So when we cannot weep in private one
tear for sin, yet at a stirring Sermon, or when we give vent to our sorrows,
and ease our troubled hearts into the bosom of some faithful friend, then we
can find tears. 4. Because Passions and Affections depend so much on the
temperature of the Body: To one they are easy, familiar and at command: to
another (as honest) they are difficult and scarce stirred at all. With most
women, and persons of weaker tempers, they are easier then with men. Some
cannot weep at the death of a friend, though never so deer: no nor perhaps feel
very sensible inward grief: and yet perhaps would have redeemed his life at a
far deerer rate (had it been possible) then those that can grieve and weep more
abundantly. 5. Because Worldly things have so great an advantage on our
Passions and Affections. 1. They are sensible and near us, and our knowledge of
them is clear: But God is not to be seen, heard or felt by our senses: he is
far from us, though locally present with us: we are capable of knowing but
little, very little of him. 2. Earthly things are always before our eyes; their
advantage is continual. 3. Earthly things being still the objects of our
senses, do force our Passions, whether we will or not: though they cannot force
our Wills. 6. Because Affections and Passions rise and fall, and neither are
nor can be in any even and constant frame: and therefore are unfit to be the
constant or certain evidence of our state: But the Wills Resolution and Choice
may be more constant. So that I advise you rather to try your self by your
Will, then by your Passionate stirrings of Love or longing, of Joy or sorrow.

Object. But does not Scripture lay as much on Love, as on any Grace? and does
not Christ say, that except we Love him above all, we cannot be his Disciples?

Answ. Its all very true. But consider, Love has two parts; the one in the
Will, which is commonly called, a faculty of the soul as Rational; and this is
the same thing that I call Willing, Accepting, Choosing or Consenting: this
Complacency is true Love to Christ; and this is the sure standing Mark. The
other is the Passionate part, commonly said to be in the soul as sensitive; and
this, though most commonly called Love, yet is, less certain and constant, and
so unfitter to try your state by; though a great duty so far as we can reach it.

2. You must understand and well remember, that it is not every willingness
that will prove your sincerity. For wicked men may have slight apprehensions of
spiritual things, which may produce some slight desires and wishes, which yet
are so feeble and heartless, that every lust and carnal desire overcomes them:
And it will not so much as enable them to deny the grossest sin. But it must be
the Prevalent part of your Will that God must have: I mean, a greater share, a
deeper and larger room then any thing in the world. That is, you must have a
higher estimation of God, and everlasting happiness, and Christ and a holy
life, then of any thing in the world: and also your Will must be so disposed
hereby and inclined to God, that if God and Glory to be obtained through Christ
by a holy self-denying life, were set before you on the one hand; and the
Pleasure, Profits and Honors of the world, to be enjoyed in a way of sin, on
the other hand; you would resolvedly take the former and refuse the later.
Indeed they are thus set before you: and upon your choice depends your
salvation or damnation (though that Choice must come from the Grace of God.)

3. Yet must you well remember, that this Willingness and Choice is still
imperfect: and therefore when I mention a hearty willingness, I mean not a
perfect willingness. There may be and is in the most gracious souls on earth,
much undisposedness, backwardness and withdrawing of heart, which is too great
a measure of unwillingness to duty. Especially to those duties which the flesh
is most averse from, and which require most of God and his Spirit to the right
performance of them.

Among all Duties, I think the soul is naturally most backward to these
following: 1. To secret Prayer: because it is spiritual, and requires great
reverence, and has nothing of external pomp or form to take us up with, and
consists not much in the exercise of common gifts, but in the exercise of
special Grace, and the breathings of the Spirit, and searchings, pantings and
strivings of a gracious soul toward God. (I do not speak of the heartless
repeating of bare words, learned by rote, and either not understood, or not
uttered from the feeling of the soul.) 2. To serious Meditation, also is the
soul very backward: that is, either to meditate on God, and the promised Glory,
or any spiritual subject, to this end, that the heart may be thereby quickened
and raised, and graces exercised: (though to meditate on the same subject, only
to know or dispute on it, the heart is nothing near so backward.) Or else to
meditate on the state of our own hearts, by way of self-examination, or
self-judging, or self-reprehension, or self-exciting. 3. Also to the Duty of
faithful dealing with each others souls, in secret reproof and exhortation,
plainly (though lovingly) to tell each other of our sins and danger, to this
the heart is usually very backward; partly through a sinful bashfulness,
partly for want of more believing lively apprehensions of our duty and our
brothers danger, and partly because we are loath to displease men and lose
their favor; it being grown so common for men to fall out with those (if not
hate them) that de^l plainly and faithfully with them. 4. Also to Take a
Reproof, as well as to Give it, the heart is very backward: Even godly men
(through the sad remainders of their sinfulness,) do too commonly frown, and
snarle, and retort our reproofs, and study presently how to excuse themselves
and put it by, or how to charge us with something that may stop our mouths,
and make the reprover seem as bad as themselves: Though they dare not tread our
reproofs under feet, and turn again and all to rent us, yet they often show the
remnants of a dogged nature, though when they review their ways, it costs them
sorrow. We must sugar and butter our words, and make them liker to stroaking
then striking, liker an approving then a reproving them, liker flattery then
faithful dealing, and yet when we have all done, they go down very hardly, and
that but half way, even with many godly people when they are under a
temptation. 5. The like may be said of all those Duties which do pinch upon our
credit or profit, or tend to disgrace us or impoverish us in the world: As the
confessing of a Disgraceful fault: the free Giving to the poor or sacred uses,
according to our estates: the parting with our own Right or Gain for Peace: the
patient suffering of wrong, and forgiving it heartily: and loving bitter
abusive enemies: especially the running upon the stream of men's displeasure,
and incurring the danger of being utterly undone in our worldly state
(especially if men be rich: who do therefore as hardly get to Heaven as a Camel
through a needles eye:) and above all, the laying down of our lives for Christ:
It cannot be expected, that godly men should perform all these with perfect
Willingness: The flesh will play its part, in pleading its own cause; and will
strive hard to maintain its own interest: O the shifts, the subtle arguments,
or at least the clamorous and importunate contradictions that all these Duties
will meet with in the best, so far as they are unrenewed, and their Graces
weak! so that you may well hence conclude that you are a sinner; but you may
not conclude that you are Graceless, because of a backwardness and some
unwillingness to Duty.

Yet your Willingness must be greater then your unwillingness; and so Christ
must have the prevailing part of your will; and from that the denomination is
usually taken so that Scripture uses to affirm Gods people to be willing, even
when they fail in the execution. So Paul Romans 7.18. says, To will is present
with me, when how to do or perform he found not: that is, not to obey so
perfectly as he would do: not to love God so intensly and fervently; not to
subdue passions and lusts so thoroughly; not to watch our thoughts, and words,
and ways so narrowly, and order them so exactly as the bent of his will did
consent to. And lest any Arminian should pretend (as they do) that Paul speaks
here in the person of an unregenerate man, as under the convictions of the Law,
and not as a man regenerate; it is plain in the text that he speaks of himself
in the state which he was then in, and that state was a regenerate state: He
expressly says, It is thus and thus with me; So then I my self with my mind do
serve the Law of God: but with my flesh the Law of sin, ver. 25. And to put it
out of doubt, the Apostle speaks the like of all Christians, Gal. 5.17. For the
flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these
are contrary ^he one to the other* so that ye cannot do the things that ye
would. This is the plain exposition of Romans 7. Here Scripture makes the Godly
Willing to do more then they do, or can do: ^ut yet it is not a perfect
Willingness, but it ^s the Prevailing Inclination and Choice of ^he Will, and
that gives the name.

4. Observe further, that I add your Actual performance of Duty; because true
hearty Willingness, will show it self in actions and endeavors. It is but
dissembling, if I should say, I am willing to perform the strictest, holiest
Duties, and yet do not perform them. To say, I am willing to Pray, and Pray
not: or to Give to the poor, and yet Give not: or to perform the most
self-denying costly Duties, and yet when it should come to the Practice, I will
not be persuaded or drawn to them? I will not confess a disgraceful sin; nor
further a good Cause to my danger, cost or trouble; nor reprove, nor submit to
reproof; nor turn from the way of temptations, or the like. Action must
discover true Willingness. The son that said to his father, I go Sir, but went
not to labor in the vineyard, was not Accepted or Justified. If therefore you
are in doubt whether your Willingness be sincere, enquire into your practice
and performance. God commands you to Pray, to instruct your family, to be
Merciful to the poor, to forgive those that wrong you, etc. The flesh and the
Devil persuade you from these. Do you perform them, or do you not? Though you
may do it with backwardness, and dullness, and weakness, yet do you Do it? and
desire you could do it better? and lament your misdoing it? and endeavor to Do
it better then you have formerly done? This shows then that the spirit
prevails, though the flesh do contradict it.

5. Yet here you must carefully distinguish of Duties: For God has made some
to be secondary parts of the condition of the Covenant, and so of flat
necessity for the continuance of our Justification, and for the attaining of
Glorification: Such are confessing Christ before men when we are called to it;
confessing sin; Praying; showing Mercy to the poor; forgiving wrongs; hearing
and yielding to Gods Word, etc. still supposing that there be opportunity and
necessaries for the performance of these. But some d^ties there are that God
has not laid so great a stress or necessity on: though yet the w^^full
resolved omission in ordinary, of any known duty, is contrary to the nature of
true Obedience.

Also, the Case may much differ with several persons, places and seasons,
concerning Duty: that may be a Duty to one man that i^ not to another; and in
one place, which is not in another; and at one season, which is not at another.
And that may be a greater duty, and of indispensable necessity to one, which to
another is not so great. It may stand with true Grace, to omit that duty which
men know not to be a duty, or not to be so to them (except where the duty is
such as is it self of absolute neeessity to salvation:) but it cannot so stand
with Grace in those that know it, ordinarily to reject it.

6. Also you must understand, that when I say, that true Willingness to be
Ruled by Christ, will show it self in Actual Obedience; I do not mean it of
every particular individual Act which is our Duty, as if you should judge your
self Graceless for every particular omission of a duty: no, though you knew it
to be a duty: and though you considered it to be a duty. For 1. There may be a
true Habituated Inclination and Willingness to obey Christ rooted in the heart,
when yet by the force of a temptation, the actual prevalency of it at that time
in that act may be hindered and suppressed. 2. And at the same time, you do hold
on in a course of obedience in other duties, 3. And when the temptation is
overcome, and Grace has been rowsed up against the flesh, and you soberly
recollect your thoughts, you will return to Obedience in that duty also. Yea
how many days, or weeks, or months, a true Christian may possibly neglect a
known duty, I will not dare to determe (of which more anon.) Yet suc^ omissions
as will not stand with a sincer^ Resolution and Willingness to obey Christ
universally (I mean a Habitual Willingness will not consist with the truth of
Grace.

7. I know the fourth Mark, about forsaking All for Christ, may seem somewhat
unseasonable and harsh to propound for the quieting of a troubled conscience.
But yet, I durst not omit it, seeing Christ has not omitted it; nay seeing he
has so urged it, and laid such a stress on it in the Scripture as he has
done; dare not dawb, nor be unfaithful, for fear of troubling: such skinning
over the wound, will but prepare for more trouble and a further cure. Christ
thought it meet even to tell young beginners of the worst (though it might
possibly discourage them, and did turn some back (that they might not come to
him upon mistaken expectations: and he requires all that will be Christians
and he saved, to count their cost before hand, and reckon what it will stand
them in to be Christ's Disciples; and if they cannot undergo his terms (that
is, to deny themselves, take up their Cross, forsake all and follow him) they
cannot be his Disciples. And Christ had rather they knew it before hand, then
to deceive themselves, or to turn back when they meet with what they never
thought of, and then to imagine that Christ had deceived them and drawn them in,
and done the wrong.

8. When I say in the fourth Mark, that you must have a settled Resolution, I
mean the same thing as before I did by hearty willingness. But it is meeter
here to call it Resolution, because this is the proper name for that act of the
Will, which is a determination of it self upon d^liberation, after any
wavering, to the d^ing or submitting to any thing as commanded. I told you, it
must be the Prevailing act of the Will that must prove you sincere: Every cold
uneffectual wish will not serve tern. Christ seeks for your heart on one side,
and the World with its pleasures, profits and honors on the other side: The
soul which upon consideration of both, does prefer Christ in his choice, and
reject the world (as it is competitor with him) and this not doubtingly and
with reservation for further deliberation or trial, but presently passes his
consent for better and worse, this is said to be a Resolving. And I know no one
word that more fitly expresses the nature of that Grace, which differenceth a
true Christian from all hypocrites, and by which a man may safely judge of his
estate.

9. Yet I here add, that it must be a settled Resolution: And that to intimate,
that it must be a Habituated Willingness or Resolution. The Prevalency of
Christ's Interest in the soul must be a Habitual Prevalency. If a man that is
terrified by a rowsing Sermon, or that h^th in expectation of present death,
should actually Resolve to forsake sin, or perform duty; without any further
change of mind, or habit, or fixedness of this Resolution, it would be of no
great value, and soon extinguished. Though yet I believe that no unsanctified
man does ever attain to that full Resolution for Christ, which has a
complacency in Christ accompanying it, and which may be termed, the Prevailing
part of the Will: Those that seem Resolved to day to be for Christ, and to deny
the world and the flesh, and the next day are unresolved again, have cause to
suspect that they were never truly Resolved. Though the Will of a godly man may
lie under declinings in the degrees of Resolution, yet Christ has always his
Habitual Resolutions, and usually his Actual in a prevalent degree.

10. I add also the Grounds (in the fourth Mark) on which this Resolution must
be raised. For false Grounds in the Understanding will not bear up a true
Resolution in the Will. And therefore we put the Articles of our Creed, before
our Profession of Consent and Obedience. Sound Doctrine, and sound Belief of
it, breeds a sound Resolution, and makes a sound heart and life. If a man
resolve to obey Christ, upon a conceit that Christ will never put him upon any
suffering (else he would not resolve it,) and that he will give him such
brutish pleasures when he is dead as Mahomet has promised to his disciples,
this Resoution were not sound: yet in many lesser points of Doctrine a true
Christian may be unsound, and yet soundly cleave to the foundation. He may
build hay and stubble possibly: but the foundation must be held.

11. Observe well (lest you mistake me) that I speak only of the Necessity of
your present Resolving to forsake all for Christ, if he call you to it; but I
speak not of your absolute Promise or Prediction that eventually, you shall not
deny or forsake him. You may be uncertain how you shall be upheld in a day of
trial, and yet you may now be Resolved or fully Purposed in your own mind what
to do. To say, I will not consent, purpose or resolve, unless I were certain to
perform my Resolutions, and not to flag or change again; this is but to say, I
will be no Christian unless I were sure to persevere. I will not be married to
Christ, lest I should be drawn to break my covenant with him.

12. Also observe, that when I speak of your resolving to forsake all for
Christ, it is not to cast away your state or life, but to submit it to his
dispose, and to relinquish it only in case that he command you so.

13. And I do not intend that you should be able thus to Resolve of your self
without the special Grace of God; nor yet without it to continue those
Resolutions; much less to perform them by actual suffering.

Object. But I cannot be sure that God will give me Grace to persevere, or at
least not to deny him as Peter did; and therefore I should neither Promise nor
Resolve what I cannot be certain to perform?

Answ. 1. I suppose you have read the many Scriptures and Arguments which our
Divines ordinarily use to prove that the true Believers shall not fall quite
away. And I know not how the opposers can answer that text which themselves use
to allege for the contrary, Mat. 13.6, 21. Those that believe for a time, and
in the time of persecution fall away, it is because the seed had not depth of
earth, the word never took rooting in their hearts. Whence it seems that it may
be well inferred, that those shall not fall away in time of temptation, in whom
the word of God has taken deep rooting. And that is, in them in whose hearts
or wills Christ has a stronger interest then the creature, or those that have
a well-grounded, unreserved, habituated or settled Resolution to be for Christ.
2. However, your present Resolution and your Covenanting with Christ is no more
but this; to say, I do Consent: or, this I am Resolved to do by the help of
Gods Grace. 3. Else no man should be Baptized or become a Christian, because he
is uncertain to keep his Covenants: For all that are Baptized, do Covenant and
vow, to forsake the world, flesh and Devil, and fight under Christ's banner to
their lives end. Understand me therefore, that you are not to promise to do
this by your own strength, but by the strength of Christ, as knowing that he
has promised his Spirit and Grace for the aid of every true Believer.

14. If your Resolution at present be hearty, you ought not to vex and disquiet
your mind with doubtful tormenting fears, what you should do, if you be put
to it, to forsake all, and suffer death for Christ. For he has promised to lay
no more on us then we can bear, but with the temptation will make us a way to
come forth, 1 Cor. 10, 13. either he will not bring us into trials beyond our
strength; or else he will increase our strength according to our trials. He
has bid us pray, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: and he
has promised, that whatsoever we ask in the name of Christ according to his
will he will give us. So that if once you can but truly say, that it is your
full Resolution to forsake all for Christ if he call you to it, and that on the
forementioned grounds, you ought not then to vex your soul with fears of the
issue: for that is but to distrust God your father and your strength. Only you
must be careful to do your duty to the keeping up of your present Resolutions,
and to wait obediently on God for the help of his Spirit, and to beg it
earnestly at his hands.

15. Much less, is it lawful for men to feign and suppose such calamities to
themselves, as God does never try men by, and then to ask themselves, Can I
bear these for Christ? and so to try themselves on false and dangerous grounds.
Some use to be troubled, lest if they were put to long and exquisite torments
for Christ they should renounce him. One says, I cannot endure the torments of
Hell for Christ: Another says, Could I endure to be roasted or torn in pieces
so many weeks or days together? or could I endure to die so many times over?
These are foolish, sinful questions, which Christ never desired you to put to
your selves. He never tries men's faith on this manner. Tormentors cannot go
beyond his Will. Nay it is but very few that he tries by death: and fewer by an
extreme tormenting death. All this therefore proceeds from error.

16. Observe, from the fifth Mark, That the present Prevalency of your
Resolutions now against those Temptations which you encounter with, may well
encourage you to expect that they should prevail hereafter, if God bring you
into greater trials. Can you now follow Christ in a holy life, though your
flesh repine and would have its liberties and pleasures, and though the world
deride or threaten you, or great ones turn against you and threaten your
undoing? Can you part with your money to the poor, or to the promoting of any
work of Christ, according to the measure of estate that God has allotted you,
notwithstanding all temptations to the contrary? Some trials you have now: if
you can go well through these, you have no cause to disquiet your mind with
fears of falling in greater trials. But he that cannot now deny his greedy
Appetite in meats and drinks so far as to forbear excess; nor can deny his
credit with men, nor bear the scorns or frowns of the world, but be on the
stronger side, and decline his duty to avoid danger, whatever become of
conscience or Gods favor; this man is not like to forsake and lay down his
life for Christ and his cause.

Object. But though I break through lesser trials, I am not sure to overcome in
greater: for the same measure of Grace will not enable a man to forsake All,
which will enable him to forsake a little. Many have gone through smaller
trials, and after forsaken Christ in greater: And Christ makes it the property
of temporaries that are not rooted in the faith, that they fall when
tribulation and persecution for the Gospel arises: and therefore it seems they
may stand till then: and if trial never come, they may never fall, and yet be
unsound in the mean time?

Answ. 1. If your trial now be considerable, the truth of Grace may be
manifested in it, though it be none of the greatest, and though in striving
against sin you have not yet resisted unto blood. 2. If you carefully observe
your own heart, you may discern whether the spirit and your resolutions be
prevalent, by their daily subduing and mortifying the flesh and its lusts. Nay
let me tell you, the Victory of Gods Spirit over the flattering, enticing world
in prosperity, is as great and glorious, if not more, then that over the
frowning, persecuting world in adversity. And therefore find the one, and you
need not fear the other. Though I confess that hypocrites do not fall so
visibly and shamefully always in prosperity as in adversity: for they have
more pretenses, advantages and carnal shifts to hide the shame of their falls.
And for that in the Parable in Mat. 13. I pray you mark one thing: Christ seems
to speak of every several sort of Hearers by a Gradation, speaking last of
those that go farthest. The first sort are the common, ignorant, negligent
Hearers, in whom the word takes no root at all. The second sort are those that
give it a slight and shallow rooting, but no deep rooting at all: these are
they that fall away in tribulation. By falling away, is meant the plain
deserting Christ or the substance of his Cause. These men till this falling
away, though they professed Christ, and heard the word with joy, yet no doubt,
did not crucify the flesh and the world: whereby they might have discovered
their unsoundness if they would, before tribulation came: First, By discerning
that the Word was not deep rooted, 1. In their Judgment and Estimation, 2. Or
in their Wills and settled Resolution. Secondly, And by discerning the
unmortified lusts of their hearts in the mean time. But it seems the third sort
of Hearers likened to the thorny ground, went further then these: for here it
is only said by Luke 8.14. that they bring no fruit to perfection: However,
whether these went farther then the other, or not, it is certain that these
also had their trial and ^ell in the trial: The deceitfullness of riches
overturned these, as the heat of persecution overturned the other. So that it
is evident that prosperity puts faith to the trial, as well as adversity. But
mark the different manner of their falls and overthrowes: They that are
overthrown by adversity, are said to fall away, that is, to forsake Christ
openly: but they that fall by prosperity, are not said to fall away; but only
that the deceitfullness of riches and cares of the world choke the word, so
that it becomes unfruitful, that is, brings no fruit to perfection. For
usually these do not openly forsake Christ, but continue often an unfruitful and
hypocritical profession; insomuch that at that very time when the Word is
choked and fruitless, yet the blade of profession may be as green as ever, and
they may be so much in some duties, and have such golden words, and wity shifts
to plead for every covetous practice, and put so fair a gloss on all their
actions, that they may keep up the credit of being very eminent Christians. So
that if your Grace can carry you well through prosperity, you may be confident
of the truth of it. 3. And then if it be thus proved true and saving, you have
cause to be confident that it will hold out in adversity also, and cause you to
overcome the shake of tribulation. I think most men are better in adversity
than in prosperity: though I confess no adversity is so shaking, as that which
leaves it in a man's choice to come out of it by sinning: As for a man in health
to be persecuted, and the persecutor to say, If thou will turn to my side and
way I will give thee thy life and preferment with it: But sickness or other
sufferings imposed only by God, and which only God can take off, are nothing so
shaking. For as the former draws us to please men that they may deliver us, so
this draws even the wicked to think of pleasing God, that He may deliver them.

17. Observe that when I ask whether this Resolution do already prevail, I do
not mean any perfect prevailing: nay sin may prevail to draw you to a
particular act (and how many, I will not undertake to tell you:) and yet still
Grace and the Spirit do conquer in the main. For you will say, that General and
Army get the victory who vanquish the other and win the field, though yet
perhaps a Troop or Regiment may be routed, and many slain.

18. When I speak of your overcoming all gross sins, as I mean in ordinary, not
doubting but its too possible for a believer to commit a gross sin; so I
confess, that its hard to tell just which sins are to be called gross, and
which infirmities only: or (as some speak) which is mortal, and which not. And
therefore this Mark has some difficulties as to the right trying by it (of
which more anon.)

19. Yet I desire that you join them all together in trial, seeing it is in the
whole that the true and full description of a Christian is contained. The same
description of a true Christian (presupposing his right belief) I have drawn up
in our public Church-profession, which in this County the Ministers have
agreed on; in the Profession of Consent in these words; I do heartily take this
one God for my only God and chief good, and this Jesus Christ for my only
Lord-Redeemer and Savior, and this holy Ghost for my sanctifier; and the
Doctrine by him revealed, and sealed by his Miracles, and now contained in the
holy Scriptures, do I t^ke for the Law of God and the Rule of my Faith and
Life: And Repenting unfeignedly of my sins, I do resolve through the Grace of
God sincerely to obey him, both in Holiness to God and Righteousness to men,
and in special Love to the Saints and Communion with them, against all the
Temptations of the Devil, the world, and my own flesh, and this to the death.
He that sincerely can speak these words, is a sincere Christian.

20. Lastly, That you may see that those five which I laid you down are all
true Marks, do but peruse these texts of Scripture following. For the first,
Psalm. 16.5, 2. and 73.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. and 4.6, 7. and 1.1, 2, 3. Josh.
24.16, 17, 18, 21, 22, 24. Mat. 6.19, 20, 21. Romans 7.24. and 8.17, 18, 23. Heb.
11.10, 15, 16, 25, 26, 27. Psalm. 16.5, 6, 7, 8. For the second, see Joh. 1.10,
11, 12. Joh. 3.16. Mark. 16.16. Acts 16.31. Joh. 14.21. and 16.27. Romans 14.9.
Luke 19.27. Jam. 1.12. Mat. 22.37. 1 Cor. 16.22. Mat. 10.37. Rev. 22.14. Heb.
5.9. For the third most of the same will serve: and Heb. 12.14. Mat. 7.24.
Psalm. 1.2, 3. Mat. 5.20. Acts 10.35. Romans 7.22. For the two last, besides the
former, see Heb. 11.6. Romans 8. from the 1. to 14. Gal. 5.17, 24. and 26.8. 1 Timothy 6.9. Luke 8.13. 1 John 2.15. and 5.4, 5. Jam. 1.27. and 4.4. Gal. 6.14.
and 1.4. Romans 12.2. Tit. 2.14. Mat. 10 37. Romans 2.5, 6, 7. Rev. 14.13. Phil.
2.14. Col. 3.23, 24. 1 Cor. 3.8, 14. Joh. 12.16. 1 John 3.22, 23. Genesis 22.16.
Mat. 10 22. and 24.13. Heb. 3.6, 14. and 6.11. Rev. 2.26, 10. and 12.11. Mat.
16.25. and 10.39. Mar. 17.33. Romans 8.9, 13. Luke 13.3, 5. Romans 6.4, 5, 6, 12,
14, 16, 17, 22.

And thus I have given you such Marks as you may safely try your self by, and
cleared the meaning of them to you. Now let me advise you to this use of them.
1. In your serious self-examination, try only by these, and not by any
uncertain Marks. I know there be promises of Life made to some particular
duties and single qualifications in Scripture, as to Humility, Meekness,
Almsdeeds, Love to the Godly, etc. but it is still both on supposition that
they be not single in the person, but are accompanied with, and flow from that
faith and love to God beforementioned; and also that they are in a prevailing
degree.

2. When ever any fresh doubtings arise in you, upon the stirrings of
corruption, or debility of Graces, still have recourse to these former Marks;
and while you find these, let not any thing cause you to pass wrong judgments
on your self. Lay these now to your own heart, and tell me, Are you not
unfeignedly willing to have Christ on the terms that he is offered? Are you
not willing to be more holy? and beg of him to make you so? Would you not be
glad if your soul were more perfectly sanctified and rid of that body of sin,
though it were to the smart and displeasing of your flesh? Are you not willing
to wait on God in the use of his Ordinances, in that poor weak measure as you
are able to perform them? Durst you or would you quit your part in God, Heaven,
Christ, and forsake the way of Holiness, and do as the profane world does,
though it were to please your flesh or save your state or life? Do not you
daily strive against the flesh, and keep it under, and deny it its desires? Do
you not deny the world when it would hinder you from works of Mercy or public
Good, according to your ability? Is it not the grief of your soul when you
fall? and your greatest trouble that you cannot walk more obediently,
innocently and fruitfully? and do you not after sinning Resolve to be more
watchful for the time to come? Are you not resolved to stick to Christ and his
holy Laws and Ways, whatever changes or dangers come? and rather to forsake
friends and all that you have, then to forsake him? Yet in a godly jealousy
and distrust of your own heart, do renounce your own strength, and resolve to
do this only in the strength of Christ? and therefore daily beg it of him? Is
it not your daily care and business to please God, and do his will, and avoid
sinning in your weak measure? I hope that all this is so, and your own case;
which if it be you have Infallible Evidences, and want but the sight and
comfort of them: You have the true grounds for Assurance, though you want
Assurance it self: Your chief danger is over, though your trouble remain. Your
soul is at the present in a safe condition, though not in the sense of it: You
are in the state of salvation, though not of consolation. It must be your next
work therefore to study Gods Mercies, and take notice what he has done for
your soul. Let not so blessed a guest as the holy Ghost dwell in you
unobserved. Shall he do such wonders in you and for you, and you not know it,
or acknowledge it? Shall he new beget you, and new make you, and produce a
spiritual, heavenly nature in you, who of your self were so carnal and earthly,
and will you not observe it? Had you any of these holy desires, endeavors or
resolutions of your self by nature? Or have the ungodly about you any of them?
O that you knew what a Work of wonderful Mercy, Wisdom and Power the Spirit
performs in the renewing of a soul? then sure you would more observe and
admire his Love to you herein!

DIRECTION XII.
12. The next Rule for your Direction for the right settling of your Peace is
this. You must know, that Assurance of Justification, Adoption, and right to
Salvation cannot be gathered from the smallest degree of Saving Grace.

HEre I must say something for explaining my meaning to you. 2. And then give
you my Reasons of this Assertion.

1. Understand that I speak of Gods ordinary working by means, not denying but
God may by a voice from Heaven, or an Angel, or other supernatural Revelation,
bestow Assurance on whom he pleases. But I hope all wise Christians will take
heed of expecting this, or of trusting too much to seeming Revelations, unless
they could prove that God uses to confer Assurance in this way; which I
think, they cannot.

2. By the smallest degree of Grace, I mean, of Faith, Love, Obedience and
those saving Graces whose acts are the condition of our Salvation, and which in
the fore-expressed Marks I laid down to you. Do not therefore so far mistake
me, as to think that I speak of a small measure of those common Gifts which are
separable from true Sanctification: such as are extensive Knowledge, Memory,
Ability of Utterance in Preaching, Repeating, Exhorting or Praying; An ornate,
plausible winning deportment before men, such as is commonly called Good
breeding or Manners; An affected humble, complementall familiarity and
condescension, to creep into men's estimation and affections, and steal their
hearts, etc. Many a one that is strong in saving Grace, is weak in all these,
and other the like.

Now for my Reasons.

1. I conceive that it is not possible for any Minister punctually to set down
a discernable difference between the least measure of True saving Grace, and
the highest degree of common Grace; and to say, Just here it is that they part,
or by this you may discern them. I do but say, I think so, because other men
may know far more then I do: But I will say it as certain, that I am not able
to do it, for my own part. This much I can tell, that the least degree of Grace
that is saving does determine the soul for God and Christ, against the world
and flesh that stand as Competitors; and so where Christ's interest prevails
in the least measure, there is the least measure of saving Grace: As when you
are weighing two things in the balance, and at last make it so near evenweight,
that one end is turned and no more: so when you are considering whether to be
for Christ or for the flesh and the world, and your Will is but even a very
little Determined to Christ, and prefers him; this is the least measure of
saving Grace. But then how a poor soul should discern this prevalent choice and
determination of it self, is all the Question. For there is nothing more easy
and common then for men to think verily, that they prefer Christ above the
creature, as long as no temptation does assault them, nor sensual objects stand
up in any cosiderable strength to entice them: Nay wicked men do truly, often
times, purpose to obey Christ before the flesh, and to take him for their Lord,
merely in the general, when they do not know or consider the quality of his
Laws; that they are so strict and spiritual and contrary to the flesh, and
hazardous to their worldly hopes and seeming-happiness: But when it comes to
particulars, and God says, Now deny thy self, and thy friend, and thy goods,
and thy life for my sake, alas, it was never his Resolution to do it; nor will
he be persuaded to it. But he that said to God who sends him to labor in his
Vineyard, I go Sir, when he comes to find the unpleasingness of the Work, he
goes not, or never sets a hand to it. So that it is evident that it is no true
saving Resolution or Willingness, which prevails not for actual Obedience.
Now here comes in the unresolvable Doubt, What is the least Measure of
Obedience that will prove a man truly Willing and Resolved, or to have truly
Accepted of Christ for his Lord? This obedience lies in Performing what is
commanded, and Avoiding what is forbidden. Now it is too certain that every
true Believer is guilty of a frequent neglect of Duty, yea of known Duty: We
know we should Love God more abundantly, and Delight in him, and Meditate more
on him, and Pray more often and earnestly then we do, and instruct our Families
more diligently, and speak against sin more boldly, and admonish our neighbors
more faithfully, with many the like: The good that we would do we do not, Romans
7.19. Nay the flesh so striveth against the Spirit, that we cannot do the good
we would. Gal. 5.17. Nay many a true Christian in time of temptation has been
drawn to omit secret prayer, or family duties almost wholly for a certain space
of time: yea and perhaps to be so corrupted in his judgment for a time, as to
think he does well in it, as also in forbearing praising God by Psalms,
Receiving the Sacraments, and Communicating with the Church, hearing the Word
publicly, etc. (for what duty almost is not denied of late?) and perhaps may
not only omit Relieving the poor for a time, but excuse it. Now what man can
punctually determine just how often a true Christian may be guilty of any such
omission? and just how long he may continue it? and what the duties be which he
may possibly so omit, and what not?

So also in sins of Commission: Alas, what sins did Noah, Lot, David, Solomon,
Asa, Peter, etc. commit? If we should say as the Papists and Arminians, that
these being mortal sins, do for the time, till Repentance restore him, cast a
true Christian out of Gods favor into a state of Damnation; then what man
breathing is able to enumerate those Mortal sins? and tell us which be so
Damning, and which not? Nay if he could say, Drunkenness is one, and Gluttony
another; Who can set the punctual stint, and say, Just so many bits a man must
eat before he be a Glutton: or Just so much he must drink before he be a
Drunkard? or by such a sign the turning point may be certainly known? We may
have signs by which he may be tried at the Bar of Man; but these are none of
them taken from that smallest degree, which specifieth and denominates the
sin before God. If we avoid the foresaid opinion, that one such sin does
bring us into the state of Damnation, yet is the difficulty never the less: For
it is certain, that he that commits sin is of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. and there
are spots which are not the spots of Gods children: and all true faith will
mortify the world to us and us to it, Gal. 6.14. and he that is in Christ has
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, Gal. 5.24. and that
if we live after the flesh we shall die. Romans 8.13. and his servants we are to
whom we obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto Righteousness,
Romans 6.16. and if we delight in iniquity or regard it God will not hear our
prayers, Psalm. 66.18. and that he that names the name of Christ must depart
from iniquity, 1 Timothy 2.19. and that God will judge all men according to their
works, and bid the workers of iniquity depart from him, Mat. ^.23. Now can any
man on earth tell us just how great or how often sinning will stand with true
Grace, and how much will not? who can find those punctual bounds in the Word
of God? I conclude therefore, that no Minister, or at least, none who is no
wiser then I am, can give a true discernable difference between the worst of
Saints and the best of the unsanctified, or the weakest degree of true Grace,
and the highest of common Grace; and so to help such weak Christians to true
Assurance of their salvation.

2. But as this is impossible to be declared by the Teachers, so much more is
it impossible to be discerned by the persons themselves (yea though it could
possibly be declared to him:) and that for these Reasons.

1. From the nature of the thing. Small things are hardly discerned. A little
is next to none. 2. From the great darkness of man's understanding, and his
unacquaintedness with himself (both the nature, faculties and motions of his
soul naturally considered, and the moral state, dispositions and motions of
it;) and is it likely that so blind an eye can discern the smallest thing, and
that in so strange and dark a place? every purblind man cannot see an atome, or
a pin, especially in the dark. 3. The heart is deceitful above all things as
well as dark; full of seemings* counterfeits and false pretenses: And a child
in Grace is not able to discover its juglings, and understand a book where
almost every word is aequivocall or mysterious. 4. The heart is most confused,
as well as dark and deceitful: It is like a house or shop of tools, where all
things are thrown together on a heap, and nothing keeps its own place: There
are such multiplicity of cogitations, fantasies and passions, and such
irregular thronging in of them, and such a confused reception and operation of
objects and conceptions, that it is a wonderful difficult thing for the best
Christian to discern clearly the bent and actions, and so the state of his own
so^^. For in such a crowd of cogitations and passions, we are like men in a
Fair or crowd of people, where a confused noise may be heard, but you cannot
well perceive what any of them say, except either some one near you, that
speaks much louder then all the rest, or else except you single out some one
from the rest, and go close to him to confer with him of purpose. Our Intellect
and Passions are like the lakes of water in the common roades, where the
frequent passage of Horses does so muddy it, that you can see nothing in it,
especially that is near the bottom; when in pure untroubled waters you may see
a small thing. In such a confusion and tumult as is usually in men's souls, for
a poor weak Christian to seek for the discovery of his sincerity, is according
to the proverb, to seek for a needle in a bottle of hay. 5. Besides all this,
the corrupt heart of man, is so exceeding backward to the work of
self-examination, and the use of other means by which the soul should be
familiarly acquainted with it self, that in a case of such difficulty, it will
hardly ever overcome them, if it were a thing that might be done. In the best,
a great deal of resolvedness, diligence and unwearied constancy in searching
into the state of the soul, is necessary to the attainment of a settled
Assurance and Peace: How much more in them that have so small and almost
undiscernable a measure of Grace to discover. 6. Yet further, The Conceptions,
Apprehensions, and consequently the sensible motions of the Will, and
especially the Passions, are all naturally exceeding mutable: And while the
mobile, agile spirits are any way the Instruments, it will be so: especially
where the Impression which is made in the understanding is so small and weak.
Naturally man's mind and will is exceeding mutable, turned into an hundred
shapes in a few days, according as objects are presented to us, and the
temperature of the body disposes, helps or hinders the mind. Let us hear one
man reason the Case; and we think he makes all as clear as the Light: Let us
hear another solve all his Arguments, and dispute for the contrary, and then we
see that our Apprehensions were abused. Let us hear him Reply and confute all
again, and confirm his Cause, and then we think him in the right again. Nothing
more changeable then the conceivings and mind of man, till he be thoroughly
Resolved and Habituated. Now in this Case, how shall those that have but little
Grace be able to discern it? It will not keep the mind from fluctuating. If
they seem Resolved for obedience to Christ to day, to morrow they are so shaken
by some enticing object, and force of the same temptation, that their
Resolution is undiscernable; nay actually they prefer sin at that time before
obedience: It is impossible then but the soul should stagger and be at a loss;
for it will judge of it self as it finds it self: and it cannot discern the
Habitual Prevalency of Christ's Interest when they feel the Actual Prevalency of
the fleshes Interest. For the Act is the only discoverer of the Habit: And if
Peter himself should then have fallen to the examination of his heart, Whether
he Preferred Christ before his Life, at the same time when he was denying and
forswearing Christ to save his Life, do you think he could have discerned it?
and yet even then Christ's Interest was greatest in him Habitually. If David
should have gone to search, whether he preferred obedience to God before his
fleshly pleasure, when he was committing Adultery; or before his credit, when
he was plotting the death of Vriah, what discovery do you think he would have
made? 7. Add to all these, that as these several distempers, were they but in
the same measure in a weak Christian as they are in the best or in most, would
yet make the smallest measure of Grace undiscernable (if we might suppose the
smallest Grace to be consistent with such a frame;) so it is certain that
whoever he be that has the least measure of Grace to discover in himself, he
has proportionably the least measure of abilities and helps to discover it,
and the greatest measure of all the forementioned hindrances: He that has but
a very little Repentance, Faith, Love and Obedience (sincere,) when he goes to
find it out, he has in the same measure, a Darker Understanding to discern
it, then others have; and a greater strangeness and disacquaintance with
himself; and more deceitfulness in his heart; and a greater confusion and
hurlyburly in his thoughts and Affections, and all more out of order and to
seek: Also he has a greater backwardness to the work of self-examination, and
can hardly get his heart to it, and more hardly, to do it thoroughly and search
to the quick, and most hardly to hold on against all withdrawing temptations,
till he have made a clearer discovery: And lastly, his soul is more mutable
then stronger Christians are, and therefore when cross Actings are so frequent,
he cannot discern the smallest prevailing Habit. If (when you are weighing
Gold) the scales be turned but with one grain, every little jogge, or wind, or
unsteadfast holding will actually lift up the heavier end, and its
preponderation is with great wavering and mobility. 8. Yet further, Consider,
those that have least Grace have most sin, habitual and actual; and they are so
frequent in transgressing, that their failings are still in their eye: and
thereby the prevalency of Christ's interest is made more doubtful and obscure:
For when he asks his own conscience, Do I will or love most the world and my
fleshly delights, or Christ and his ways? presently conscience remembers him,
at such a time, and such a time thou did choose thy fleshly pleasures,
profits or credit, and refuse obedience: and it is so often, and so foully, that
the soul is utterly at a loss, and cannot discern the Habitual prevalent bent
and Resolution of the Will. 9. Besides, Conscience is a Judge in man's soul, and
will be Accusing and condemning men so far as they are guilty: now they that
make work for the most frequent and terrible Accusations of Conscience that
will stand with true Grace, are unlikely to have Assurance. For Assurance
quiets the soul and eases it; and a galled Conscience works the contrary way.
They that keep open the wound, and daily fret off the skin more, and are still
grating on the galled part, are unlikely to have Assurance. 10. Again, These
weakest Christians being least in Duty and most in sinning (of any in whom sin
reigns not) they are consequently most in provoking and displeasing God. And
they that do so, shall find that God will show them his displeasure, and will
displease them again. They must not look to enjoy Assurance, or see the Pleased
face of God, till they are more careful to please him, and are more sparing
and seldom in offending him. As Gods universal Justice in Governing the world,
will make as great a difference between the sincerely Obedient and Disobedient,
as there is between Heaven and Hell; so God^ Paternal Justice in Governing his
family, will make as wide a difference between the more Obedient children and
the less Obedient, as is between his dreadful frowns, and his joyous reviving
smiles; or between his smarting Rod, or his encouraging Rewards. 11. If God
should give Assurance and Peace to the sinning and least obedient believers, he
should not fit his providential disposals to their good. It is not that which
their state requires, nor would it tend to their Cure any more then a healing
Plaster to a sore that is rotten in the bottom, or a Cordial to the removal
of a cacochymy, or the purging out of corrupt redundant humors. They are so
inclined to the Lethargy of security, that they have need of continual
pinching, striking or loud calling-on, to keep them waking: (still remember,
that by this weak Christian, I mean not every doubting distressed soul, that is
weak in their own apprehension, and little in their own eyes, and poor in
spirit: but I mean those that have the least measure of sincere Love to Christ,
and desire after him, and tenderness of conscience, and care to please God, and
the greatest measure of security, worldliness, pride, flesh-pleasing, and
boldness in sinning, which is consistent with sincerity in the faith.) I
believe there is no father or mother that has children to govern, but they
know by experience, that ^here is a necessity of frowns and rods for the more
disobedient; and that rewards and smiles are no cure for stubbornness or
contempt. 12. Lastly, Do but well consider, what a sola^cisme in Government it
would be, and what desperate inconveniences it would have brought into the
world, if God should but have set such a punctual landmark between his Kingdom
and the Kingdom of Satan, as we are ready to dream of: If God should have said
in his Word, just so often a man may be drunk, or may murder, or commit adultery,
or steal, or forswear himself, and yet be a true Christian and be saved! Or
just so far a man may go in neglecting duty to God and man, and in cherishing
his flesh, hiding his sin, etc. and yet be a true Believer and be saved. This
would 1. Embolden men in sinning, and make them think, I may yet venture, for I
stand on safe ground: 2. And it would hinder Repentance: Indeed it would be the
way to rob God of his honor; and multiply provocations against him, and keep
his children in disobedience, and hinder their growth in holiness, and cause a
deformity in Christ's body, and a shame to his Religion and sacred name. As for
those that say, Assurance never encourages men in sin, but tends to destroy
it. I answer, It is true of Gods Assurance, seasonably given to those that are
fit for it, and used by them accordingly: But if God should have told all the
world, just how far they may sin, and yet be certain of salvation, this would
have bred Assurance in those that were unfit for it, and it would have been but
the putting of new wine into old cracked bottles, or a new piece into an old
garment, that would break them, or make worse the rent. I must therefore freely
tell these objectors (I am sorry that so many of my old acquaintance now harp
so much on this Antinomian string) that ignorance or error has so blinded
them, that they have forgotten, or know not 1. What an imperfect piece the best
is in this life, much more the worst true Christian. 2. Nor what a subtle Devil
we have to tempt us. 3. Nor what an active thing corruption is, and what
advantage it will take on unseasonable Assurance. 4. Nor what the nature of
Grace and Sanctification is; and how much of it lies in a godly jealousy of
our selves and apprehension of our danger, and that the fear of God is the
beginning of wisdom, See Heb. 4.1. Nay 5. They have forgotten what a man is,
and how inseparable from his nature is the Principle of self-preservation, and
how necessary the apprehension of danger and the fear of evil to himself, is to
the avoiding of that evil, and so to his preservation. 8. Yea if they knew but
what a Commonwealth or a family is, they would know that fear of evil, and
desire of self-preservation, is the very motive to Associations, and the
groundwork of all Laws and Government, and a great part of the life of all
Obedience.

And thus I have fully proved to you, That the smallest measure of Grace,
cannot help men to Assurance, in Gods ordinary way.

Perhaps you will say, What comfort is there in this to a poor weak Christian?
This is rather the way to put him quite out of heart and hope. I answer. No
such matter: I shall show you the uses of this observation in the following
Directions. In the mean time I will say but this, The expectations of
unseasonable Assurance and out of Gods way, is a very great cause of keeping
many in languishing and distress, and of causing others to turn Antinomians,
and snatch at comforts, which God never gave them, and to feign and frame an
Assurance of their own making, or build upon the delusions of the great
Deceiver* transforming himself into an Angel of Light.

DIRECTION XIII.
13. From the last mentioned Observation, there is one plain Consectary
arising, which I think you may do well to note by the way, viz. That According
to Gods ordinary way of giving Grace, it cannot be expected that Christians
should be able to know the very time of their first receiving or acting true
saving Grace* or just when they were Pardoned, Justified, Adopted and put into
a state of Salvation.

THis must needs be undeniable, if you grant the former Point, That the least
measure of Grace, yields not Assurance of its sincerity (which is proved:)
and withal if you grant this plain truth, That it is Gods ordinary way, to
give a small measure of Grace at the first. This I prove thus: 1. Christ
likeneth Gods Kingdom of Grace to a grain of mustard seed, which is at first
the least of all seeds, but after comes to a tree: And to a little leaven,
which leaveneth the whole lump. I will not deny but this may be applied to the
visible progress of the Gospel and increase of the Church: but it is plainly
appliable also to the Kingdom of Christ within us. 2. The Scripture often calls
such young beginners, Babes, Children, Novices, etc. 3. We are all commanded
still to grow in Grace; which implies that we have our smallest measure at the
first. 4. Heb. 5.12. shows, that strength of Grace should be according to
time and means. 5. Common experience is an invincible argument for this. Men
are at a distance from Christ when he first calls them to come to him: and
many steps they have Toward him before they reach To him. We are first so far
enlightened as to see our sin and misery, and the meaning and truth of the
Gospel, and so rowsed out of our security, and made to look about us, and see
that we have souls to save or lose, and that it is no jesting matter to be a
Christian: and so we come to understand the tenor of the Covenant, and Christ's
terms of saving men: But alas how long is it usually after this, before we
come sincerely to yield to his terms, and take him as he is offered, and
Renounce the World, Flesh and the Devil, and Give up our selves to him in a
faithful Covenant! We are long deliberating before we can get our backward
hearts to Resolve. How then should a man know just when he was past the highest
step of common or preparative Grace, and arived at the first step of special
Grace?

Yet mark, that I here speak only of Gods ordinary way of giving Grace: For I
doubt not but in some God may give a higher Degree of Grace at the first day of
their conversion, then some others do attain in many years. And those may know
the time of their true Conversion, both because the effect was so discernable,
and because the suddenness makes the change more sensible and observable.

But this is not the ordinary course. Ordinarily Convictions lie long on the
soul before they come to a true Conversion. Conscience is wounded, and smarting
long, and long grudging against our sinful and negligent courses, and telling
us of the Necessity of Christ and a holy life, before we sincerely obey
Conscience, and give up our selves to Christ. We seldom yield to the first
conviction or persuasion. The Flesh has usually too long time given it to
plead its own Cause; and to say to the Soul, Will thou forsake all thy pleasure
and merry company and courses? Will thou beggar thy self? or make thy self a
scorn and mocking stock to the world? Art thou ever able to hold out in so
strict a course? and to be undone? and to forsake all and lay down thy life for
Christ? Is it not better venture thy self in the same way as thou have gone in,
as well as others do, and as so many of thy forefathers have done before thee?
Under such sinful Deliberations as these we usually continue long before we
fully Resolve: And many demurres and delays we make before we conclude to take
Christ on the terms that he is offered to us. Now I make no doubt but most or
many Christians can remember how and when God stirred their Consciences and
wakened them from their security, and made them look about them, and roused
them out of their natural Lethargy: Some can tell what Sermon first did it:
Others can remember by what degrees and steps God was doing it long: The
ordinary way appointed by God for the doing of it first, is the instruction of
Parents: And (as I have fullier manifested in my Book of Infant Baptism) if
Parents would do their duties, they would find, that The Word publicly
preached was not appointed to be the first ordinary means of Conversion and
Sanctification; but commonly, Grace would be received in childhood: I speak not
of Baptismal Relative Grace, consisting in the pardon of Original sin; nor yet
any infusion of Habits before they have the use of reason (because I suppose it
is hid from us, what God does in that.) But I speak of actual Conversion: and I
prove that this should be the first ordinary way and time of Conversion to the
children of true Christians, because it is the first means that God has
appointed to be used with them. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 6.4. Parents are
commanded to teach their children the Law of God, urgently, at home and as they
walk abroad, lying down and rising up; and to bring them up in the admonition
and nurture of the Lord: and to train up a child in the way he should go, and
then when they are old they will not depart from it, Prove. 22.6. And children
are commanded to Remember their Creator in the days of their youth, Eccles.
12.1. And if this be Gods first great means, then doubtless he will ordinarily
bless his own means here, as well as in the Preaching of the Word.

From all this I would have you learn this lesson: That you ought not to
trouble your self with fears and doubts lest you are not truly Regenerate,
because you know not the Sermon or the very time and manner of your Conversion:
but find that you have grace, and then, though you know not just the time or
manner of your receiving of it, yet you may nevertheless be Assured of
Salvation by it. Search therefore what you are, and how your will is disposed
and resolved, and how your Life is ordered, rather then to know how you became
such. I know the workings of the Spirit on the soul may be discerned, because
they stir up discernable Actings in our own spirits. The souls Convictions,
Consideration, Resolutions and Affections are no insensible things: But yet the
work of Grace usually begins in common Grace, and so proceeds by degrees till
it come to special saving Grace, even as the work of nature does, first
producing the matter and then introducing the form; first producing the embryo,
before it introduce a Rational soul. And as no child knows the time or manner
of his own Formation, Vivification or Reception of that soul, so I think, few
true Believers can say, Just such a day, or at such a Sermon I became a true
Justified, sanctified man. That was the hour of your true Conversion and
Justification, When you first preferred God and Christ and Grace before all
things in this world, and deliberately and seriously Resolved to take Christ
for your Savior and Governor, and give up your self to him to be saved,
taught and governed, and to obey him faithfully to the death against all
Temptations, whatsoever you should lose or suffer by it. Now I would but ask
those very Christians that think they do know the very Sermon that converted
them, Did that Sermon bring you to this Resolution? Or was it not only some
troubling, rowsing preparation hereto? I think some desperate sickness or the
like Affliction is a very usual means to bring Resolutions to be downright and
fixed, with many souls that long delayed and fluctuated in unresolvedness, and
lay under mere uneffectual Convictions.

Obj. But this runs on your own grounds, that saving Grace and common Grace do
differ but in degrees.

Answ. I think most will confess that as to the Acts of Grace, and that is it
that we are now enquiring after; and that is all the means that we have of
discerning the Habits: Yet remember that I still tell you, That there is a
specifical Moral difference, though grounded but in a gradual Natural
difference. Yea and that one grain of the Spirits working, which turns the Will
in a prevalent measure for Christ, (together with the illumination necessary
thereto) deserves all those elogies and high titles that are given it in the
Word; so great a change does it make in the soul! Well may it be called, The
New Creature: Born of the Spirit: The Workmanship of God: The new Life: yea The
Image of God, and The Divine Nature (if that Text be not meant of the Divine
Nature in Christ which we are Relatively made partakers of in our Union with
him.) When you are weighing things in the balance, you may add grain after
grain, and it makes no turning or motion at all, till you come to the very last
grain, and then suddenly that end which was downward is turned upward. When you
stand at a loss between two highwayes, not knowing which way to go, as long as
you are deliberate, you stand still: All the Reasons that come into your mind,
do not stir you: But the last Reason which Resolves you, sets you in motion.
So is it in the change of a sinners heart and life: He is not changed (but
preparing toward it) while he is but Deliberating, Whether he should choose
Christ or the world? But the last Reason that comes in and Determines his Will
to Christ, and makes him resolve and enter a firm Covenant with Christ, and
say, I will have Christ for Better or Worse, this makes the greatest change
that ever is made by any work in this world. For how can there be greater then
the turning of a soul from the creature to the Creator? so distant are the
Terms of this change. After this one Turning act Christ has that Heart, and
the main bent and endeavors of the life, which the world had before. The man
has a new End, a new Rule and Guide, and a new Master. Before the Flesh and
the Devil were his Masters, and now Christ is his Master. So that you must not
think so meanly of the Turning, Determining, Resolving act of Grace, because it
lies but in a gradual difference naturally from common Grace, If a Prince
should offer a condemned beggar to marry her, and pardon her, and make her his
Queen; Her Deliberation may be the way to her Consent, and one Reason after
another may bring her near to consenting. But it is that which turns her Will
to Consent, Resolve, Covenant and Deliver her self to him, which makes the
great change in her state. Yet all the foregoing Work of common Grace has a
hand in the change, though only the turning Resolution do effect it: It is the
rest with this that does it: As when the last grain turns the scales, the
former do concur. I will conclude with D^ Prestons words in his Golden
Scepter, page 210. Obj. It seems then that the knowledge of a carnal man and of
a Regenerate man do differ but in Degrees, and not in kind. Ans. The want of
Degrees here alter the kind. As in Numbers the Addition of a Degree alters the
species and kind. Read for this also D. Jackson of saving faith,. 3. chapter 3.
page 297, 298. and frequently in other places. So much of that observation.

DIRECTION XIV.
14. Yet further I would have you to understand this: That As the least measure
of Saving Grace is ordinarily undiscernable from the greatest measure of common
Grace, (notwithstanding the greatness of the change that it makes) so a measure
somewhat greater is so hardly discernable, that it seldom brings Assurance: And
therefore it is only the stronger Christians that attain Assurance ordinarily;
even those, who have a great degree of Faith and Love, and keep them much in
exercise, and are very watchful and careful in Obedience: And consequently
(most Christians being of the weaker sort) it is but few that do attain to
Assurance of their Justification and Salvation.

HEre are two or three points which I would have you distinctly to observe,
though I lay them all together for brevity. 1. That it is only a greater
measure of Grace that will ordinarily afford Assurance. 2. That therefore it is
only the stronger and holier and more obedient sort of Christians that usually
reach to a Certainty of Salvation. 3. That few Christians do reach to a strong
or high degree of Grace. 4. And therefore it is but few Christians that reach
to Assurance.

For the two first of these it will evidently appear that they are true, by
reviewing the Reasons which I gave of the last point save one. He that will
attain to a Certainty of Salvation, must 1. Have a large measure of Grace to be
discerned. 2. He must have that Grace much in Action, and lively Action: For it
is not mere Habits that are discernable. 3. He must have a clear understanding
to be acquainted with the Nature of Spiritual things: To know what is a sound
evidence, and how to follow the search, and how to repel particular
Temptations. 4. He must have a good acquaintance and familiarity with his own
heart: and to that end must be much at home, and be used sometime to a diligent
observation of his heart and ways. 5. He must be in a good measure acquainted
with, and a Conqueror of contradicting Temptations. 6. He must have some
competent cure of the deep Deceitfulness of the heart, and it must be brought
to an open, plain, ingenuous frame, willing to know the worst of it self. 7. He
must have some cure of that ordinary confusion and tumultuous disorder that is
in the thoughts and affections of men: and get things into an order in his
mind. 8. He must be a man of Diligence, Resolution, and unwearied Patience,
that will Resolvedly set on the work of self-examination, and painfully watch
in it, and constantly follow it from time to time till he attain a Certainty.
9. He must be one that is very fearful of sinning, and careful in close
obedient walking with God, and much in sincere and spiritual duty, that he keep
not conscience still in accusing and condemning him, and God still offended
with him, and his wounds fresh bleeding, and his Soul still smarting. 10. He
must be a man of much fixedness and constancy of mind, and not of the ordinary
mutability of mankind; that so he may not by remitting his zeal and diligence,
lose the sight of his evidences, nor by leaving open his soul to an alteration
by every new intruding thought and temptation, let go his Assurance as soon as
he attaineth it. All these things in a good degree are Necessary to the
attaining of Assurance of Salvation.

And then do I need to say any more to the Confirmation of the third Point,
That few Christians reach this measure of Grace? O that it were not as clear as
the light, and as discernable as the earth under our feet, that most true
Christians are weaklings and of the lower forms in the School of Christ! Alas,
how ignorant are most of the best? How little Love, or Faith, or Zeal, or
heavenly-mindedness, or Delight in God, have they? How unacquainted with a
frequent exercise of these Graces? How unacquainted with the way of
self-examination? and how backward to it? and how dull and careless in it?
doing it by the halves, as Laban searched Rachels Tent? How easily put off with
an excuse? How little acquainted with their own hearts? or with Satan's
temptations, and ways of deceiving? how much deceitfulness remains in their
hearts? how confused are their minds? and what distractions and tumults are
there in their thoughts? how bold are they in sinning? and how little
tenderness of Conscience, and care of obeying have they? how frequently do they
wound Conscience, provoke God, and obscure their Evidences? and how mutable are
their Apprehensions? and how soon do they lose that Assurance which they once
attain? and upon every occasion quite lose the sight of their evidences? yea
and Remit their actual Resolutions, and so lose much of the Evidence it self?
Is not this the common case of Godly people? O that we could truly deny it: Let
their lives be witness, let their visible neglects, worldliness, pride,
impatiency of plain Reproof, remisness of Zeal, dullness and customariness in
Duty, strangeness to God, unwillingness to secret Prayer and Meditation,
unacquaintedness with the Spirits operations and joys, their unpeaceableness
one with another, and their too frequent blemishing the glory of their holy
Profession by the unevenness of their walking, let all these witness, whether
the School of Christ have not most children in it: and how few of them ever go
to the University of riper knowledge? and how few of those are fit to begin
here the works of their Priestly Office, which they must live in for ever? in
the high and joyful Praises of God and of the Lamb, who has Redeemed them by
his Blood, and made them Kings and Priests to God, that they may Reign with him
for ever? I am content to stand to the Judgment of all humble self-knowing
Christians, whether this be not true of most of themselves? and for those that
deny it, I will stand to the Judgment of their Godly neighbors, who perhaps
know them better then they know themselves.

And then this being all so, the fourth point is undeniable, That It is but
very few Christians that reach to Assurance of Salvation. If any think (as
intemperate hot spirited men are like enough to charge me) that in all this I
countenance the Popish doctrine of Doubting and Uncertainty, and contradict the
common doctrine of the Reformed Divines that Write against them; I answer, 1. I
do contradict both the Papists that deny Assurance, and many foreign Writers
who make it far more Easy, Common, and Necessary then it is (much more both
them and the Antinomists, who place Justifying faith in it.) But I stand in the
midst between both extremes; and I think I have the company of most English
Divines. 2. I come not to be of this mind merely by reading Books, but mainly,
by reading my own heart, and consulting my own experience, and the experience
of a very great number of Godly people of all sorts, who have opened their
hearts to me, for almost twenty years time. 3. I would entreat the gainsayers
to study their own hearts better for some considerable time, and to be more in
hearing the case and complaints of Godly people; and by that time they may
happily come to be of my mind. 4. See whether all those Divines that have been
very practical, and successful in the work of God, and much acquainted with
the way of the Recovery of lost souls, be not all of the same Judgment as I in
this point, (such as T. Hooker, Jo. Rogers, Preston, Sibs, Bolton, Dod,
Culverwell, etc.) And whither the confidentest men for the contrary be not
those that study Books more then hearts, and spend their days in Disputing,
and not in winning souls to God from the world.

Lastly, Let me add to what is said, these two Proofs of this fourth Point here
asserted.

1. The constant experience of the greatest part of Believers, tells us, that
Certainty of salvation is very rare. Even of those that live comfortably and in
peace of Conscience, yet very few of them do attain to a Certainty. For my
part, it is known that God in undeserved Mercy has given me long the society
of a great number of Godly people, and great interest in them, and privacy with
them, and opportunity to know their minds, and this in many places (my station
by providence having been often removed:) and I must needs profess, that of all
these I have met with few, yea very few indeed, that if I seriously and
privately asked them, Are you Certain that you are a true Believer, and so are
Justified and shall be Saved, durst say to me, I am Certain of it. But some in
great doubts and fears: most too secure and neglective of their states, without
Assurance, and some in so good hopes (to speak in their own language) as
calmeth their spirits, that they can comfortably cast themselves on God in
Christ. And those few that have gone so far beyond all the rest, as to say,
They were Certain of their sincerity and salvation, were the Professors whose
state I suspected more then any of the rest; as being the most proud,
self-conceited, censorious, passionate, unpeaceable sort of Professors: and
some of them living scandalously, and some fallen since to more scandalous
ways then ever: And the most of their humble, godly acquaintance or neighbors
suspected them as well as I. Or else some very few of them that said they were
Certain, were honest godly people (most women) of small Judgment and strong
Affections; who depended most on that which is commonly called The sense or
feeling of Gods Love; and were the lowest at some times, as they were the
highest at other times: and they that were one month certain to be saved,
perhaps the next month were almost ready to say, they should certainly be
damned. So that taking out all these sorts of persons, the sober, solid,
judicious Believers, that could groundedly and ordinarily say, I am Certain
that I shall be Saved, have been so few, that it is sad to me to consider it.
If any other men's experiences be contrary, I am glad of it; so be it they be
Sober Judicious men able to gather experiences; and so they live not among mere
Antinomians, and take not the discovery of their mere opinion, for a discovery
of experience. For I have seen in diverse professors of my long acquaintance,
the strange power of Opinion and Fantasy in this thing. I have known those
that have lived many years in doubting of their Salvation, and all that while
walked uprightly; and in the late Wars, falling into the company of some
Anabaptists, they were by them persuaded that there was no right way to their
comfort but by being Rebaptized, and associating themselves with the
Rebaptized Church, and abstaining from the hearing of the Unbaptized Parish
Priests (as they called them) No sooner was this done, but all their former
doubtings and troubles were over, and they were as comfortable as any others
(as themselves affirmed) which no doubt proceeded from, partly the strength of
Fantasy conceiting it should so be, and partly from the Novelty of their way
which delighted them, and partly from the strong* Opinion they had that this
was the way of Salvation, and that the want of this did keep them in the dark
so long, and partly from Satan's policy, who troubles people least, when they
are in a way that pleases him: But when these people had lived a year or two
in this comfortable condition, they fell at last into the society of some
Libertines or Familists, who believe that the Scriptures are all but a dream,
fiction or Allegory: These presently persuaded them, that they were fools to
regard Baptism or such Ordinances, and that they might come to hear again in
our Congregations, seeing all things were lawful, and there was no Heaven or
Hell but within men, and therefore they should look to their safety and credit
in the world, and take their pleasure. This lesson was quickly learned, and
then they cried down the Anabaptists, and confessed they were deluded, and so,
being grown loose while they were Anabaptists, to mend the matter, they grew
Epicures when they had been instructed by the Libertines, and this was the end
of their new gotten comfort. Others I have known that have wanted Assurance,
and falling among the Antinomians, were told by them that they undid themselves
by looking after Signs and Marks of Grace, and so laying their comforts upon
something in themselves: whereas they should look only to Christ for Comfort,
and not at any thing in themselves at all: and for Assurance, it is only the
Witness of the Spirit without any Marks, that must give it them; and to fetch
Comfort from their own Graces and Obedience, was to make it themselves in stead
of Christ and the holy Ghost, and was a Legal way: No sooner was this Doctrine
received, but the Receivers had Comfort at will, and all was sealed up to them
presently by the Witness of the Spirit in their own Conceits: Whence this came,
judge you: I told you my judgment before. Sure I am that the sudden looseness
of their lives, answering their ignorant, loose, ungospel-like doctrine, did
certify me that the Spirit of Comfort was not their Comforter: For he is also
a Spirit of Holiness, and comfort men by the means of a holy Gospel, which
has precepts and threatenings as well as Promises.

2. And as the experience of the state of Believers assures us that few of
them attain to Certainty; so experience of the imperfection of their
understandings shows us that few of them are immediately capable of it. For how
few Believers be there that understand well, what is a sound evidence, and what
not? Nay how many Learned men have taught them, That the least unfeigned Desire
of Grace, is the Grace it self (as some say) or at least a certain evidence of
it (as others say:) Whereas, alas, how many have unfeignedly desired many
Graces, and yet have Desired the Glory and Profits of the world so much more,
that they have miscarried and perished? How many have taught them that the
least unfeigned Love to God, or to the Brethren, is a certain Mark of saving
Grace? Whenas many a one has unfeignedly loved God and the Brethren, who yet
have loved house, land, credit, pleasure, and life so much more, that God has
been thrust as it were into a corner, and has had but the worlds leavings; and
the poor Saints have had little compassion or relief from them, nor would be
looked on in times of danger and disgrace. As Austin and the Schoolmen use to
say, Wicked men do Vti Deo and frui creaturis, Use God and enjoy the creatures:
Godly men do Frui Deo, and uti creaturis, Enjoy God and use the creatures. The
meaning is, Both Regenerate and Unregenerate have some Will or Love, both to
God and to the Creature: But the wicked do Will or Love the Creature as their
chief Good with their chiefest Love, and they only Love God as a Means to help
them to the Creature, with a Love subordinate to their Love to the Creature:
Whereas the Godly do Will or Love God as their chief Good, with their chiefest
Love or Complacency, and Love the Creature but as a Means to God, with an
inferior Love.

If then the Nature of Sincerity be so little known, then Assurance of
Sincerity cannot be very common. More might be said to prove that Certainty of
Salvation is not common among true Christians; but that it is labor in vain,
as to them, seeing experience and their own ready confession does witness it.

Now what is the use that I would have you make of this? Why it is this: If
Assurance of Sincerity and Justification (much more of Salvation) be so rare
among true Christians, then you have no cause to think that the want of it
proves you to be no true Christian. You see then that a man may be in a state
of Salvation without it; and that it is not Justifying Faith, as some have
imagined, nor yet a necessary concomitant of that Faith. You see that you were
mistaken in thinking that you had not the Spirit of Adoption, because you had
no assuring witness within you effectively testifying to you that you are the
child of God. All Gods children have the Spirit of Adoption: (For because they
are sons, therefore has God sent the Spirit of his Son into their hearts,
whereby they cry Abba Father, Gal. 4.6.) But all Gods children have not
Assurance of their Adoption; therefore the Spirit of Adoption does not always
assure those of their Adoption in whom it abides. It is always a
witness-bearer of their Adoption: But that is only objectively by his Graces
and operations in them; as a Landmark is a witness whose Land it is where it
stands: or as your Sheep-mark witnesses which be your Sheep: or rather as a
sensible Soul witnesses a living Creature, or a rational Soul witnesses that
we are Men: But efficiently it does not always witness: as a Landmark or
Sheep-mark is not always discerned: and a bruit knows not it self to be a bruit:
and a man is not always actually knowing his own humanity, nor can know it at
all in the Womb, in Infancy, in Distraction, in an Epilepsie, Apoplexy or the
like disease which depriveth him of the use of reason. Besides, it is no doubt,
but the Apostle had some respect to the eminent gift of the Spirit, for
Tongues, Prophecies, Miracles and the like which was proper to that age; though
still as including the Spirit of Holiness.

You see then that you need not be always in disquiet when you want Assurance:
For else how disquiet a life should most Christians live! I shall show you more
anon that all a man's comforts depend not so on his Assurance, but that he may
live a comfortable life without it: Trouble of mind may be overcome;
Conscience may be quieted; True peace attained, yea a man may have that Joy in
the holy Ghost, wherein the Kingdom of God is said to consist, without
Certainty of Salvation. (If there be any passage in my Book of Rest, Part 3d,
in pressing to get Assurance, which seem contrary to this, I desire that they
may be reduced to this sense, and no otherwise understood.) This shall be
further opened anon, and other grounds of comfort manifested, besides Assurance.

DIRECTION XV.
15. Yea this much more I would here inform you of, That Very many even of the
stronger, holier, watchful, and obedient Christians, are yet uncertain of
their Salvation, even then when they are Certain of their Justification and
Sanctification; and that because they are uncertain of their perseverance and
overcoming: For a man's Certainty of his Salvation can be no stronger than is
his Certainty of enduring to the end and overcoming.

THat you may not misunderstand me in this, observe 1. That I do not say
Perseverance is a thing uncertain in it self: 2. Nor that it is uncertain to
all Christians: 3. But that it is uncertain to many even strong and
self-knowing Christians. Divines use to distinguish of the Certainty of the
Object, and of the Subject: and the former is either of the Object of Gods
Knowledge, or of man's. I doubt not but God knows Certainly who shall be saved,
which with his Decree does cause that which we call Certainty of the Object, as
to man's understanding: But men themselves do not always know it.

If a man have the fullest Certainty in the world that he is Gods child, yet if
he be uncertain whether he shall so continue to the end, it is impossible that
he should have a Certainty of his Salvation. For it is he only that endures to
the end that shall be saved.

Now that many eminent Christians of great knowledge and much zeal and
obedience are uncertain of their Perseverance, is proved by two Infallible
Arguments. 1. By experience: If any should be so censorious as to think that
none of all those Nations and Churches abroad that deny the Doctrine of Certain
Perseverance of all Believers, have any strong Christians among them, yet we
have had the knowledge of such at home. 2. Besides the Difficulty of the
Subject is a clear Argument that a strong Christian may be uncertain of it* God
has made all those points plain in Scripture, which must be Believed as of
Necessity to Salvation: But the Certainty of all Believers Perseverance, is not
a Point of flat Necessity to Salvation to be Believed. Otherwise it would be a
hard matter to prove that any considerable number were ever saved, till of
late; or are yet saved, but in a very few Countries. It is a Point that the
Churches never did put into their Creed; where they summed up those Points that
they held necessary to Salvation. There are a great number of Texts of
Scripture which seeming to intimate the contrary, do make the Point of great
Difficulty to many of the wisest. And those Texts that are for it, are not so
express as fully to satisfy them. Besides that the examples of these ten years
last past have done more to stagger many sober wise Christians in this Point,
then all the Arguments that ever were used by Papists, Arminians or any other:
To see what kind of men in some places have fallen, and how far; as I am
unwilling further to mention.

If you ask me, what I think of this my self, and consequently what Assurance I
have of my own Salvation; I will freely tell you, both how far I am arrived in
Assurance of Sincerity of Grace and Justification, and how far in the matter
of Perseverance and so of Salvation. I lay seven years under great Doubtings of
the truth of my Sanctification; especially for want of those Lively,
Affectionate, Heart-melting effects which I desired to have found; and for want
of Deeper apprehensions of God, Christ, Glory, Sin, Misery, Mercy, Duty, etc.
which made me still fear that all I had was but the mere effects of Education,
Reading and Speculative Knowledge; and so that I had only a Notional Religion,
that touched my Fantasy and swom in my Brain, but* workt not thoroughly on my
Heart; for want of more Deep and Serious Believing of those holy Truths which
should be operative. Yet all this while, Probabilities of Grace, affording me
that which we commonly call Hope, did bear me up. Now through the great
unspeakable Mercy of my God, I have attained to so strong a Probability of my
Sincerity and Sanctification, as in a large sense may be called Assurance or
Certainty, but not in the strictest sense: much less is it a perfect Assurance:
I have so strong a persuasion of the truth of my Faith, and so of the pardon of
my sins, as overcomes most doubtings and trouble of mind, and keeps me in
quietness and peace of mind, and some Joy in the holy Ghost, and Delightful
thoughts of my everlasting Rest; and gives me a Confidence in God, and Access
with boldness to the Throne of his Grace. But yet I find that carnal security
has a great hand in the alaying of my troubles, though not in the raising of
my Joys: (And it is no unusual thing for a good Cause and a bad Faith,
Assurance and Carnal security to join together in one effect; even in expelling
trouble from the heart.) Yet dare I scarce say (in the usual sense of the
word,) that I am certain of my Sincerity and so of my Justification: especially
when Temptations have prevailed, and the strength of the fleshes interest, and
the weakness of Christ's interest in my Estimation and Will and Affections, have
appeared more then ordinary: And when I have thought how much stronger Trials I
may yet be put to, which others daily undergo: especially the Temptations of
Prosperity do oftener make me fear, then those of persecution and adversity. I
am sometimes afraid, lest it be but the weakness of my Body, and the distance
of Objects, and smalness of Temptations, that makes them no more prevailing
with me: And that if I had as strong a body as others, and were in that
Dignity, Wealth and Abundance of all things, as some are; whether Honors,
Car^al Pleasures, Sports, Delightful Meats, Drinks, Beauty, and such vanities
might not carry me away, as I see they do others, that made as great a show of
Holiness. Yet do not these doubts much affright or disquiet me, because I find
God at present possessing me with those Resolutions to cast away all for
Christ, which, I doubt not, are the work of his own Grace, and because I have
experience of abundance of preventing and sustaining Grace; and because I find
at the present that God enableth me to account all things loss and dross and
dung for him, and easily without much reluctance to empty my purse for him and
his poor, and to lay out my time and strength for him and his Church, and with
some good success to resist Temptations; and that I have no Desire, (in any
activity or prevalency) to be any higher in the world then I am, but think God
has chosen out for me the best condition and station that I could have desired
in all the world. And then for Perseverance and Salvation, this is my Case: It
is my strong opinion that no man who has attained to a Rootedness in the
Faith, and so is thoroughly sanctified, does ever totally and finally fall away:
which Christ seems to intimate in saying that the Cause why men fall away in
Tribulation and Persecution, is because the seed had not deep Rooting, Mat. 13.
And I am yet more confident that none of the Elect shall ever fall away; and
persuaded, that all the Rooted, through-Christians, are Elect. But yet I dare
not say, that I am Certain of this, that all are elect to salvation, and shall
never fall away totally and finally, who sincerely Believe and are Justified.
It is my opinion, but I dare not put it into my Creed among either the Points
of absolute Necessity, or undoubted Verity. I know how many Texts of Scripture
seem to speak otherwise: and I know how generally the Primitive Fathers thought
otherwise, if a man can know their minds by their Writings: I know that Austin
himself, the Mall of the Pelagians, seems to be either unresolved, or more
against this Perseverance then for it. I know how many Learned, Godly men do
differ from me, and deny the Certainty of Perseverance: I know how sad and
shaking examples this age has afforded: And therefore I am not Certain,
properly, strictly Certain, of my Perseverance, and so not fully, strictly
Certain of my Salvation: Nor so near to a Certainty of my Salvation, as I am to
a Certainty of my Faith, Justification, Adoption and Sanctification. Yet am I
so strongly confident of it, (that I shall hold out, and be saved) that it does
not only calm and quiet my mind, and overcome my troubles and fears, but also
enable me to Rejoice in Hope of the Glory to come, and to Desire Christ's coming
to Judgment, and to think of Death with much more contentedness and submission
then else I should do: For as I am much persuaded that the Rooted in Grace do
never fall quite away, so if I were sure that they did, yet I know so much of
the Graciousness of Gods Nature, and his Covenant, that he will not forsake any
that do not wilfully forsake him; and I have so full a Resolution to cleave to
him wrought in me by his Spirit, and such experience of tender Love, and his
preserving me in Trials, that I have a strong confidence that he will never
permit me to fall from him. Yet do I see a Necessity of daily praying to him
Not to Lead me into Temptation, but to Deliver me from the evil; and to live in
continual watchfulness, expecting daily Assaults, and renewing daily my
Repentance and Resolutions.

Thus have I, as truly as I am now able, opened my very heart and state to you,
as before the Searcher of my heart: which I have done for three Reasons. 1.
That my Judgment may be truly known in the Point of Perseverance. 2. Because I
find the communicating of Experiences of each others hearts and states is of
great use to Believers. 3. Because I find that many Godly people, by diverse
passages in my Book of Rest, about Living in Heavenly Delights, do think that I
have attained a greater Certainty then I have: and that themselves are unhappy
and must live uncomfortably till they can attain to that which they think I
have done. As for those that think, and will be ready to say, that I am warping
to Arminian or Popish Doubting; I regard not their words or censures: I am none
of those that dare in the hearing of God affirm that I have the Certainty which
I have not, merely to avoid the suspicion of erring. Nor dare I by hot Disputes
maintain that which the constant Experience of my self and the best and most of
my acquaintance does contradict: and believe my Authors before my own heart,
and the undoubted testimony of Christians concerning themselves. Yet remember
that I do not deny but many others may have both more Assurance of their own
Sincerity, and more clear understanding of the Doctrine of Perseverance then I
have; which may give them a Certainty that no true Believer shall quite fall
away. I dare not think that others have not a higher degree of Light and
Certainty then ^ have.

But I think by this time I have persuaded you that a proper Certainty of our
Salvation is not so common a thing as some Controversal Doctors, or some
self-conceited Prosessors do take it to be. And therefore that you must not lay
all your comfort on your Assurance of Salvation. As for them who are most
highly confident both of the doctrine of the Certain Perseverance of every
Believer, merely upon tradition, and prejudice, because they have been always
taught so, or else upon weak grounds which will not bear them out in their
confidence; and are as confident of their own Salvation on as slender grounds,
having never well understood the Nature of saving Grace, Sincerity, Examination
nor Assurance; nor understood the Causes of doubting which might else have
shaked them; I will not call their greatest Confidence, by the name of
Assurance or Certainty of Salvation, though it be accompanied with never so
great boastings, or pretenses or expressions of the highest Joys. And for your
self I advise you, first use those comforts which those may have who come short
of Assurance.

DIRECTION XVI.
16. The next thing which I would have you learn is this, That There are
several grounds of the great Probability of our Salvation, besides the general
grounds mentioned in the beginning: and by the Knowledge of these, without any
further Assurance, a Christian may live in much Peace and Comfort, and in
Delightful, Desirous thoughts of the Glory to come: And therefore the next
work which you have to do, is to discover those probabilites of your Sincerity
and your Salvation, and then to receive the Peace and Comfort which they may
afford you, before you can expect Assurance it self.

I Shall here open to you the several parts of this Proposition and Direction
distinctly. 1. I told you in the beginning of the four grounds of Probability
which all may have in general, from 1. The Nature of God, 2. And of the
Mediator; and his Office. 3. And the universal sufficiency of Christ's
satisfaction. 4. And the general tenor of the Promise and offer of Pardon and
Salvation. Now I add; that besides all these, there are many grounds of strong
Probability which you may have of your own Sincerity, and so of your particular
Interest in Christ and Salvation, when you cannot reach to a Certainty.

1. Some kind of Probability you may gather by comparing your self with
others. Though this way be but delusory to unregenerate men, whose confidence
is plainly contradicted by the Scriptures, yet may it be lawful and useful to
an humble soul that is willing to obey and wait on God: I mean, to consider,
that if such as you should perish, how few people would God have in the world?
Consider first in how narrow a compass the Church was confined before Christ's
coming in the flesh? and how carnal and corrupt even that visible Church then
was? and even at this day, the most Learned do compute, that if you divide the
world into thirty parts, nineteen of them are Heathenish Idolaters, six of them
are Ma^ometans, and only fi^e of them are Christians. And of these five that
are Christians, how great a part are of the Ethiopian, Greek and Popish
Churches? so ignorant, rude and superstitious and erroneous, that salvation
cannot be imagined to be near so easy or ordinary with them as with us: and of
the Reformed Churches, commonly called Protestants, how small is the number?
And even among these, What a number are grossly ignorant and profane? and of
those that profess more knowledge and zeal, how many are grossly Erroneous,
Schismatical and Scandalous. How exceeding small a number is left then that are
such as you? I know this is no assuring Argument: but I know withal that
Christ died not in vain; but he will see the fruit of his sufferings to the
satisfaction of his soul: and the God of Mercy, who is a Lover of mankind,
will have a multitude innumerable of his saved ones in the earth.

2. But your strongest Probabilities are from the Consideration of the Work of
God upon your Soul, and the present frame and inclination of your Soul to God.
You may know that you have workings above nature in you; and that they have
been kept alive and carried on these many years against all opposition of the
flesh and the world: It has not been a mere flash of conviction which has
been extinguished by sensuality, and left you in the darkness of security and
prophanness as others are. You dare not give up your Hopes of Heaven for all
the world: You would not part with Christ, and say, Let him go, for all the
pleasures of sin, or treasures of the earth: If you had (as you have) an offer
of God, Christ, Grace and Glory on one side, and worldly prosperity in sin on
the other side, you would choose God, and let go the other. You dare not, you
would not give over Praying, Hearing, Reading, and Christian company, and give
up your self to worldly, fleshly pleasures; yet you are not Assured of
salvation, because you find not that Delight and Life in Duty, and that
Witness of the Spirit, and that communion with God, nor that tenderness of
heart, as you desire. It is well that you desire them: But though you be not
Certain of Salvation, do not you see a great likelihood, a Probability in all
this? Is not your heart raised to a Hope that yet God is merciful to you, and
means you good? Doubtless this you might easily discern.

The second thing that I am to show you is, that there may much spiritual
Comfort and Peace of Conscience be enjoyed without any Certainty of Salvation,
given upon these forementioned Probabilities. Which I prove thus, 1. No doubt
but Adam in innocence had Peace of Conscience, and Comfort and Communion with
God, and yet he had no Assurance of Salvation; I mean, either of continuing in
Paradise, or being translated to Glory. For if he had, either he was sure to
persevere in Innocence and so to be glorified. (But that was not true) or else
he must foreknow both that he should fall and be raised again and saved by
Christ. But this he knew not at all. 2. Experience tells us that the greatest
part of Christians on earth do enjoy that Peace and Comfort which they have,
without any Certainty of their Salvation. 3. The Nature of the thing tells
us, that a likelihood of so great a mercy as everlasting Glory must needs be a
ground of great Comfort. If a poor condemned prisoner do but hear that there is
Hopes of a pardon, specially if very probable, it will glad his heart. Indeed
if an Angel from Heaven were brought into this state it would be sad to him:
But if a devil or a condemned sinner have such Hope, it must needs be glad news
to them. The devils have it not, but we have.

3. Let me next therefore entreat you to take the Comfort of your Probabilities
of Grace and Salvation. Your horse or dog knows not how you will use them
Certainly; yet will they lovingly follow you, and put their heads to your hand,
and trust you with their lives without fear, and love to be in your company;
because they have found you kind to them, and have tried that you do them no
hurt, but good: yea though you do strike them sometimes, yet they find that
they have their food from you, and your favor does sustain them. Yea your
little children have no Certainty how you will use them; and yet finding that
you have always used them kindly, and expressed Love to them, though you whip
them sometimes, yet are glad of your company, and desire to be in your lap, and
can trust themselves in your hands, without tormenting themselves with such
doubts as these, I am uncertain how my mother will use me, whether she will
wound me, or kill me, or turn me out of doors and let me perish. Nature
persuades us not to be too distrustful of those that have always befriended
us, and especially whose Nature is Merciful and Compassionate: Nor to be too
suspicious of evil from them that have always done us good: Every man knows
that the Good will do good, and the Evil will do evil: and accordingly we
expect that they should do to us. Naturally we all fear a Toad, a Serpent, an
Adder, a mad Dog, a wicked Man, a mad Man, a cruel blood thirsty Tyrant, and
the Devil: But no one fears a Dove, a Lamb, a good Man, a merciful
compassionate Governor, except only the Rebels or notorious offenders that
know he is bound in justice to destroy or punish them. And none should fear
distrustfully the wrath of a gracious God, but they who Will not submit to his
Mercy, and Will not have Christ to reign over them, and therefore may know that
he is bound in Justice, if they come not in, to destroy them. But for you that
would be Obedient and Reformed, and are troubled that you are no better, and
beg of God to make you better, and have no sin, but what you would be glad to
be rid of, may not you, at least, see a strong Probability that it shall go
well with you? O make use therefore of this Probability: and if you have but
Hopes that God will do you good, rejoice in those Hopes, till you can come to
rejoice in Assurance.

And here let me tell you that Probabilities are of diverse Degrees according to
their diverse Grounds. Where men have but a little Probability of their
Sincerity, and a greater Probability that they are not Sincere in the faith,
these men may be somewhat born up, but it behooves them presently to search in
fear, and to amend that which is the cause of their fear. Those that have more
Probability of the Sincerity of their hearts, then of the contrary, may well
have more peace then trouble of mind: Those that have yet a higher Degree of
Probability may live in more Joy: and so according to the Degree of Probability
may their Comforts still arise.

And observe also, that it is but the highest Degree of this Probability here
which we call a Certainty: For it is a Moral Certainty, and not that which is
called a Certainty of Divine faith, nor that which is called a Certainty of
evidence in the strictest sense; though yet evidence there is for it: But it is
the same evidences materially which are the ground of Probability and of
Certainty: Only sometime they differ Gradually (one having more Grace and
another less) and sometime not so neither: for he that has more Grace may
discern but a Probability in it (through some other defect) no more then he
that has less: But when one man discerns his Graces and Sincerity but darkly,
he has but a Probability of Salvation manifested by them: and when another
discerns them more clearly, he has a stronger Probability: and he that
discerns them most clearly (if other necessaries concur) has that which we
call a Certainty.

Now I am persuaded that you frequently see a strong Probability of your
Sincerity: and may not that be a very great stay and comfort to your soul? Nay
may it not draw out your heart in Love, Delight and Thankfulness? Suppose that
your name were written in a piece of paper, and put among a hundred, or fifty,
or but twenty other like papers into a Lottery; and you were certain that you
should be the owner of this whole Land except your name were drawn the first
time, and if it were drawn, you should die: Would your Joy or your Sorrow for
this be the greater? Nay if it were but ten to one, or but two to one odds on
your side, it would keep you from drooping and discouragement: And why should
it not do so in the present case?

DIRECTION XVII.
17. My next advice to you is this, For the strengthening your apprehensions of
the Probability of your Salvation. Gather up and improve all your choicest
Experiences of Gods good will and mercy to you: And observe also the
Experiments of others in the same kind.

WE do God and our selves a great deal of wrong by forgetting, neglecting and
not improving our Experiences. How does God charge it on the Israelites,
especially in the wilderness, that they forgot the Works of God, by which he
had so often manifested his Power and Goodness? Psalm. 78. and 107. see 105,
106. When God had by one Miracle silenced their unbelief, they had forgotten it
in the next distress. It was a sign the disciples hearts were hardened when
they forgot the Miracles of the loaves, and presently after were distrustful
and afraid, Mar. 6.52. God does not give us his mercies only for the present
use, but for the future: nor only for the body, but for the soul. I would this
truth were well learned by Believers. You are in sickness, in troubles, and
dangers, and pinching straits, in fears and anguish of mind: In this case you
cry to God for help, and he does in such a manner deliver you, as silenceth
your distrust, and convinces you of his love; at least of his readiness to do
you good. What a wrong is it now to God and your self to forget this presently,
and in the next temptation to receive no strengthening by the consideration of
it? Does God so much regard this dirty flesh, that he should do all this merely
for its ease and relief? No, he does it to kill your unbelief, and convince you
of his special Providence, his care of you, and love to you, and power to help
you, and to breed in you more loving, honorable and thankful thoughts of him:
Lose this benefit and you lose all: You may thus use one and the same Mercy a
hundred times. Though it be gone as to the body; it is still fresh in a
believing, thankful, careful soul. You may make as good use of it at your
very death, as the first hour. But O the sad forgetfulness, mutability and
unbelief of these hearts of ours! What a number of these choice experiences do
we all receive? When we forget one, God gives another, and we forget that too:
When unbelief does blasphemously suggest to us, Such a thing may come once or
twice by chance. God adds one experience to another, till it even shame us
out of our unbelief, as Christ shamed Thomas, and we cry out, My Lord and My
God. Has it not been thus often with you? Have not Mercies come so seasonably,
so unexpectedly, either by small means, or the means themselves unexpectedly
raised up; without your designing or effecting; and plainly in answer to
prayers, that they have brought conviction along with them? and you have seen
the Name of God engraven on them? Sure it is so with us, when through our
sinful negligence, we are hardly drawn to open our eyes, and see what God is
doing. Much more might we have seen if we had but observed the workings of
Providence for us. Especially they that are in an afflicted state, and have
more sensible daily use for God, and are awakened to seek him, and regard his
dealings. I know a Mercy to the body is no certain evidence of Gods Love to the
soul. But yet from such experiences a Christian may have very strong
Probabilities. When we find God hearing Prayers, it is a hopeful sign that we
have some interest in him. We may say, as Manoahs wife said to him, Judge.
13.23. If the Lord had meant to destroy us, he would not have received a
sacrifice at our hands, nor have done all this for us. To have God so near to
us in all that we call upon him for, and so ready to relieve us; as if he could
not deny an earnest prayer, and could not endure to stop his ears against our
cries and groans; these are hopeful signs that he means us good. I know
special Grace is the only Certain Evidence of special Love: But yet these kind
of experiences are many times more effectual to refresh a drooping doubting
soul, then the surest Evidences. For Evidences may be unseen, and require a
great deal of holy skill and diligence to try them, which few have: But these
experiences are near us, even in our bodies, and show themselves: They make all
our bones say, Lord who is like unto thee? And it is a great advantage to have
the help of sense it self for our Consolation. I hope you yet remember the
choice particular Providence by which God has manifested to you (...)
Goodness, even from your youth till now: especially his frequent answering of
your prayers! Methinks these should do something to the dispelling of those
black distrustful thoughts of God. I could wish you would write them down, and
often review them. And when Temptations next come, remember with David, who helped
you against the Lion and the Bear, and therefore fear not the uncircumcised
Philistine.

2. And you may make great use also of the experiences of others. Is it not a
great satisfaction to hear twenty or forty or a hundred Christians, of the
godliest lives, to make the very same complaints as you do your sel^? The very
same complaints have I heard from as many. By this you may see your case is not
singular, but the ordinary case of the tenderest Consciences; and of many that
walk uprightly with God. And also, is it not a great help to you, to hear other
Christians tell how they have come into those troubles; and how they have got
out of them? what hurt them? and what helped them? and how God dealt with them
while they lay under them? How desirous are diseased persons to talk with
others that have had the same disease? and to hea^ them tell, how it took them,
and how it (...) them, and specially what cured them. Besides, it will give you
much stronger hopes of cure and recovery to peace of conscience, when you hear
of so many that have been cured of the same disease. Moreover, is it not a
reviving thing, to hear Christians open the Goodness of the Lord? and that in
particulars, as upon experience they have found him to their own souls? To hear
them tell you of such notable discoveries of Gods special providence and care
of his people, as may refell all Temptations to Atheism and unbelief? To hear
them give you their frequent and full experiences of Gods hearing and answering
their Prayers, and helping them in their distresses? Though the carnal part of
the Mercy were only theirs, yet by improvement, the spiritual part may be
yours. You may have your faith, and love, and joy confirmed by the experiences
of David, Job, Paul, which are past so long ago; and by the experiences of all
your Godly acquaintance, as if they were your own. This is the benefit of the
unity of the Church: the blessings of one member of the body are blessings to
the rest; and if one Rejoice the rest may Rejoice with them, not only for their
sakes, but also for their own. Such as God is to the rest of his children, such
he is and will be to you. He is as ready to pity you as them; and to hear your
complaints and moans as theirs. And lest we should think that none of them were
so bad as we; he has left us the examples of his mercies to worse then ever we
were. You never were guilty of witchcraft, and open Idolatry, as Manasses was,
and that for a long time, and drawing the whole Nation, and chief part of the
Visible Church on earth, into Idolatry with him. You never had your hand in the
blood of a Saint, and even of the first Martyr ( Stephen) as Paul had: You
never hunted after the blood of the Saints, and persecuted them from City to
City as he did: And yet God did not only forgive him, but was found of him when
he never sought him, yea when he was persecuting him in his Members, and
kicking against the pricks; yea and made him a chosen Vessel to bear about his
Name, and as noble an Instrument of the Propagation of his Gospel, as if he had
never been guilty of any such crimes: that he might be an encouraging example
to the unworthiest sinners, and in him might appear the riches of his Mercy, 1 Timothy 1.13, 16. see also Titus 3.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Is there no ground of comfort in
these examples of the Saints? The same we may say of the experiences of Gods
people still: And doubtless it were well if experimental Christians did more
fully and frequently open to one another their experiences. It were the way to
make private particular Mercies, to be more public and common Mercies; and to
give others a part in our blessings without any diminution of them to our
selves. Not that I would have this so openly and rashly done, (by those who
through their disability to express their minds, do make the works and
language of their Spirit seem ridiculous to carnal ears) as I perceive some in
a very formality would have it, (as if it must be one of their Church customs,
to satisfy the society of the fitness of each member before they will receive
them:) But I would have Christians that are sit to express their minds, to do
it in season and with wisdom: Especially those to whom God has given any more
eminent and notable experiments, which may be of public use. Doubtless God
has lost very much of the honor due to his Name, and poor Christians much of
the benefit which they might have received, (and may challenge by the mutual
interest of fellow members) for want of the public communication of the
extraordinary and more notable experiences of some men. Those that write the
lives of the holiest men when they are dead, can give you but the outside and
carcass of their Memorials; The most observable passages are usually secret,
known only to God and their own souls; which none but themselves are able to
communicate. For my own part, I do soberly and seriously profess to you, that
the experiences I have had of Gods special Providence, and Fatherly care, and
specially of his hearing prayers, have been so strange and great and exceeding
numerous, that they have done very much to the quieting of my spirit, and the
persuading my soul of Gods Love to me, and the silencing and shaming of my
unbelieving heart, and especially for the conquering of all temptations that
lead to Atheism or Infidelity, to the denying of special Providence, or or the
verity of the Gospel, or of the Necessity of holy Prayer and worshipping of
God. Yea those passages that in the bulk of the thing seem to have no great
matter in them, yet have come at such seasons, in such a manner, in evident
answer to prayers, that they have done much to my confirmation. O happy
Afflictions and Distresses! Sufferings and Danger force us to Pray, and force
the cold and customary Petitioner to seriousness and importunity. Importunate
Prayers bring evident returns: such returns give us sensible experiences: such
experiences raise faith, love, and thankfulness; kill unbelief and Atheism; and
encourage the soul in all distresses, to go the same way as when it sped so
well. I often pity the poor seduced Infidels of this age that deny Scripture
and Christ himself, and doubt of the usefulness of Prayer and holy Worship; and
I wish that they had but the experiences that I have had. O how much more might
it do then all their Studies and Disputes! Truly I have once or twice had
motions in my mind to have publicly and freely communicated my experiences in
a Relation of the more observable passages of my Life: But I found that I was
not able to do it to Gods praise as was meet, without a show of ostentation and
vanity, and therefore I forbore.

DIRECTION XVIII.
18. Next, that you may yet further understand the true Nature of Assurance,
Faith, Doubting and Desperation, I would have you observe this; That God does
not command every man, nor properly any man, ordinarily by his Word, to Bel^eve
that his sins are forgiven, and himself is Justified, Adopted, and shall be
saved. But he has prescribed a way by which they may attain to Assurance of
these, in which way it is men's Duty to seek it: So that our Assurance is not
properly that which is called A Certainty of Belief.

I Have said enough for the proof of this Proposition in the third Part of my
Book of Rest, Chap. 1^. whither I must refer you. But there is more to be
said yet for the Application of it. But first I must briefly tell you the
meaning of the words. 1. God commands us all to believe (wicked and godly)
that our sins are made pardonable by the sufficient satisfaction of Christ for
them; and that God is very merciful and ready to forgive: and that he has
conditionally forgiven us all in the New Covenant, making a deed of gift of
Christ and pardon and Life in him to all, on condition they Believe in him and
Accept what is given. 2. But no man is commanded to Believe that he is Actually
forgiven. 3. Therefore I say our Assurance is not strictly to be called Belief*
or a Certainty of Belief. For it is only our Certain Belief of those things
which we take on the mere credit of the Witnesser or Revealer, which we call,
Certainty of Faith. Indeed we commonly in English use the word Belief to
express any confident, but uncertain opinion or persuasion: And if any will so
take it, then I deny not but our Assurance is a Belief. But it is commonly
taken by Divines for an Assent to any thing on the credit of the word of the
Revealer; and so is distinguished both from the sensible Apprehension of
things, and from Principles that are known by the mere Light and help of
Nature; and from the Knowledge of Conclusions which by Reasoning we gather from
those Principles. Though yet one and the same thing may be Known as Revealed in
Nature, and Believed as Revealed Immediately of Supernaturally. And so we both
Know and Believe that there is one only God, who made and preserves All
things. 4. But our Assurance is an Act of Knowledge, participating of Faith and
internal sense or Knowledge reflect. For Divine Faith says, He that Believes
is Justified and shall be Saved. Internal sense and knowledge of our selves
says, But I Believe. Reason, or Discursive Knowledge says, Therefore I am
Justified and shall be saved.

Only I must advise you, that you be not troubled when you meet with that which
is contrary to this in any great Divines: For it is only our former Divines
whose Judgments were partly hurt by hot Disputations with the Papists herein,
and partly not come to that maturity as others since them have had opportunity
to do. And therefore in their expositions of the Creed and such like passages
in the Text, they eagerly insist on it, that when we say, We Believe the
Forgiveness of sin, and Life everlasting, every man is to profess that he
Believes that his own sins are forgiven, and he shall have Life everlasting
himself. But our later Divines, and specially the English, and most especially
these that deal most in Practicals, do see the mistake, and lay down the same
doctrine which I teach you here, God bids us not Believe as from him, more then
he has revealed. But only one of the Propositions is revealed by Gods
Testimony, He that Believes shall be Saved. But it is no where written that
You do Believe, nor that You shall be Saved; nor any thing equivalent. And
therefore you are not commanded to Believe either of these. How the Spirit
reveals these, I have fully told you already. In our Creed therefore we do
profess to Believe Remission of sins to be Purchased by Christ's death, and in
his Power to give, and Given in the Gospel to All on Condition of Believing in
Christ himself for Remission: But not to Believe that our own sins are
Actually and Fully Pardoned.

My end in telling you this again (which I have told you elsewhere) is this,
That you may not think (as I find abundance of poor troubled souls to do) that
Faith (much less justifying Faith) is a Believing that you have true Grace, and
shall be saved; And so fall a condemning your self unjustly every time that you
doubt of your own Sincerity; and think that so much as you doubt of this, so
much unbelief you have: and so many poor souls complain that they have no
faith, or but little, and that they cannot Believe, because they Believe not
their own Faith to be Sincere: and when they wholly judge themselves
unsanctified, then they call that Desperation, which they think to be a sin
inconsistent with true Grace. These are dangerous Errors, all arising from
that one Error which the heat of contention did carry some good men to, that
Faith is a Belief that our sins are forgiven by Christ. Indeed all men are
bound to apply Christ and the Promise to themselves. But that application
consists in a Belief that this Promise is true as belonging to all, and so to
me, and then in Acceptance of Christ and his benefits as an offered gift; and
after this in Trusting on him for the full performance of his Promise. Hence
therefore you may best see what Unbelief and Desperation are, and how far men
may charge themselves with them. When you doubt whether the Promise be True, or
when you refuse to Accept Christ and his Benefits offered in it, and
consequently to Trust him as one that is Able and Willing to save you, if you
do Assent to his Truth and Accept him; this is Unbelief. But if you do Believe
the Truth of the Gospel, and are heartily Willing to Accept Christ as offered
in it, and only Doubt whether your Belief and Acceptance of him be sincere, and
so whether you shall be saved, this is not Unbelief, but ignorance of your own
Sincerity, and its consequents. Nay, and though that Affiance be wanting which
is a part of Faith, yet it is but a hindering of the exercise of it, for want
of a necessary concomitant condition; for the Grace of Affiance in the Habit
and Virtually is there: so that it is not formally Distrust or Unbelief, any
more then your not Trusting God in your sleep is Distrust. If a friend do
Promise to give you a hundred pound on condition that you thankfully Accept it:
If you now do Believe him, and do thankfully Accept it; but yet through some
vain scruple shall think My thankefulness is so small that it is not sincere,
and therefore I doubt, I do not perform his condition, and so shall never have
the gift. In this case now, you do Believe your friend and you do not Distrust
him properly; but you Distrust your self, that you perform not the condition;
and this hinders the exercise of that Confidence or Affiance in your friend
which is habitually and virtually in you. Just so is it in our present case.

The same may be said of Desperation, which is a Privation of Hope: When we
have Believed the Truth of the Gospel, and Accepted Christ offered, we are then
bound to Hope that God will give us the Benefits promised: So hope is nothing
but A Desirous expectation of the good so promised and believed. Now if you
begin to Distrust whether God will make good this promise or no, either
thinking that it is not True, or he is not able, or has changed his mind
since the making of it, and on these grounds you let go your Hopes, this is
Despair. If because that Christ seems to Delay his coming, we should say, I
have waited in Hope till now, but now I am out of Hope that ever Christ will
come to Judge the world and Glorify Believers, I will expect it no longer:
this is Despair. And it has its several Degrees more or less, as unbelief
has. Indeed the Schoolmen say that Affiance is nothing but strengthened Hope.
Affiance in the properest sense is the same in substance with Hope; only it
more expresses a Respect to the Promise and Promiser, and indeed is Faith and
Hope expressed both together in one word. So that what I said before of Distrust,
is true of Despair. If you do continue to Believe the Truth of the Gospel, and
particularly of Christ's coming and glorifying his Saints, and yet you think he
will not glorify you because you think that you are not a true Believer or
Saint; This is not Desperation in the proper sense. For Desperation is the
privation of Hope, where the formal cause, the heart and life of it is wanting.
But you have here Hope in the Habit, and Virtually do Hope in Christ: but the
Act of it as to your own particular salvation is hindered, upon an accidental
mistake. In the forementioned example, If your friend Promise to give you a
hundred pound on condition of your thankful Acceptance, and promises to come
at such an hour and bring it you: If now you stay till the hour be almost come,
and then say, I ^m out of Hope of his coming now; he has broke his word; this
is properly a Despair in your friend. But if you only think that you have
overstaid the time, and that it is past, and therefore you shall not have the
gift, this may be called a Despair of the event, and a Despair of your self;
but not properly a Despair in your friend; only the Act of Hoping in God is
hindered as is said. So it is in our present case. Men may be said to Despair
of their Salvation, and to Despair in themselves, but not to Despair in God,
except the formal cause of such Despair were there present; and except they are
drawn to it, by not believing his Truth and Faithfulness. The true nature of
Despair is expressed in that of the Apostles, Luke 24.21. We trusted that this
was he that should Redeem Israel: Only it was but imperfect Despair: else it
had been damnable. Their hopes were shaken. And for my part, I am persuaded
that it is only this proper Despair in God, which is the damnable Desperation,
which is threatened in the Scripture: and not the former: And that if a poor
soul should go out of this world without any Actual Hope of his own Salvation,
merely because he thinks that he is no true Believer, that this Soul may be
saved, and prove a true Believer for all this. Alas, the great sin that God
threatens is our Distrust of his Faithfulness, and not the doubting of our own
sincerity and Distrust of our selves. We have great reason to be very jealous
of our own hearts, as knowing them to be Deceitful above all things and
desperately wicked, who can know them? But we have no reason at all to be
Jealous of God. Where find you in Scripture that any is condemned for hard
thoughts of themselves, or for not knowing themselves to have true Grace; and
for thinking they had none? It is true unbelief in Gods Promise that men are
condemned for: even that sin which is an Aversion of the Soul from God. But
perhaps you will ask, Is doubting of our own sincerity and Salvation no sin? I
answer, Doubting is either taken in opposition to Believing; or in opposition
to knowing or to conjecturing.

1. Doubting as it signifies only A not-believing that our sins are pardoned
and we shall be saved, is no sin (still remember that I take Believing in the
strict proper sense, for The Crediting of a Divine Testimony or Assertion) For
God has no where commanded us ordinarily to Believe either of these. I say
Ordinarily (as I did in the Proposition before) because when Christ was on
earth he told a man personally Thy sins are forgiven thee (whether he meant
only as to the present disease inflicted for them, or also all punishment,
Temporal and Eternal, I will not now discuss) so Nathan from God told David,
His sin was forgiven: But these were Privileges only to these persons, and
not common to all. God has no where said, either that All men's sins are
actually forgiven; or that yours or mine by name are forgiven: But only that
All that Believe are forgiven: which supposes them to Believe before they are
forgiven, and that they may be forgiven; and therefore it is not true that they
are forgiven before they Believe: and therefore this faith is not a Believing
that they are forgiven, but a Believing on Christ for forgiveness. Else men
must Believe an Untruth to make it become True by their Believing it.

2. But now, Doubting, as it is opposed to the Knowledge of our Remission and
Justification, in those that are Justified is a sin: (For it can be no sin
for an unjustified person to know that he is unjustified.) But then, I pray you
mark, how far it is a sin in the Godly, and what manner of sin it is. 1. It
is a sin as it is part of our natural ignorance and original Depravedness of
our Understandings, or a fruit hereof and of our strangeness to our own hearts,
and of their deep Deceitfulness, Confusion, Mutability or Negligence. 2. And
further as all these are increased by long custom in sinning, and so the
discerning of our states is become more difficult, it is yet a greater sin.
3. It is a sin as it is the fruit of any particular sin by which we have
obscured our own graces, and provoked God to hide his face from us. And so all
ignorance of any Truth which we ought to know, is a sin, so the ignorance of
our own Regeneration and sincerity is a sin, because we ought to know it. But
this is so far from being the great condemning sin of unbelief which Christ
threatens in his New Law, that it is none of the greatest or most heinous sort
of sins, but the infirmity in some measure of every Christian.

And let me further acquaint you with this difference between these Doubtings,
and your Fears and Sorrows that follow thereupon. Though the Doubting it self
be your sin, yet I suppose that the Fears and Sorrows and Cares that follow it
may be your Duty. Yet Respectively and by remote participation even these also
must be acknowledged sinful; even as our prayers for that pardon which we have
received and knew it not, may by remote participation be called sinful:
because if we had not sinned we should not have been ignorant of our own
hearts: and if we had not been ignorant we should not have Doubted of the least
true Grace we have: and if we had not so Doubted, we should not have Feared or
Sorrowed or Prayed for that Remission in that sense. But yet though these may
be called sinful, as they come from sin, yet more nearly and in themselves
considered on supposition of our present estate, they are all Duties, and great
Duties necessary to our Salvation. You may say to a Thief that begs for pardon,
If thou had not stolen thou had not need to have begged pardon. Yet supposing
that he has stolen it may be his Duty to beg pardon. And so you may say to a
poor fearing soul, that fears Damnation and Gods wrath, Thou need not fear
if thou had not sinned. But when he has once by sin obscured his evidences,
and necessitated Doubting, then is fear and sorrow and praying for
Justification and pardon, his Duty: And indeed not fitly to be called sin, but
rather a fruit of sin in one respect (and so has some participation in it) but
a fruit of the Spirit and of Christ's command in another respect, and so a
necessary Duty. For else we should say, that it is a sin to Repent and Believe
in Christ, and to love him as Redeemer: For you may say to any sinner, Thou
need not to have Repented, Believed in a Redeemer, etc. but for thy sin; Yet
I hope none will say that so doing is properly a sin, though doing them
defectively is. God does not will and approve of it, that any soul that can see
no signs of Grace and sincerity in it self, should yet be as confident, and
merry and careless, as if they were certain that all were well. God would not
have men doubt of his Love, and yet make light of it: This is a contempt of
him. Else what should poor carnal sinners do that find themselves
unsanctified. No nor does God expect that any man should judge of himself
better then he has evidence to warrant such a judgment: But that every man
should prove his own work that so he may have rejoicing in himself alone, and
not in another. For he that thinks he is something when he is nothing,
deceives himself, Gal. 6.3, 4, 5, 6. And no man should be a self-deceiver,
especially in a case of such unexpressible consequence. It is therefore a most
desperate doctrine of the Antinomians (as most of theirs are) that all men
ought to believe Gods special Love to them, and their own Justification: and
that they are justified by Believing that they were justified before: and that
no man ought to question his faith (says Saltmarsh, any more then to question
Christ:) and that all fears of our Damnation, or not being Justified after this
Believing, are sin: and those that persuade to them, are Preachers of the
Law. (How punctually do the most profane ungodly people, hold most points of
the Antinomian belief, though they never knew that Sect by name!) God
commands no man to Believe more then is true: nor immediately to cast away
their doubts and fears; but to overcome them in an orderly methodical way: that
is, using Gods means till their Graces become more discernable, and their
understandings more clear and fit to discern them, that so we may have
Assurance of their sincerity, and thereby, of our Justification, Adoption, and
right to Glorification. Heb. 4.1. Let us therefore fear least a Promise being
left of entering into his Rest, any of us should seem to come short of it. Psalm.
2.11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with trembling. Kiss the
Son lest he be angry and ye perish. Phil. 2.12. Work out your salvation with
fear and trembling. Not only 1. A reverent fear of Gods Majesty. 2. And a
filial fear of offending him. 3. And an awful fear of his Judgments, when we
see them executed on others, and hear them threatened. 4. And a filial fear of
temporal chastisements; and lawful and our duty: but also 5. A fear of
damnation exciting to most careful importunity to escape it; when ever we have
so far obscured our evidences, as to see no strong probability of our sincerity
in the faith, and so of our salvation. The sum of my speech therefore is
this: Do not think that all your fears of Gods wrath are your sins: Much of
them is your great duty. Do you not feel that God made these fears at your
first conversion, the first and a principal means of your Recovery? to drive
you to a serious consideration of your state and ways, and to look after
Christ with more longing and estimation? and to use the means with more
resolution and diligence? Have not these fears been chief preservers of your
diligence and integrity ever since? I know love should do more then it does
with us all: But if we had not daily use for both (Love and Fear) God would not
1. Have planted them both in our natures. 2. And have renewed them both by
regenerating Grace. 3. And have put into his word the objects to move both (
viz. Threatenings as well as Promises) That fear of God which is the beginning
of wisdom includes the fear of his threatened wrath. I could say abundance more
to prove this, but that I know as to you it is needless for conviction of it:
but remember the use of it. Do not put the name of unbelief upon all your fears
of Gods displeasure. Much less should you presently conclude that you have no
faith, and that you cannot believe, because of these fears. You may have much
faith in the midst of these fears; and God may make them preservers of your
faith, by quickening you up to that means that must maintain it, and by keeping
you from those evils that would be as a worm at the root of it, and eat out its
precious strength and life. Security is no friend to faith; but a deadlier
enemy then fear it self. Obj. Then Cain and Judas sinned not by despairing: or
at least not damnably. Answ. 1. They despaired not only of themselves, and of
the event of their salvation, but also of God; of his Power or Goodness, and
Promise, and the sufficiency of any satisfaction of Christ. Their infidelity
was the root of their despair. 2. Far is it from me to say or think that you
should despair of the event, or that it is no sin; yea or that you should
cherish causeless and excessive jealousies and fears: I shall show you toward
the end, the sinfulness of so doing. Take heed of all fears that drive you from
God, or that distract or weaken your spirit, or disable you from duty, or drown
your love to God, and delight in him, and destroy your apprehensions of Gods
Loveliness and Compassion, and raise black and hard, and unworthy thoughts of
God in your mind. Again, I entreat you avoid and abhor all such fears. But
if you find in you the fears of godly jealousy of your own heart, and such
moderated fears of the wrath of God, which banish security, presumption and
boldness in sinning, and are (as D. Sibbs calls them) the awe-band of your soul;
and make you fly to the merits and bosom of the Lord Jesus, as the affrighted
child to the lap of the mother, and as the manslayer under the Law to the City
of refuge, and as a man pursued by a Lion, to his Sanctuary or hold; do not
think you have no faith because you have these fears; but moderate them by
faith and love, and then thank God for them. Indeed Perfect love (which will be
in heaven when all is perfected) will cast out this fear; and so it will do
sorrow and care, and prayer and means. But see you lay not these by till
Perfect love have cast them out. See Jer. 5.22, 23. and Heb. 12. two last
verses. Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let us serve
God acceptably with reverence and godly fear. For our God is a consuming fire.

I am sensible that I am too large on these foregoing heads; I will purposely
shorten the rest lest I weary you.

DIRECTION XIX.
19. Further understand, that Those few who do attain to Assurance, have it not
either perfectly or constantly ( for the most part) but mixed with imperfection,
and often clouded and interrupted.

THat the highest Assurance on earth is imperfect, I have showed you elsewhere.
If we be imperfect, and our faith imperfect, and the knowledge of our own
hearts imperfect, and all our evidences and graces imperfect; then our
Assurance must needs be imperfect also. To dream of Perfection on earth, is to
dream of Heaven on earth: And if Assurance may be here perfect, why not all our
Graces? Even when all Doubtings are overcome, yet is Assurance far short of
the highest degree.

Besides that measure of Assurance which godly men do partake of, has here its
many sad interruptions, in the most. Upon the prevalency of Temptations, and
the hidings of Gods face, their souls are often left in a state of sadness, that
were but lately as in the arms of Christ. How fully might this be proved from
the examples of Job, David, Jeremy and others in Scripture? and much more
abundantly by the daily complaints and examples of the best of Gods people now
living among us. As there is no perfect evenness to be expected in our
obedience while we are on earth; so neither will there be any constant or
perfect evenness in our comforts. He that has life in one duty, is cold in the
next: and therefore he that has much joy in one duty, has little in the next.
Yea perhaps duty may but occasion the renewall of his sorrows; that the soul
who before felt not its own burden, at a Sermon, or in Prayer, or holy
Meditation, which were wont to revive him, now seems to feel his miseries to be
multiplied. The time was once with David, when the thoughts of God were sweet
to him, and he could say, In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy
comforts delight my soul: And yet he saw the time also, When he remembered God
and was troubled, he complained and his Spirit was overwhelmed: God so held his
eyes waking, that he was troubled and could not speak: he considered the days
of old, and the years of ancient time; he called to remembrance his song in the
night, he communed with his own heart, and his spirit made diligent search:
Will the Lord, says he, cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no more?
Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? Has God
forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercy? Was not
this a low ebb and a sad case that David was in? Till at last he saw, This was
his infirmity, Psalm. 77.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Had David no former
experiences to remind? no arguments of comfort to consider of? Yes, but there
is at such a season an incapacity to improve them: There is not only a want of
comfort, but a kind of aversness from it: The soul bends it self to break its
own Peace, and to put away comfort far from it. So says he in verse. 2. My
soul refused to be comforted. In such cases, men are witty to argue themselves
into distress; that it is hard for one that would comfort them to answer them;
and they are witty in refelling all the Arguments of comfort that you can offer
them; so that it is hard to fasten any thing on them. They have a
weak-wilfulness against their own Consolations.

Seeing then that the best have such storms and sad interruptions, do not you
wonder or think your case strange if it be so with you. Would you speed better
then the best? Long for Heaven then, where only is Joy without sorrow, and
everlasting Rest without interruption.

DIRECTION XX.
20. Let me also give you this warning, That You must never expect so much
Assurance on earth, as shall set you above a Possibility of the loss of Heaven,
or above all apprehensions of real danger of your miscarrying.

I Conceive this advertisement to be of great necessity. But I must first tell
you the meaning and then the reasons of it. Only I am sorry that I know not how
to express it fully, but in School terms which are not so familiar to you. 1.
That which shall certainly come to pass, we call a thing [ Future]. That which
May and Can be Done, we call [ Possible.] All things are not Future which are
Possible: God can do more then he has done or will do. He could have made more
worlds, and so more were Possible then were Future. Moreover a thing is said to
be Possible, in reference to some Power which can accomplish it: whether it be
Gods Power, or Angels, or man's. God has Decreed that none of his Elect shall
finally or totally fall away and perish: and therefore their so falling and
perishing is not-future, that is, It is a thing that shall never come to pass:
But God never Decreed that it should be utterly Impossible, and therefore it
still remains Possible, though it shall never come to pass. Obj. But it is
said, They shall deceive if it were Possible the very Elect. A most comfortable
place, which many opposers of Election and Free Grace, do in vain seek to
obscure. But let me tell you for the right understanding of it, 1. That as I
said, [ Possible] and [ Impossible] are Relative terms, and have Relation to
the Power of some Agent, as proportioned to the thing to be Done: Now this Text
speaks only of the power of false Christ's and false Prophets (and the devil by
them) Their power of Deceiving is exceeding great, but not great enough to
Deceive the Elect: which is true in two Respects, 1. Because the Elect are
guided and fortified by Gods Spirit. 2. Because seducers work not efficiently,
but finally, by propounding objects; or by a Moral improper efficiency only.
All their seducements cannot force or necessitate us to be Deceived by them.
But though it be impossible to them to do it; yet it is Possible to God to
permit (which yet he never will) and so Possible for our selves to be our own
Deceivers, or to give Deceivers strength against us, by a wilful receiving of
their poisoned baits. 2. Besides Christ spoke not in Aristotle's School, but
among the Vulgar, where words must be used in the common sense, or else they
will not be understood: And the Vulgar use to call that Impossible which shall
never come to pass.

And indeed when we say that it is Possible, or Impossible for a man to sin or
fall away, there is some degree of Impropriety in the Terms; because Possible
and Impossible are terms properly relating to some power apportioned to a work:
but sinning and falling away thereby, are the consequents of impotency, and not
the effects of Power: except we speak of the natural act, wherein the sin
abides. But this must be born with, for want of a fitter word to express our
meaning by. But I Will leave these things which are not fit for you, and desire
you to leave them and overpass them, if you understand them not.

2. I here told you also, that you must not look to be above all apprehension
of danger of your miscarrying. The grounds of this are these: 1. Because, as is
said, our miscarrying remains still Possible. 2. Because the perfect certain
knowledge of our Election, and that we shall not fall away, is proper to God
only: We have our selves but a Defective, interrupted Assurance of it. 3. The
Covenant gives us salvation but on condition of our perseverance, and
perseverance on condition that we quench not the Spirit: which we shall do, if
we lose the apprehension of our danger. 4. Accordingly there is a connection in
our Assurance, between all the several causes of our Salvation, and necessaries
thereto; whereof the apprehension of danger is one. We are sure we shall be
saved, if we be sure to Persevere: else not. We are sure to Persevere, if we be
sure faithfully to resist Temptations. We can be no surer of faithful
resisting of Temptations, then we are sure to be kept in an apprehension of our
danger.

I still say therefore that the Doctrine of Antinomians is the most ready way
to Apostasy and perdition: and no wonder if it lead to the Licentiousness and
Scandals which our eyes have seen to be its genuine fruits! They cry down the
weakness, unbelief and folly of poor Christians, that will apprehend themselves
in danger of falling away, and so live in fear, after they are once Justified;
and that if they fall into sin (as whoredom, drunkenness, murder, Perjury,
destroying the Ministry, and expelling the Gospel, etc.) will presently
question or fear their estates and their Justification. Such like passages I
lately read in some printed Sermons of one of my ancient acquaintance, who
would never have come to that pass that he is at now, if his Judgment and
Humility had been as great as his Zeal. I entreat you therefore never to expect
such an Assurance as shall extinguish all your apprehensions of danger. He that
sees not the danger, is nearest it and likely to fall into it. Only he that
sees and apprehends it, is likely to avoid it. He that sees no danger of
falling away, is in greatest danger of it. I doubt not but that's the cause of
the Seditions, Scandals, Heresies, Bloodguiltiness, Destroying of the Churches
of Christ, and most Horrid Apostacies, Hypocrisy and wickedness, which these
late times have been guilty of; that they apprehended not the danger of ever
coming into such a state, or ever doing such things, but would have said, Am I
a Dog? to him that should have foretold them what is come to pass. Wonderful!
that men should be so blinded by false doctrine, as not to know, that the
apprehension of danger is made in the very fabrication of the nature of man, to
be the very engine to move his soul in all ways of self-preservation and
salvation! Yea it is that very supposed principle, upon which all the
Government of the world, and the Laws and order of every Nation, are grounded.
We could not keep the very Bruits from tearing us in pieces, but for their own
safety: because they apprehend themselves to be in danger by it! The fear of
man is it that restrains them. But for this, no man's life would be in any
safety. For every malicious man would be a murderer: He that fears not the
loss of his own life, is master of another man's. Do these men think that the
apprehension of bodily dangers may carry them on through all undertakings, and
be the potent spring of most of their actions, and warrant all those courses
that else would be unwarrantable, so that they dare plead Necessity to warrant
those fearful things which by extenuating language (like Saul's) are called
Irregularities* And yet that it is unlawful or unmeet for a Christian, yea the
weakest Christian, to live in any apprehensions of danger to their souls?
either danger of sinning, or falling away, or perishing for ever? No wonder if
such do sin, and fall away and perish. Would these men have fought well by Sea
or Land, if they had apprehended no danger? Would the earth have been so
covered with carcasses and with blood (yea even of Saints) and the world filled
with the doleful calamities that accompanied and have followed, if there had
been no apprehensions of danger? Would they take Physic when they are sick?
Would they avoid fire, or water, or thieves; but through an apprehension of
danger? Let them talk what they please, if ever they escape hell, without a
deep apprehension of the danger of it, it must be in a way not known by
Scripture or by Nature. Sure I am Paul did tame his body and bring it in
subjection, through an apprehension of this danger, lest when he had Preached
to others, himself should be a castaway or reprobate, 2 Cor. 9.27. And Christ
himself, when he bids us, Fear not them that can kill the body (whom yet
these men think it lawful to fear and fight against) yet charge us, with a
double charge, so Fear him that is able to destroy both body and soul in hell:
yea I say unto you, says Christ, fear him, Luke 12.5. What can be plainer? and
that to his Disciples? My detestation of these destructive Antinomian
Principles, makes me to run out further against them then I intended: Though it
were easy more abundantly to manifest their hatefulness: But my reasons are
these: 1. Because these Mountebanks are still thrusting in themselves and
impudently proclaiming their own skill, and the excellency of their remedies
for the cure of wounded consciences, and the settling of peace: when indeed
their receipts are rank poison, gilded with the precious name of Christ and
Free Grace. 2. Because I would not have your doubtings cured by the Devil; for
he will but cure one disease with another, and a lesser with a far greater. If
he can so cure your fears and doubtings as to bring you into carnal security
and presumption, he will lose nothing by the cure, and you will get nothing. If
he can turn a poor doubting troubled Christian, to be a secure Antinomian, he
has cured the smart of a cut finger by casting them into a Lethargy, or
stupefaction by his opium. To go to Antinomian receipts to cure a troubled
soul, is as going to a Witch to cure the body. 3. I would have you sensible of
Gods goodness to you in these very troubles that you have so long lain under.
Your blessed Physician knew your disease, and the temperature of your soul.
Perhaps he saw that you were in some danger of being carried away with the
Honors, Profits or Pleasures of this world; and would have been entangled in
either covetousness, pride, voluptuousness or some such desperate sin: And
now by these constant and extraordinary apprehensions of your danger, these
sins have been much kept under, temptations weakened, and your danger
prevented. If you have found no such inclinations in your self, yet God might
find them. Had it not been far worse for you to have lain so many years in
pride, sensuality and forgetfulness of God, and utter neglect of the (...) of
your soul, then to have lain so long as you have done in apprehensions of your
danger? O love and admire your wise Physician! Little do you know now what he
has been doing for you: Nor shall you ever fully know it in this life: but
hereafter you shall know it, when your sanctification, and consolation, and his
praises shall be perfected together. 4. If you should for the time to come
expect or desire that God should set you out of all apprehension of danger, you
know not what it is that you desire: It were to desire your own undoing. Only
see that you apprehend not your danger to be greater then it is; nor so
apprehend it as to increase it, by driving you from Christ, but as to prevent
it by driving you to him. Entertain not fancies and dreams of danger in stead
of right apprehensions. Apprehend your happiness and grounds of hope and
comfort, and safety in Christ, and let these quite exceed your apprehensions of
the danger. Look not on it as a remediless danger, or as greater then the
remedy. Do not conclude that you shall perish in it, and it will swallow you
up: But only let it make you hold fast on Christ, and keep close to him in
obedience. Shall I lay open all the matter expressed in this section, by a
familiar comparison?

A King having many Subjects and Sons, which are all beyond Sea, or beyond some
River, they must needs be brought over to him before they can live or reign
with him. The River is frozen over at the sides till it come almost to the
middle. The foolish children are all playing on the Ice, where a deceiving
enemy enticeth them to play on till they come to the deep, where they drop in
one by one and perish. The eldest Son, who is with the Father on the other
side, undertaketh to cast himself into the water, and swim to the further side,
and break the Ice, and swim back with them all that will come with him and hold
by him. The Father bids him, Bring all my Subjects with you, if they will come
and hold by you; but be sure you fail not to bring my Sons. This is resolved
on: The Prince casts himself in the water, and swimmeth to the further side:
He makes a way through the Ice, and offers all of them his safe carriage, if
they will Accept him to be their bearer and helper, and will trust themselves
on him, and hold fast by him till they come to the further side. Some refuse
his help and think he would deceive them, and lead them into the deep and there
leave them to perish: Some had rather play on the Ice and will not hearken to
him: Some dare not venture through the streams, or will not endure the coldness
of the water: Some waveringly agree to him, and hold faintly by his skirt, and
when they feel the cold water, or are near the deep, or are weary of holding,
they lose him; either turning back; or perishing suddenly in the gulf. The
children are of the same mind with the rest, but he is resolved to lose none
of them, and therefore he charge them to come with him, and tells them fully
what a welcome they shall have with their Father; and cease not his
importunity till he persuade them to consent: Some of them say, How shall we
ever get over the River? we shall be drowned by the way: He tells them, I will
carry you safe over; so you will but hold fast by me: Never fear; I warrant
you: They all lay hold on him and venture in with him. When they are in the
midst some are afraid, and cry out, We shall be drowned: There he encourages,
and bids them trust him; hold fast; and fear not. Others when they hear these
words that they need not fear, they grow so bold and utterly secure as to lose
their hold: To these he spe^keth in other language, and charge them to hold
fast by him, for if they lose their hold they will fall into the bottom, and if
they stick not to him they will be drowned. Some of them upon this warning hold
fast: others are so boldly confident of his skill and good will and promise
that they forget or value not his warning and threatening, but lose their hold:
Some through laziness and weariness do the like. Whereupon he lets them sink
till they are almost drowned and cry out for help, Save us or we perish, and
think they are all lost: and then he lays hold of them and fetches them up
again, and chideth them for their bold folly, and bids them look better to
themselves and hold faster by him hereafter if they love themselves. Some at
last through mere weariness and weakness, before they can reach the bank, cry
out, O I am tired, I faint, I shall never hold fast till I reach the shore, I
shall be drowned. These he comfort and gives them cordials and holds them
by the hand, and bids them, Despair not: do your best: Hold fast, and I will
help you. And so he brings them all safe to the Haven.

This King is God: Heaven is his habitation: The Subjects are all men: The Sons
who are part of the Subjects are the Elect: The rest are the Non-Elect: The
River or Sea is the passage of this life. The further side, is all men's
natural, sinful distance and separation from God and happiness: The Ice that
bears them, is this frail life of Pleasures, Profits and Honors which delight
the flesh: The depth unfrozen is hell. He that ticeth them thither is the
devil: The eldest Son that is sent to bring them over, is Jesus Christ. His
Commission and undertaking is, to help all over that refuse not his Help; and
to see that the Elect be infallibly Recovered and Saved. Do I need to go over
the other particulars? I know you see my meaning in them all: Specially that
which I aim at is this: that as Paul had a promise of the life of all that were
with him in the ship, and yet when some would have gone out, he told them
Except these abide in the ship ye cannot be saved, Act. 27.31. (so that he
makes their apprehension of danger in a Possibility of being drowned to be the
means of detaining them in the ship till they came all safe to land) so Jesus
Christ who will infallibly save all his Elect (they being given him by his
Father to be infallibly saved) will do it by causing them to hold fast by him,
through all the troubles and labors and temptations of this tumultuous
tempestuous world, and that till they came to land; and the apprehension of
their danger shall be his means to make them hold fast: Yet is not their safety
principally in themselves, but in him: Nor is it their holding fast by him that
is the chief cause of their difference from those that perish: but that is his
love and resolution to save them. And therefore when they do let go their hold,
he will not so lose them; but will fetch them up again: Only he will not bring
them through this sea of danger, as you would draw a block through the water:
but as men that must hold fast, and be commanded and threatened to that end: and
therefore when they lose their hold, it is the fear of drowning, which they
felt themselves near, which shall cause them to hold faster the next time: and
this must needs be the fear of a possible danger. And for those that perish
they have none to blame but themselves. They perish not for want of a Savior:
but because they would not lay hold on him, and follow him through the tempests
and waves of trial: Nor can they quarrel with him, because he did more for
others, and did not as much for them, as long as he offered them so sufficient
help, that only their own wilful refusal was their ruin, and their perdition
was of themselves.

I conclude therefore, That seeing our Salvation is laid by God, upon our
faithful obedient holding fast to Christ through all trials and difficulties,
and our holy fear is the means of that holding fast (Christ being still the
principal cause of our safety) therefore never look for such a Certainty of
Salvation as shall put you above such fears and moderated apprehensions of
danger: For then its ten to one you will lose your hold. You read in Scripture
very many warnings to take heed least we fall, and threatenings to those that do
fall away and draw back. What are all these for, but to excite in us those
moderate fears and cares and holy diligence which may prevent our falling away.
And remember this, that there can be no such holy fears and cares and
diligence, where there is no danger or possibility of falling away; for there
can be no Act without its proper Object: And the Object of fear is A possible
hurt, at least in the apprehension of him that fears it. No man can fear that
evil which he knows to be Impossible.

DIRECTION XXI.
21. The next advice which I must give you is this, Be thankful if you can but
reach to a settled Peace and composure of your mind, and lay not too much on
the high raptures and feelings of comfort which some do possess: And if ever
you enjoy such feeling Joys, expect not that they should be either long or
often.

IT is the cause of miserable languishing to many a poor soul to have such
importunate expectations of such passionate Joys, that they think without
these they have no true comfort at all; no witness of the Spirit, no Spirit of
Adoption, no joy in the holy Ghost. Some think that others have much of this
though they have not, and therefore (...) themselves because it is no^ (...) as
with others: when alas, they little (...) how it goes with others! Some (...)
raptures sometimes themselves; and therefore when they are gone, they think
they are forsaken, and that all grace, or peace at least is gone with them.
Take heed of these expectations. And to satisfy you let me tell you these two
or three things: 1. A settled calm and peace of soul is a great Mercy, and not
to be undervalued and looked at as Nothing, 2. The highest raptures and
passionate feeling joys, are usually of most doubtful sincerity. Not that I
would have any suspect the sincerity of them without cause: but such passions
are not so certain signs of Grace, as the settled frame of the understanding
and will* nor can we so easily know that they are of the Spirit: and they are
liable to more questioning, and have in them a greater Possibility of deceit.
Doubtless it is very much that Fantasy and Melancholy, and specially a
natural weakness and moveable temper will do in such cases* Mark whether it be
not mostly these three sorts of people that have or pretend to have such
extraordinary raptures and feelings of joy. 1. Women and others that are most
passionate* 2. Melancholy People. 3. Men that by erroneous opinions have lost
almost all their understandings in their fantasies, and live like men in a
continual dream. Yet I doubt not but solid men have often high joys; and more we
might all have if we did our duty: And I would have no Christian content
himself with a dull quietness of spirit, but by all means possible to be much
in laboring to rejoice in God, and raising their souls to heavenly delights: O
what lives do we lose, which we might enjoy! But my meaning is this: Look at
these joys and delights as Duties and as Mercies, but look not at them as
Marks of trial; so as to place more necessity in them then God has done, or to
think them to be ordinary things. If you do but feel such an high estimation of
Christ and Heaven, that you would not leave him for all the world, take this
for your surest Sign. And if you have but so much Probability or Hope of your
interest in him, that you can think of God as one that loves you, and can be
thankful to Christ for Redeeming you, and are gladder in these hopes of your
interest in Christ and Glory then if you were owner of all the world; take this
for a happy Mercy and a high Consolation. Yet I mean not that your joy in
Christ will be always so sensible, as for worldly things; but it will be more
rational, solid, and deeper at the Heart. And that you may know by this, You
would not for all the Pleasures, Honors or Profits in the world be in the same
case as once you were (supposing that you were converted since you had the use
of Reason and Memory) or at least as you see the ungodly world still lie in.

3. And let me add this: Commonly those that have the highest passionate joys
have the saddest lives: for they have with all the most passionate fears and
sorrows. Mark it whether you find not this prove true. And it is partly from
Gods will in his dispensations: partly from their own necessities, who after
their exaltations do usually need a prick in the flesh, and a messenger of
Satan to buffet them, lest they be exalted above measure: and partly and most
commonly it is from the temperature of their bodies. Weak pastionate women of
moveable spirits and strong affections, when they Love they Love violently, and
when they Rejoice, especially in such cases, they have most sensible joys, and
when any fears arise, they have most terrible sorrows. I know it is not so with
all of that sex; but mark the same people usually that have the highest Joys,
and see whether at other times they have not the greatest troubles. This week
they are as at the gates of Heaven, and the next as at the doors of hell. I am
sure with many it is so. Yet it need not be so if Christians would but look at
these high joys as Duties to be endeavored and Mercies to be valued: But when
they will needs Judge of their state by them, and think that God is gone from
them, or forsaken them, when they have not such joys, then it leaves them in
terror and amazement. Like men after a flash of lightning that are left more
sensible of the darkness. For no wise man can expect that such Joys should be
a Christians ordinary state; or God should so diet us with a continual feast.
It would neither suit with our health, nor the condition of this Pilgrimage.
Live therefore on your Peace of conscience as your ordinary diet: when this is
wanting, know that God appoints you a fast for your health: and when you have
a feast of high Joys, feed on it and be thankful: but when they are taken
from you, gape not after them as the Disciples did after Christ at his
Ascension; but return thankfully to your ordinary diet of Peace: and remember
that these Joys which are now taken from you, may so return again: however
there is a place preparing for you, where your Joys shall be full.

DIRECTION XXII.
22. My next Direction is this, Spend more of your time and care about your
Duty then about your Comforts: and for the exercise and increase of your Graces
then for the discovery of them: And when you have done all that you can, for
Assurance and Comfort, you shall find that it will very much depend on your
Actual Obedience.

THis Direction is of as great importance as any that I have yet given you: but
I shall say but little of it because I have spoke of it so fully already in my
Book of Rest, Part 3. Chapter 8, 9, 10, 11. My Reasons for what I here assert are
these: 1. Duty goes in order of nature and time before comfort: as the Precept
is before the Promise: Comfort is part of the Reward, and therefore necessarily
supposes Duty. 2. Grace makes men both so ingenuous and Divine, as to consider
Gods due as well as their own; and what they should Do, as well as what they
shall Have: still remembering that our works cannot Merit at Gods hands. 3. As
we must have Grace before we can Know we have it, so ordinarily we must have a
good measure of Grace before we can so clearly discern it as to be certain of
it. Small things, I have told you are next to none, and hardly discernable by
weak eyes. When all ways in the world are tried, it will be found, that there
is no way so sure for a doubting soul to be made certain of the truth of his
Graces, as to keep them in Action, and get them increased. And it will be found
that there is no one cause of Christians doubting of the truth of their Faith,
Love, Hope, Repentance, Humility, etc. so great or so common as the small
degree of these Graces. Does not the very language of complaining Christians
show this? One says, I have no faith: I cannot believe: I have no love to God:
I have no delight in Duty: Another says, I cannot mourn for sin: my heart was
never broken: I cannot patiently bear an injury: I have no courage in opposing
sin, etc. If all these were not in a low and weak degree, men could not so
ordinarily think they had none. A lively, strong, working Faith, Love, Zeal,
Courage, etc. would show themselves, as do the highest Towers, the greatest
mountains, the strongest winds, the greatest flames, which will force an
observance by their greatness and effects. 4. Consider also that it is more
pleasing to God to see his people study him and his will directly, then to
spend the first and chiefest of their studies about the attaining of comforts
to themselves. 5. And it is the nature of Grace to tend first and chiefly
toward God: and but secondarily to be the evidence of our own happiness. We
have faith given us principally that we might believe, and live by it in daily
applications of Christ: We have repentance that it might break us off from sin
and bring us back to God: We have Love that we might Love God and our Redeemer,
his Saints and Laws and ways: We have Zeal that we might be quickened in all
our holy duties: and we have obedience to keep us in the way of our duty: The
first thing we have to do with these Graces is to use them for those holy ends
which their nature does express. And then the discerning of them that we may
have Assurance follows after this both in time and dignity. 6. And it is a
matter of far greater concernment to our selves to seek after the obtaining
of Christ and Grace, then after the certain knowledge that we have them. You
may be saved though you never get Assurance here, but you cannot be saved
without Christ and Grace. God has not made Assurance the Condition of your
salvation. It tends indeed exceedingly to your comfort, and a precious mercy it
is; but your safety lies not on it. It is better go sorrowful and doubting to
Heaven, then comfortably to hell. First therefore ask what is the Condition of
salvation and the way to it, and then look that you do your best to perform it,
and to go that way; and then try your performance in its season. 7. Besides, as
it is a work of far greater moment, so also of quicker dispatch, to Believe
and Love Christ truly, then to get Assurance that you do truly Believe and Love
him. You may believe immediately (by the help of Gods Grace:) but getting
Assurance of it, may be the work of a great part of your life. Let me therefore
entreat this one thing of you, that when you feel the want of any Grace, you
would not presently bend all your thoughts upon the enquiry Whether it be true
or no; but rather say to your self I see trying is a great and difficult, a
long and tedious work: I may be this many years about it, and possibly be
unresolved still. If I should conclude that I have no Grace, I may be mistaken:
and so I may, if I think that I have it. I may inquire of friends and Ministers
long, and yet be left in doubt; It is therefore my surest way to seek presently
to obtain it, if I have it not, and to increase it if I have it: and I am
certain none of that labor will be lost: to get more is the way to know I have
it.

But perhaps you will say, How should I get more Grace? that is a business of
greater difficulty then so. I answer, Understand what I told you before, that
as the beginning of Grace is in your Understanding, so the heart and life of it
is in your Will: and the Affections and passionate part are but the fruits and
branches. If therefore your Grace be weak, it is chiefly in an unwillingness to
yield to Christ and his Word and Spirit. Now how should an unwilling soul be
made willing? Why thus, 1. Pray constantly as you are able, for a willing
mind, and yielding inclinable heart to Christ. 2. Hear constantly those
Preachers that bend their doctrine to inform your understanding of the great
necessity and excellency of Christ and Grace and Glory; and to persuade the
Will with the most forcible Arguments. A persuading quickening Ministry that
helps to excite your Graces and draw up your heart to Christ, is more useful
then they that spend most of their time to persuade you of your sincerity, and
give you comfort. 3. But specially lay out your thoughts more in the most
serious Considerations of those things which tend to breed and feed those
particular Graces which you would have increased. Objects and moving Reasons
kept much upon the mind by serious thoughts, are the great engine appointed
both by nature and by Grace to turn about the soul of man. Thoughts are to your
soul, as taking in the Air, and Meat and Drink to your body. Objects considered
do turn the soul into their own Nature. Such as are the things that you most
think and consider of (I mean in pursuance of them) such will you be your self.
Consideration, frequent serious Consideration is Gods great Instrument to
convert the soul and to confirm it: to get grace and to keep it and increase
it: If any soul perish for want of Grace, it is ten to one it is mainly for want
of frequent and serious Consideration. That the most of us do languish under
such weaknesses, and attain to small degrees of Grace, is for want of sober,
frequent consideration. We know not how great things this would do, if it were
but faithfully managed. This then is my advice, When you feel so great a want
of faith and love (for those be the main Graces for trial and use) that you
doubt whether you have any or none, lay by those doubting thoughts a while, and
presently go and set your self to consider of God's Truth, Goodness,
Amiableness, and Kindheartedness to miserable unworthy sinners: think what he
is in himself, and what he is to you, and what he has done for you, and what
he will do for you if you do but consent. And then think of the vanity of all
the childish Pleasures of this world, how soon, and in how sad a case they will
leave us; and what silly contemptible things they are in comparison of the
everlasting Glory of the Saints! By that time you have warmed your soul a
little with such serious thoughts, you will find your Faith and Love revive,
and begin to stir and work within you: And then you will feel that you have
Faith and Love! Only remember what I told you before, that the heart and soul
of saving Faith and Love (supposing a Belief that the Gospel is true) is all in
this one Act of Willingness or Consent to have Christ as he is offered.
Therefore if you doubt of your Faith and Love, it is your own Willingness that
you doubt of; or else you know not what you do. Now methinks, if you took but a
sober view of the goodness of God and the Glory of Heaven on one side, and of
the silly, empty, worthless world on the other side; and then ask your heart,
Which it will choose? and say to your self, O my soul, the God of Glory offers
thee thy choice, of dung and vanity for a little time, or of the unconceivable
Joys of Heaven for ever: Which will thou choose? I say, methinks the answer of
your own soul should presently resolve you that you do Believe, and that you
Love God above this present world! For if you can choose him before the world,
then you are more willing of him then the world: and if he have more of your
will, for certain he has more of your Faith and Love. Use therefore, in stead
of doubting of your Faith, to Believe till you put it out of doubt: And if yet
you doubt, study God and Christ and Glory yet better, and keep those objects by
Consideration close to your heart, whose nature is to work the heart to Faith
and Love. For certainly objects have a mighty power on the soul: and certainly
God and Christ and Grace and Glory are Mighty Objects; as able to make a full
and deep impression on man's soul as any in the world: and if they work not, it
is not through any imperfection in them, but because they be not well applied,
and by Consideration held upon the heart that they may work. Perhaps you will
say, that Meditation is too hard a work for you; and that your memory is so
weak that you want matter to meditate upon; or if you do meditate on these, yet
you feel no great motion or alteration on your heart. To this I answer: If you
want matter, take the help of some book that will afford you matter; and if you
want life in Meditation, peruse the most quickening writings you can get. If you
have not better at hand, read over (and seriously consider as you read it)
those passages in the end of my Book of Rest, which direct you in the exercise
of these graces, and give you some matter for your Meditation to work upon. And
remember that if you can increase the resolved choice of your will, you
increase your Love, though you feel not those Affectionate workings that you
desire.

Let me ask you now whether you have indeed taken this course in your
doubtings? If not, how unwisely have you done? Doubting is no cure: but actual
Believing and Loving is a cure. If Faith and Love were things that you would
fain get, but cannot, then you had cause enough to fear, and to lie down and
rise in trouble of mind from one year to another. But its no such matter: It
is so far from being beyond your reach or power to have these Graces though you
would, that they themselves are nothing else but your very Willingness; at
least your Willingness to have Christ is both your Faith and Love. It may be
said therefore to be in the power of your Will, which is nothing else but that
Actual Willingness which you have already. If therefore you are unwilling to
have him, what makes you complain for want of the sense of his presence, and
the Assurance of his Love, and the Graces of his Spirit, as you frequently do?
It Is strange to me, that people should make so many complaints to God and men,
and spend so many sad hours in fears and trouble, and all for want of that
which they would not have: If you be not Willing be Willing now: If you say you
cannot; do as I have before directed you: One hours sober, serious thoughts of
God and the world, of Christ and Satan, of sin and Holiness, of Heaven and
hell, and the differences of them, will do very much to make you Willing. Yet
mistake me not: Though I say you may have Christ if you Will, and Faith and
Love if you Will, and no man can truly say, I would be glad to have Christ (as
he is offered) but Cannot; Yet this Gladness, Consent or Willingness which I
mention, is the effect of the special work of the Spirit, and was not in your
power before you had it: nor is it yet so in your power as to Believe without
Gods further help: but he that has made you willing, will not be wanting to
maintain your willingness. Though I will say to any man, You may have Christ if
you Will: yet I will say to no man, You can be willing of your self, or without
the special Grace of God.

Nay let me further ask: Have not you darkened, buried or weakened your Graces,
in stead of exercising and increasing them, even then when you complained for
want of Assurance of them? when you found a want of Faith and Love, have not
you weakened them more, and so made them less discernable? Have you not fed
your unbelief, and disputed for your doubtings, and taken Satan's part against
your self; and (which is far worse) have you never through these doubtings
entertained hard thoughts of God, and presented him to your soul as unwilling
to show you mercy, and in an unlovely, dreadful, hideous shape, fitter to
affright you from him then to draw you to him, and likelier to provoke your
hatred then your love? If you have not done thus, ^ know too many troubled
souls that have: And if you have, you have taken a very unlikely way to get
Assurance. If you would have been certain that you Loved God in sincerity, you
should have labored to Love him more, till you had been certain: And that you
might do so, you should have kept better thoughts of God in your mind. You
will hardly love him while you think of him as evil, or at least as hurtful to
you. Never forget this Rule which I laid you down in the beginning, that He
that will ever love God, must apprehend him to be Good: and the more large and
deep are our apprehensions of his goodness, the more will be our Love: For such
as God appears to be to men's fixed conceivings, such will their Affections be
to him. For the fixed, deep conceptions or apprehensions of the mind, do lead
about the soul, and guide the life.

I conclude therefore with this important and importunate request to you, That
though it be a duty necessary in its time and place, to examine our selves
concerning our sincerity, in our several graces and duties to God; yet be sure
that the first and far greater part of your time, and pains and care and
inquiries, be for the getting and increasing of your grace, then for the
discerning it; and to perform your duty rightly, then to discern your right
performance. And when you confer with Ministers or others that may teach you,
see that you ask ten times at least, How should I get or increase my ^aith, my
love to Christ, and to his people? for once that you ask, How shall I know that
I believe or love? Yet so contrary has been and still is the practice* of most
Christians among us in this point, that I have heard it twenty times asked, How
shall I know that I truly love the Brethren? for once that I have heard it
demanded, How should I bring my heart to love them better? And the like I may
say of love to Christ himself.

I should next have spoke of the second part of the Direction, How much our
Assurance and Comfort, will still depend on our Actual obedience. But this will
fall in in handling the two or three next following Directions.

DIRECTION XXIII.
23. My next advice is this, Think not that those doubts and troubles of mind,
which are caused and continued by wilful Disobedience, will ever be well
healed but by the healing of that Disobedience: or that the same means must be
used and will suffice to the cure of such troubles; which must be used and will
suffice to cure the troubles of a tender-conscience, and of an obedient
Christian, whose trouble is merely through mistakes of their condition.

I Will begin with the later part of this Direction. He that is troubled upon
mere mistakes may be quieted upon the removal of them. If he understood not the
universal extent of Christ's satisfaction, or of the Covenant or conditional
Grant of Christ and Life in him: and if upon this he be troubled, as thinking
that he is not included; the convincing him of his error may suffice to the
removal of his trouble. If he be troubled through his mistaking the nature of
true Faith, or true Love, or other Graces, and so think that he has them not
when he has them; the discovery of his error may be the quieting of his soul.
The soul that is troubled upon such mistakes must be tenderly dealt with: Much
more they that are disquieted by groundless fears, or too deep apprehensions of
the wrath or justice of God, of the evil of sin, and of their unworthiness, and
for want of fuller apprehensions of the loving kindness of God, and the tender
compassionate nature of Christ. We can scarce handle such souls too gently. God
would have all to be tenderly dealt with, that are tender of displeasing and
dishonouring him by sin. Gods own language may teach all Ministers what
language we should use to such, Isa. 57.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Thus says
the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose Name is Holy; I dwell in
the high and holy place; with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit,
to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite
ones. For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth: For the
spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have made, etc. But the
wicked are like the troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire
and dirt: There is no peace says my God to the wicked. Much more tender
language may such expect from Christ in the Gospel, where is contained a fuller
revelation of his Grace. If Mary a poor sinful woman lie weeping at his feet,
and washing them with her tears, he has not the heart to spurn her away; but
openly proclaims the forgiveness of her many sins. As soon as ever the heart
of a sinner is turned from his sins, the heart of Christ is turned to him.
The very sum of all the Gospel is contained in those precious words, which
fully express this, Matthew. 11.28, 29, 30. Come unto me all ye that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest. Take my yoke upon you and learn of
me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find Rest unto your souls:
For my yoke is easy and my burden is light. When the Prodigal, Luke 15.20.
does once come home to his Father, with sorrow and shame con^esting his
unworthiness, yea but resolved to confess it; his Father preventeth him, and
sees him afar off, and stays not his coming but runs and meets him: and when
he comes to him he does not upbraid him with his sins, nor say, Thou Rebel,
why have thou forsaken me, and preferred harlots and luxury before me? nay he
does not so much as frown upon him: but compassionatly falls on his neck and
kisseth him: Alas, God knows that a poor sinner in this humbled troubled case,
has burden enough on his back already, and indeed more then he is able of
himself to bear. The sense of his own sinful folly and misery is burden
enough: If God should add to this his frowns and terrors, and should spurn at
a poor sinner that lies prostrate at his feet, in tears or terrors, who then
should be able to stand before him, or to look him in the face? But he will not
break the bruised reed; he will not make heavier the burden of a sinner. He
calls them to come to him for Ease and Rest, and not to oppress them or kill
them with his terrors. We have not a King like Rehoboam that will multiply our
pressures; but one whose office it is to break our yoaks, and loose our bonds
and set us free. When he was a Preacher himself on earth, you may gather what
Doctrine he preached by his Text, which he chose at one of his first public
Sermons; which as you may find in Luke 4.18, 19. was this, The Spirit of the
Lord is upon me; because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor;
he has sent me to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the
captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that
are bruised; to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. O if a poor bruised,
wounded soul had but heard this Sermon from his Saviors own mouth; what
heart-meltings would it have caused? what pangs of Love would it have raised in
him! You would sure have believed then that the Lord is gracious, when All
(that heard him) bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words that
proceeded out of his mouth, Luke 4.22. I would desire no more for the comfort
of such a soul then to see such a sight, and feel such a feeling as the poor
penitent Prodigal did, when he found himself in the arms of his Father, and
felt the kisses of his mouth, and was surprised so unexpectedly with such a
torrent of Love. The soul that has once seen and felt this, would never sure
have such hard and doubtful thoughts of God, except through ignorance they
knew not whose arms they were that thus embraced them, or whose voice it was
that thus bespoke them; or unless the remembrance of it were gone out of their
minds. You see then what is Gods own language to humbled Penitents, and what
is the method of his dealings with them: And such must be the language and
dealing of his Ministers: They must not wound when Christ would heal; nor make
sad the heart that Christ would comfort, and would not have made sad, Ezekiel.
13.22.

But will this means serve turn, or must the same course be taken, to remove
the sorrows of the wilfully disobedient? No, God takes another course himself,
and prescribes another course to his Ministers, and requires another course
from the sinner himself. But still remember who it is that I speak of: It is
not the ordinary unavoidable infirmities of the Saints that I speak of; such as
they cannot be rid of, though they fain would; such as Paul speaks of, Romans
7.19. The good that I would do I do not: and when I would do good evil is
present with me: And Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, etc. so
that we cannot do the things that we would. A true Christian would Love God
more perfectly, and Delight in him more abundantly, and bring every thought in
subjection to his Will, and subdue the very remnants of carnal concupiscence,
that there should be no stirrings of lust or unjust anger, or worldly desires,
or pride within him; and that no vain word might pass his lips: all this he
would do but he cannot. Striving against these unavoidable infirmities is
conquering.

But though we cannot keep under every motion of concupiscence, we can forbear
the execution. Anger will stir upon provocations; But we may restrain it in
degree, that it set us not in a flame, and do not much distemper or discompose
our minds: and we can forbid our tongues all raging, furious or abusive words
in our Anger; all cursing, swearing or reproachful speaking. If an envious
thought against our Brother do arise in our hearts, because he is preferred
before us* we may hate it and repress it, and chide our hearts for it, and
command our tongues to speak well of him, and no evil. Some pride and
self-esteem will remain and be stirring in us, do what we can, it is a sin so
deeply rooted in our corrupt Natures: But yet we can detest it, and resist it,
and meet with abhorrence our self-conceited thoughts, and rejoycings in our own
reputations and fame, and inward heart-risings against those that undervalue us
and stand in the way of our Repute; and we may forbear our boasting language,
and our contestings for our credit, and our excuses of our sins, and our
backbitings and secret defaming of those that cross us in the way of credit: We
may forbear our quarrels and estrangements and dividings from our Brethren, and
stiff insisting on our own conceits, and expecting that others should make our
Judgments their Rule, and say and do as we would have them, and all dance
after our pipe; all which are the effects of inward Pride* We cannot, while we
are on earth, be free from all inordinate Love of the world, and the Riches and
Honors of it; but we may so watch against it and repress it, as that it shall
neither be preferred before God, nor draw us to unlawful ways of gain, by
lying, deceit and overreaching our Brethren; by stealing, unjust or unmercifull
dealings, oppressing the poor, and insulting over those that are in the way of
our thriving, and crushing them that would hinder our aspiring designs, and
treading them down that will not bow to us, and taking revenge of them that
have crossed or disparaged us, or cruelly exacting all our Rights and Debts of
the poor; and squeezing the purses of subjects or tenants, or those that we
bargain with, like a sponge, as long as any thing will come out: Yea we may so
far subdue our love of the world, as that it shall not hinder us from being
merciful to the poor, compassionate to our servants and laborers, and
bountiful to our power in doing good works: nor yet shut out Gods service from
our families or closets, nor rob him of our frequent, affectionate thoughts,
especially on the Lords day. So for sensuality or the pleasing of our flesh
more immediately; we shall never on earth be wholly freed from inordinate
motions, and temptations, and fleshly desires, and urgent inclinations and
solicitations to forbidden things. But yet we may restrain our Appetite by
reason, so far that it bring us not to gluttony and drunkenness, and a
studying for our bellies, and pampering of our flesh, or a taking care for it,
and making provision to satisfy its lusts, Romans 13.14. We may forbear the
obeying it, in excess of Apparel, in undecent, scandalous or time-wasting
Recreations, in uncleanness or unchaste speeches or behavior, or the reading of
amorous Books and Sonnets, or feeding our eyes or thoughts on filthy or
enticing objects, or otherways wilfully blowing the fire of lust: So also for
the performance of Duty: We shall never in this life be able to Hear or Read so
diligently, and understandingly or affectionately as we would do: nor to
remember or profit by what we hear, as we desire. But yet we can bring our
selves to the Congregation, and not prefer our ease or business or any vain
thing before Gods Word and Worship, or loath or despise it because of some
weakness in the speaker: And we may in a great measure restrain our thoughts
from wandering, and force our selves to attend; and labor when we come home to
recall it to mind. We cannot call on God so fervently, believingly or
delightfully as we would: But yet we may do it sincerely as we can, and do it
constantly* We cannot instruct our children and servants, and reprove or exhort
our neighbors, with that boldness, or love and compassion and discretion and
meet expressions, as we would: But yet we may do it faithfully and frequently
as we are able.

So that you may see in all this what sin it is that Paul speaks of, Romans 7.
when he says, When he would do good, evil is present with him; and that he is
lead captive to the Law of sin, and serves the Law of sin with his flesh: and
Gal. 4.17. when he says, We cannot do the things that we would; he speaks not
of wilful sinning, or gross sin, but of unavoidable infirmities; whereby also
we are too often drawn into a committing of many sins which we might avoid
(for so the best do.)

And because you may often read and hear of sins of Infirmity, as
distinguished from other sins, let me here give you notice, that this word
may be taken in several senses, and that there are three several sorts of
sins of Infirmity in the Godly.

1. There are those sins which a man cannot avoid though he would: which are
in the gentlest sense called Sins of Infirmity. Here note 1. That Adam had none
such. 2. And that the reason of them is because 1. Our Reason which should
direct, and our Wills themselves which should command, are both Imperfect. 2.
And our Faculties that should be commanded and directed are by sin grown
impotent and obstinate, and have contracted a rebelling disobedient
disposition. 3. And that degree of Grace, which the best attain to in this
life, is not such as wholly to overcome either the imperfection of the guiding
and commanding faculty, or the rebellion of the obeying faculties. Otherwise if
our own Wills were perfect, and the rebellion of the inferior faculties cured,
no man could then say, The good that I would I do not, and the evil that I
would not that I do. For the Will would so fully command, that all would obey,
and it self being perfect, all would be perfect. And therefore in Heaven it is
and will be so.

I know Philosophers conclude that all acts of the inferior Faculties are but
acts commanded by the Will: It should be so I confess: It is the office of the
Will to command, and the understanding to direct, and the rest to obey. But in
our state of sinful imperfection the soul is so distempered and corrupted,
that the Will cannot fully rule those Faculties that it should rule; so that it
may be said, I would forbear sin but cannot. For 1. The understanding is become
a dark, imperfect Directer. 2. The Will is become an imperfect Receiver of the
Understandings Directions; yea an opposer, as being tainted with the
neighborhood of a distempered sense. 3. When the Will is rectified by Grace,
it is but in part; and therefore when Paul or any holy man says, I would do
good, and I would not do evil, they mean it not of a perfect willingness, but
of a sincere; to wit, that this is the main bent of their Will, and the
resolved prevalent act of it, is for good. 4. When the Will does command, yet
the commanded Faculties do refuse to obey, through an unfitness, of impotency
and corruption. 1. The Will has but an imperfect command of the Understanding
(I mean as to the exercise of the act, in which respect it commands it, and
not as to the specification of the act.) A man may truly and strongly desire to
Know more, and apprehend things more clearly, and yet cannot. 2. The Will has
but an imperfect command of the Fantasy or Thoughts; so that a man may truly
say, I would think more frequently, more intentively, and more orderly of good,
and less of vanity; and yet I cannot. For objects and passions may force the
Fantasy and Cogitations in some degree. 3. The Will has but an imperfect
command of the passions: so that a man may truly say, I would not be troubled,
or afraid, or grieved, or disquieted, or angry; but I cannot choose, and I
would mourn more for sin, and be more afraid of sinning and of Gods
displeasure, and more zealous for God, and more delighted in him, and joy more
in holy things, but I cannot. For these passions lie so open to the assault of
objects (having the senses for their inlet, and the moveable spirits for their
seat or instruments) that even when the Will commands them one way, an object
may force them in part against the Wills command, as we find sensibly in cases
of fear, and sorrow or anger, which we can force a man to whether he will or
no. And if there be no contradicting object, yet cannot the Will excite these
passions to what height it shall command. For their motion depends as much (and
more) on the lively manner of representing the Object, and the working nature
and weight of the object represented, and upon the heat and nobility of the
spirits, and temperature of the body, as upon the command of the Will. 4. Much
less can the Will command out all vicious habits and sensual or corrupt
inclinations: and therefore a true Christian may well say in respect of these,
that he would be more holy, heavenly and disposed to good, and less to evil,
but he cannot. 5. As for complacency and displacency, liking or disliking, love
and hatred, so far as they are passions, I have spoke of them before: but so
far as they are the immediate acts of the Will (Willing and Nilling) they are
not properly said to be commanded by it, but elicit, or acted by it: (wherein
how far it has power is a most noble Question; but unfit for this place or
your capacity.) And thus you see that there are many Acts of the Soul, beside
Habits, which the Will cannot now perfectly command, and so a Christian cannot
be what he would be, nor do the things that he would: And these are the first
sort of sins of Infirmity.

If you say, Sure these can be no sins because we are not willing of them,
and there is no more sin then there is will in it. I answer, 1. We were in Adam
willing of that sin which caused them. 2. We are in some degree inclining in
our Wills to sin, though God have that prevalent part and determination, which
in comparative cases does denominate them. 3. The Understanding and Will may be
most hainously guilty where they do not consent, in that they do not more
strongly dissent, and more potently and rulingly command all the subject
Faculties. And so a Negation of the Wills act, or of such a Degree of it, as is
necessary to the Regiment of the sensual part, is a deep guilt, and great
offense, and it may be said, that there is Will in this sin. It is morally or
reputatively voluntary, though not naturally: because the Will does not its
office when it should: As a man is guilty of voluntary murder of his own
child, that stands by and sees his servant kill him, and does not do his best
to hinder him. I would this were better understood by some Divines: For I think
that the commonest guilt of the Reason and Will in our actual sins, is by
Omission of the exercise of their Authority to hinder it: And that most sins
are more brutish, as to the true efficient cause, then many imagine; and yet
they are humane or moral Acts too, and the soul nevertheless guilty; because
the commanded Faculties performed not their office, and so are the Moral or
Imputative causes, and so the great culpable causes of the fact. (But I am
drawn nearer to Philosophy and points beyond your reach then I intended: a
fault that I must be still resisting in all my Writings, being upon every
occurring difficulty carried to forget my subject, and the capacity of the
meanest to whom I write: But what you understand not pass over and go to the
next.

The second kind of sins of Infirmity are, The smaller sort of sins which
we may forbear if we will; that is, If we be actually, though not perfectly,
yet prevalently Willing; or if our Wills be determined to forbear them: or if
the chief part of the Will actually be for such forbearance. The first sort are
called sins of Infirmity in an Absolute sense. These last I call sins of
Infirmity in both an Absolute and Comparative sense: that is, both as they
proceed from our inward corruption, which through the weakness of the soul
having but little grace, is not fully restrained, and also as it is compared
with gross sins: And so we may call idle words, and rash expressions in our
have, and such like, Sins of Infirmity, in comparison of Murder, Perjury, or
the like gross, sins; which we commonly call Crimes, or Wickedness, when the
former we use to call but Faults. These Infirmities are they which the Papists
(and some Learned Divines of our own; as Rob. Baronius in his excellent
Tractate de Peccat. Mortali and Veniali) do call Venial sins: Some of them in
a fair and honest sense, viz. Because they are such sins as a true Christian
may live and die in, though not unrepented or unresisted, yet not subdued so
far as to forsake or cease from the practice of them; and yet they are
pardoned. But other Papists call them Venial sins in a wicked sense, as if
they needed no pardon, or deserved not eternal punishment. (And why should they
call them Venial if they need not pardon?) A justified man lives in the daily
practice of some vain thoughts, or the frequent commission of some other
sins, which by his utmost diligence he might restrain: But he lives not in
the frequent practice of Adultery, Drunkenness, False-witnessing, Slandering,
Hating his Brother, etc.

Yet observe that though the forementioned lesser sins are called
Infirmities, in regard of the matter of them; yet they may be so committed in
regard of the end and manner of them, as may make them crimes or gross sins:
As for example, If one should use idle words wilfully, resolvedly, without
restraint, reluctance or tenderness of conscience, this were gross sinning: or
the nearer it comes to this, and the more wilfulness or neglect or evil ends
there is in the smallest forbidden action, the worse it is, and the grosser.
And observe (of which more anon) that the true bounds or difference between
gross sins, and those lesser faults, which we call Infirmities, cannot be
given; (I think, by any man; I am sure not by me) either as to the Act it self,
to say, just what Acts are gross sins and what not; or else, as to the manner
of committing them; as to say, Just how much of the Will must go to make a
gross sin; or Just how far a man may proceed in the degree of evil intents;
or how far in the frequency of sinning, before it must be called a gross
sin.

3. The third sort of sins which may be called Sins of Infirmity, are these
last mentioned gross sins themselves, so far as they are found in the
Regenerate: These are gross sins put in opposition to the former sort of
Infirmities; but our Divines use to call them all Sins of Infirmity, in
opposition to the sins of Unbelievers, who are utterly unholy. And they call
them Sins of Infirmity 1. Because the person that commits them is not dead
in sins, as the Unregenerate are, but only diseased, wounded and infirm. 2.
Because that they are not committed with so full consent of Will, as those of
the Unregenerate are; but only after much striving, or at least contrary to
Habitual Resolutions, though not against Actual.

Here we are in very great Difficulties, and full of Controversies: Some say,
that these gross sins do extinguish true Grace, and are inconsistent with it:
and that David and Peter were out of the (...) of Grace till they did again
Repent: Others say, that they were in the state of Grace and not at al so
liable to condemnation, but that if they had died in the Act, they had been
saved: because There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: and
that therefore all the sins of Believers are alike sins of Infirmity, pardoned
on the same terms: and therefore as a rash word may be pardoned without a
particular repentance, so possibly may these gross sins. To others this seems
dangerous and contrary to Scripture, and therefore they would fain find out a
way between both: But how to do it clearly and satisfactorily is not easy (at
least, to me, who have been long upon it, but am yet much in the dark in it.) I
think it is plain that such persons are not totally unsanctified by their sin:
I believe that Christ's interest is Habitually more in their Wills, then is the
interest of the flesh or world, at that very time when they are sinning, and so
Christ's interest is least as to their Actual Willing: And so sin prevails
for that time against the Act of their Faith and Love, but not wholly against
the prevalent part of the Habit. And therefore when the shaking wind of that
stormy temptation is over, the soul will return to Christ by Repentance, Love,
and renewed Obedience. But then to know what state he is Relatively in this
while, as to his Justification and Reconciliation and right to Glory, is the
point of exceeding difficulty. Whether as we distinguish of Habitual Faith and
Love and Obedience, which he has not lost; and Actual, which he has lost; so
we must make some answerable distinction of Justification (Habitual and Actual
it cannot be) into Virtual Justification, which he has not lost, and Actual
Justification which he has lost? or into Plenary Justification (which he has
not) and Imperfect Justification, wanting a further Act to make it Plenary
(which may remain.) But still, it will be more difficult to show punctually
what this Imperfect or Virtual Justification is? and most difficult to show,
Whether with the loss of Actual Plenary Justification, and the loss of a
Plenary Right to Heaven, a man's salvation may consist; that is, Whether if he
should die in that condition, he should be saved or condemned? Or if it be
said, that he shall certainly repent, 1. Yet such a supposition may be put,
while he yet repents not; for the enquiry into his state; How far there is
any intercision of his Justification, Pardon, Adoption or Right to salvation?
2. And whether it can fully be proved that it is impossible (or that which
never was or shall be) for a Regenerate man to die in the very act of a gross
sin (as self-murder or the like?) For my part I think God has purposely left
us here in the dark, that we may not be too bold in sinning, but may know that
whether the gross sins of Believers be such as destroy their Justification and
right to Glory, prevalently, or not, yet certainly they leave them in the dark,
as to any Certainty of their Justification or Salvation.

And then more dark is it and impossible to discover, How far a man may go in
these grosser sins; and yet have the prevalent habits of Grace? As to the
former Question about the intercision of Justification, I am somewhat
inclinable to think, that the habit of Faith has more to do in our
Justification then I have formerly thought, and may as properly be said to be
the condition as the act: and that as long as a man is (in a prevalent degree)
habitually a Believer, he is not only imperfectly and virtually Justified, but
so far actually Justified, that he should be saved, though he were cut off
before he actually Repent: And that he being already habitually Penitent,
having a hatred of all sin as sin, should be saved, if mere want of opportunity
do prevent the Act: And that only those sins do bring a man into a state of
condemnation, or prove him in such, which consist not with the Habitual
Pre-eminence of Christ's interest in our souls above the interest of the flesh
and world; And that David's and Peter's were such as did consist with the
pre-eminence of Christ's interest in the habit. But withal, that such gross
sins must needs be observable, and so the soul that is guilty does ordinarily
know its guilt, yea and think of it: And that it is inconsistent with this
habitual Repentance, not to Repent actually as soon as Time is afforded, and
the violence of passion so far allaied, as that the soul may recollect it
self, and Reason have its free use: And that he that has this leisure and
opportunity for the free use of Reason, and yet does not Repent, it is a sign
that the interest of the flesh is habitually as well as actually stronger then
Christ's interest in him. I say, in this doubtful case, I am most inclining to
judge thus: But as I would have no man take this as my resolved Judgment, much
less as certain Truth, and least of all, to venture on sin or impenitency
ever the more for such a doubtful opinion, which does not conclude him to be
certainly unjustified; so I am utterly ignorant both how long sensual passions
may possibly rage and keep the soul from sober Consideration; or how far they
may interpose in the very time of Consideration and frustrate it, and prevail
against it: and so keep the sinner from actual Repenting, or at least, from a
full ingenuous acknowledgement and bewailing of the sin which is necessary to
full Repentance: and how long Repentance may be so far stifled, as to remain
only in some inward grudgings of conscience, and trouble of mind, hindered
from breaking out into free Confession (which seems to have been David's case
long.) Nay it is impossible to know just how long a man may live in the very
practice of such gross sin, before Christ's habitual Interest above the flesh be
either overthrown, or proved not to be there? and how often a man that has true
Grace may commit such sins: These things are undiscernable; besides that none
can punctually define a gross sin so as to exclude every degree of Infirmities,
and include every degree of such gross sin.

Perhaps you will marvel why I run so far in this Point; It is both to give
you as much light as I can, what sins they be which be to be called
Infirmities, and so what sins they be that do forbid that gentle, comforting
way of cure, when the soul is troubled for them, which must be used with those
that are troubled more then needs, or upon mistakes: and also to convince you
of this weighty Truth, That Our Comfort yea and Assurance has a great
dependence on our actual obedience: yea so great that the least obedient sort
of sincere Christians cannot by ordinary means have any Assurance: and the most
obedient (if other necessaries concur) will have the most Assurance: and for
the middle sort; their Assurance will rise and fall, ordinarily with their
obedience: so that there is no way to comfort such offending Christians but by
reducing them to fuller obedience by Faith and Repentance, that so the
evidences of their Justification may be clear, and the great impediments of
their Assurance and Comfort be removed.

This I will yet make clearer to you by its Reasons, and then tell you how to
apply it to your self.

1. No man can be sure of his salvation or Justification but he that is sure of
his true Faith and Love. And no man can be sure of his true Faith and Love, but
he that is sure of the sincerity of his obedience: For true Faith does ever
take God for our great Sovereign, and Christ for our Lord-Redeemer, and
contains a Covenant-delivery of a man's self to God and the Redeemer to be
Ruled by him, as a Subject, Child, Servant and Spouse. This is not done
sincerely and savingly unless there be an actual and habitual Resolution to
obey God and the Redeemer, before all creatures, and against all temptations
that would draw us from him To obey Christ a little, and the flesh more, is no
true obedience: If the flesh can do more with us to draw us to sin, then Faith
and Obedience do, to keep us from sin, ordinarily; this is no true Faith or
Obedience. If Christ have not the Sovereignty in the soul, and his Interest be
not the most predominant and potent, we are no true Believers. Now it is plain,
that the Interest of the world and flesh does actually prevail, when a man is
actually committing a known sin, and omitting a known duty: and then it is
certain that Habits are known but by the Acts. And therefore it must needs be
that the soul that most sins must needs be most in doubt whether the
Interest of Christ or the flesh be predominant? and so whether his obedience be
true or no? and so whether he did sincerely take Christ for his Sovereign? and
that is, whether he be a true Believer? For when a man is enquiring into the
state of his soul, Whether he do subject himself to Christ as his only
Sovereign? and whether the Authority and Love of Christ will do more with him,
then the temptations of the world, flesh and devil? he has no way to be
resolved but by feeling the Pulse of his own Will? And if he say, I am willing
to obey Christ before the f^^sh, and yet do actually live in an obedience to
the flesh before Christ, he is deceived in his own Will: for this is no saving
Willingness. A wicked man may have some will to obey Christ principally: but
having more will to the contrary, viz. to please the flesh before Christ,
therefore he is wicked still: so that you see in our self-examination, the
business is for the most part finally Resolved into our sincere actual
obedience. For thus we proceed: We first find, He that believes and loves
Christ sincerely, shall be saved. Then we proceed, He that believes sincerely
takes Christ for his Sovereign. Then, He that truly takes Christ for his
Sovereign, does truly resolve to obey him and his Laws, before the world, flesh
or devil. Then, He that truly resolves thus to obey Christ before all, does
sincerely perform his resolution, and does so obey him. For that is no true
resolution ordinarily, that never comes to performance. And here we are cast
unavoidably to try whether we do perform our resolutions by actual obedience?
before we can sit down with settled Peace: much more before we get Assurance.
Now those that are diligent and careful in obeying, and have greatest conquest
over their corruptions, and do most seldom yield to temptations, but do most
notably and frequently conquer them, these have the clearest discovery of the
performance of their resolutions by obedience; and consequently the fullest
Assurance: But they that are oftenest overcome by temptations, and yield most
to sin, and live most disobediently, must needs be furthest from Assurance of
the sincerity of their obedience, and consequently of their salvation.

2. God himself has plainly made our actual obedience, not only a sign of true
Faith, but a secondary part of the condition of our salvation as promised in
the New Covenant. And therefore it is as impossible to be saved without it, as
without Faith: supposing that the person have opportunity to obey, in which
case only it is made necessary as a condition. This I will but cite several
Scriptures to prove, and leave you to peruse them if you be unsatisfied. Romans
8.1, to 14. They that are in Christ Jesus, are they that walk, not after the
flesh but after the Spirit. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye
by the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. Rev. 22.14.
Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree
of Life, and may enter in by the Gate into the City. Heb. 5.9. He is become the
Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him. Matthew. 11.28, 29, 30.
Take my yoke upon you, for it is easy, and my burden for it is light. Learn of
me to be meek and lowly, etc. and ye shall find Rest, etc. John 16.27. Luke
13.24. Phil. 2.12. Romans 2.7, 10. Joh. 15.12, 17. and 14.21. Mat. 5.44. Luke
6.27, 35. Pro. 8.17, 21. Matthew. 10.37. 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. 2 Timothy 2.5, 12. Matthew.
25.41, 42. Jam. 2.21, 22, 23, 24, 26. and 1.12. and 2.5. Prove. 1.23. and 28.13.
Luke 13.3, 5. Matthew. 12.37. and 11.25, 26. and 6.12, 14, 15. 1 John 1.9. Act.
8.22. and 3.19. and 22.16. Luke 6.37. 1 Pet. 4.18. and 1.2, 22. Romans 6.16. with
abundance more the like. Now when a poor sinner that has often fallen into
Drunkenness, Railing, Strife, Envying, etc. shall read that these are the
works of the flesh, and that for these things sake the wrath of God comes on
the children of disobedience; and that every man shall be judged according to
his works, and according to what he has done in the flesh; and that they that
do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; it cannot be but that his
Assurance of salvation must needs have so great a dependence on his obedience,
as that these sins will diminish it. When he reads Romans 6.16. His servants ye
are to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto
Righteousness; he must needs think, how such a time and such a time he obeyed
sin: and the oftener and the more wilfully he did it, the doubtfuller will his
case be. Especially if he be yet in a sinful course, which he might avoid,
whether of gross sin, or any wilful sin, it cannot be but this will
obscure the evidence of his obedience. Men cannot judge beyond evidence: and he
that has not the evidence of his true obedience, has not the evidence of the
sincerity of his Faith.

3. Moreover, Assurance and Comfort are Gods gifts; and without his gracious
aid we cannot attain them. But God will not give such gifts to his children
while they stand out in disobedience, but when they carefully please him.
Paternal Justice requires this.

4. And it would do them abundance of hurt, and God much dishonor if he should
either tell them just how often or how far they may sin and yet be saved; or
yet should keep up their Peace and Comforts as well in their greatest
disobedience, as in their tenderest careful walking with him. But these things
I spoke of before, and formerly elsewhere.

You see then that though some obedient tender Christians may yet on several
occasions be deprived of Assurance; yet ordinarily no other but they have
Assurance: And that Assurance and Comfort will rise and fall with obedience.

And for all the Antinomian objections against this, as if it were a leading
men to their own righteousness from Christ, I refer you to the twenty
Arguments which I before laid you down to prove that we may and must fetch our
Assurance and Comfort from our own works and Graces: and so from our own
Evangelical Righteousness, which is subordinate to Christ's Righteousness (which
he speaks of, Matthew. 25. last; and in forty places more;) though we must have
no thoughts of a Legal Righteousness (according to the Law of Works or
Ceremonies) in our selves. They may as well say that a woman does forsake her
husband, because she comfort her self in this, that she has not forsaken
him or been false and unchaste, thence gathering that he will not give her a
bill of Divorce: Or that a servant forsakes his Master; or a subject his
Prince; or a Parent is forsaken by his child; because they comfort themselves
in their Obedience and Loyalty, gathering thence that they are not flat Rebels,
and shall not be used as Rebels! Or that any that enter Covenant with Superiors
do forsake them because they comfort themselves in their keeping Covenant, as a
sign that the Covenant shall be kept with them: All these are as wise
collections, as to gather that a man forsakes Christ and his Righteousness, and
sets up his own in stead of it, because he looks at his not forsaking,
refusing and vilifying of Christ, his Love and faithful obedience to Christ,
as comfortable signs that Christ will not forsake and reject him. Do these men
think that a Rebel may have the love of his Prince, and as much comfort from
him as a Loyal subject? or a whorish woman have as much love and comfort from
her husband, as a faithful Wife? or a stubborn rebellious son or servant have
as much love and comfort from their Father or Master as the dutiful? If there
be so near a Relation as hitherto we have supposed, between a Sovereign and
subjection to him, and a Husband and Marriage-faithfulness to him, and a Master
and service to him, and a Father and loving obedience to him; it is strange
that men should suppose such a strange opposition, as these men do? Certainly
God does not so when he says, Mal. 1.6. If I be a Father where is mine honor?
and if I be a Master where is my fear? And Isa. 1.3, 4. Hear O heavens, and
give ear O earth, for the Lord has spoken: I have nourished and brought up
children and they have rebelled against me: The Ox knows his owner, and the
Ass his Masters crib: but Israel does not know, my people does not consider:
Ah sinful Nation! a people laden with iniquity! a seed of evil doers! children
that are corrupters! they have forsaken the Lord! they have provoked the holy
one of Israel to anger! they are gone away backward. And Jer. 3.19. Thou shall
call me my Father, and shall not depart away from me. And 2 Timothy 2.19. The Lord
knows who are his: and let him that names the Name of Christ depart from
iniquity. And Psalm. 66.18. If I delight in iniquity or regard it, God will not
hear my prayers, says David himself. Doubtless Paul did not forsake Christ's
Righteousness by confidence in his own, when he says, This is our rejoicing,
the Testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity we have
had our conversation among you, 2 Cor. 1.12. with many the like which I before
mentioned. Nor does the Lord Jesus at the day of Judgment turn men off from
his Righteousness, when he says, Well done good and faithful servant; because
thou have been faithful in a very little, I will make thee ruler over much,
Luke 19.17. Mat. 25.23. and calls them thereupon Righteous, saying, And the
righteous shall go into life everlasting, Mat. 25. last.

It remains now that I further acquaint you what use you should make of this
observation, concerning the dependence of Assurance upon actual obedience. And
1. I advise you, if your soul remain in doubts and troubles, and you cannot
enjoy God in any way of peace and comfort, nor see any clear evidence of the
sincerity of your faith; take a serious view of your obedience: and faithfully
survey your heart and life, and your daily carriage to God in both. See whether
there be nothing that provokes God to an unusual Jealousy. If there be, it is
either the increase of some carnal interest in your heart, or else the wilful
or negligent falling into some actual sin, of commission or omission. In the
making of this search you have need to be exceeding cautelous; for if I have
any acquaintance with the mystery of this business, your peace or trouble,
comfort or discomfort, will mainly depend on this. And your care must lie in
this point; that you diligently avoid these two extremes: First, That you do
not deal negligently and unfaithfully with your own soul, as either unwilling
to know the truth, or unwilling to be at that labor which you must needs be at
before you can know it. Secondly, That you do not either condemn your self when
your conscience does acquit you, or vex your soul with needless scruples, or
make unavoidable or ordinary infirmities to seem such wilful heinous sins,
as should quite break your settled peace. O how narrow is the path between these
two mistaken roads? and how hard a thing, and how rare is it to find it and to
keep in it? For your self and all tender conscienc'd Christians that are
heartily willing to be Ruled by Christ, I would persuade you equally to beware
of both these* because some souls are as inclinable to the later extreme as to
the former (during their troubles.) But for the most Christians in the world, I
would have them first and principally avoid the former, and that with far
greater diligence then the later. For 1. Naturally all men's hearts are far
proner to deal too remisly, yea unfaithfully with themselves in searching after
their sins, then too scrupulously and tenderly. The best men have so much pride
and carnal self-love, that it will strongly incline them to excuse, or mince,
or hide their sins, and to think far lightlier and more favorably of it
then they should do, because it is theirs. How was the case altered with Judah
toward Thamar, when he once saw it was his own act. How was David's zeal for
Justice allaied, as soon as he heard, Thou art the man? This is the most common
cause why God is fain to hold our eyes on our transgressions by force, because
we are so loath to do it more voluntarily: and why he opens our sin in such
crimson and scarlet colors to us; because we are so apt either to look on them
as nothing, or to shut our eyes and overlook them: and why God does hold us so
long on the rack, because we would still ease our selves by uningenuous excuses
and extenuations: and why God does break the skin so often and keep open our
wounds; because we are still healing them by such carnal shifts. This proud
sin-excusing distemper needs no other proof or discovery, then our great
tenderness and backwardness in submitting to reproofs: How long do we excuse
sin, and defend our pretended innocence, as long we can find a word to say
for it. Does not daily experience of this sad distemper even in most of the
godly, discover fully to us, that most men (yea naturally all) are far proner
to overlook their sins, and deal unfaithfully and negligently in the trial;
then to be too tender, and to charge themselves too deep.

Besides, If a Christian be heartily willing to deal impartially and search to
the quick, yet the heart is lamentably deceitful, that he shall overlook much
evil in it, when he has done his best. And the devil will be far more
industrious to provoke and help you to hide, excuse and extenuate sin, then
to open it, and see it as it is. His endeavor to drive poor souls into
terrors, is usually but when he can no longer keep them in presumption: When
he can hide their sin no longer, nor make it seem small to keep them in
impenitency, then he will make it seem unpardonable and remediless, if he can:
but usually not before. So that you see the frame of most men's spirits does
require them, to be rather over-jealous in searching after their sins, then
over-careless and confident of themselves.

2. Besides this; I had rather of the two that Christians would suspect and
search too much then too little, because there is a hundred times more danger
in seeing sin less then it is, or overlooking it, then in seeing it greater
then it is, and being over-fearfull. The later mistake may bring us into
sorrow; and make our lives uncomfortable to us (and therefore should be
avoided:) but usually it does not endanger our happiness; but is often made a
great occasion of our good. But the former mistake may hazard our everlasting
salvation, and so bring us to remediless trouble.

3. Yea, lest you should say, This is sad language to comfort a distressed
wounded soul, let me add this one Reason more. So far as I can learn by
reading the Scriptures, and by long experience of very many souls under
troubles of conscience, It is most commonly some notable cherished corruption
that breeds and feeds the sad uncomfortable state of most professors,
except those who by melancholy or very great ignorance, are so weak in their
Intellectuals, as that they are incapable of making any true discovery of their
condition, and of passing a right judgment upon themselves thereupon.

Least I should make sad any soul that God would not have sad, let me desire
you to observe, 1. That I say but of most Professors, not all: For I doubt not
but God may hide his face for some time from some of the holiest and wisest of
Believers, for several and great reasons. 2. Do but well observe most of the
humble obedient Christians that you know to lie under any long and sad distress
of mind, and you will find that they are generally of one of the two
forementioned sorts: either so ignorant as not to know well what faith is, or
what the conditions of the Covenant are, or what is the extent of the promise,
or the full sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction for all sinners, or what are
the evidences by which they may try themselves: Or else they are Melancholy
persons whose fancy is still molested with these perturbing vapors and their
understandings so clouded and distempered, that Reason is not free* And so
common is this later, that in my observation, of all the Christians that have
lived in any long and deep distress of mind, six if not ten for one have been
deeply Melancholy; except those that feed their troubles by disobedience. So
that besides these ignorant and Melancholy persons, and disorderly declining
Christians, the number of wounded spirits I think is very small, in comparison
of the rest. Indeed it is usual for many at or shortly after their first change
to be under trouble and deep fears: But that is but while the sense of former
sin is fresh upon their hearts. The sudden discovery of so deep a guilt, and
so great a danger, which a man did never know before, must needs amaze and
affright the soul: and if that fear remain long where right means are either
not known or not used, for the cure, it is no wonder: and sometimes it will be
long if the rightest means be used. But for those that have been long in the
Profession of holiness, and yet lie, or fall again, under troubles of soul
(except those before excepted) I would have them make a diligent search,
whether God do not observe either some fleshly interest incroach upon his
Right; or some actual sin to be cherished in their hearts or conversations?

And here let me tell you, when you are making this search, what particulars
they be which I would have you to be most jealous of. 1. The former sort which
I call contrary carnal interest incroaching on Christ's Right, are they that you
must look after with far more diligence then your actual sins. 1. Because
they are the far greatest and most dangerous of all sins, and the root of
all the rest: for as God is the End and Chief Good of every Saint, so these
sins do stand up against him as our End and Chief good; and carry away the
soul by that Act which we call simply willing, or complacency, and so these
interests are men's Idols, and resist Gods very Sovereignty and perfect
Goodness, that is, They are against God himself as our God. Whereas those which
I now call Actual sins as distinct from these, are but the violation of
particular Precepts, and against Gods means and Laws directly, and but remotely
or indirectly against his Godhead; and they have but that act of our Will which
we call Election, Consent or Use, which is proper to Means, and not to the End.
2. Because as these sins are the most damnable, so they lie deepest at the
heart, and are not so easily discovered. It is ordinary with many to have a
Covetous, Worldly, Ambitious heart, even damnably such, that yet have wit to
carry it fairly without; yea and seem truly Religious to themselves and others.
3. Because these sins are the most common: For though they reign only in
hypocrites and other unsanctified ones, yet they dwell too much in all men on
earth.

If you now ask me what these sins are: I answer, They are, as denominated
from the Point or Term from which men turn, all comprised in this one
Unwillingness of God, or the turning of the heart from God; or not loving God
But as we denominate them from the Term or Object to which they turn, they are
all comprised in this one, Carnal self-love, or turning to and preferring our
carnal self before God, and as it inclines to action, all or most of it is
comprehended in this one word Flesh-pleasing. But because there are a Trinity
of sins in this Unity, we must consider them distinctly. Three great Objects
there are about which this sin of Flesh-pleasing is exercised: 1. Credit or
Honor. 2. Profit or Riches. 3. Sensual Pleasure, more strictly so called,
consisting in the more immediate Pleasing of the senses; Whereas the two first
do more remotely please them, by laying in Provision to that end: Otherwise all
three are in the general but Flesh-pleasing. The three great sins therefore
that do most directly fight against God himself in his Sovereignty, are 1.
Pride or Ambition. 2. Worldlines or Love of Riches. 3. Sensuality,
Voluptuousness, or inordinate Love of Pleasures. There are in the Understanding
indeed other sins as directly against God as these, and more radical (as 1.
Atheism, denying a God. 2. Polutheism, denying our God to be the Alone God, and
joining others with him. 3. Idolatry, owning false Gods. 4. Infidelity, denying
Jesus Christ our Lord-Redeemer. 5. Owning false Saviors and Prophets, in his
stead, or before him, as do the Mahometans. 6. Joining other Redeemers and
Saviors with him, as if he were not the alone Christ. 7. Denying the holy
Ghost, and denying Credit to his Holy and Miraculous Testimony to the Christian
faith, and blasphemously ascribing all to the devil: which is the sin against
the Holy Ghost. 8. Owning and believing in devils, or Lying spirits in stead of
the Holy Ghost: as the Montanists, Mahometans, Ranters, Familists do. 9. Owning
and adjoining devils or Lying spirits in coordination or equality with the Holy
Ghost, and believing equally his doctrine and theirs, as if he were not sole
and sufficient in his Work. All these are sins directly against God himself,
and if prevalent, most certainly damning; three against the Father, three
against the Son, and three against the Holy Ghost. But these be not they that
I need now to warn you of. These are prevalent only in Pagans, Infidels, and
Blasphemers. Your troubles and complaints show that these are not predominant
in you. It is therefore the three forementioned sins of the Heart or Will
that I would have you carefully to look after in your troubles, to see whether
none of them get ground and strength in you.

1. Enquire carefully into your humility. It is not for nothing that Christ
has said so much of the excellency and necessity of this Grace; When he bids
us learn of him to be meek and lowly: when he blesses the meek and poor in
spirit: when he sets a little child in the midst of them, and tells them,
Except they become as that child they could not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven: when he stoopeth to wash and wipe his Disciples feet, requiring them to
do so by one another. How often does the Holy Ghost press this upon us?
Commanding us, to submit our selves to one another: and not to mind high
things; but to condescend to men of low estate, Romans 12.16. and not to be wise
in our own esteem, but in honor prefer others before our selves, Romans 12.10.
How often has God professed to resist and take down the Proud, and to give Grace
to the humble and dwell with them? Search carefully therefore lest this sin
get ground upon you. For though it may not be so predominant and reigning as to
damn you, yet may it cause God to afflict you and hide his face from you, and
humble you by the sense of his displeasure, and the concealment of his Love.
And though one would think that doubting troubled souls should be always the
most humble, and freest from pride, yet sad experience has certified me, that
much pride may dwell with great doubtings and distress of mind. Even some of
the same souls that cry out of their own unworthiness, and fear lest they shall
be firebrands of Hell, yet cannot endure a close reproof, especially for any
disgraceful sin, nor cannot bear a disparaging word, nor love those, nor speak
well of them who do not value them, nor endure to be crossed or contradicted in
word or deed, but must have all go their way, and follow their judgment, and
say as they say, and dance after their pipe, and their hearts rise aginst those
that will not do it; much more against those that speak or do any thing to the
diminishing of their Reputation: They cannot endure to be low, and past by, and
overlooked when others are preferred before them, or to be slighted and
disrespected, or their words, or parts, or works, or judgments to be contemned
or disparaged: Nay some are scarce able to live in the same House, or Church,
or Town in love and peace with any but those that will humor and please them,
and speak them fair, and give them smooth and stroaking language, and forbear
crossing, reproving and disparaging them. Every one of these singly is an
evident mark and fruit of pride; how much more all jointly. I seriously profess
it amazeth me to consider how hainously most professors are guilty of this sin!
even when they know it to be the devils own sin, and the great abomination
hated of God, and read and hear so much against it as they do, and confess it
so often in their prayers to God, and yet not only inwardly cherish it, but in
words, actions, gestures, apparel, express it, and passionately defend these
discoveries of it. The confusions and distractions in Church and State are
nothing else but the proper fruits of it: so are the contentions among
Christians, and the unpeaceableness in families: For only from pride comes
contention, says Solomon, Prove. 13.10. For my part when I consider the great
measure of pride, self-conceitedness, self-esteem that is in the greatest part
of Christians that ever I was acquainted with, (we of the Ministry not
excepted) I wonder that God does not afflict us more, and bring us down by foul
means that will not be brought down by fair. For my own part I have had as
great means to help me against this sin, as most men living have had, first in
many years trouble of mind, and then in near twenty years languishing and
bodily pains, having been almost twenty times at the graves mouth, and living
near it continually; and lastly, and above all, I have had as full a sight of
it in others, even in the generality of Professors, and in the doleful state
of the Church and State, and heinous detestable abominations of this age^,
which one would think should have fully cured it. And yet if I hear but either
an applauding word from any of fame, on one side, or a disparaging word on the
other side, I am fain to watch my heart as narrowly as I would do the thatch of
my house when fire is put to it, and presently to throw on it the water of
Detestation, Resolution, and Recourse to God: And though the acts through Gods
great mercy be thus restrained, yet the constancy of these inclinations assures
me, that there is still a strong and deep root. I beseech you therefore, if you
would ever have settled Peace and Comfort, be watchful against this sin of
Pride, and be sure to keep it down, and get it mortified at the very heart.

2. The next sin that I would have you be specially jealous of is
coveteousness, or love of the profits or riches of the world. This is not the
sin of the rich only, but also of the poor: and more heinous is it in them to
love the world inordinatly that have so little of it, then in rich men that
have more to tempt them: though dangerous in both. Nor does it lie only in
coveting that which is another, or in seeking to get by unlawful means; but
also in over-valuing and over-loving the wealth of the world though lawfully
gotten. He that loves the world (that is, above Christ and holiness) the love
of the Father is not in him (that is, savingly and sincerely) 1 John 2.15. He
that loves house or lands better then Christ cannot be his Disciple. I beseech
you therefore when God hides his face, search diligently, and search again and
again, least the world should encroach on Christ's interest in your heart: If it
should be so, can you wonder if Christ seem to withdraw, when you begin to set
so light by him, as to value dung and earth in any comparison with himself? May
not he well say to you, If you set so much by the world, take it, and see what
it will do for you? If you can spare me better then your wealth, you shall be
without me. Must not the Lord Jesus needs take it exceeding unkindly, that
after all his love and bloodshed and pains with your heart, and seals of his
kindness, and discoveries of his Amiableness and the Treasures of his Kingdom,
you should now so much forget and slight him, to set up the world in any
comparison with him? and to give such loving entertainment to his enemy? and
look so kindly on a competitor? Is his glory worth no more then so? and has he
deserved no better at your hands? Again therefore do I beseech you to be
afraid, lest you should be guilty of this sin. Examine, whether the thoughts of
the world grow not sweeter to you, and the thoughts of God and glory more
unwelcome, and unpleasing? whether you have not an eagerness after a fuller
estate, and too keen an edge upon your desires after riches? or at least, after
a fuller portion and provision for your children? or after better
accommodations and contentments in House, Goods, or other worldly things? Do
not worldly hopes delight you too much? and much more your worldly possessions?
Are you not too busily contriving how to be richer, forgetting Gods words, 1 Timothy 6.8, 9, 17. Does not the world eat out the life of your duties, that when
you should be serious with God, you have left your heart behind you, and
drowned your affections in things below? Does not your soul stick so fast in
this mud and clay, that you can scarce stir it Godward in Prayer or heavenly
Meditation? Do not you cut short duties in your family and in secret, if not
frequently omit them, that so you may be again at your worldly business? Or do
you not customarily hurry them over because the world will not allow you
leisure to be serious? and so you have no time to deal in good earnest with
Christ or your soul? Do not your very speeches of Christ and heaven grow few
and strange, because the world must first be served? When you see your brother
have need, do you not shut up the bowels of your compassions from him? Does not
the love of the world make you hard to your servants? hard to those you buy and
sell with? And does it not incroach much on the Lords own day? Look after this
earthly vice in all these discoveries: search for your enemy in each of these
corners. And if you find that this is indeed your case, you need not much
wonder if Christ and you be stranger then heretofore. If this earth get between
your heart and the Sun of Life, no wonder if all your Comforts are in an
eclipse; seeing your Light is but as the Moon's, a borrowed Light. And you must
be the more careful in searching after this sin, both because it is certain
that all men have too much of it, and because it is of so dangerous a nature,
that should it prevail, it would destroy: For coveteousness is Idolatry. And
among all the heinous sins that the godly have fallen into, look into the
Scripture, and tell me how many of them you find charged with coveteousness?
And also, because it is a blinding befooling sin, not only drawing old men,
and those that have no children, and rich men, that have no need to pursue
these things as madly as others; but also hiding it self from their eyes, that
most that are guilty of it will not know it: Though, alas, if they were but
willing it were very easy to know it. But the power of the sin does so set
awork their wits to find excuses and fair names and titles for to cloak it,
that many delude others by it, and more delude themselves, but none can delude
God. The case of some Professors of Godliness that I have known is very
lamentable in this point: who being generally noted for a dangerous measure of
worldliness, by most that know them, could yet never be brought to acknowledge
it in themselves: Nay by the excellency of their outward duties and discourse,
and the strength of their wits (alas, ill employed) and by their great ability
of speech, to put a fair gloss on the foulest of their actions, they have gone
on so smoothly and plausibly in their worldliness, that though most accused
them of it behind their backs, yet no man knew how to fasten any thing on
them. By which means they were hindered from repentance and recovery.

In this sad case, though it be Gods course very often to let hypocrites and
other enemies go on and prosper, because they have their portion in this life,
and the reckoning is to come; yet I have often observed that for Gods own people,
or those that he means to make his people by their recovery, God uses to cross
them in their worldly desires and designs: Perhaps he may let them thrive a
while, and congratulate the prosperity of their flesh, but at last he breaks in
suddenly on their wealth, and scatters it abroad, or adds some cross to it
that imbitters it all to them, and then asks them, Where is now your Idol?
and then they begin to see their folly. If you do dote on any thing below to
the neglecting of God, he will make a rod for you of that very thing you dote
upon; and by it will he scourge you home to himself.

3. The third great heart-sinne which I would have you jealous of, is
Sensuality or Voluptuousness, or pleasing the senses inordinately. The two
former are in this the more mortal sins, in that they carry more of the
Understanding and Will with them, and make Reason it self to be serviceable to
them in their workings; whereas sensuality is more in the flesh and passion,
and has often times less assistance of Reason or Consent of the Will. Yet is the
Will tainted with sensual inclinations, and both Reason and Will are at the
best guilty of connivence, and not exercising their authority over the sensual
part. But in this sensuality is the more dangerous vice, in that it has so
strong and inseparable a seat as our sensual appetite; and in that it acts so
violently and ragingly as it does; so that it bears down a weak opposition of
Reason and Will, and carries us on blindfold, and transformeth us into bruits.
I will not here put the Question concerning the gross acting of this sin (of
that anon:) but I would have you very jealous of a sensual disposition. When a
man cannot deny his appetite what it would have; or at least, coveteousness can
do more in restraining it, then conscience: When a man cannot make a Covenant
with his eyes, but must gaze on every alluring object: When the flesh draws to
forbidden pleasures, in meats, drinks, apparel, recreations, lasciviousness,
and all the considerations of Reason cannot restrain it; this is a sad case:
and God may well give over such to sadness of heart. If we walk so pleasingly
to the flesh, God will walk more displeasingly to us.

And as you should be jealous of these great heart-transgressions, so should
you be of particular actual sins. Examine whether the jealous eye of God see
not something that much offends him and causes your heaviness. I will not
enlarge so far as to mind you of the particular sins that you should look
after, seeing it must be All, and your obedience must be universal. Only one I
will give you a hint of. I have observed God sometimes show himself most
displeased and angry to these Christians, who have the least tenderness and
compassion toward the infirmities of others. He that has made the forgiving
others a necessary condition of Gods forgiving us, will surely withdraw the
sense of our forgiveness, when we withdraw our forgiveness and compassion to
men. He that casts the unmercifull servant into hell, who takes his
fellow servants by the throat, will threaten us and frown upon us if we come but
near it. Blessed are the merciful for they shall obtain mercy. He shall have
judgment without mercy that shows no mercy, Jam. 2.13. Study well Romans 14.
and 15. Chap. and Gal. 6. which the proud, censorious, self-esteeming
Professors of this age have studied so little, and will not understand. When we
deal sourly and churlishly with our weak brethren, and in stead of winning an
offendour by love, we will vilify him, and disdain him, and say, How can such
a man have any Grace? and will think and speak hardly of those that do but
cherish any hopes that he may be gracious, or speak of him with tenderness and
compassion; no wonder if God force the consciences of such persons to deal as
churlishly and sourly with them, and to clamor against them, and say, How
can thou have any true grace, who have such sins as these? When our Lord
himself dealt always so tenderly with sinners, that it gave occasion to the
slanderous Pharisees to say, He was a friend of Publicans and sinners: (and so
he was; even their greatest friend.) And his command to us is, We then that are
strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves:
Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to edification: For even
Christ pleased not himself, Romans 15.1.23. And Gal. 6.1, 2. Brethren, if a man
be overtaken with a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such a one in the
spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye
one another burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ. When people can bear
with almost no infirmity in a neighbor, in a servant, or in their nearest
friends, but will make the worst of every fault, no wonder if God make such
feel their dealings with others, by his dealings with them. Had such that Love
to their poorest brethren, which thinks no evil, and speaks not evil, which
suffers long and is kind, envieth not, vaunteth not it self, is not puffed
up, behaveth not it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked,
bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all
things, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 7. Had we more of this love which covers a multitude
of Infirmities; God would cover our Infirmities the more, and tell us of them,
and trouble us for them the less.

To this sin I may add another, which is scarce another, but partly the same
with this, and partly its immediate effect: and that is, Vnpeaceableness and
unquietness with those about us; this commonly occasioneth God to make us as
unpeaceable and unquiet in our selves. When people are so froward, and peevish,
and troublesome, that few can live in peace with them, either in family or
neighborhood, except those that have little to do with them, or those that can
humor them in all things, and have an extraordinary skill in smooth speaking,
flattering or man-pleasing, so that neighbors, servants, children, and
sometimes their own yoak-fellows, must be gone from them, and may not abide
near them, as a man gets out of the way from a wild beast or a mad dog, or
avoideth the flames of a raging fire; is it any wonder if God give these people
as little peace in their own spirits, as they give to others. When people are
so hard to be pleased that no body about them or near them can tell how to fit
their humors; neighbors cannot please them, servants cannot please them,
Husband or Wife cannot please each other; every word is spoke amiss, and every
thing done amiss to them; what wonder if God seem hard to be pleased, and as
frequently offended with them? especially if their unpeaceableness trouble the
Church, and in their turbulency and self-conceitedness, they break the peace
thereof.

Thus I have told you what sins you must look after when you find your peace
broken, and your conscience disquieted; search carefully lest some iniquity lie
at the root. Some I know will think that it is an unseasonable discourse to a
troubled conscience, to mind them so much of their sins, which they are apt
to look at too much already. But to such I answer, either those sins are
mortified and forsaken; or not: If they be; then these are not the persons that
I speak of, whose trouble is fed by continued sin: but I shall speak more to
them anon. If not; then it seems for all their trouble of conscience, sin is
not sufficiently laid to heart yet.

The chiefest thing therefore that I intend in all this discourse, is this
following advice to those that upon search do find themselves* guilty in any
of these cases. As ever you would have peace of conscience, set your selves
presently against your sins* And do not either mistakingly cry out of one
sore, when it is another that is your malady; nor yet spend your days in fears
and disquietness of mind, and fruitless complainings, and in the mean time
continue in wilful sinning: but resist sin more, and torment your minds
less: and break off your sin and your terrors together.

In these words I tell you what must be done for your cure; and I warn you of
two sore mistakes of many sad Christians hereabouts. The cure lies in breaking
off sin, to the utmost of your power. This is the Achan that disquieteth all.
It is Gods great mercy that he disquieteth you in sinning, and gives you not
over to so deep a slumber and peace in sin, as might hinder your repentance
and reformation. The dangerous mistakes here are these two.

1. Some do as the Lapwing, cry loudest when they are furthest from the nest:
and complain of an aching tooth, when the disease is in the head or heart. They
cry out, O I have such wandering thoughts in prayer, and such a bad memory, and
so hard a heart that I cannot weep for sin; or such doubts and fears, and so
little sense of the Love of God, that I doubt I have no true Grace: When they
should rather say, I have so proud a heart, that God is fain by these sad means
to humble me: I am so high in my own eyes, so wise in my own conceit, and so
tender of my own esteem and credit, that God is fain to make me base in my own
eyes, and to abhor my self. I am so worldly and in love with earth, that it
draws away my thoughts from God, duls my love, and spoils all my duties. I am
so sensual that I venture sooner to displease my God then my flesh: I have so
little compassion on the infirmities of neighbors and servants and other
brethren, and deal so censoriously, churlishly and unmercifully with them, that
God is fain to hide his mercy from me, and speak to me as in anger, and vex me
as in sore displeasure. I am so froward, peevish, quarrelsome, unpeaceable and
hard to be pleased, that it is no wonder if I have no peace with God, or in my
own conscience; and if I have so little quietness who love and seek it no more.
Many have more reason, I say, to turn their complaints into this tune.

2. Another most common unhappy miscarriage of sad Christians lies here, that
They will rather continue complaining and self-tormenting, then give over
sinning, so far as they might give it over if they would. I beseech you in
the Name of God to know and consider what it is that God requires of you. He
does not desire your vexation but your reformation. No further does he desire
the trouble of your mind, then as it tends to the avoiding of that sin
which is the cause of it. God would have you less in your fears and troubles,
and more in your obedience. Obey more, and disquiet your mind less. Will you
take this counsel presently and see whether it will not do you more good, then
all the complaints and doubtings of your whole life have done. Set your self
with all your might against your pride, worldliness and sensuality, your
unpeaceableness and want of love and tenderness to your brethren; and whatever
other sin your conscience is acquainted with. I pray you tell me, If you had
gravel in your shoe, in your travel, would it not be more wisdom, to sit down
and take off your shoe, and cast it out, then to stand still or go complaining,
and tell every one you meet of your soreness? If you have a thorn in your foot,
will you go on halting and lamenting, or will you pull it out? Truly sin is
the thorn in your conscience: and those that would not have such troubled
consciences told of their sins for fear of increasing their distress, are
unskilful comforters; and will continue the trouble while the thorn is in. As
ever you would have peace then, resolve against sin to the utmost of your
power: Never excuse it, or cherish it, or favor it more. Confess it freely.
Thank those that reprove you for it. Desire those about you to watch over you,
and to tell you of it: yea to tell you of all suspicious signs that they see
of it, though it be not evident. And if you do not see so much Pride,
Worldliness, Unpeaceableness or other sins in your self, as your friends
think they see in you, yet let their judgment make you jealous of your heart;
seeing self-love does often so blind us, that we cannot see that evil in our
selves, which others see in us; nay which all the Town may take notice of. And
be sure to engage your friends that they shall not smooth over your faults, or
mince them, and tell you of them in extenuating language, which may hinder
Conviction and Repentance; much less silence them, for fear of displeasing you:
but that they will deal freely and faithfully with you. And see that you
distaste them not, and discountenance not their plain dealing, lest you
discourage them, and deprive your soul of so great a benefit. Think best of
those as your greatest friends, who are least friends to your sin, and do
most for your recovery very from it. If you say, Alas, I am not able to
mortify my sins: It is not in my power. I answer, 1. I speak not of a
perfect conquest: nor of a freedom from every passion or infirmity. 2. Take
heed of pretending disability when it is unwillingness. If you were heartily
willing you would be able to do much, and God would strengthen you. Cannot you
resist Pride, Worldliness and Sensuality if you be willing? Cannot you forbear
most of the actual sins you commit, and perform the duties that you omit, if
you be Willing? (though not so well as you would perform them?) Yea let me say
this much, lest I endanger you by sparing you: Many a miserable hypocrite does
live in trouble of mind and complaining, and after all perish for their
wilful disobedience. Did not the rich young man go far before he would break
off with Christ? and when he did leave him he went away sorrowful. And what
was the cause of his sorrow? Why the matter was, that he could not be saved
without selling all and giving it to the poor, when he had great Possessions.
It was not that he could not be rid of his sin: but that he could not have
Christ and Heaven without forsaking the world* This is the case of unsanctified
persons that are enlightened to see the need of Christ, but are not weaned from
worldly profits, honors and pleasures; they are perhaps troubled in mind,
(and I cannot blame them) but it is not that they cannot leave sinning, but
that they cannot have Heaven without leaving their delights and contentments on
earth. Sin as sin they would willingly leave: For no man can love evil as evil.
But their fleshly profits, honors and pleasures they will not leave; and there
is the stop: and this is the cause of their sorrows and fears. For their own
judgment cries out against them, He that loves the world, the love of the
Father is not in him: If ye live after the flesh ye shall die. God resists
the proud. This is the voice of their informed understandings: And conscience
seconds it and says, Thou art the man. But the flesh cries louder then both
these, Will thou leave thy pleasures? will thou undo thy self? will thou be
made a scorn or laughing stock to all? Or rather it strongly draws and
provokes, when it has nothing to say: No wonder if this poor sinner be here
in a strait, and live in distress of mind. But as long as the flesh holds so
fast, that all this conviction and trouble* will not cause it to lose its hold,
the poor soul is still in the bonds of iniquity. The case of such an hypocrite
or half-Christian is like the case of the poor Papist, that having glutted
himself with flesh in the Lent, was in this strait that either he must vomit it
up, and so disclose his fault and undergo penance; or else he must be sick of
his furfeit, and hazard his life: But he resolves rather to venture on the
danger, then to bear the penance. Or their case is like that of a proud woman,
that has got on a strait garment, or a pinching shoe, and because she will not
be out of the fashion, she will rather choose to bear the pain, though she halt
or suffer at every step. Or like the more impudent sort of them, who will
endure the cold, and perhaps hazard their lives, by the nakedness of their
necks and breasts and arms, rather then they will control their shameless
pride. What cure now should a wise man wish to such people as these? Surely,
that the shoe might pinch yet a little harder, till the pain might force them
to cast it off. And that they might catch some cold that would pay them for
their folly (so it would but spare their lives) till it should force them to be
ashamed of their pride, and cover their nakedness: Even so when disobedient
hypocrites do complain that they are afraid they have no grace, and afraid God
does not pardon them, and will not save them, I should tell them, if I knew
them, that I am afraid so to; and that it is not without cause; and desire that
their fears were such, as might affright them from their disobedience, and
force them to cast away their wilful sinning. I have said the more on this
point, because I know if this advice do but help you to mortify your sin, the
best and greatest work is done, whether you get Assurance and comfort or no:
and withal that it is the most probable means to this Assurance and Comfort.

I should next have warned you of the other extreme, viz. needless scruples;
but I mean to make that a peculiar Direction by it self, when I have first
added a little more of this great means of Peace, A sound Obedience,

DIRECTION XXIV.
24. My next advice for the obtaining of a settled Peace and Comfort, is this:
[Take heed that you content not your self with a cheap course of Religion, and
such a serving of God as costeth you little or nothing: But in your abstaining
from sin, in your rising out of sin, and in your discharge of Duty, incline
most to that way which is most self-denying, and displeasing to the flesh (so
you be sure it be a lawful way.) And when you are called out to any work which
will stand you in extraordinary labor and cost, you must be so far from
shrinking and drawing your neck out of the yoke, that you must look upon it as
a special prize that is put into your hand, and a singular advantage and
opportunity for the increase of your comforts.

THIS Rule is like the rest of the Christian Doctrine, which is not thoroughly
understood by any way but experience. Libertines and sensual Professors that
never tried it, did never well understand it. I could find in my heart to be
large in explaining and applying it, but that I have been so large beyond my
first intentions in the former Directions, that I will cut off the rest as
short as ^ well can.

Let none be so wickedly injurious to me, as to say I speak or think of any
Merit, properly so called, in any the costliest work of man: Fasten not that on
me which I both disclaim, and desire the Reader to take heed of. But I must
tell you these two things:

1. That a cheap Religion is a far more uncertain evidence of sincerity, then a
dear. it will not discover so well to a man's own soul, whether he prefer Christ
before the world, and whether he take him and his Benefits for his Portion and
Treasure.

2. That a cheap Religion is not usually accompanied with any notable degree of
Comforts, although the person be a sincere-hearted Christian.

Every Hypocrite can submit to a Religion that will cost him little: much more
which will get Reputation with men of greatest Wisdom and Piety: Yea he may
stick to it, so it will not undo him in the world* If a man have knowledge, and
gifts of utterance, and strength of body, it is no costly matter to speak many
good words, or to be earnest in opposing the sins of others, and to preach
zealously and frequently (much more if he have double honor by it, Reverent
Obedience, and Maintenance, as Ministers of the Gospel have, or ought to have.)
It is hard to discern sincerity in such a course of Piety and Duty. Woe to those
Persecutors that shall put us to the Trial, how far we can go in suffering for
Christ: but it should be a matter of Rejoicing to us, when we are put upon it.
To be Patient in Tribulation is not enough: but to Rejoice in it, is also the
duty of a Saint. Let those that think this draws men to Rejoice too much in
themselves, but hear what the Lord Jesus himself says, and his Spirit in his
Apostles, Mat. 5 10, 11, 12. Blessed are they which are persecuted for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye when
men shall revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil sayings
against you falsely for my names sake: Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great
is your reward in Heaven.] Iam. 1.2, 3, 12. My Brethren, count it all joy when
ye fall into diverse temptations (not inward temptations of the Devil and our
Lust, but trials by persecution:) knowing that the trying of your faith works
patience. Blessed is the man that endures temptation; for when he is tried, he
shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love
him.] See Luke 6.23. 1 Pet. 4.13. Act. 5.41. 2 Cor. 6.10. and 7.4. Col. 1.11.
Heb. 10.34. 2 Cor. 13.9. and 12.15. Oh how gloriously does a tried faith shine,
to the comfort of the Believer, and the admiration of the Beholders? How easily
may a Christian try himself at such a time when God is trying him? One hours
experience, when we have found that our faith can endure the furnace, and that
we can hazard or let go all for Christ, will more effectually resolve all our
doubtings of our sincerity, then many a months trial by mere questioning of our
own deceitful hearts.

Object. But (you may say) what if God call me not to suffering or hazards?
must I cast my self upon it without a Call? or must I be therefore without
Comfort?

Answ. No; you shall not need to cast your self upon suffering; nor yet to be
without Comfort for want of it. I know no man but may serve God at dearer rates
to the flesh then most of us do, without stepping out of the way of his duty:
Nay he must do it, except he will avoid his duty. Never had the Church yet such
times of prosperity, but that faithful duty would hazard men, and cause their
trouble in the flesh. Can you not* nay ought you not to put your self to
greater labor for men's souls? If you should but go day after day among the
poor ignorant people where you live, and instruct them in the knowledge of God,
and bear with all their weakness and rudeness, and continue thus with Patience;
this might cost you some labor, and perhaps contempt from many of the
unthankful: and yet you should not do more then your duty, if you have
opportunity for it, as most have, or may have, if they will. If you should
further hire them to learn Catechisms; if you should extend your liberality to
the utmost for relief of the poor, this would cost you somewhat. If you carry
on every Just Cause with Resolution, though never so many great friends would
draw you to betray it: this may cost you the loss of those friends. If you will
but deal plainly with the ungodly, and against all sin, as far as you have
opportunity, especially if it be the sins of Rulers and Gentlemen of name and
power in the world; it may cost you somewhat. Nay though you were Ambassadors
of Christ, whose office is to deal plainly, and not to please men in evil upon
pain of Christ's displeasure; you may perhaps turn your great friends to be your
great enemies. Go to such a Lord, or such a Knight, or such a Gentleman, and
tell him freely, that God looks for another manner of spending his time then
in hunting and hawking, and sporting and feasting, and that this precious time
must be dearly reckoned for: Tell him, that God looks he should be the most
eminent in Holiness, and in a Heavenly life, and give an example thereof to all
that are below him, as God has made him more eminent in worldly dignity and
possessions. Tell him, that where much is given, much is required; and that a
low profession, and dull approbation of that which is good, will serve no man,
much less such a man. Tell him, that his Riches must be expended to feed and
cloth the poor, and promote good uses, and not merely for himself and family,
or else he will make but a sad account: and that he must freely engage his
reputation, estate and life, and all for Christ and his Gospel, when he calls
him to it; yea and forsake all for him, if Christ put him to it, or else he can
be no Disciple of Christ's: and then what good will his Honors and Riches do
him, when his Soul shall be called for? Try this course with Great men, yea
with Great men that seem religious, and that no further then faithfulness and
compassion to men's souls does bind you, and do it with all the wisdom you can,
that is not carnal; and then tell me what it does cost you. Let those Ministers
that are near them, plainly and roundly tell both the Parliament Men, and
Commanders of the Army, of their unquestionable transgressions, and that
according to their nature, (and woe to them if they do not) and then let them
tell me what it does cost them. Alas Sirs, how great a number of Professors are
base, daubing, self-seeking Hypocrites, that cull out the safe, the cheap, the
easy part of duty, and leave all the rest! And so ordinarily is this done, that
we have made us a new Christianity by it; and the Religion of Christ's own
making, the self-denying course prescribed by our Master, is almost unknown;
and he that should practice it would be taken for a madman, or some
self-conceited Cynick, or some saucy, if not seditious fellow. It is not
therefore because Christ has not prescribed us a more self-denying, hazardous,
laborious way, that men so commonly take up in the Cheapest Religion: but it is
through our false-heartedness to Christ* and the strength of sensual carnal
Interests in us, which make us put false Interpretations on the plainest
precepts of Christ which charge any unpleasing duty on us, and Familistically
turn them into Allegories, or at least we will not yield to obey him. And,
truly, I think that our shifting off Christ in this unworthy manner, and even
altering that very frame and nature of Christian Religion (by turning that into
a flesh-pleasing Religion, which is more against the flesh then all the
Religions else in the world) and dealing so reservedly, superficially and
unfaithfully in all his work, is a great cause why Christ does now appear no
more openly for men, and pour out no larger a measure of his Spirit in Gifts
and Consolations. When men appeared ordinarily in the most open manner for
Christ, in greatest dangers and sufferings: then Christ appeared more openly
and eminently for them (yet is none more for meekness, humility and love, and
against unmerciful or dividing zeal, then Christ.)

2. And as you see that a cheap Religiousness does not to discover sincerity:
so secondly, it is not accompanied with that special blessing of God. As God
has engaged himself in his Word, that they shall not lose their Reward that
give but a cup of water in his name: so he has more fully engaged himself to
those that are most deeply engaged for him; even that they that forsake all for
him, shall have manifold recompense in this life, and in the world to come
eternal life. Let the experience of all the world of Christians be produced,
and all will attest the same truth, That it is Gods usual course to give men
larger Comforts in dearer duties, then in cheap: Nay seldom does he give large
Comforts in cheap duties: and seldom does he deny them in dearer, sobeit they
are not made dear by our own sin and foolish indiscretion, but by his command,
and our faithfulness in obeying him. Who knows not that the Consolation of
Martyrs is usually above other men's, who has read of their sufferings and
strange sustentations? Christian, do but try this by thy own experiences, and
tell me, when thou have most resolutely followed Christ in a good Cause; when
thou have stood against the faces of the greatest for God; when thou have cast
thy life, thy family and estate upon Christ, and run thy self into the most
apparent hazards for his sake: have not thou come off with more inward peace
and comfort, then the cheaper part of thy Religion has afforded thee? When
thou have stood to the Truth and Gospel, and have done Good through the
greatest opposition, and lost thy greatest and dearest friends because thou
would not forsake Christ and his service, or deal falsely in some Cause that
he has trusted thee in: have not thou come off with the blessing of Peace of
Conscience? Nay, when thou have denied thy most importunate Appetite, and most
crossed thy lusts, and most humbled and abased thy self for God, and denied thy
credit, and taken shame to thy self in a free confessing of thy faults, or
patiently put up the greatest abuses, or humbled and tamed thy flesh by
necessary abstinence, or any way most displeased it, by crossing its interest,
by bountiful giving, laborious duty, dangers or sufferings for the sake of the
Lord Jesus, his Truth and People: has it not been far better with thee in thy
Peace and Comforts then before? I know some will be ready to say, That may be
from Carnal Pride in our own doing or suffering. I answer; It may be so: And
therefore let all watch against that. But I am certain that this is Gods
ordinary dealing with his people, and therefore we may ordinarily expect it: It
is for their encouragement in faithful duty; and I may truly say, for their
Reward, when himself calls that a Reward which he gives for a cup of water. Lay
well to heart that Example of Abraham for which he is so often extolled in the
Scripture, viz. his readiness to sacrifice his only Son: This was a dear
Obedience: And, says God, Because (mark Because) thou have done this thing, in
blessing I will bless thee, etc. David would not offer to God that which cost
him nothing, 2 Samuel 24.24. 1 Chronicles. 21.24. God will have the best of your
hearts, the best of your labors, the best of your e^tates, the best of all, or
he will not accept it. Abels sacrifice was of the best, and it was accepted:
And God says to Cain, If thou do well, shall not thou be accepted?

Seeing this is so, let me advise you; Take it not for a calamity, but for a
precious advantage, when God calls thee to a hazardous costly service, which is
like to cost thee much of thy estate, to cost thee the loss of thy chiefest
friends, the loss of thy credit, the indignation of Great ones, or the
painfullest diligence and trouble of body: Shift it not off, but take this
opportunity thankfully, lest thou never have such another for the clearing of
thy sincerity, and the obtaining of more then ordinary Consolations from God:
Thou have now a Prize in thy hand for spiritual riches, if thou have but a
heart to improve it. I know all this is a paradox to the unbelieving world: But
here is the very excellency of the Christian Religion, and the Glory of Faith.
It looks for its greatest spoils, and richest prizes from its Conquests of
fleshly Interests: It is not only able to do it, but it expects its
advancement and consolations by this way. It is engaged in a war with the world
and flesh* and in this war it plays not the vapouring fencer, that seems to do
much, but never strikes home, as Hypocrites and carnal worldly Professors do:
but he lays it home and spares not, as one that knows, That the fleshes ruin
must be his Rising, and the fleshes thriving would be his Ruin. In these
things the true Christian alone is in good sadness, and all the rest of the
world but in jest. The Lord pity poor deluded souls! You may see by this one
thing, how rare a thing true Christianity is among the Multitude that take
themselves for Christians! and how certain therefore it is that few shall be
saved! Even this one point of true Mortification, and self-denial, is a
stranger among the most of Professors. Oh how sad a testimony of it are the
actions of these late times, wherein so much has been done for self, and
safety, and carnal interests, and so little for Christ! yea, and that after the
deepest engagements of Mercies and Vows that ever lay on a people in the world:
Insomuch that through the just judgment of God, they are now given up to
doubt, whether it be the duty of Rulers to do any thing as Rulers for Christ,
or no? or whether they should not let Christ alone to do it himself? Well, this
which is such a mystery to the unregenerate world, is a thing that every
genuine Christian is acquainted with: for they that are Christ's have crucified
the flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof; and the world is dead to
them, and they to the world, Gal. 6.11.

Take this counsel therefore in all the several cases mentioned in the
Direction:

1. In your preventing sin, and maintaining your Innocence, if you cannot do it
without denying your credit, and exposing your self to disgrace; or without the
loss of friends, or a breach in your estate, do it nevertheless: Yea, if it
would cost you your utter ruin in the world, thank God that put such an
opportunity into your hand for extraordinary Consolations: For ordinarily the
Martyrs Comforts exceed other men's, as much as their burden of duty and
suffering does. Cyprian is fain to write for the comfort of some Christians in
his times, that at death were troubled that they mist of their hopes of
Martyrdom. So also if you cannot mortify any lust without much pinching the
flesh, do it cheerfully; for the dearer the victory costeth you, the sweeter
will be the issue and review.

2. The same counsel I give you also in your rising from sin. It is the sad
condition of those that yield to a Temptation, and once put their foot within
the doors of Satan, that they ensnare themselves so, that they must undergo
thrice as great difficulties to draw back, as they needed to have done
beforehand for prevention and forbearance. Sin unhappily engages the sinner
to go on; and one sin does make another seem necessary. O how hard a thing is
it for him that wronged another by stealing, deceit, overreaching in
bargaining, or the like, to confess his fault, and ask him forgiveness, and to
the utmost of his ability to make restitution! What abundance of difficulties
will be in the way? It will likely cost him the loss of his Credit, besides the
breach in his estate, and perhaps lay him open to the rage of him that he has
wronged. Rather he will be drawn to cover his sin with a Lie, or at least by
Excuses. And so it is in many other sins. Now in any of these Cases, when men
indulge the flesh, and cannot find in their hearts to take that loss or shame
to themselves, which a through-Repentance does require, they do but feed the
troubles of their soul, and hide their wounds and sores, and not ease them.
Usually such persons go on in a galled, unpeaceable condition, and reach not to
solid Comfort: (I speak only of those to whom such Confession or Restitution is
a duty.) And I cannot wonder at it: For they have great cause to question the
truth of that Repentance, and consequently the soundness of that heart, which
will not bring them to a self-denying duty, nor to Gods way of rising from
their sin. It seems at present the interest of the flesh is actually
predominant, when no Reason or Conviction will persuade them to contradict it.
As ever you would have sound Comfort then in such a Case as this, spare not the
flesh. When you have sinned, you must rise again or perish. If you cannot rise
without fasting, without free confessing, without the utter shaming of your
selves, without restitution; never stick at it. This is your hour of Trial: O
yield not in the Conflict. The dearer the Victory costeth you, the greater will
be your Peace. Try it; and if you find it not so, I am mistaken. Yet if you
have sinned so that the opening of it may more discredit the Gospel, then your
Confession will honor it, and yet your Conscience is unquiet, and urges you
to confess; in such a case be first well informed, and proceed warily and upon
deliberation; and first open the case to some faithful Minister or able
Christian in secret, that you may have good advice.

3. The same counsel also would I give you in the performance of your duty. A
Magistrate is convinced he must punish sinners, and put down Alehouses, and be
true to every Just Cause: but then he must steel his face against all men's
reproaches, and the solicitations of all friends. A Minister is convinced that
he must teach from house to house, as well as publicly, if he be able; and
that he must deal plainly with sinners according to their conditions; yea and
require the Church to avoid Communion with them, if they be obstinate in evil
after other sufficient means: But then he shall lose the Love of his People,
and be accounted Proud, Precise, Rigid, Lordly, and perhaps lose his
maintenance. Obey God now; and the dearer it costeth you, the more Peace and
Protection, and the larger blessing may you expect from God: For you do (as it
were) oblige God the more to stick to you; as you will take your self obliged
to own, and bear out, and reward those that hazard state, and credit, and life
for you. And if you cannot obey God in such a Trial, it is a sad sign of a
false-hearted Hypocrite: except your fall be only in a temptation, from which
you rise with renewed Repentance and Resolutions, which will conquer for the
time to come. As Peter, who being left to himself for an example of humane
frailty, and that Christ might have no friend to stick by him when he suffered
for our sin, yet presently wept bitterly, and afterward spent his strength and
time in preaching Christ, and laid down his life in Martyrdom for him.

So perhaps many a poor servant, or hard labourer, has scarce any time except
the Lords day to Pray or Read. Let such pinch the flesh a little the more (so
they do not overthrow their health) and either work the harder, or fare the
harder, or be clothed the more meanly, or especially break a little of their
sleep, that they may find some time for these duties; and try whether the Peace
and Comfort will not Recompense it. Never any man was a loser for God! So
private Christians cannot conscionably discharge the great plain duty of
Reproof and Exhortation; lovingly, yet plainly telling their friends and
neighbors of their sins, and danger, and duty, but they will turn friends into
foes, and possibly set all the Town on their heads. But is it a Duty, or is it
not? If it be, then trust God with the Issue, and do your work, and see whether
he will suffer you to be losers.

For my part I think, that if Christians took Gods work before them, and spared
the flesh less, and trusted themselves and all to Christ alone, and did not
balk all the troublesome costly part of Religion, and that which most crosses
the interest of the flesh; it would be more ordinary with them to be filled
with the joys of the Holy Ghost, and walk in that Peace of Conscience which is
a Continual Feast; and to have such full and frequent views both of the
sincerity of their Evidencing Graces, and of Gods Reconciled Face, as would
banish their doubts and fears, and be a greater help to their certainty of
salvation, then much other labor does prove. If you flinch not the fiery
furnace, you shall have the company of the Son of God in it. If you flinch not
the Prison and Stocks, you may be able to sing as Paul and Silas did. If you
refuse not to be stoned with Stephen, you may perhaps see Heaven opened as he
did. If you think these Comforts so dear bought, that you will rather venture
without them; let me tell you, you may take your course, but the end will
convince you to the very heart, of the folly of your choice. Never then
complain for want of Comfort; remember you might have had it, and would not.
And let me give you this with you: You will shortly find, though worldly
Pleasures, Riches and Honors were some slight salves to your molested
Conscience here, yet there will no cure nor ease for it be found hereafter:
Your merry hours will then all be gone, and your worldly Delights forsake you
in Distress: but these solid Comforts which you judged too dear, would have
ended in the Everlasting Joys of Glory. When men do flinch God and his Truth in
straits, and juggle with their Consciences, and will take out all the
honorable, easy, cheap part of the work of Christ, and make a Religion of that
by it self, leaving out all the disgraceful, difficult, chargeable,
self-denying part; and hereupon call themselves Christians, and make a great
show in the world with this kind of Religiousness, and take themselves injured
if men question their honesty and uprightness in the faith: these men are
notorious self-deceivers, mere Hypocrites; and in plain truth, this is the very
true description by which damnable Hypocrites are known from sound Christians.
The Lord open men's eyes to see it in time while it may be cured. Yea, and the
nearer any true Christian does come to this sin, the more does he dis-oblige
God, and quench the Spirit of Comfort, and darken his own Evidences, and
destroy his Peace of Conscience, and create unavoydable Troubles to his Spirit,
and estrangedness betwixt the Lord Jesus and his own soul. Avoid this
therefore, if ever you will have Peace.

DIRECTION XXV.
25. My next Advice shall be somewhat near of kin to the former. If you would
learn the most expeditious way to Peace and settled Comfort, [Study well the Art
of Doing Good: and let it be your every-days contrivance, care and business,
how you may lay out all that God has trusted you with, to the greatest
pleasing of God, and to your most comfortable account.]

STill remember (lest any Antinomian should tell you that this savours of
Popery, and trusting for Peace to our own Works.)

1. That you must not think of giving any of Christ's honor or office to your
best works. You must not dream that they can do any thing to the satisfaction
of Gods Justice for your sins: nor that they have any proper Merit in them, so
as for their worth to oblige God to Reward you: nor that you must bring them as
a Price to purchase Christ and Heaven: nor that you have any Righteousness or
Worthiness in your self and Works, which the Law of Works will so denominate or
own. But only you must give Obedience its due under Christ; and so you honor
Christ himself, when those that detract from Obedience to him, do dishonor
him: and you must have an Evangelical Worthiness and Righteousness (so called
many and many times over in the Gospel) which partly consists in the
sincerity of your Obedience and Good Works; as the condition of continuing your
state of Justification, and right to eternal Life.

2. Remember I have given you many Arguments before, to prove that you may take
Comfort from your Good Works, and Gracious Actions.

3. If any further Objections should be made against this, read considerately
and believingly Math. 25. and Math. 5. and 7. Chapters throughout, or the
former only; and I doubt not but you will be fully resolved. But to the work.

Those men that study no other Obedience ^hen only to do no (positive) harm,
are so ^ar from true Comfort, that they have yet no ^rue Christianity; I mean,
such as will be saying to them. Doing Good is a high part of a Christians
obedience, and must be the chief part of his life. The Heathen could tell him
that asked him, How men might be like to God? That one way was, To do good to
all. This is beyond our power, being proper to God the Universal Good, whose
Mercy is over all his Works. But our Goodness must be Communicative, if we will
be like God, and it must be extended and diffused as far as we can. The
Apostles charge is plain, and we must obey it if we will have Peace. Gal. 6.10.
While you have time, Do good to all men, but especially to them of the
household of faith. Isa. 1.16, 17. Cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek
judgment* relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow:
Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord; though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like Crimson, they
shall be as wool.] Heb. 13.16. To Do Good, and to communicate, forget not; for
with such sacrifices God is well pleased.] 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Charge them
that be rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in
uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all things to
enjoy: That they Do Good, that they be rich in Good Works, ready to distribute*
willing to communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation
against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.] See Luke
6.33, 34, 35, Mar. 14.7. Math. 5.44. 1 Pet. 3.11. Jam. 4.17. Psalm. 34.14. and
37.27. and 36.3. and 37.3. Trust in the Lord, and Do Good.] Gen* 4.7. If thou
Do Well, shall thou not be Accepted? but if thou do Evil, sin lies at the
door.] Act. 10.3, 4.34, 35. Cornelius, thy Prayers and thine Alms are come up
for a Memorial before God.] 35. [ In every Nation he that fears God, and
works Righteousness, is Accepted of him.] Romans 6.16. Know ye not that to whom
ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey?
whether of sin unto death, or of Obedience unto Righteousness?] 13. Yield your
selves unto God as those that are alive from the dead, and your members as
Instruments of Righteousness unto God.] Mat. 5.16. Act. 9.36. Ephesians. 2.10. We are
created in Christ Jesus to Good Works, which God has ordained that we should
walk in them.] 1 Timothy 2.10. and 5.10. and 5.25. 2 Timothy 3.17. Tit. 2.7. and
3.8.14. and 2.14. He redeemed us from all iniquity, that he might purify to
himself a peculiar people, zealous of Good Works.] 1 Pet. 2.12. Heb. 10.24.
Let us consider one another, to Provoke to Love and to Good Works.] What a
multitude of such passages may you find in Scripture?

You see then how great a part of your Calling and Religion consists in Doing
Good. Now it is not enough to make this your care now and then, or do Good when
it falls in your way but you must study it, or it will not be well done. You
must study which are Good Works; and which are they that you are called to: and
which are the best Works, and to be preferred, that you choose not a less
instead of a greater. God looks to be served with the best. You must study for
opportunities of Doing Good, and of the means of succeeding and accomplishing
it; and for the removing of Impediments; and for the overcoming of disswasives,
and withdrawing Temptations. You must know what Talents God has entrusted you
with, and those you must study to do Good with. Whether it be Time, or Interest
in men, or opportunity, or Riches, or Credit, or Authority, or Gifts of mind,
or of body: If you have not one, you have another, and some have all.

This therefore is the thing that I would persuade you to: Take your self for
Gods Steward: Remember the time when it will be said to you [ Give account of
thy Stewardship; thou shall be no longer Steward] Let it be your every-days
contrivance, how to lay out your Gifts, Time, Strength, Riches or Interest, to
your Masters use. Think which way you may do most, first, to Promote the
Gospel, and the Public Good of the Church: and then, which way you may help
toward the saving of particular men's souls; and then which way you may better
the Commonwealth; and how you may do good to men's bodies; beginning with your
own, and those of your family, but extending your help as much further as you
are able. Ask your self every morning, Which way may I this day most further my
Masters business, and the Good of men? Ask your self every night, What Good
have I done to day? And labor as much as may be, to be Instruments of some
great and standing Good, and of some Public and Universal Good; that you may
look behind you at the years end, and at your lives end, and see the Good that
you have done. A piece of bread is soon eaten, and a penny or a shilling is soon
spent: But if you could win a Soul to God from sin, that would be a visible
everlasting Good: If you could be Instruments of setting up a Godly Minister in
a Congregation that want, the everlasting Good of many Souls might in part be
ascribed to you: If you could help to heal and unite a Divided Church, you
might more rejoice to look back on the fruits of your labor, then any
Physician may Rejoice to see his poor Patient recovered to health. I have told
Rich men in another Book, what opportunities they have to do Good if they had
hearts: How easy were it with them to refresh men's bodies, and to do very much
for the saving of souls! To relieve the poor; to set their Children to trades;
to ease the oppressed. How easy to maintain two or three poor Scholars at the
Universities for the service of the Church? But I hear but of few that do ever
the more in it, except three or four of my friends in these parts. Let me
further tell you, God does not leave it to them as an indifferent thing. Math.
25. They must feed Christ in the poor, or else starve in Hell themselves: They
must cloth naked Christ in the poor, or be laid naked to his fiery indignation
for ever. How much more diligently then must they help men's souls, and the
Church of Christ, as the need is greater, and the work better* Oh the blinding
power of Riches! O the easiness of man's heart to be deluded! Do Rich men never
think to lie rotting in the dust? do they never think that they must be
accountable for all their Riches? and for all their Time, and Power, and
Interests? Do they not know that it will comfort them more at Death and
Judgment, to hear in their reckoning, Item so much given to such and such
Poor? so much to promote the Gospel? so much to maintain poor Scholars while
they study to prepare themselves for the Ministry? etc. then to hear, so much
in such a Feast? to entertain such Gallants? to please such Noble friends? so
much at dice, at cards, at horse-races, at cock-fights? so much in excess of
Apparel? and the rest to leave my Posterity in the like pomp? Do they not know
that it will comfort them more to hear then of their time spent in Reading
Scripture, secret and open Prayer, Instructing and examining their Children and
Servants; going to their poor Neighbors houses to see what they want, and to
persuade them to godliness; and in being examples of eminent holiness to all;
and in suppressing Vice, and doing Justice; then to hear of so much time spent
in Vain Recreations, Visits, Luxuries and Idleness? O deep Unbelief and
hardness of heart, that makes Gentlemen that they tremble not to think of this
Reckoning: Well, let me tell both them and all men, that if they knew but
either that undispensable duty of Doing Good, that lies on them, or how
necessary and sure a way (in subordination to Christ) this act of Doing Good is
for the souls Peace and consolation, they would study it better, and practice
it more faithfully then now they do: They would then be glad of an opportunity
to do Good, for their own Gain, as well as for Gods honor, and for the love of
Good it self. They would know that lending to the Lord is the only thriving
Usury; and that no part of all their Time, Riches, Interest in men, Power or
Honors will be then comfortable to them, but that which was laid out for God;
And they will one day find, that God will not take up with the scraps of their
Time and Riches which their flesh can spare; but he will be first served, even
before all comers, and that with the best, or he will take them for no servants
of his. This is true, and you will find it so, whether you will now believe it or
no.

And because it is possible these lines may fall into the hands of some of the
Rulers of this Commonwealth, let me here mind them of two weighty things.

1. What opportunities of Doing very great Good has been long in their hands?
and how great an account of it they have to make. It has been long in their
power to have done much to the Reconciling of our Differences, and healing our
Divisions, by setting Divines a work of different Judgments to find out a
temperament for Accommodation. It has long been in their power to have done
much toward the supply of all the dark Congregations in England and Wales,
with competently able, sound and faithful Teachers! We have many Congregations
that do contain three thousand, five thousand, or ten thousand souls, that have
but one or two Ministers, that cannot possibly do the tenth part of the
Ministerial work of Private oversight; and so poor souls must be neglected, let
Ministers be never so able or painful: We have diverse Godly Private Christians
of so much understanding as to be capable of helping us as Officers in our
Churches: but they are all so poor that they are not able to spare one hour in
a day or two from their labor, much less to give up themselves to the work:
How many a Congregation is in the same Case? Nothing almost is wanting to us to
have set our Congregations in the order of Christ, and done this great work of
Reformation which there is so much talking of, so much as want of Maintenance
for a Competent Number of Ministers or Elders to attend the work. I am sure in
great Congregations this is the Case, and a sore that no other means will
remedy. Was it never in the power of our Rulers to have helped us here? Was
nothing sold for other uses, that was once Devoted and Dedicated to God, and
might have helped us in this our miserable distress? Were our Churches able to
maintain their own Officers, our Case were more tolerable: but when a
Congregation that wants six, or seven, or ten, is not able to maintain one, it
is hard.

2. The second thing that I would mind our Rulers of, is, What mortal Enemies
those men are to their souls, that would persuade them that they must not, as
Rulers, Do Good to the souls of men, and to the Church as such; nor further the
Reformation, nor propagate the Gospel, nor stablish Christ's orders in the
Churches of their Country, any otherwise then by a common maintaining the Peace
and Liberties of all. What doctrine could more desperately undo you if
entertained? If you be once persuaded that it belongs not to you to Do Good,
and the Greatest Good, to which all your successes have but made way, then all
the Comfort, the Blessing and Reward is lost: And consequently all the Glorious
preparative successes, as to you, are lost: If once you take your selves to
have nothing to do as Rulers for Christ, you cannot promise your selves that
Christ will have any thing to do for you as Rulers in a way of Mercy: This Mr.
Owen has lately told you in his Sermon, Oct. 13. The God of Heaven forbid,
that ever all the Devils in Hell, the Jesuits at Rome, or the seduced souls in
England, should be able to persuade the Rulers of this Land, who are so deeply
bound to God by Vows, Mercies, Professions, and high expenses of treasure and
blood, to Reform his Church, and propagate his Gospel; that now after all this
it belongs not to them, but they must as Rulers be no more for Christ the^
for Mahomet: But if ever it should prove the sad case of England to have such
Rulers (which I strongly hope will never be) if my Prognosti^ks fail not, this
will be their fate: The Lord Jesus will forsake them, as they have forsaken
him, and the Prayers of his Saints will be fully turned against them; and his
Elect shall cry to him night and day, till he avenge them speedily, by making
these his enemies to l^ck the dust, and dashing them in pieces like a Potters
vessel, because they would not that he should reign over them: And then they
shall know whether Christ be not King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Perhaps you may think I Digress from the matter in hand: But as long as I
speak but for my Lord Christ, and for Doing Good, I cannot think that I am
quite out of my way. But to return nearer to those for whose sakes I chiefly
write: This is that sum of my advice: Study with all the understanding you
have, how to do as much Good while you have time as possibly you can, and you
shall find that (without any Popish or Pharisaical self-confidence) to be the
most excellent art for obtaining spiritual Peace, and a large measure of
comfort from Christ.

To that end use seriously and daily to bethink your self, What way of
expending your Time and Wealth, and all your Talents, will be most comfortable
for you to hear of, and review at Judgment? and take that as the way most
comfortable now. Only consult not with flesh and blood: make not your flesh of
your counsel in this work: but take it for your enemy: expect its violent
unwearied opposition: But regard not any of its clamours or repinings: But
know, as I said before, that your truest spiritual comforts are a Prize that
must be won upon the conquest of the flesh. I will only add to this the words
of Blessed Dr. Sibs (a man that was no enemy to Free Grace, nor unjust Patron
of man's Works) in his Preface to his Souls Conflict; Christ is first a King of
Righteousness, and then of Peace: The Righteousness that he works by his Spirit
brings a Peace of sanctification: whereby though we are not freed from sin, yet
we are enabled to combat with it, and to get the victory over it. Some Degree
of Comfort follows every Good Action, as heat accompanies fire, and as beams
and influences issue from the Sun: Which is so true, that very Heathens upon
the discharge of a good Conscience, have found Comfort and Peace answerable:
this is a Reward before our Reward Again, In watchfulness and diligence we
sooner meet with Comfort then in idle Complaining. Again, Page 44, 45. An
unimployed life is a burden to it self. God is a pure act: always Working:
always Doing: and the nearer our soul comes to God, the more it is in action,
and the freer from disquiet. Men experimentally feel that Comfort in Doing that
which belongs unto them, which before they longed for and went without. And in
his Preface to the Bruised Reed; There is no more Comfort to be expected from
Christ then there is Care to Please him. Otherwise to make him an A better of a
lawless and a loose life, is to transform him into a fancy; nay into the
likeness of him whose works he came to destroy, which is the most detestable
Idolatry of all. One way whereby the Spirit of Christ prevails in his, is to
preserve them from such thoughts: Yet we see, People will frame a Divinity to
themselves, pleasing to the flesh, suitable to their own ends, which being vain
in the substance, will prove likewise vain in the fruit, and a building upon
the sands. So far Dr. Sibs. It seems there were Libertines and Antinomians
then: and will be as long as there are any carnal unsanctified Professors.

DIRECTION XXVI.
26. Having led you thus far toward a settled Peace, my next Direction shall
contain a Necessary Caution, lest you run as far into the contrary extreme,
viz. Take heed that you neither trouble your own soul with needless scruples;
about matters of doctrine, of duty, or of sin, or about your own Condition: Nor
yet that you do not make your self more work then God has made you, by
feigning things unlawful which God has not forbidden, or by placing your
Religion in Will Worship, or in an overcurious insisting on Circumstantials,
or an over-rigorous dealing with your Body.

THis is but the Exposition of Solomon's, Be not Over-wise, and be not Righteous
^vermuch, Eccl. 7.16. A man cannot serve God too much; formally and strictly
considering his service: much less Love him too much. But we may do too much
Materially intending thereby to serve God; which though it be not true
Righteousness, yet being Intended for Righteousness, and done as a service of
God, or Obedience to him, is here called Over-much-Righteousness. I know it is
stark madness in the profane secure World to think that the doing of no more
then God has commanded us, is Doing too much, or More then needs; as if God
had bid us do more then needs, or had made such Laws as few of the foolish
Rulers on earth would make: This is plainly to Blaspheme the Most High* by
denying his Wisdom and his Goodness, and his Just Government of the World: and
to Blaspheme his holy Laws, as if they were too strict, precise, and made us
more to do then needs: and to reproach his sweet and holy ways, as if they were
grievous, intolerable and unnecessary. Much more is their Madness, in charging
the Godly with being too Pure, and too Precise, and making too great a stir for
Heaven, and that merely for their Godliness and Obedience, when, alas, the best
do fall so far short of what Gods Word and the necessity of their own souls do
require, that their Consciences do more grievously accuse them of Negligence,
then the barking World does of being too precise and diligent: And yet more mad
are the World, to lay out so much Time, and Care, and Labor for Earthly
Vanities, and to provide for their contemptible bodies for a little while, and
in the mean time to think that Heaven and their Everlasting Happiness there,
and the escaping of everlasting damnation in Hell, are Matters not worth so
much ado, but may be had with a few cold wishes, and that its but folly to do
so much for it as the Godly do: That no labor should be thought too much for
the World, the Flesh and the Devil, and every little is enough for God. And
that these wretched souls are so blinded by their own lusts, and so bewitched
by the Devil into an utter Ignorance of their own hearts, that they verily
think, and will stand in it, that for all this They Love God above all, and
love Heavenly things better then Earthly, and therefore shall be saved.

But yet Extremes there are in the service of God, which all wise Christians
must labor to avoid. It is a very great Question among Divines, Whether the
common rule in Ethics, That Virtue is ever in the middle between two extremes,
be sound, as to Christian Virtues: Amesius says, No. The Case is not very
hard, I think, to be resolved, if you will but use these three Distinctions. 1.
Between the Acts of the mere Rational faculties, Understanding and Will,
called, Elicite Acts; and the Acts of the Inferior faculties of soul and body,
called, Imperate Acts. 2. Between the Acts that are About the End immediately,
and those that are About the Means. 3. Between the Intension of an Act, and the
Objective-Extension, and Comparison of Object with Object. And so I say: 1. The
End (that is, God and Salvation) cannot be too fully Known, or too much Loved,
with a pure Rational Love of Complacency, nor too much sought by the Acts of
the soul as purely Rational: For the End being loved and sought for it self,
and being of Infinite Goodness, must be loved and sought without Measure or
Limitation, it being Impossible here to exceed. Prop. 2. The Means, while they
are not mis-apprehended, but taken as Means, and Materially well understood,
cannot be too clearly discerned, nor too Rightly chosen, nor too Resolutely
prosecuted. Prop. 3. It is too possible to mis-apprehend the Means, and to
place them instead of the End, and so to Over-love them. Prop. 4. The Nature of
all the Means consists in a Middle or Mean betwixt two Extremes, materially:
both which Extremes are sin: so that it is possible to over-do about all the
Means, as to the Matter of them, and the Extent of our acts. Though we cannot
Love God too much, yet it is possible to Preach, Hear, Pray, Read, Meditate,
Confer of Good too much: For one Duty may shut out another; and a greater may
be neglected by our overdoing in a lesser: which was the Pharisees sin in
Sabbath-Resting. 5. If we be never so right in the extension of our Acts, yet
we may go too far in the Intension of the Imperate Acts or Passions of the
soul, and that both on the Means and End: Though the pure Acts of Knowing or
Willing cannot be too great toward God and Salvation, yet the Passions and
Acts commonly called Sensitive, may. A man may Think on God not only too much
(as to exclude other necessary thoughts) but too Intensly: and Love and Desire
too Passionately: For there is a Degree of Thinking or Meditating, and of
Passionate Love and Desire, which the brain cannot bear, but it will cause
Madness, and quite overthrow the use of Reason, by overstretching the organs,
or by the extreme turbulency of the agitated spirits. Yet I never knew the man,
nor ever shall do I think, that was ever guilty of one of these excesses, that
is, of Loving or Desiring God so Passionately as to distract him: But I have
often known weak-headed people (that be not able to order their thoughts) and
many Melancholy People* Guilty of the other; that is, of thinking too much and
too seriously and intensly on Good and Holy things, whereby they have
overthrown their Reason and been distracted. And here I would give all such
weak-headed Melancholy persons this warning, That whereas in my Book of Rest, I
so much press a constant course of Heavenly Meditation, I do intend it only
for sound heads, and not for the Melancholy that have weak heads, and are
unable to bear it. That may be their sin, which to others is a very great duty:
While they think to do that which they cannot do, they will but disable
themselves for that which they can do. I would therefore advise those
Melancholy persons whose minds are so troubled, and heads weakened, that they
are in danger of overthrowing their Understandings (which usually begins in
multitudes of scruples, and restlesness of mind, and continual fears, and
blasphemous temptations: where it begins with these, distraction is at hand, if
not prevented) that they forbear Meditation, as being no duty to them, though
it be to others; and instead of it be the more in those duties which they are
fit for: especially Conference with Judicious Christians, and Cheerful and
Thankful acknowledgement of Gods Mercies. And thus have I showed you, how far
we may possibly exceed in Gods service: Let me now a little apply it.

It has ever been the Devils Policy to begin in persuading men to Worldlyness,
Fleshpleasing, Security and Presumption, and utter Neglect of God and their
souls, or at least preferring their bodies and worldly things: and by this
means he destroys the world. But where this will not take, but God awaketh
men effectually, and casts out the sleepy Devil, usually he fills men's heads
with needless scruples, and next sets them on a Religion not commanded, and
would make poor souls believe they do Nothing, if they do not more then God
has commanded them. When the Devil has no other way left to destroy Religion
and Godliness, he will pretend to be Religious and Godly himself: and then he
is always over-religious and over-godly in his Materials. All overdoing in Gods
work is undoing. And who ever you meet with that would Over-do, suspect him to
be either a subtle destroying enemy, or one deluded by the destroyer. O what a
Tragedy could I here show you of the Devils acting! and what a Mystery in the
Hellish Art of Deceiving could I open to you! And shall I keep the Devils
counsel? No. O that God would open the eyes of his poor desolate Churches at
l^st to see it!

The Lord Jesus in Wisdom and tender Mercy, establishes a Law of Grace, and
Rule of Life, Pure and Perfect, but simple and plain; laying the Condition of
man's salvation more in the Honesty of the Believing Heart, then in the strength
of Wit, and subtilty of a Knowing Head. He comprised the Truths which were of
Necessity to salvation in a Narrow room: So that the Christian Faith was a
matter of great plainness and simplicity. As long as Christians were such, and
held to this, the Gospel rode in Triumph through the world, and an Omnipotency
of the Spirit accompanied it, bearing down all before it. Princes and Scepters
stoopt: subtle Philosophy was non-plust; and all useful Sciences came down, and
acknowledged themselves Servants, and took their places, and were well
contented to attend the pleasure of Christ; As Mr. Herbert says in his Church
Militant:

Religion thence fled into Greece, where Arts
Gave her the highest place in all men's hearts:
Learning was posed: Philosophy was set;
Sophisters taken in a Fishers Net.
Plato and Aristotle were at a loss,
And wheeled about again to spell Christ's Cross.
Prayers chas't Syllogisms into their den,
And Ergo was transformed into Amen.
The Serpent envying this Happiness of the Church, has no way to undo us, but
by drawing us from our Christian simplicity. By the occasion of Heretics
quarrels and errors, the Serpent steps in, and will needs be a spirit of Zeal
in the Church; and he will so Over-do against Heretics, that he persuades
them, they must enlarge their Creed, and add this Clause against one, and that
against another, and all was but for the perfecting and preserving of the
Christian Faith: And so he brings it to be a Matter of so much Wit to be a
Christian (as Erasmus complains) that ordinary heads were not able to reach it.
He had got them with a Religious zealous Cruelty to their own and others souls,
to lay all their Salvation, and the Peace of the Church upon some unsearchable
mysteries about the Trinity, which God either never revealed, or never clearly
revealed, or never laid so great a stress upon: Yet he persuades them, that
there was Scripture-p^oof enough for these: Only the Scripture sp^^e it but in
the premises, or in darker terms, and they must but gather into their Creed the
Consequences, and put it into plainer expressions which Heretics might not so
easily corrupt, pervert or evade. Was not this Reverend Zeal? and was not the
Devil seemingly now a Christian of the most judicious and forward sort? But
what got he at this one game? 1. He necessitated Implicit Faith even in
Fundamentals, when he had got points beyond a vulgar reach among Fundamentals.
2. He necessitated some living Judge for the Determining of Fundamentals quoad
nos, though not in se (the Soul of Popish wickedness) that is, what it is in
sense that the People must take for Fundamentals. 3. He got a standing Verdict
against the perfection and sufficiency of Scripture (and consequently against
Christ, his Spirit, his Apostles, and the Christian Faith:) That it will not
afford us so much as a Creed or Systeme of Fundamentals, or Points absolutely
Necessary to Salvation and Brotherly Communion, in fit or tolerable phrases;
but we must mend the language at least. 4. He opened a gap for humane
Additions, at which he might afterward bring in more at his pleasure. 5. He
framed an Engine for an Infallible Division, and to tear in Pieces the Church,
Casting out all as Heretics that could not subscribe to his Additions, and
necessitating separation by all dissenters, to the Worlds End, till the Devils
engine be overthrown. 6. And hereby he lays a ground upon the Divisions of
Christians, to bring men into doubt of all Religion, as not knowing which is
the right. 7. And he lays the ground of certain heart-burnings, and mutual
Hatred, Contentions, Revilings, and Enmity. Is not here enough got at one Cast?
Does there need any more to the establishing of the Romish and Hellish
darkness? Did not this one act found the Seat of Rome? Did not the Devil get
more in his Gown in a day, then he could get by his Sword in three hundred
years? And yet the Holy Ghost gave them full warning of this beforehand. 2
Cor. 11.2, 3. For I am Jealous over you with a godly Jealousy; for I have
espoused you to one Husband, that I may present you as a chaste Virgin to
Christ. But I fear lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplitity that is in
Christ. Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in the Faith receive ye: but not to
Doubtful Disputations. Psalm. 19. The Law of the Lord is perfect. 2 Timothy 3.16,
17. All Scripture is given by Inspiration from God, and is profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that
the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all Good Works. Isa.
8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to these, it
is because there is no truth in them. With many the like.

This plot the Serpent has found so successful, that he has followed it on to
this day. He has made it the great Engine to get Rome on his side, and to make
them the great Dividers of Christ's Church: He made the Pope and the Council of
Trent believe, that when they had owned the ancient Creed of the Church, they
must put in as many and more additional Articles of their own, and Anathematize
all gainsayers: and these Additions must be the peculiar Mark of their Church,
as Romish: and then all that are not of that Church, that is, that own not
those super-added Points, are not of the true Church of Christ, if they must be
Judges. Yea among our selves has the Devil used successfully this plot: What
Confession of the purest Church has not some more then is in Scripture? The
most modest must mend the phrase, and speak plainer, and somewhat of their own
in it; not excepting our own most reformed Confession.

Yea and where Modesty restrains men from putting all such inventions and
explications in their Creed, the Devil persuades men that they being the
Judgments of Godly Reverend Divines (no doubt to be Reverenced, valued and
heard) it is almost as much as if it were in the Creed, and therefore whoever
dissenteth must be noted with a black coal, and you must disgrace him, and
avoid Communion with him as an Heretic. Hence lately is your Union, Communion
and the Churches Peace laid upon certain unsearchable Mysteries about
Predestination, the order and objects of Gods Decrees, the manner of the
Spirits secretest operations on the soul, the Nature of the Wills essential
Liberty, and its power of self-determining the Divine concourse, determination
or predestination of man's and all other Creatures actions, etc. that he is
scarcely to be accounted a fit member for our fraternal Communion that differs
from us herein. Had it not been for this one Plot, the Christian Faith had been
kept pure; Religion had been one; the Church had been one; and the hearts of
Christians had been more one then they are. Had not the Devil turned Orthodox,
he had not made so many true Christians Heretics, as Epiphamus and Austin have
enrolled in the black List: Had not the Enemy of Truth and Peace got into the
Chair, and made so pathetique an Oration as to inflame the minds of the Lovers
of Truth to be over-zealous for it, and to do too much, we might have had Truth
and Peace to this day. Yea still, if he see any man of Experience and
Moderation stand up to reduce men to the ancient simplicity, he presently seems
the most zealous for Christ, and tells the unexperienced Leaders of the flocks,
that it is in favor of some Heresy that such a man speaks; he is plotting a
Carnal Syncretism, and attempting the reconcilement of Christ and Belial; he is
tainted with Popery, or Socinianism, or Arminianism, or Calvinism, or
whatsoever may make him odious with those he speaks to. O what the Devil has
got by Over-doing?

And as this is true in Doctrines, so is it in Worship, and Discipline, and
Pastoral Authority and Government. When the Serpent could not get the World to
despise the poor Fishermen that published the Gospel, (the Devil being Judged,
and the World Convinced by the Power of the Holy Ghost, the Agent, Advocate and
Vicar of Christ on earth) he will then be the forwardest to honor and promote
them: And if he cannot make Constantine a Persecutor of them, he will persuade
him to raise them in worldly glory to the Stars, and make them Lords of Rome,
and possess them with Princely Dignities and Revenues. And he has got as much
by over-honouring them, as ever he did by persecuting and despising them. And
now in England, when this plot is descryed, and we had taken down that
super^^uous honor, as Antichristian, what does the Devil but set in again on
the other side? and none is so Zealous a Reformer as he. He cries down all as
Antichristian, which he desires should fall: Their Tithes and Maintenance are
Antichristian and oppressive (O Pious Merciful Devil) down with them! These
Church Lands were given by Papists to Popish uses, to maintain Bishops, and
Deans, and Chapters: down with them. These Colledge-lands, these Cathedrals,
nay these Church-houses, or Temples (for so I Will call them, whether the Devil
will or no) all come from Idolaters, and are abused to Idolatry: down with
them. Nay think you but he has taken the boldness to cry out, These Priests,
these Ministers, are all Antichristian, Seducers, Needless, Enviers of the
spirit of Prophesy, and of the Gifts of their Brethren, Monopolizers of
Preaching: down with them too! So that though he yet have not what he would
have, the old Serpent has done more as a Reformer by over-doing, then he did
in many a year as a Deformer or hinderer of Reformation: Yet if he do but see
that there is a Sovereign Power that can do him a Mischief, he is ready to tell
them. They must be Merciful, and not deal Cruelly with sinners! Nay it belongs
not to them to reform, or to Judge who are Heretics and who not* or to
restrain false doctrine, or Church-disturbers. Christ is sufficient for this
himself.] How o^t has the Devil preached thus, to tie the hands of those that
might wound him?

Would you see any further how he has played this successful game of
Over-doing? Why he has done as much by it in Worship and Discipline, as almost
in any thing: When he cannot have Discipline neglected, he is an over-zealous
spirit in the breasts of the Clergy; and he persuades them to appoint men
Penance, and Pilgrimages, and to put the necks of Princes under their feet. But
if this Tyranny must be abated, he cries down all Discipline, and tells them it
is all but Tyranny and humane Inventions; And this confessing sin to Ministers
for Relief of Conscience; and this open Confessing in the Congregation for a
due Manifestation of Repentance, and satisfaction to the Church, that they may
hold Communion with them, it is all but Popery and Priestly Domineering.

And in matter of Worship, worst of all: When he could not persuade the world
to persecute Christ, and to refuse him and his Worship, the Serpent will be the
most zealous Worshipper, and says, as Herod, and with the same mind, Come and
tell me, that I may worship him. He persuades men to Do and Over-do: He sets
them on laying out their Revenues in sumptuous Fabrics, in fighting to be
Masters of the Holy Land and Sepulcher of Christ, on going Pilgrimages.
Worshipping Saints, Angels, Shrines, Relics, Adoring the very bread of the
Sacrament as God, excessive fastings, choice of meats, Numbered Prayers on
beads, Repetitions of words, so many Ave Mary's, Pater Nosters, the name Jesus
so often Repeated in a breath, so many Holy Days to Saints, Canonical hours, even
at midnight to pray, and that in Latin for greater reverence, Crossings, holy
garments, variety of prescribed gestures, kneeling and worshipping before
Images, sacrificing Christ again to his Father in the Mass; forswearing
Marriage; living retiredly as separate from the world; multitudes of new
prescribed Rules and orders of life; vowing poverty, begging without need;
creeping to the Cross, Holy water, and Holy bread, carrying Palms, kneeling at
Altars, bearing Candles, Ashes; In Baptism, Crossing, Conjuring out the Devil,
salting, spittle, oil; taking Pardons, Indulgencies and Dispensations of the
Pope; praying for the Dead, perambulations, serving God to Merit Heaven, or to
ease souls in Purgatory; doing Works of supererogation, with multitudes the
like: All these has the Devil added to Gods Worship, so zealous a Worshipper
of Christ is he, when he takes that way. Read Mr. Herberts Church Militant of
Rome, page 188, 189, 190. I could trace this Deceiver yet further, and tell you
wherein, when he could not hinder Reformation in Luthers days, he would needs
over-do in Reforming! But O how sad an example of it have we before our eyes in
England! Never people on earth more hot upon Reforming! Never any deeper
engaged for it. The Devil could not hinder it by fire and sword; when he sees
that, he will needs turn Reformer as I said before, and he gets the Word, and
cries down Antichrist, and cries up Reformation, till he has done what we see!
He has made a Babel of our work, by confounding our languages; For though he
will be for Reformation too, yet his name is Legion, he is an Enemy to the one
God, one Mediator and Head, one Faith and one Baptism, one heart, and lip* and
one way. Unity is the chief butt that he shoots at. Is Baptism to be Reformed?
Christ is so moderate a Reformer, that he only bids, Down with the Symbolical
Mystical Rite of man's vain addition. But the Serpent is a more Zealous
Reformer: He says, Out with express Covenanting! Out with Children; They are a
corruption of the Ordinance: and to others he says, Out with Baptism it self.
We might follow him thus through other Ordinances. Indeed he so Overdoes in his
Reforming, that he would not leave us a Gospel, a Ministry, a Magistra^y to be
for Christ, an Ordinance, no nor a Christ: (though yet he would seem to own a
God, and the light of Nature.) All these with him are Antichristian.

By this time I hope you see that this way of Over-doing has another Author
then many zealous people do imagine: and that it is the Devils common
successful trade: so that his Agents in State-Assemblies are taught his Policy,
When you have no other way of un-doing, let it be by over-doing. And the same
way he takes with the souls of particular persons: If he see them troubled for
sin, and he cannot keep them from the knowledge of Christ and free Grace, he
puts the name of [ free Grace and Gospel* preaching] upon Antinomian and
Libertine errors which subvert the very Gospel and free Grace it self. If he
see men convinced of this, and that it is neither common nor Religious
Libertinism and sensuality that will bring men to Heaven, then he will labor
to make Papists of them, and to set them on a task of external formalities, or
macerating their bodies with hurtful fastings, watchings and cold, as if
self-murder were the highest pitch of Religion, and God had a pleasure to see
his people Torment themselves! I confess it is very few that ever I knew to
have erred far in Austere usage of their bodies: But some I have; and
especially poor Melancholy Christians that are more easily drawn to deal
rigorously with their flesh then others be. And such Writings as lately have
been published by some English Popish Formalists, I have known draw men into
this snare I would have all such remember, 1. That God is a Spirit, and will be
worshipped in Spirit and in Truth: and such Worshippers does he seek. 2. That
God will have mercy and not sacrifice; and that the Vitals of Religion are in a
Consumption when the heat of Zeal is drawn too much to the outside. And that
placing most in externals is the great character of Hypocrisy, and is that
Pharisaical Religion to which the doctrine and practice of the Lord Jesus was
most opposite, as any that will read the Gospel may soon see. 3. That God has
made our bodies to be his Servants, and Instruments of Righteousness, Romans 6.
13. and helpful and serviceable to our souls in Well-doing: And therefore it is
Disobedience, it is Injustice, it is Cruelty to disable them, and causlesly to
vex and torment them, much more to destroy them. You may see by sick men, by
Melancholy men, by Mad men and Children, how unfit that soul is to know, or
Love, or serve God, that has not a fit body to work in and by. The Serpent
knows this well enough: If he can but get you by excessive fastings, watchings,
labors, studies, or other austerities, especially sadness and perplexities of
mind, to have a sick body, a crazed brain, or a short life, you will be able to
do him but little hurt, and God but little service, besides the pleasure that
he takes in your own Vexation. Nay he will hope to make a further advantage of
your weakness, and to keep many a soul in the snares of sensuality, by telling
them of your miseries: and saying to them, Do thou not see in such a man or
woman, what it is to be so holy and precise? They will all run mad at last: If
once thou grow so strict, and deny thy self thy Pleasures, and take this
precise course, thou will but make thy life a misery, and never have a merry
day again. Such examples as yours the Devil will make use of, that he may
terrify poor souls from Godliness, and represent the word and ways of Christ
to them in an odious, and unpleasing, and discouraging shape. Doubtless that
God who himself is so Merciful to your Body as well as to your Soul, would have
you to be so too: He that provideth so plentifully for its refreshment, would
not have you refuse his provision. He that says the Righteous man is merciful
to his beast, no doubt would not have him to be unmerciful to his own body. You
are commanded to Love your Neighbor but as your self: And therefore by cruelty
and unmerciful dealing with your Own body, you will go about to Justify the
like dealing with others. You durst not deny to feed, to cloth, to comfort and
refresh the poor, lest Christ should say, You did it not to me. And how should
you dare to deny the same to your self? How will you answer God for the neglect
of all that service which you should have done him, and might, if you had not
disabled your bodies and minds? He requires that you Delight your self in him:
And how can you do that when you habituate both mind and body to a sad,
dejected, mournful garb? The service that God requires, is, To serve him with
cheerfulness in the abundance that we possess, Deuteronomy. 28.47. If you think that I
here contradict what I said in the former Directions, for pinching the flesh,
and denying its desires, you are mistaken: I only show you the danger of the
contrary extreme. Gods way lies between both. The truth is (if you would be
resolved how far you may please or displease the flesh), The flesh being
ordained to be our servant and Gods servant, must be used as a servant: You
will give your servant food, and raiment, and wholesome lodging, and good usage,
or else you are unjust, and he will be unfit to do your work: But so far as he
would Master you, or disobey you, you will correct him or keep him under. You
will feed your horse, or else he will not carry you: But if he grow unruly, you
must tame him. It is a delusory formality of Papists to tie all the Countries
to one time and measure of fasting, as Lent, Fridays, etc. when men's states are
so various that many (though not quite sick) have more need of a restoring
diet; and those that need fasting, need it not all at once, nor in one measure,
but at the time, and in the measure, as the taming of their flesh requires it.
As (...) Physician should proclaim that all his Patients should take Physic
such 40 days every year, whether their disease be plethorick or consuming, from
fullness or from abstinence, and whether the disease take him at that time of
the year or another. And remember that you must not under pretenses of saving
the body, disable it to serve God. You will not lay any such correction on your
Child or Servant as shall disable them from their work, but such as shall
excite them to it. And understand that all your Afflicting your body must be
but either Preventive, as keeping the fire from the thatch, or Medicinal and
Corrective, and not strictly Vindictive: for that belongs to your Judge: Though
in a subordination to the other ends, the smart or suffering for its fault, is
one end, and so it is truly Penal or Vindictive, as all Chastisement is: And so
Paul says, Behold what Revenge, etc. 2 Cor. 7.11. But not as mere Judicial
Revenge is. Remember therefore, though you must so far tame your Body as to
bring it into subjection, that you perish not by pampering it; yet not so far
as to bring it to weakness, and sickness, and unfitness for its duty: Nor yet
must you dare to conceit that you please God, or satisfy him for your sin, by
such a wronging and hurting your own body. Such Popish Religiousness shows that
men have very low and carnal conceits of God. Was it not a base wickedness in
them that offered their Children in sacrifice, to think that God would be
pleased with such cruelty? Yea, were it not to have directed us to Christ, he
would not have accepted of the blood of bulls and goats: It is not sacrifice
that he desires: He never was bloodthirsty, nor took any pleasure in the
Creatures suffering. How can you think then that he will take pleasure in your
consuming and destroying your own bodies? It is as unreasonable as to imagine
that he delights to have men cut their own throats, or hang themselves; for
pining and consuming ones self is self-murder as well as that. Yet I know no
man should draw back from a painful or hazardous work when God calls him to it,
for fear of destroying the flesh: But do not make work or suffering for your
selves. God will lay as much Affliction on you as you need; and be thankful if
he will enable you to bear that: but you have no need to add more. If your
selves make the suffering, how can you with any encouragement beg strength of
God to bear it? and if you have not strength, what will you do? Nay how can you
pray for deliverance from Gods Afflictings, when you make more of your own? And
thus I have showed you the danger of Over-doing, and what a hindrance it is to
a settled Peace, both of Church (State) and Soul; though perhaps it may not
condemn a particular Soul so certainly (in most parts of it) as doing too
little will.

5. The next part of my Direction (first expressed) is, that You avoid causless
scruples, about doctrines, duties, sins or your own state.

These are also Engines of the Enemy to batter the Peace and Comfort of your
soul; He knows that it is cheerful Obedience with a confidence of Christ's
Merits and Mercies that God Accepts: And therefore if he cannot hinder a poor
soul from setting upon Duty, he will hinder him if he can by these scruples
from a cheerful and prosperous progress. First, if he can, he will take in
scruples about the Truth of his Religion, and showing him the many opinions
that are in the world, he will labor to bring the poor Christian to a loss. Or
else he will assault him by the men of some particular Sect, to draw him to
that party, and so by corrupting his Judgment to break his Peace: or at least
to trouble his head, and divert his thoughts from God, by tedious Disputes. The
Papists will tell him that they are the only true Catholic Church (as if they
had g^t a Monopoly or Patent for Religion, and had confined Christ to
themselves) who are such notorious abusers of him. And as if all the Churches
of Greece, Ethiopia and the rest of the world were unchurcht by Christ to
humor Master Pope, though they be far more in Number, and many of them sounder
in doctrine then the Romanists are; Those of other parties will do the like,
each one to draw him to their own way. And the Devil would make him believe
that there are as many Religions as there be odd Opinions: when, alas, the
Christian Religion is one, and but one, consisting, for the doctrinals, in
those fundamentals contained in our Creed: and men's lesser erroneous opinions
are but the scabs that adhere to their Religion: Only the Church of Rome is a
very Leper, whose infectious disease does compel us to avoid her company: (As
for any sort of men that deny the Fundamentals, I will not call them by the
name of Christians) So also in Duties of Worship Satan will be casting in
Scruples. If they should hear the Word, he will cause them to be scrupling the
calling of the Minister, or something in his doctrine, to discourage them. If
they should Dedicate their Children to Christ in the Baptismal Covenant, he
will be raising scruples about the Lawfulness of Baptizing Infants: When they
should solace their souls at the Lords Supper, or other Communion of the
Church, he will be raising scruples about the fitness of every one that they
are to Join with, and whether it be lawful to Join with such an Ignorant man,
or such a wicked man; or whether it be a true Church, or rightly gathered, or
governed, or the Minister a true Minister, and twenty the like. When they
should Join with the Church in the singing of Gods Praises, he will move one to
scruple singing David's Psalms, another to scruple singing among the ungodly,
another singing Psalms that agree not to every man's condition; another, because
our Translation is bad, or our Meeter defective, and we might have better (...)
should spend the Lords Day in Gods Spiritual Worship, he causes one to scruple
whether the Lords Day be of Divine Institution: another he drives into the
other extreme, to scruple almost every thing that is not worship; Whether they
may provide their meat on that day (when^yet it is a solemn day of
thanksgiving, and they scruple not much more on other thanksgiving days) or
whether they may so much as move a stick out of their way; Others he moves to
trouble themselves with scruples, at what hour the day begins and ends, and the
like: Whereas if they, 1. Understood that worldly rest is commanded but as a
help to spiritual Worship. 2. And that they must employ as much of that day in
Gods work as they do of other days in their Callings, and rest in the night as
at other times, and that God looks to Time for the Works sake, and not at the
Work for the Time sake; this would cast out most of their scruples. The like
course Satan takes with Christians in Reading, Praying in secret, or in their
families, Teaching their families, Reproving Sinners, Teaching the Ignorant,
Meditation, and all other duties, too long to mention the particular scruples
which he thrusts into men's heads, much more to Resolve them, which would
require a large Volume alone.

Now I would entreat all such Christians to consider how little they Please
God, and how much they Please Satan, and how much they break their own Peace,
and the Peace of the Churches. If you send a man on a Journey, would you like
him better that would stand Questioning and scrupling every step he goes,
whether he set the right foot before? or whether he should go in the footpath,
or in the road? or him that would cheerfully go on, not thinking which foot
goes forward; and rather step a little beside the path, and in again, then to
stand scrupling when he should be going. If you send reapers into your harvest,
which would you like better? Him that would stand scrupling how many straws he
should cut down at once, and at what height, and with fears of cutting them too
high or too low, too many at once or too few, should do you but little work? Or
Him that would do his work cheerfully as well as he can? Would you not be angry
at such childish unprofitable diligence or curiosity as is a hindrance to your
work? And is it not so with our Master? There was but one of those parties in
the right that Paul spoke to, Romans 14, and 15. And yet he not only persuades
them to bear with one another, and not to Judge one another, but to receive the
weak in f^^th, and not to doubtful disputations: but he b^^s them, Let every
man be fully persuaded in his own mind. How? Can he that erreth be fully
persuaded in his error? Yes: he may go on boldly, and confidently, not
troubling himself with demurs in his duty, as long as he took* the safer side
in his doubt. Not that this should encourage any to venture on sin, or to
neglect a due enquiry after Gods mind. But I speak against tormenting scruples,
which do no work, but hinder from it, and stay us from our Duty.

The same I say against scruples about your sins: Satan will make you believe
that every thing is a sin, that he may disquiet you, if he cannot get you to
believe that nothing almost is sin, that he may destroy you. You shall not put
a bit in your mouth but he will move a scruple whether it were not too Good, or
too much. You shall not cloth your self but he will move you to scruple the
lawfulness of it. You shall not come into any company but he will afterward vex
you about every word you spoke, lest you sinned*

The like I may say also about your condition: but more of that anon.

DIRECTION XXVII.
27. When God has once showed you a Certainty, or but a strong probability of
your sincerity and his special Love: Labor to fix this so deep in your
Apprehension and Memory, that it may serve for the time to come, and not only
for the present: And leave not your soul too open to Changes upon every New
Apprehension, nor to question all that is past upon every Jealousy: Except when
some Notable declining to the world and the flesh, or a committing of Gross
sins, or a wilfulness or carelessness in other sins that you may avoid, do give
you just Cause of questioning your sincerity, and bringing your s^ul again to
the bar, and your estate to a more exact review.

SOme Antinomian Writers and Preachers you shall meet with, who will persuade
you* whatsoever sin you fall into, never more to question your Justification or
Salvation. I have said enough before to prove their doctrine detestable. Their
reason is, Because God changes not as we change, and Justification is never
lost. To which I answer, 1. God hated us while we were workers of Iniquity,
Psalm. 11.5. and 5.5. and was angry with us when we were Children of wrath, Ephesians.
3.1, 2, 3. And afterward he laid by that Hatred and Wrath: and all this without
change. If we cannot reach to apprehend how Gods unchangeableness can stand
with the fullest and frequentest expressions of him in Scripture, must we
therefore deny what those expressions do contain? As Austin says, Shall we
deny that which is plain, because we cannot reach that which is obscure and
difficult? 2. But if these men had well studied the Scriptures, they might have
known that the same man that was yesterday Hated as an Enemy, may to Day be
Reconciled and loved as a Son, and that without any change in God; even as it
falls out within the reach of our Knowledge: For God Rules the world by his
Laws: They are his Moral Instruments: By them he Condemns: By them he
Justifies; so far as he is said in this Life, before the Judgment day, to do
it (unless there be any other secret act of Justification with him, which man
is not able now to understand.) The change is therefore in our Relations, and
in the Moral Action of the Laws. When we are Unbelievers and Impenitent, we are
Related to God as Enemies, Rebels, Unjustified and Unpardoned: being such as
Gods Law Condemns and pronounces Enemies; and the Law of Grace does not yet
Justify or pardon: and so God is, as it were, in some sense obliged according
to that Law which we are under, to deal with us as Enemies by destroying us:
And this is Gods Hating, Wrath, etc. When we Repent, Return and Believe, our
Relation is changed: The same Law that did Condemn us, is Relaxed and Disabled,
and the Law of Grace does now Acquit us; it Pardons us, it Justfieth us; and
God by it: And so God is Reconciled to us, when we are such as according to his
own Law of Grace, he is, as it were, Obliged to forgive and to do Good to and
to use as sons. Is not all this apparently without any change in God! Cannot he
make a Law that shall change its Moral Action according to the change of the
actions or inclinations of sinners? and this without any change in God? And so,
If it should so be, that a Justified man should fall from God, from Christ,
from sincere Faith or Obedience, the Law would Condemn him again, and the Law
of Grace would Justify him no more (in that state) and all this without any
change in God. 3. If this Antinomian Argument would prove any thing, it would
prove Justification before and so without Christ's satisfaction, because there
is no change in God. 4. The very point, That no justified man shall ever fall
from Christ, is not so clear and fully revealed in Scripture, and past all
doubt from the assault of Objections, as that a poor soul in such a Relapsed
estate should venture his everlasting salvation wholly on this, supposing that
he were Certain that he was once sincere. For my own part, I am persuaded that
no Rooted Believer, that is Habitually and Groundedly Resolved for Christ, and
has crucified the flesh and the world (as all have that are thoroughly Christ's)
do ever fall quite away from him afterward. But I dare not lay my salvation on
this. And, if I were no surer of my salvation, then I am of the truth of this
my Judgment, to speak freely, my soul would be in a very sad Condition. 5. But
suppose it as certain and plain as any word in the Gospel, (that a Justified
man is never quite Unjustified) Yet as every new sin brings a new obligation to
punishment (or else they could not be pardoned, as needing no pardon) so must
every sin have its particular pardon, (and consequently, the sinner a
particular Justification from the Guilt of that sin) besides his first general
pardon (and Justification:) (For to pardon sin before it is committed, is to
pardon sin that is no sin, which is a Contradiction, and Impossibility.) Now,
though for daily unavoydable Infirmities, there be a pardon of Course, upon the
Title of our Habitual Faith and Repentance; yet whether in case of Gross sin,
or more notable Defection, this will prove a sufficient Title to particular
pardon, without the addition of actual Repentance; and what Case the sinner is
in till that actual Repentance and Faith, as I told you before, are so
difficult questions (it being ordered by Gods great wisdom that they should be
so) that it beseems no wise man to venture his salvation on his own opinion in
these. Nay it is certain, that if Gross sinners having opportunity, and
knowledge of their sins, Repent not, they shall perish. And therefore I think,
a Justified man has great Reason upon such falls, to examine his particular
Repentance, (as well as his former state) and not to promise himself, or
presume upon a pardon without it. 6. And besides all this, though both the
Continuance of Faith, and non-intercision of Justification be never so certain,
yet when a man's obedience is so far overthrown, his former Evidences and
Persuasions of his Justification will be uncertain to him. Though he have no
Reason to think that God is changeable, or Justification will be lost, yet he
has Reason enough to question whether ever he were a true Believer, and so
were ever Justified. For Faith works by Love: and they that Love Christ will
keep his Commandments. Libertines and carnal men may talk their pleasure: but
when Satan maintains not their Peace, sin will break it: and Dr. Sibs words
will be found true, Souls Conflict, page 41, 42. Though the main pillar of our
Comfort be the free forgiveness of our sins, yet if there be a neglect ^f
growing in Holiness, the soul will never be soundly quiet, because it will be
pro^e to question the truth of Justification: and it is as proper for sin to
raise doubts and fears in the Conscience, as for rotten flesh and wood to breed
worms: Where there is not a pure Conscience* there is not a pacified
Conscience, etc. Read the rest.

This much I have been fain to premise, lest my words for Consolation should
occasion security and desolation. But now let me desire you to peruse the
Direction, and practice it. If when God has given you Assurance, or strong
probabilities of your sincerity, you will make use of it but only for that
present time, you will never then have a settled Peace in your soul: Besides,
the great wrong you do to God, by necessitating him to be so often renewing
such discoveries, and repeating the same words to you so often over. If your
Child offend you, would you have him when he is pardoned no longer to believe
it then you are telling it him? Should he be still asking you over and over
every day, Father, am I forgiven, or no? Should not one answer serve his turn?
Will you not believe that your money is in your purse or chest any longer then
you are looking on it? Or that your corn is growing on your land, or your
cattle in your grounds any longer then you are looking on them? By this Course
a Rich man should* have no more content then a beggar, longer then he is
looking on his money, or goods, or lands: and when he is looking on one, he
should again lose the Comfort of all the rest. What has God given you a Memory
for, but to lay up former apprehensions, and discoveries, and experiences, and
make use of them on all meet occasions afterward? Let me therefore persuade
you to this great and necessary work. When God has once Resolved your Doubts,
and showed you the truth of your Faith, Love or Obedience, Write it down, if
you can, in your book (as I have advised you in my Treatise of Rest) Such a day
upon serious perusal of my heart* I found it thus and thus with my self. Or at
least, Write it deep in your Memory; And do not suffer any fancies, or fears,
or light surmises to cause you to question this again, as long as you fall not
from the Obedience or Faith which you then discovered. Alas, man's Apprehension
is a most mutable thing: If you leave your soul open to every new apprehension,
you will never be settled: You may think two contrary things of your self in an
hour. You have not always the same opportunity for right discerning, nor the
same clearness of Apprehension, nor the same outward means to help you, nor the
same inward Assistance of the Holy Ghost: When you have these therefore, make
use of them, and fix your wavering soul, and take your Question and Doubt as
Resolved, and do not tempt God, by calling him to new Answers again and again,
as if he had given you no answer before. You will never want some occasion of
Jealousy and fears as long as you have Corruption in your heart, and sin in
your life* and a Tempter to be troubling you: But if you will suffer any such
wind to shake your Peace and Comforts, you will be always shaking, and
fluctuating as a wave of the Sea* And you must labor to apprehend not only
the Uncomfortableness, but the Sinfulness also of this course. For though the
questioning your own sincerity on every small occasion be not near so great a
sin, as the questioning of Gods Merciful Nature, or the truth of his Promise,
or his Readiness to show Mercy to the Penitent soul, or the Freeness and
Fullness of the Covenant of Grace: yet even this is no contemptible sin. For 1.
You are doing Satan's work, in denying Gods Graces, and Accusing your self
falsely, and so pleasing the Devil in Disquieting your self. 2. You slander Gods
Spirit as well as your own soul, in saying, He has not Renewed and Sanctified
you, when he has. 3. This will necessitate you to further Unthankfulness: for
who can be Thankful for a Mercy that thinks he never received it? 4. This will
shut your mouth against all those Praises of God, and that Heavenly joyful
Commemoration of his great unspeakable Love to your soul, which should be the
blessed work of your life. 5* This will much abate your Love to God, and your
sense of the Love of Christ in dying for you, and all the rest of your Graces,
while you are still questioning your Interest in Gods Love. 6. It will lay such
a discouragement on your soul, as will both destroy the sweetness of all Duties
to you (which is a great evil) and thereby make you backward to them, and
heartless in them: You will have no mind of Praying, Meditation, or other
duties, because all will seem dark to you, and you will think that every thing
makes against you. 7. You rob all about you of that cheerful encourageing
example and persuasion which they should have from you, and by which you might
win many souls to God: And contrarily you are a discouragement and hindrance to
them. I could mention many more sinful aggravations of your denying Gods Graces
in you on every small insufficient occasion; which methinks should make you be
very tender of it, if not to avoid unnecessary Trouble to your self, yet at
least to avoid sin against God.

And what I have said of Evidences and Assurance, I would have you understand
also of your Experiences. You must not make Use only at the present of your
Experiences, but lay them up for the time to come. Nor must you tempt God so
far as to expect new Experiences upon every new scruple or doubt of yours* as
the Israelites expected New Miracles in the Wilderness, still forgetting the
Old. If a Scholar should in his Studies forget all that he has Read and
Learned, and all the Resolutions of his Doubts which in study he has attained,
and leave his Understanding still as an unwritten Paper, as Receptive of every
Mutation and New Apprehension, and contrary Conceit, as if he had never studied
the Point before, he will make but a poor proficiency, and have but a
fluctuating unsettled brain. A Scholar should make all the studies of his Life
to compose one entire Image of Truth in his soul, as a Painter makes every line
he draws to compose one entire picture of a man; and as a Weaver makes every
thread to compose one Web: so should you make all former Examinations,
Discoveries, Evidences and Experiences, Compose one full Discovery of your
Condition, that so you may have a settled Peace of soul: And see that you tie
both Ends together; and neither look on your present troubled state without
your former, lest you be unthankful, and unjustly discouraged; nor on your
former state without observance of your present frame of heart and life, lest
you deceive your self, or grow secure. O that you could well observe this
Direction! How much would it help you to escape extremes, and Conduce to the
settling of a well-grounded Peace, and at once, to the well ordering of your
whole Conversation.

DIRECTION XXVIII.
Be very Careful that you create not perplexities and terrors to your own soul,
by rash mis-interpretations of any Passages either of Scripture, of Gods
Providence, or of the Sermons or private Speeches of Ministers: But Resolve
with Patience, yea with Gladness, to suffer Preachers to deal with their
Congregations in the most searching, serious, and awakening manner: lest your
weakness should be a wrong to the whole Assembly, and possibly the undoing of
many a sensual, drowsy or obstinate soul, who will not be convinced and awaked
by a Comforting way of Preaching, or by any smoother or gentler means.

HEre are three dangerous enemies to your Peace, which (for brevity) I warn you
of together.

1. Rash Mis-interpretations and misapplications of Scripture. Some weak-headed
Troubled Christians can scarce read a Chapter, or hear one read, but they will
find something which they think does Condemn them. If they read of Gods Wrath
and Judgment, they think it is meant against them. If they read, Our God is a
Consuming Fire, they think presently it is themselves that must be the ^ewel:
Whereas Justice and Mercy have each their proper objects: The burningst Fire
will not waste the Gold, nor is Water the Fuel of it: But combustible matter
it will presently consume. An humble soul, that lies prostrate at Christ's feet,
confessing its unworthiness, and bewailing its sinfulness, this is not the
object of Revenging Justice: Such a soul bringing Christ's Merits, and pleading
them with God, is so far from being the Fuel of this Consuming ^ire, that he
brings that water which will undoubtedly quench it. Yet this
Scripture-expression of our God, may subdue carnal s^curity even in the best,
but not dismay them or ^^scourage them in their hopes. Another (...) in Psalm.
5. I will set thy sins in order (...); and he thinks, certainly God will d^^l
thus by him. Not considering, that God charge only their sins upon them that
^ha^ge them not by true Repentance on themselves, and Accept not of Christ who
has Discharged them by his blood. It is the excusers, and mincers, and
defenders of sin, that love not those that Reprove them, and that will not
avoid them, nor the occasions of them, that would not be Reformed, and will not
be persuaded, in whose souls Iniquity has Dominion, and that Delight in it, it
is these on whom God Charge their sin: For this is the Condemnation, that
Light is come into the world, and men Love Darkness rather then Light: and come
not to the Light, lest their deeds should be Reproved, Joh. 3.20, 21. But for
the soul that trembles at Gods Word, and Comes home to God with shame and
sorrow, Resolving to return no more to wickedness, God is so far from Charging
his sins upon him, that he never mentions them, as I told you, is evident in
the Case of the Prodigal. He makes not a poor sinners burden more heavy by
hitting him in the teeth with his sins, but makes it the office of his Son to
ease him by disburthening him.

Many more Texts might be named (and perhaps it would not be lost labor) which
Troubled Souls do mis-understand and misapply: but it would make this Writing
tedious, which is already swelled so far beyond my first intention.

2. The second Enemy of your Peace here mentioned, is, Misunderstanding and
misapplying Passages of Providence. Nothing more common with Troubled souls,
then upon every new Cross and Affliction that befalls them, presently to think,
God takes them for Hypocrites! and to question their sincerity! As if David and
Job had not left them a full warning against this Temptation. Do you lose your
Goods? so did Job. Do you lose your Children? so did Job: and that in no very
Comfortable way. Do you lose your Health? so did Job. What if your godly
friends should come about you in this Case, and bend all their wits and
speeches to persuade you that you are but an Hypocrite? as Jobs friends did by
him? Would not this put you harder to it? Yet could Job resolve, I will not let
go mine Integrity till I dye. I know Gods Chastisements are all Paternal
Punishments: and that Christians should search and try their hearts and ways at
such times; but not conclude that they are Graceless ever the more for being
Afflicted, seeing God chasteneth every son whom he receives, Heb. 12.6, 7. And
in searching after sin it self in your Afflictions, be sure that you make the
Word, and not your sufferings, the Rule to discover how far you have sinned;
and let Afflictions only quicken you to try by the Word. How many a Soul have
I known that by mis-interpreting Providence, have in a blind Jealousy been
termed quite from Truth and Duty, supposing it had been error and sin? and all
because of their Afflictions? As a foolish man in his sickness accuses the
last meat that he ate before he fell sick, though it might be the wholsomest
that ever he ate, and the disease may have many Causes which he is Ignorant of.
One man being sick, a busy seducing Papist comes to him (for it is their use to
take such opportunities) and tells him, It is Gods hand upon you for forsaking
or straying from the Roman Catholic Church; and God has sent this Affliction
to bring you home: all your Ancestors lived and dyed in this Church, and so
must you if ever you will be saved. The poor Jealous affrighted sinner hearing
this, and through his Ignorance being unable to answer him, thinks it is even
true, and presently turns Papist. In the same manner do most other Sects. How
many have the Antin^mians and Anabaptists thus seduced? finding a poor silly
woman (for it is most common with them) to be under sad doubts and distress of
soul, one tells her, It is Gods hand on you to convince you of error, and to
bring you to submit to the Ordinance of Baptism: and upon this many have been
Rebaptized, and put their foot into that snare which I have yet seen few
escape and draw back from. Another comes and tells the troubled soul, It is
Legal Preaching, and looking at something in your self for Peace and Comfort,
which has brought you into this distress: As long as you follow these Legal
Preachers, and read their books, and look at any thing in your self, and seek
Assurance from Marks within you, it will never be better with you. These
Preachers understand not the nature of free Grace, nor ever tasted it
themselves, and therefore they cannot preach it, but despise it. You must know
that Grace is so free that the Covenant has no Condition: You must Believe and
not look after the Marks: and Believing is but to be persuaded that God is
Reconciled to you, and has forgiven you: for you are Justified before you were
born if you are one of the Elect, and can but Believe it; 't is not any thing
of your own by which you can be Justified: Nor is it any sin of yours that can
unjustifie. It is the witness of the Spirit only persuading you of your
Justification and Adoption, that can give you Assurance; and fetching it from
any thing in your self, is but a resting on your own Righteousness, and
forsaking Christ. When the Antinomian has but sung this Ignorant Charm to a
poor Soul as Ignorant as himself, and prepared by terrors to entertain the
Impression, presently it (often) takes, and the sinner without a wonder of Mercy
is undone. This Doctrine which subverteth the very scope of the Gospel, being
entertained, subverteth his Faith and Obedience; and usually the Libertinism of
his opinion is seen in his Liberty of Conscience, and Licentious practices: and
his trouble of mind is cured, as a burning fever, by opium, which gives him
such a sleep*that he never awaketh till he be in another world. Yet these
errors are so gross, and so fully against the express Texts of Scripture, that
if Ministers would condescendingly, lovingly and familiarly deal with them, and
do their duty, I should hope many well-meaning Souls might be recovered. Thus
you see the danger of rash interpreting, and so misinterpreting Providence. As
such interpretations of prosperity and success deludeth not only the Mohammedan
world, and the Profane world, but many that seemed Godly; so many such
Interpretations of Adversity and Crosses do; especially if the Seducer be but
kind and liberal to relieve them in their Adversity he may do with many poor
Souls almost what he please.

3. The third Enemy to your peace here mentioned, is, Misinterpreting or
misapplying the Passages of Preachers, in their Sermons, Writings, or private
Speeches. A Minister cannot deal thoroughly or seriously with any sort of
sinners, but some fearful troubled souls apply all to themselves. I must
entreat you to avoid this fault, or else you will turn Gods Ordinances, and the
daily food of your souls into bitterness and wormwood, and all through your
mistakes. I think there is few Ministers so preach, but you might perceive whom
they mean, and they so difference as to tell you who they speak to. I confess
it is a better sign of an honest heart, and self-judging conscience, to say He
speaks now to me: this is my case: then to say, He speaks now to such or such a
one: this is their case. For it is the property of Hypocrites to have their eye
most abroad; and in every duty to be minding most the faults of others: and you
may much discern such in their prayers, in that they will fill their
confessions most with other men's sins, and you may feel them all the while in
the bosom of their neighbors, when you may even feel a sincere man speaking
his own heart, and most opening his own bosom to God. But though self-applying,
and self-searching be far the better sign, yet must not any wise Christian do
it mistakingly* for that may breed abundance of very sad effects. For besides
the aforesaid embittering of Gods Ordinances to you, and so discouraging you
from them, do but consider what a grief and a snare you may prove to your
Minister. A grief it must needs be to him who knows he should not make sad the
soul of the innocent, to think that he cannot avoid it, without avoiding his
duty. When God has put two several Messages in our mouths, Isa. 3.10, 11. Say
to the R^ghteous, it shall be well with him: and Say to the wicked, it shall be
ill with him; He that believes shall be saved; He that believes not shall be
damned, and we speak both; will you take that as spoken to you, which is spoken
to the unbeliever and the wicked? Alas, how is it possible then for us to
forbear troubling you? If you will put your head under every stroke that we
give against sin and sinners, how can we help it if you smart? what a sad case
are we in, by such misapplications! We have but two Messages to deliver, and
both are usually lost by misapplication. The wicked says, I am the Righteous,
and therefore it shall go well with me: the Righteous says, I am the wicked,
and therefore it shall go ill with me: The Unbeliever says, I am a Believer,
and therefore am justif^^d; The Believer says, I am (...) Unbeliever* and
therefore am condemned: nay* it is not only the loss of our preaching, but we
often do them much harm: for they are hardened that should be humbled; and they
are wounded more that should be healed A Minister now must needs tell them, who
he means by the Believer, and who by the Unbeliever, who by the Righteous, and
who by the wicked: and yet when he has done it as accurately, and as
cautelously as he can, misapplying souls will wrong themselves by it: so that
because people cannot see the distinguishing line, it therefore comes to pass
that few are comforted, but when Ministers preach nothing else but comfort: and
few humbled, but where Ministers bend almost all their endeavors that way, that
people can feel almost nothing else from him: But for him that equally would
divide to each their portion, each one snatcheth up the part of another, and he
often misseth of profiting either: And yet this is the course that we must take.

And what a snare is this to us, as well as a grief? what if we should he so
moved with compassion of your troubles, as to fit almost all our Doctrine and
Application to you? what a fearful guilt should we draw upon our own souls*

Nay, what a snare may you thus prove to the greater part of the Congregation?
Alas, we have seldom past one or two, or three troubled Consciences in an
Auditory (and perhaps some of their troubles be the fruit of such wilful
sinning, that they have more need of greater humbling yet) should we now
neglect all the rest of these poor souls, to preach only to you? O how many an
ignorant hardhearted sinner comes before God every day! Shall we let such go
away as they came, without ever a blow to awaken them and stir their hearts!
when alas, all that ever we can do is too little! when we preach you into tears
and trembling, we preach them asleep! Could we speak swords, it would scarce
make them feel, when you through misapplication have gone home with anguish and
fears; how few of all these have been pricked at the heart, and said, What
shall we do to be saved? Have you no Pity now on such stupid souls as these? I
fear this one distemper of yours, that you cannot bear this rousing preaching,
does bewray another and greater sin; look to it, I beseech you; for I think I
have spied out the cause of your trouble: Are you not your self too great a
stranger to poor stupid sinners? and come not among them? or pity them not as
you should? and do not your duty for the saving of their souls? but think it
belongs not to you but to others? Do you use to deal with servants and
neighbors about you, and tell them of sin and misery, and the remedy, and seek
to draw their hearts to Christ, and bring them to duty? I doubt you do little
in this (and that is sad unmercifulness:) for if you did, truly you could not
choose but find such miserable ignorance, such senselesness and blockishness,
such hating reproof and unwillingness to be reformed, such love of this world,
and slavery to the flesh, and so little savor of Christ, Grace, Heaven and the
things of the Spirit, and especially such an unteachableness, intractableness
(as thorns and briars) and so great a difficulty of moving them an inch from
what they are, that you would have been willing ever after to have Ministers
preach more rousingly then they do, and you would be glad for their sakes when
you heard that which might awake them and prick them to the heart. Yea, if you
had tried how hard a work it is to bring worldly formal Hypocrites to see their
Hypocrisy, or to come over to Christ from the creature, and to be in good
earnest in the business of their salvation, you would be glad to have Preachers
search them to the quick, and ransack their hearts, and help them against their
affected and obstinate self-delusions.

Besides, you should consider that the^ Case is far different from yours. Your
disease is pain and trouble, they are stark dead: You have Gods favor and
doubt of it: they are his enemies and never suspect it: You want comfort, and
they want pardon and life: if your disease should never here be cured, it is
but going more sadly to heaven: But if they be not recovered by Regeneration,
they must lie for ever in Hell: And should we not then pity them more then
you? and study more for them? and preach more for them? and rather forget you
in a Sermon then them? should you not wish us so to do? should we more regard
the comforting of one, then the saving of an hundred? Nay more, we should not
only neglect them but dangerously hurt them, if we should preach too much to
the case of troubled souls: For you are not so apt to misapply passages of
terror, and to take their portion, as they are apt to apply to themselves such
passages for comfort, and take your portion to themselves.

I know some will say, that it is preaching Christ, and setting forth Gods Love
that will win them best, and terrors do but make unwilling Hypocrital
Professors. This makes me remember how I have heard some Preachers of the times
blame their Brethren for not preaching Christ to their People* when they
Preached the danger of rejecting Christ, disobeying him and resisting his
Spirit. Do these men think that it is no preaching Christ (when we have first
many years told men the fullness of his satisfaction, the freeness and general
extent of his Covenant or Promise, and the riches of his Grace, and the
incomprehensibleness of his Glory, and the Truth of all) to tell them
afterward the danger of refusing, neglecting, and disobeying him? and of
living after the flesh, and preferring the world before him? and serving
Mammon, and falling off in persecution, and avoiding the cross, and yielding in
Temptation, and quenching the Spirit, and declining from their first Love, and
not improving their Talents, and not forgiving and loving their brethren, yea
and enemies? etc. Is none of this Gospel? nor preaching Christ? yea, is not
Repentance it self (except despairing Repentance) proper to the Gospel, seeing
the Law excludes it, and all manner of hope. Blame me not, Reader, if I be
zealous against these men, that not only know no better what preaching Christ
is, but in their ignorance reproach their Brethren for not preaching Christ,
and withal condemn Christ himself, and all his Apostles? Do they think that
Christ himself knew not what it was to preach Christ? or that he set us a
pattern too low for our imitation? I desire them soberly to read Mat. 5.6, 7,
10, 25. Romans 8. from the first verse to the 14. Romans 2. Heb. 2. and 4. and 5.
and 10 and then tell me whether we preach as Christ and his Apostles did. But
to the Objection: I Answer first, we do set forth Gods love, and the fullness of
Christ, and the sufficiency of his death and satisfaction for all, and the
freeness and extent of his offer and promise of mercy, and his readiness to
welcome returning sinners: this we do first (mixing with this the discovery of
their natural misery by sin, which must be first known) and next we show them
the danger of Rejecting Christ and his offer, 2. When we find men settled
under the preaching of free Grace, in a base contempt or sleepy neglect of it,
preferring the world and their carnal pleasures and ease before all the Glory
of heaven, and Riches of Christ and Grace, is it not time for us to say, How
shall ye escape, if ye neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2.3. and of how much
soarer punishment shall he be thought worthy that treads under foot the blood
of the Covenant? Heb. 10.26 when men grow careless and unbelieving, must we not
say, Take heed lest a promise being lest of entering into his Rest, any of you
should seem to come short of it? Heb. 4.1. 3. Has not Christ led us, commanded
us and taught us this way? Except ye Repent, ye shall all perish, was his
Doctrine, Luke 13.3, 5. Go into the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature: (what is that Gospel?) He that believes shall be saved, and he that
believes not shall be damned, Mark 16.16. Those mine Enemies that would not I
should reign over them, bring hither and stay them before me, Luke 19.27. Does
any of the Apostles speak more of hellfire, and the worm that never dies, and
the fire that never is quenched, their Christ himself does? And do not his
Apostles go the same way? even Paul, the greatest preacher of faith, 2 Thessalonians.
1*7, 8, 9. and 2.12, etc. What more common? Alas, what work should we make, if
we should stroke and smooth all men with Antinomian language? It were the way
to please all the sensual profane multitude; but it is none of Christ's way to
save their souls. I am ready to think that these men would have Christ
preached, as the Papists would have him prayed to; to say, Jesu, Jesu, Jesu,
nine times together, and this often over, is their praying to him; and to have
Christ's name often in the Preachers mouth, some men think is the right preaching
Christ.

Let me now desire you hereafter, to be glad to hear Ministers awaken the
profane and dead-hearted hearers, and search all to the quick, and misapply
nothing to your self: but if you think any passage does nearly concern you,
open your mind to the Minister privately, when he may satisfy you more fully,
and that without doing hurt to others: And consider what a strait Ministers are
in that have so many of so different conditions, inclinations and conversations
to preach to*,

DIRECTION XXIX.
29. Be sure you forget not to distinguish between Causes of Doubting of your
sincerity, and causes of mere Humiliation, Repentance and Amendment: And do not
raise Doubtings and Fears, where God calls you but to Humiliation, Amendment,
and fresh recourse to Christ.

THis Rule is of so great moment to your peace, that you will have daily use
for it and can never maintain any true settled peace without the practice of it.
What more common then for poor Christians to pour out a multitude of complaints
of their weaknesses, and wants, and miscarriages; and never consider all the
while that there may be cause of sorrow in these, when yet there is no cause of
doubting of their sincerity. I have showed before, that in gross falls and
great backslidings, Doubtings will arise, and sometime our fears and jealousies
may not be without cause; But it is not ordinary infirmities, nor every sin
which might have been avoided, that is just cause of Doubting. Nay your very
Humiliation must no further be endeavored then it tends to your Recovery, and
to the honoring of mercy: For it is possible that you may exceed in the
measure of your Griefs. You must therefore first be resolved wherein the Truth
of saving Grace does consist, and then in all your failings and weaknesses
first know, whether they contradict sincerity it self and are such as may give
just cause to question your sincerity: If they be not (as the ordinary
infirmities of Believers are not) then you may and must be humbled for them,
but you may not Doubt of your Salvation for them. I told you before* by what
marks you may discern your sincerity, that is, wherein the nature of saving
faith and holiness does consist: Keep that in your eye: and as long as you
find that sure and clear, let nothing make you doubt of your Right to Christ
and Glory. But, alas, how people do contradict the will of God in this! when
you have sinned, God would have you bewail your folly and unkind dealing, and
fly to mercy through Christ: and this you will not do: But he would not have
you torment your self with fears of damnation, and questioning his Love: and
yet this you will do. You may discern by this that Humiliation and Reformation
are sure of God, man's heart is so backward to it: and that vexations, doubts
and fears in true Christians that should be comfortable, are not of God, man's
nature is so prone to them (though the ungodly that should fear and doubt are
as backward to it.)

I think it will not be unseasonable here to lay down the particular Doubts
that usually trouble sincere Believers, and see how far they may be just, and
how far unjust and causeless; and most of them shall be from my own former
experience; and such as I have been most troubled with my self, and the rest
such as are incident to true Christians, and too usual with them

DOUBT. I.
I Have often heard and read in the best Divines, that Grace is not born with us,
and therefore Satan has always possession before Christ, and keeps that
possession in Peace, till Christ come and bind him and cast him out; and that
this is so great a work that it cannot choose but be observed, and for ever
remembered by the soul where it is wrought; yea the several steps and passages
of it may be all observed: first casting down, and then lifting up: first
wounding and killing, and then healing and reviving. But I have not observed
the distinct parts and p^s^^ges of this change in me, nay, I know of no such
sudden observable change at all: I cannot remember that ever I was first
killed, and then revived: Nor do I know by what Minister, nor at what Sermon,
or other means that work which is upon me was wrought: No nor what day or
month or year it was begun. I have slided insensibly into a Profession of
Religion, I know not how: And therefore I fear that I am not sincere, and the
work of true Regeneration was never yet wrought upon my soul.

ANSWER.
I will lay down the full answer to this in these Propositions. 1. It is true
that Grace is not Natural to us, or conveyed by Generation. 2. Yet it is as
true that Grace is given to our Children as well as to us. That it may be so,
and is so with some, all will grant who believe that Infants may be, and are
saved: And that it is so with the Infants of Believers, I have fully proved in
my Book of Baptism: But mark what Grace I mean: The Grace of Remission of
original sin the Children of all true Believers have at least a high
probability of, if not a full Certainty; their parent Accepting it for himself
and them, and Dedicating them to Christ, and engaging them in his Covenant, so
that he takes them for his People, and they take him for their Lord and
Savior. And for the Grace of inward Renewing of their Natures or Dispositions,
it is a secret to us, utterly unknown whether God use to do it in Infants or
no. 3. Gods first-ordained way for the working of inward holiness is by Parents
Education of their Children, and not by the public Ministry of the Word: of
which more anon. 4. All godly Parents do acquaint their Children with the
doctrine of Christ in their Infancy, as soon as they are capable of receiving
it, and do afterward inculcate it on them more and more. 5. These Instructions
of Parents are usually seconded by the workings of the Spirit according to the
capacity of the Child, opening their understandings to receive it, and making
an impression thereby upon the heart. 6. When these Instructions and the inward
workings of the Spirit are just past the preparatory part, and above the
highest step of Common Grace, and have attained to special saving Grace, is
ordinarily undiscernible: and therefore as I have showed already, in Gods usual
way of working Grace, men cannot know the just day or time when they began to
be in the state of Grace. And though men that have long lived in Profaneness,
and are changed suddenly, may conjecture near at the time: yet those that God
has been working on early in their youth, yea or afterward by slow degrees,
cannot know the time of their first receiving the Spirit. 8. The Memories of
all men are so slippery and one thought so suddenly thrust out by another, that
many a thousand souls forget those particular workings which they have truly
felt. 9. The Memories of Children are far weaker then of others: and therefore
it is less probable that all the Spirits workings should by them be remembered.
9. And the motions of Grace are so various, sometimes stirring one Affection,
and sometimes another; sometimes beginning with smaller motions, and then
moving more strongly and sensibly, that its usual for later motions which are
more deeply affecting, to make us overlook all the former, or take them for
nothing. 10. God deals very variously with his Chosen in their Conversion, as
to the accidentals and circumstances of the work. Some he calls not home till
they have run a long race in the way of Rebellion, in open drunkenness,
swearing, worldliness, and derision of holiness: These he usually humbles more
deeply, and they can better observe the several steps of the Spirit in the
work; (and yet not always neither) Others he so restrains in their youth,
that though they have not saving Grace, yet they are not guilty of any Gross
sins, but have a liking to the people and ways of God: and yet he does not
savingly convert them till long after. It is much harder for these to discern
the time or manner of their Conversion: yet usually some conjectures they may
make: And usually their humiliation is not so deep. Others, as is said, have
the saving workings of the Spirit in their very Childhood, and these can least
of all discern the certain time or order. The ordinary way of Gods dealing with
those that are Children of Godly Parents, and have good Education, is, by
giving them some liking of Godly persons and ways, some Conscience of sin, some
Repentance, and recourse by prayer to God in Christ for mercy; yet youthful
lusts and folly, and ill company, do usually much stifle it; till at last by
some Affliction, or Sermon, or Book, or good Company, God sets home the
work, and makes them more Resolute and victorious Christians. These persons
now can remember that they had convictions and stirrings of Conscience when
they were young, and the other forementioned works: perhaps they can remember
some more notable rowsings and awakenings long after, and perhaps they have had
many such fits and steps, and the work has stood at this pass for a long time,
even many years together. But at which of all these Changes it was that the
Soul began to be savingly sincere, I think is next to an impossibility to
discern. According to that experience which I have had of the state of
Christians, I am forced to Judge that most of the Children of the Godly that
ever are Renewed, are Renewed in their Childhood, or much toward it then done,
and that among forty Christians there is not one that can certainly name the
month in which his soul first began to be sincere; and among a thousand
Christians, I think not one can name the hour. The Sermon which awakened them
they may name, but not the hour when they first arrived at a saving sincerity.

My advice therefore to all Christians is this; Find Christ by his Spirit
dwelling in your hearts, and then never trouble your selves, though you know
not the time or manner of his entrance. Do you value Christ above the world?
and Resolve to choose him before the world? and perform these Resolutions? Then
need you not doubt but the Spirit of Jesus is victorious in you.

DOUBT II.
BUT I have often read and heard, that a man cannot come to Christ till he feel
the heavy burden of sin: It is the weary and heavy-laden that Christ calls
to him. He binds up only the brokenhearted: he is a Physician only to
those that feel themselves sick: he brings men to Heaven by the gates (...)
Hell: They must be able to say, I am in a lo^^ Condition, and in a state of
damnation, and ^f I should dye this hour I must perish for ever, before Christ
will deliver them. God will not throw away the blood of his Son on those that
feel not their absolute necessity of it, and that they are undone without it.
But it was never thus with me to this day.

ANSWER.
YOU must distinguish carefully between Repentance as it is in the Mind and
Will, and as it shows it self in the Passion of Sorrow. All that have saving
interest in Christ, have their Judgments and Wills so far changed, that they
know they are great sinners, and that there is no way to the obtaining of
pardon and salvation but by Christ, and the free mercy of God in him; and
thereupon they are convinced that if they remain without the Grace of Christ,
they are undone for ever: Whereupon they understanding that Christ and Mercy is
offered to them in the Gospel, do heartily and thankfully accept the offer, and
would not be without Christ, or change their Hopes of his Grace for all the
world, and do resolve to wait upon him for the further discovery of his Mercy
and the workings of his Spirit, in a Constant and Conscionable use of his
Mea^s, and to be Ruled by him, to their power. Is it not thus with you? If it
be* here is the Life and Substance of Repentance which consists in this
change of the mind and heart: and you have no Cause to Doubt of the truth of
it, for want of more deep and passionate humiliation. 2. I have told you before
how uncertain and unconstant the Passionate effects of Grace are, and how unfit
to Judge by, and given you several Reasons of it. Yet I doubt not but some work
upon the Affections there is, as well as on the Will and Understanding: but
with so great diversity of manner and degrees, that it is not safe judging by
it only or chiefly: Is there no degree of Sorrow or Trouble that has touched
your heart for your sin or Misery? If your Affections were no wh^^ stirred, you
would hardly be moved to Act^on; to use means, or avoid iniquity, much less
would you so often complain as you do. 3. If God prevented those heinous sins in
the time of your unregeneracy, which those usually are guilty of who are called
to so deep a degree of sorrow, you should rather be thankful that your wound
was not deeper, then troubled that the Cure cost you not dearer. Look well
whether the Cure be wrought in the change of your heart and life from the world
to God by Christ, and then you need not be troubled that it was wrought so
easily. 4. Were you not acquainted with the evil of sin, and danger and misery
of sinners in your very Childhood? and also of the necessity of a Savior, and
that Christ dyed to save all sinners that will believe and Repent? and has not
this fastened on your heart, and been working in you by Degrees ever since? If
it be so, then you cannot expect that you should have such deep terrors as
those that never hear of sin and Christ till the news come upon them suddenly
in the ripeness of their sin. There is a great deal of difference betwixt the
Conversion of a Jew or any other Infidel, who is brought on the sudden to know
the doctrine of Sin, Misery, and Salvation by Christ; and the Convertion of a
Professor of the Christian Religi^^* who has known this doctrine in some sort
from his Childhood, and who has a sound Religion, though he be not sound in
his Religion, and so needs not a Conversion to a sound faith, but only to a
soundness in the faith. The suddenness of the News must needs make those
Violent Commotions and Changes in the one, which cannot ordinarily be expected
in the other, who is acquainted so early with the truth, and by such degrees.
5. But suppose you heard nothing of Sin and Misery, and a Redeemer in your
Childhood, or at least understood it not (which yet is unlikely) yet let me ask
you this: Did not that Preacher, or that Book, or whatever other Means God used
for your Conversion, reveal to you Misery and Mercy both together? Did not you
hear and believe that Christ dyed for sin, as soon as you understood your Sin
and Misery? Sure I am that the Scripture reveals both together: and so does
every sound Preacher, and every sound Writer (notwithstanding that the
slanderous Antinomians do shamelesly proclaim that we preach not Christ, but
the Law.) This being so, you may easily apprehend that it must needs abate very
much of the Terror, which would else have been unavoydable. If you had read or
heard that you were a sinner, and the Child of Hell and of Gods (...)* and that
there was no Remedy (which is (...) a Preaching of the Law, as we must not use
to any in the world, nor any since the first promise to Adam must receive;) Yea
or if you had heard Nothing of a Savior for a year, or a day, or an hour after
you had heard that you were an Heir of Hell; and so the Remedy had been but
Concealed from you, though not denied (which ordinarily must not be done) then
you might in all likelihood have found some more terrors of soul that hour.
But when you heard that your sin was pardonable as soon as you heard that you
were a sinner, and heard that your Misery had a sufficient Remedy provided, if
you would accept it, or at least that it was not Remediless, and this as soon
as you heard of that misery, what wonder is it if this exceedingly abate your
fears and troubles! Suppose two men go to visit two several Neighbors that
have the Plague, and One of them says, It is the Plague that is on you; you
are but a Dead man: The other says to the other sick person, It is the Plague
that you have; but here is our Physician at the next door that has a Receipt
that will cure it as Infallibly and as easily as if it were but the prick of a
pin; he has cured thousands and never failed one that took his Receipt: but if
you will not send to him, and trust him, and take his Re^e^^t there is no hopes
of you. Tell me now whether the first of these sick persons be not like to be
more troubled then the other? and whether it will not remove almost all the
fears and troubles of the latter to hear of a Certain Remedy as soon as he
hears of the disease? though some trouble he must needs have to think that he
has a disease in it self so desperate or loathsome. Nay, let me tell you, so
the Cure be but well done, the less Terrors and despairing fears you were put
upon, the more Credit is it to your Physician and his Apothecary, Christ and
the Preacher or Instrument that did the work: and therefore you should rather
praise your Physician, then question the Cure.

DOUBT III.
BUT it is common with all the world to consent to the Religion that they are
bred up in, and somewhat affected with it, and to make Conscience of obeying
the precepts of it: so do the Jews in theirs: the Mahometans in theirs: And I
fear it is no other work on my soul but the mere force of Education, that
makes me Religious, and that I had never that great Renewing work of the
Spirit upon my soul; and so that all my Religion is but mere Opinion, or
Notions in my Brain.

ANSWER.
1. ALL the Religions in the world, besides the Christian Religion, have either
much error and wickedness mixed with some Truth of God, or they contain some
lesser parcel of that Truth alone (as the Jews) Only the Christian Religion
has that whole Truth which is saving. Now so much of Gods Truth as there is in
any of these Religions, so much it may work Good effects upon their souls; as
the knowledge of the Godhead, and that God is Holy, Good, Just, Merciful, and
that he shows them much undeserved Mercy in his daily providence, etc. But
mark these two things, 1. That all persons of false Religions do more easily
and greedily embrace the false part of their Religion then the true; and those
they are zealous for, and practice with all their might, because their natural
corruption does befriend it, and is as combustible fuel for the fire of Hell
to catch in: but that Truth of God which is mixed with their Error, if it be
practical, they fight against it, and abhor it while they hold it, because it
crosses their lusts: insomuch that it is usually but some few of the more
convinced and civil that God in providence makes the main Instruments of
continuing those Truths of his in that part of the wicked world: For we find
that even among Pagans the Prophaner and more sensual sort did deride the
better sort, as our profane Christians do the godly whom they called Puritans.
2. Note, that the Truth of God which in these false Religions is still
acknowledged, is so small a part and so oppressed by Errors, that it is not
sufficient to their salvation (that is, to give them any sound Hope) nor is it
sufficient to make such clear and deep and powerful Impressions in their minds
as may make them Holy or truly Heavenly, or may overcome in them the Interest
of the world and the flesh.

This being so, you may see great reason, why a Turk or a Heathen may be
zealous for his Religion without Gods Spirit, or any true Sanctification, when
yet you cannot be so truly zealous for yours without it. Indeed the speculative
part of our Religion, separated from the Practical, or from the hard and self
denying part of the Practical, many a wicked man may be zealous for: as to
maintain the Godhead, or that God is merciful, etc. or to maintain against the
Jews that Jesus is the Christ, or against the Turks that he is the only
Redeemer and Teacher of the Church, or against the Papists that all the
Christians in the world are Christ's Church as well as the Romans; and against
the Socinians and Arrians, that Christ is God, etc. But this is but a small part
of our Religion: nor does this, or any heathenish Zeal, sanctify the heart, or
truly mortify the flesh, or overcome the world. They may contemn Life and cast
it away for their Pride and Vainglory: but not for the hopes of a holy and
blessed Life with God. This is but the prevalency of one corruption against
another, or rather of vice against nature. There is a common Grace of God that
goes along with common Truths, and according to the measure of their obedience
to the Truth, such was the change it wrought; which was done by common Truths,
and common Grace together, but not by their false mixtures at all. But God has
annexed his special Grace only to the special Truths of the Gospel or
Christian-Religion. If therefore God do by common Grace work a great change on
a Heathen by the means of common Truths, and do by his special Grace work a
greater and special change on you, by the means of the special truths of the
Gospel, have you any reason hereupon to suspect your condition? or should you
not rather both admire that providence and common Grace which is manifested
without the Church, and humbly, rejoycingly and thankfully embrace that special
saving Grace which is manifested to your self above them?

2. And for that which you speak of Education, you have as much cause to doubt
of your conversion, because it was wrought by public preaching, as because it
was wrought by Education. For 1. Both are by the Gospel: For it is the Gospel
that your Parents taught you, as well as which the Preacher teaches you. 2 I
have showed you, that if Parents did not shamefully neglect their duties, the
Word Publicly preached would not be the ordinary instrument of Regeneration to
the Children of true Christians, but would only build them up, and direct them
in the faith, and in obedience. The proof is very plain: If we should speak
nothing of the Interest of our Infants in the Covenant-Grace upon the
Conditional force of their Parents faith, nor of their Baptism: yet Deuteronomy. 6.
and Ephesians. 6. and often in the Proverbs you may find that it is Gods strict
Command that Parents should teach Gods word to their Children, and bring them
up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord; yea with a prediction or half
promise, that if we train up a child in the way he should go, when he is old
he shall not depart from it, Prove. 22.6. Now its certain that God will usually
bless that which he appoints to be the usual means, if it be rightly used:
For he has appointed no means to be used in vain.

I hope therefore by this time you see, that instead of being troubled that the
work was done on your soul by the means of Education, 1. You had more Reason to
be troubled if it had been done first by the public Preaching of the word: For
it should grieve you at the heart to think, 1. That you lived in an
unregenerate state so long, and spent your childehood in vanity and sin, and
thought not seriously on God and your salvation, for so many years together. 2.
And that you or your Parents sin should provoke God so long to withdraw his
Spirit and deny you his Grace. 2. You may see also what unconceiveable thanks
you owe to God, who made Education the means of your early change. 1. In that
he prevented so many and grievous sins which else you would have been guilty of
(And you may read in David's and Manasses case, that even pardoned sins have
oft-times very sad effects left behind them.) 2. That you have enjoyed Gods
Spirit and Love so much longer then else you would have done. 3. That iniquity
took not so deep rooting in you, as by custom it would have done. 4. That the
Devil cannot Glory of that service which you did him, as else he might: and
that the Church is not so much the worse, as else it might have been by the
mischief you would have done; and that you need not all your days look back
with so much trouble, as else you must, upon the effects of your ill doing; nor
with Paul, to think of one Stephen, yea many Saints in whose blood you first
embrued your hands, and to cry out, I was born out of due time: I am not worthy
to be called a Christian, because I persecuted the Church of God: I was mad
against them, and persecuted them into several Cities: I was sometime foolish,
disobedient, serving diverse lusts and pleasures. Would you rather that God had
permitted you to do this? 5. And me thinks it should be a comfort to you, that
your own Father was the Instrument of your spiritual Good: that he that was the
means of your Generation, was the means of your Regeneration: both because it
will be a double comfort to your Parents, and because it will endear and engage
you to them in a double bond. For my part, I know not what God did secretly in
my heart before I had the use of memory and reason, but the first good that
ever I felt on my soul, was from the Counsels and teachings of my own father in
my childehood; and I take it now for a double mercy, being gladder that he was
the Instrument to do me Good, then if it had been the best Preacher in the
world: How foul an oversight is it then, that you should be troubled at one of
the choicest mercies of your life, yea that your life was capable of, and for
which you owe to God such abundant thanks!

DOUBT. IV.
But my great fear is, that the life of Grace is not yet within me, because I
am so void of spiritual sense and feeling: Me thinks I am in spiritual things
as Dead as a block, and my heart as hard as a Rock or the nether Millstone:
Grace is a principle of new Life, and Life is a principle of sense and motion:
it causes vigor and Activity; such should I have in Duty if I had the Life of
Grace. But I feel the great curse of a dead heart within me: God seems to
withdraw his quickening Spirit, and to forsake me; and to give me up to the
hardness of my heart. If I were in Covenant with him, I should feel the
blessing of the Covenant within me; The hard heart would be taken out of my
body, and a heart of flesh, a soft heart would be given to me: But I cannot
weep one tear for my sins. I can think on the blood of Christ, and of my bloody
sins that caused it, and all will not wring one tear from mine eyes: And
therefore I fear that my soul is yet destitute of the life of Grace.

ANSWER.
1. A Soft heart consists in two things, 1. That the Will be perswadable,
tractable and yielding to God, and pliable to his will: 2. That the Affections
or Passions be somewhat moved herewithal about spiritual things. Some degree
more or less of the latter, does concur with the former; but I have told you
that it is the former wherein the heart and life of Grace does lie and that the
latter is very various, and uncertain to try by. Many do much overlook the
Scripture-meaning of the word Hard-heartedness. Mark it up and down concerning
the Israelites who are so often charged by Moses, David, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and
other Prophets, to be hardhearted, or to harden their hearts, or stiffen their
necks; and you will find that the most usual meaning of the Holy Ghost is
this; They were an intractable, disobedient, obstinate people: or as the Greek
word in the New Testament signifies, which we often translate Unbelieving,
they were an Vnperswadable people: no saying would serve them. They set light
by Gods Commands, Promises, and severest Threatenings, and Judgments
themselves: nothing would move them to forsake their sins and obey the voice of
God. You shall find that hardness of heart is seldom put for want of tears, or
a melting weeping disposition; and never at all for the want of such tears,
where the will is tractable and obedient. I pray you examine your self then
according to this Rule. God offers his Love in Christ, and Christ with all
his benefits to you: Are you willing to Accept them? He commands you to
worship him, and use his ordinances, and Love his people, and others, and to
forsake your known Iniquities, so far that they may not have dominion over you:
Are you Willing to this? He commands you to take him for your God, and Christ
for your Redeemer, and stick to him for better and worse, and never forsake
him. Are you willing to do this? If you have a stiff Rebellious heart, and will
not Accept of Christ and Grace, and will rather let go Christ then the world,
and will not be persuaded from your known iniquities, but are loath to leave
them, and love not to be reformed, and will not set upon those duties, as you
are able, which God requires, and you are fully convinced of, then are you
Hard-hearted in the Scripture sense. But if you are glad to have Christ with
all your heart upon the terms that he is offered to you in the Gospel, and you
do walk-daily in the way of duty as you can, and are willing to Pray, and
willing to hear and wait on God in his Ordinances, and willing to have all Gods
Graces formed within you, and willing to let go your profitablest and sweetest
sins, and it is your daily desires, O that I could seek God, and do his will
more faithfully, zealously and pleasingly then I do! O that I were rid of this
body of sin! these carnal, corrupt and worldly inclinations, and that I were as
holy as the best of Gods Saints on earth! And if when it comes to practice,
whether you should obey or no, though some unwillingness to duty and
willingness to sin be in you, you are offended at it, and the greater bent of
your Will is for God, and it is but the lesser which is toward sin, and
therefore the world and flesh do not lead you captive, and you live not
wilfully in avoidable sins, nor at all in gross sin: I say, if it be thus with
you, then you have the Blessing of a soft heart, a heart of flesh, a new heart;
for it is a Willing obedient tractable heart, opposed to obstinacy in sin,
which Scripture calls a soft heart. And then for the Passionate part, which
consists in lively feelings of sin, misery, mercy, etc. and in weeping for
sin, I shall say but this; 1. Many an unsanctified person has very much of it,
which yet are desperately Hard-hearted sinners. It depends far more on the
temper of the body, then of the Grace in the soul: Women usually can weep
easily (and yet not all) and children, and old men. Some complexions incline to
it, and others not: Many can weep at a Passion-Sermon, or any moving duty, and
yet will not be persuaded to obedience: these are hard-hearted sinners for all
their tears. 2. Many a tender godly person cannot weep for sin; partly through
the temper of their minds* which are more judicious and solid, and less
passionate, but mostly from the temper of their bodies, which dispose them not
that way. 3. Deepest sorrows seldom cause tears, but deep thoughts of heart: as
greatest joys seldom cause laughter, but inward pleasure. I Will tell you how you
shall know whose heart is truly sorrowful for sin and tender: He that would be
at the greatest cost or pains to be rid of sin, or that he had not sinned. You
cannot weep for sin: but you would give all that you have to be rid of sin; you
could wish when you dishonored God by sin, that you had spent that time in
suffering rather; and if it were to do again on the same terms and inducements,
you would not do it: Nay, you would live a beggar condtendedly, so you might
fully please God, and never sin against him, and are content to pinch your
flesh and deny your worldly interest for the time to come, rather then wilfully
disobey. This is a truly tender heart. On the other side, another can weep to
think of his sin; and yet if you should ask him, what would thou give, or
what would thou suffer, so thou had not sinned? or that thou might sin
no more? Alas, very little: For the next time that he is put to it, he will
rather venture on the sin, then venture on a little loss, or danger, or
disgrace in the world, or deny his craving flesh its pleasures. This is a
hard-hearted sinner. The more you would part with to be rid of sin, or the
greater cost you would be at for that end, the more Repentance have you, and
true tenderness of heart. Alas, if men should go to Heaven according to their
weeping, what abundance of children and women would be there for one man! I Will
speak truly my own Case. This doubt lay heavy many a year on my own soul: when
yet I would have given all that I had to be rid of sin; but I could not weep a
tear for it. Nor could I weep for the death of my dearest friends, when yet I
would have bought their lives, had it been Gods will, at a dearer rate then
many that could weep for them ten times as much. And now since my nature is
decayed, and my body languisheth in consuming weakness, and my head more
moistened, and my veins filled with phlegmatic watery blood, now I can weep: and
yet I find never the more tender-heartedness in my self then before. And yet to
this day so much remains of my old disposition, that I could wring all the
money out of my purse easier then one tear out of my eyes, to save a friend, or
rescue them from evil: when I see diverse that can weep for a dead friend, that
would have been at no great cost to save their lives. 5. Besides, as Dr. Sibs
says, There is often sorrow for sin in us, when it does not appear: It wants
but some quickening word to set it afoot. It is the nature of Grief to break
out into tears most, when sorrow has some vent, either when we use some
expostulating aggravating terms with our selves, or when we are opening our
hearts and case to a friend: then sorrow will often show it self, that did not
before. 6. Yet do I not deny but that our want of Tears and tender Affections
and heart-meltings, are our sins: For my part, I see exceeding Cause to bewail
it greatly in my self, that my soul is not raised to a higher pitch of tender
sensibility of all spiritual things, then it is: and I doubt not but it should
be the matter of our daily confession and complaint to God, that our hearts are
so dull and little affected with his sacred Truths, and our own sins: But this
is the scope of all my Speech, Why do not you distinguish between. Matter of
Sorrow and Matter of Doubting? No question but you should lament your dullness
and stupidity, and use all Gods means for the quickening of your Affections,
and to get the most lively frame of soul: but must it cause you to doubt of
your sincerity when you cannot obtain this? Then will you never have a settled
Peace or Assurance for many days together, for ought I know. I would ask you
but this: Whether you are willing or unwilling of all that hardness,
insensibleness, and dullness which you complain of? If you are willing of it,
what makes you complain of it? If you are unwilling, it seems your will is so
far sound; and it is the Will that is the seat of the Life of Grace which we
must try by: And was not Paul's Case the same with yours? Romans 7.19. when he
says, The Good which I Would do, I do not? and; When I Would do Good, Evil is
present with me. I know Paul speaks not of gross sins, but ordinary
Infirmities: and I have told you before, that the Liveliness and Sensibility of
the Passions or Affections, is a thing that the Will, though sanctified, cannot
fully command or excite at its pleasure. A sanctified man cannot Grieve or Weep
for sin when he will, or so much as he will: he cannot Love, Joy, be Zealous,
etc. when he will: He may be truly Willing, and not Able: And is not this your
Case? And does not Paul make it the Case of all Christians? Gal. 5.17. The
flesh lusts, against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these
are contrary one to the other, so that we cannot do the things that we would.
Take my Counsel therefore in this, if you love not self-deceiving and
disquietness. Search whether you can say unfeignedly, I would with all my heart
have Christ and his quickening and santifying Spirit and his softning Grace, to
bring my hard heart to Tenderness, and my dull and blockish soul to a lively
frame! O that I could attain it! And if you can truly say thus, Bless God that
has given you saving sincerity: And then let all the rest of your Dullness, and
Deadness, and Hard-heartedness be matter of daily sorrow to you, and spare not,
so it be in Moderation, but let it be no matter of Doubting. Confess it,
complain of it, pray against it, and strive against it: but do not deny Gods
Graces in you for it.

And here let me mind you of one thing; That it is a very ill distemper of
spirit when a man can mourn for nothing, but what Causes him to Doubt of his
salvation: It is a great Corruption, if when your Doubts are Resolved, and you
are persuaded of your salvation* if then you cease all your humiliation and
sorrow for your sin: For you must sorrow that you have in you such a body of
Death, and that which is so displeasing to God, and are able to please and
enjoy him no more, though you were never so Certain of the pardon of sin and of
salvation.

7. Lastly, let me ask you one Question more: What is the reason that you are
so troubled for want of Tears for your sin* Take heed lest there lie some
Corruption in this trouble that you do not discern. If it be only because your
deadness and dullness is your sin, and you would fain have your soul in that
frame, in which it may be fittest to please God and enjoy him: then I commend
and encourage you in your trouble. But take heed lest you should have any
conceit of a Meritoriousness in your Tears; for that would be a more dangerous
sin then your want of Tears. And if it be for want of a sign of Grace, and
because a dry eye is a sign of an unregenerate soul; I have told you, It is not
so, except where it only seconds an impenitent heart, and comes from, or
accompanies and unrenewed Will, and a prevailing unwillingness to turn to God
by Christ. Show me, if you can, where the Scripture says, He that cannot Weep
for sin, shall not be Saved, or has no true Grace? Is not your complaint in
this the very same that the eminentest Christians have used in all times? That
most Blessed, holy man, Mr. Bradford, who sacrificed his life in the flames
against Romish abominations, was wont to subscribe his Spiritual Letters
(endited by the breath of the Spirit of God) thus: The most miserable
Hard-hearted sinner, John Bradford.

DOUBT V.
O But I am not willing to Good; and therefore I fear that even my will it self
is yet unchanged: I have such a backwardness and undisposedness to Duty,
especially secret Prayer, Meditation, and self-examination, and reproving and
exhorting sinners, that I am fain to force my self to it against my will. It is
no Delight the find in these Duties that brings me to them, but only I use
violence with my self, and am fain to pull my self down on my knees, because I
know it is a Duty, and I cannot be saved without it: but I am no sooner on my
knees, but I have a motion to rise, or be short, and am weary of it, and find
no great miss of duty when I do omit it.

ANSWER.
1. THis shows that your soul is sick when your meat goes so much against your
stomach that you are fain to force it down: And sickness may well cause you to
complain to God and man. But what is this to Deadness! The Dead cannot force
down their meat, nor digest it at all. It seems by this that you are sanctified
but in a low Degree, and your Corruption remains in some strength; and let that
be your sorrow, and the overcoming of it be your greatest care and business:
But should you therefore say that you are unsanctified? It seems that you have
still the flesh lusting against the spirit, that you cannot do the Good you
would: when you would pray with Delight and unweariedness, the flesh draws
back, and the Devil is hindering you. And is it not so in too great a measure
with the best on earth? Remember what Christ said to his own Apostles, when
they should have done him one of their last Services, as to the attendance of
his body on earth, and should have comforted him in his Agony, they are all
asleep: Again and again he comes to them, and finds them asleep: Christ is
Praying and sweating blood, and they are still sleeping, though he warned them
to watch and Pray that they enter not into Temptation. But what does God say to
them for it? Why he uses this same Distinction between Humiliation for sin,
and Doubting of sincerity and salvation, and he helps them to the former, and
helps them against the latter; Could ye not watch with me one hour? says he.
There he convinces them of the sin, that they may be humbled for it. The
spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak, says he. There he utterly
resists their Doubtings, or preventeth them; showing them wherein sincere
Grace consists, even in the spirits willingness; and telling them that they
had that Grace; and then telling them whence came their sin, even from the
weakness of the flesh.

2. I have showed you, that as every man's Will is but partly sanctified (as to
the Degree of holiness) and so far as it is imperfect, it will be unwilling; so
that there is something in the Duties of secret Prayer, Meditation and Reproof,
which makes most men more backward to them then other duties. The last does so
cross our fleshly Interests; and the two former are so spiritual, and require
so pure and spiritual a soul, and set a man so immediately before the living
God, as if we were speaking to him face to face, and have nothing of external
pomp to draw us, that it is no wonder, if while there is flesh within us, we
are backward to them! especially while we are so unacquainted with God, and
while strangeness and consciousness of sin does make us draw back: Besides that
the Devil will more busily hinder us here then anywhere.

3. The Question therefore is not whether you have an unwillingness and
backwardness to Good? for so have all: Nor yet whether you have any cold
uneffect^al wishes? for so have the ungodly: Bu^ whether your Willingness be
not more then your unwillingness? And in that, 1. It must not be in every
single act of duty; for a godly man may be actually more unwilling to a duty at
this particular time, then willing; and thereupon may omit it: but it must be
about your Habitual Willingness, manifested in ordinary actual Willingness. 2.
You must not exclude any of those Motives which God has given you to make you
willing to Duty: He has Commanded it; and his Authority should move you: He
has Threatened you; and therefore Fear should move you: Or else he would never
have Threatened. He has made Promises of Reward, and therefore the Hope of that
should move. And therefore you may perceive here what a dangerous mistake it is
to think that we have no Grace, except our Willingness to Duty be without Gods
Motives, from a mere Love to the Duty it self, or to its effect. Nay, it is a
dangerous Antinomian mistake to imagine that it is our duty to be Willing to
Good without these Motives of God; I say, To take it so much as for our Duty to
exclude Gods Motives, though we should not judge of our Grace by it. For it is
but an Accusation of Christ (and his Law) who has ordained these Motives of
Punishment and Reward, to be his Instruments to move the soul to duty. Let me
therefore put the right Question to you; Whether all Gods Motives laid together
and considered, the ordinary prevailing part of your Will be not rather for
Duty then against it? This you will know by your practice. For if the
prevailing part be against Duty, you will not do it: If it be for Duty, you
will ordinarily perform it, though you cannot do it so well as you would. And
then you may see that your backwardness and remaining unwillingness must still
be matter of Humiliation and resistance to you, but not matter of Doubting. Nay
thank God that enableth you to pull down your self on your knees when you are
unwilling: For what is that but the prevailing of your willingness against your
unwillingness? Should your unwillingness once prevail, you would turn your back
upon the most acknowledged Duties.

DOUBT. VI.
But I am afraid that it is only slavish fear of Hell, and not the Love of
God, that causes me to obey: and if it were not for this fear, I doubt whether
I should not quite give over all. And perfect Love casts out fear.

ANSWER.
I Have answered this already. Love will not be perfect in this life. In the
life to come it will cast out all fear of damnation: and all fear that drives
the soul from God, and all fear of men (which is meant in Rev. 21.8. where the
fearful and unbelievers are condemned; that is, those that fear men more then
God) And that 1 John 4.17, 18. speaks of a Tormenting Fear, which is it that
I am persuading you from, and consists in Terrors of soul upon an
apprehension that God will condemn you; But it speaks not of a filial fear,
nor of a fear lest we should by forsaking God, or by yielding to Temptation,
lose the Crown of Life, and so perish: as long as this is not a tormenting
fear, but a cautelous, preserving, preventing fear. Besides the Text plainly
says, It is that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, that Love
casts out this fear: And at that day of Judgment, Love will have more fully
overcome it. It is a great mistake to think that Filial Fear is only the fear
of temporal chastisement, and that all fear of Hell is slavish. Even Filial
Fear is a Fear of Hell: But with this difference. A son (if he know himself to
be a Son) has such a persuasion of his Fathers Love to him, that he knows he
will not cast him off, except he should be so vile as to renounce his Father;
which he is moderately fearful or careful lest by Temptation he should be drawn
to do, but not distrustfully fearful, as knowing the helps and mercies of his
Father. But a slavish Fear is, when a man having no apprehensions of Gods love*
or willingness to show him mercy, does look that God should deal with him as a
slave, and destroy him when ever he does amiss. It is this slavish Tormenting
fear which I spend all this writing against. But yet a great deal even of this
slavish fear may be in those sons, that know not themselves to be sons.

But suppose you were out of all fear of Damnation! do not belie your own
heart, and tell me, Had you not rather be Holy then Unholy? pleasing to God,
then displeasing? and would not the Hope of Salvation draw you from sin to
duty, without the fear of Damnation in Hell? But you will say, That is still
Mercenary, and as bad as slavish fears. I answer, Not so, This Hope of
Salvation, is the Hope of enjoying God, and living in perfect Pleasingness to
him, and pleasure in him in Glory; And the Desire of this is a Desire of Love:
It is Love to God that makes you Desire him, and Hope to enjoy him.

Lastly I say again, Take heed of separating what God has joined. If God, by
putting in your nature the several Passions of Hope, Fear* Love etc. and by
putting a Holiness into these Passions, by sanctifying Grace, and by putting
both Promises and dreadful Threatenings into his word; I say, if God by all
these means has given you several motives to obedience, take heed of
separating them: Do not once ask your heart such a question, Whether it would
obey if there were no Threatening, and s no ^ear. Nor on the otherside, do not
let Fear do all, without Love. Doubtless the more Love constrains to duty,
the better it is: and you should endeavor with all your might that you might
feel more of the force of Love in your duties: But do you not mark how you
cherish that Corruption that you complain of? Your Doubts and Tormenting Fears
are the things that Love should cast out. Why then do you entertain them? If
you say, I cannot help it: why then do you cherish them? and own them? and
plead and dispute for them? and say you do well to Doubt, and you have Cause?
Will this ever cast out Tormenting Fears? Do you not know that the way to cast
them out, is not to maintain them by distrustful thoughts or words, but to see
their sinfulness, and abhor them, and to get more high thoughts of the
Lovingkindness of God, and the tender mercies of the Redeemer, and the
unspeakable Love that he has manifested in his sufferings for you, that so the
Love of God may be more advanced and powerful in your soul* and may be able to
cast out your Tormenting Fears. Why do you not do this instead of Doubting? If
Tormenting Fears and Doubtings be a sin, why do you not make Conscience of
them? and bewail it that you have been so guilty of them? Will you therefore
Doubt because you have slavish fears? Why that is to Doubt because you Doubt;
and to Fear because you Fear; and so to sin still because you have sinned.
Consider well of the folly of this course.

DOUBT VII.
BUT I am not able to Believe: and without Faith there is no pleasing God, nor
hope of salvation. I fear Unbelief will be my ruin.

ANSWER.
1. I Have answered this Doubt fully before. It is grounded on a Mistake of the
Nature of true Faith. You think that Faith is the Believing that you are in
Gods favor, and that you are Justified: but properly this is no Faith at all,
but only Assurance, which is sometimes a fruit of Faith, and sometimes never
in this life obtained by a Believer. Faith consists of two parts; 1. Assent
to the Truth of the Word. 2. Acceptance of Christ as he is offered; Which
immediately produces a Trusting on Christ for salvation, and a Consent to be
Governed by him, and Resolution to obey him; which in the fullest sense are
also acts of Faith. Now do not you Believe the truth of the Gospel? And do you
not Accept of Christ as he is offered therein? If you are truly willing to have
Christ as he is offered, I dare say you are a true Believer. If you be not
willing, for shame never complain. Men use rather to speak against those that
they are unwilling of, then complain of their absence, and that they cannot
enjoy them.

2. However, seeing you complain of unbelief, in the Name of God do not cherish
it, and plead for it, and by your own cogitations fetch in daily matter to feed
it: but do more in detestation of it, as well as complain.

DOUBT VIII.
But I am a stranger to the witness of the spirit, and the Joy of the Holy
Ghost, and Communion with God, and therefore how can I be a true Believer?

ANSWER.
1. FEeding your Doubts and Perplexities, and arguing for them, is not a means
to get the Testimony and Joy of the Spirit: but rather studying with all Saints
to know the Love of Christ which passes knowledge, to comprehend the height,
and breadth, and length, and depth of his Love: and seeking to understand the
things that are given you of God. Acknowledge Gods general Love to Mankind,
both in his Gracious Nature, and Common Providence, and Redemption by Christ,
and deny not his Special Mercies to your self, but dwell in the study of the
Riches of Grace, and that is the way to come to the Joy of the Holy Ghost. 2. I
have told you before what the witness of the Spirit is, and what is the
ordinary mistake herein. If you have the Graces and holy operations of the
Spirit, you have the witness of the Spirit, whether you know it or not. 3. If
by your own doubtings you have deprived your self of the Joy of the Holy Ghost,
bewail it, and do so no more; but do not therefore say you have not the Holy
Ghost. For the Holy Ghost often works Regeneration and Holiness, before he
works any sensible Joys. 4. You have some hope of salvation by Christ left in
you: You be not yet in utter despair: And is it no Comfort to you to think that
you have yet any Hope? and are not quite past all Remedy? It may be your
sorrows may so cloud it that you take no notice of it: but I know you cannot
have the least Hope without some answerable Comfort. And may not that Comfort
^e truly the Joy of the Holy Ghost? 5. And for Communion with God, let me ask
you: Have you no recourse to him by Prayer in your straits? Do you not wait at
his mouth for the Law and direction of your life? Have you received no holy
desires, or other Graces from him? Nay, are you sure that you are not a member
of Christ, who is one with him? How can you then say, that you have no
Communion with him? Can there be Communication of Prayer, and Obedience from
you? yea your own self delivered up to Christ? and a Communication of any life
of Grace from God, by Christ and the Spirit? and all this without Communion? It
cannot be. Many a soul has most near Communion with Christ that knows it not.

DOUBT IX.
I Have not the spirit of prayer: When I should pour out my soul to God, I have
neither bold access, nor matter of Prayer nor Words.

ANSWER.
DO you know what the spirit of Prayer is? It contains, 1. Desires of the
soul after the things we want, especially Christ and his Graces. 2. An
addressing our selves to God with these Desires, that we may have help and
relief from him. Have not you both these? Do you not Desire Christ and Grace,
Justification and Sanctification? Do you not look to God as him who alone is
able to supply your wants, and bids you ask that you may receive? Do you
utterly despair of help, and to seek to none? Or do you make your addresses by
Prayer to any but God? But perhaps you look at words, and matter to dilate
upon, that you may be able to hold out in a long speech to God, and you think
that is the effect of the spirit of Prayer. But where do you find that in Gods
Word? I confess that in many, and most, the spirit which helps to Desires,
does also help to some kind of expressions: Because if a man be of able natural
parts, and have a tongue to express his own mind, the promoting of holy Desires
will help men to expressions. For a full soul is hardly hindered from venting it
self: And experience teaches us, that the spirits enflaming the heart with
holy Affections, does very much furnish both the Invention and Expression. But
this is but accidental and uncertain: For those that are either men of unready
tongues, or that are so ill bred among the rude vulgar, that they want fit
expressions of their own minds, or that are of over-bashful dispositions, or
especially that are of small knowledge, and of little and short acquaintance
with those that should teach them to pray by their examples, or that have been
but of short standing in the School of Christ, such a man may have the spirit
of Prayer many a year, and never be able in full expressions of his own to make
known his wants to God: no, nor in good and tolerable sense and language,
before others to speak to God, from his own Invention. A man may know all those
Articles of the Faith that are of flat necessity to Salvation, and yet not be
able to find matter or words for the opening of his heart to God at length. I
would advise such, to frequent the Company of those that can teach and help
them in Prayer, and neglect not to use the smallest parts they have, especially
in secret between God and their own souls, where they need not so much as in
public to be regardful of expressions: and in the mean time to learn a Prayer
from some Book, that may fitliest express their necessities; or to use the Book
it self in Prayer. If they distrust their memories: not resol^ing to stick he^^
and make it a means of ind^l^i^^ ^^eir la^i^ess and negligence, much less to
reproach and deride those that express their desires to God from the present
sense of their own wants (as some wickedly do deride such:) but to use this
lawful help till they are able to do better without it then with it, and then
to lay it by, and not before. The Holy Ghost is said, Romans 8.16. to help our
Infirmities in Prayer: but how? 1. By teaching us what to pray for: not always
what matter or words to enlarge our selves by; but what necessary Graces to
pray for. 2. By giving us Sighs and Groans unexpressible: which is far from
giving Copious expressions: For Groans and Sighs be not words: and if they be
Groans that we cannot express, it would rather seem to intimate a want of
expression, then a constant abounding therein, where the spirit does assist:
Though indeed the meaning is, that the Groans are so deep, that they are past
the expression of our words: All our speech cannot express that deep sense that
is in our hearts. For the Understanding has the advantage of the Affections
herein: All the thoughts of the mind may be expressed to others; but the
Feelings and fervent Passions of the soul can be but very defectively expressed.

Lastly, All have not the spirit of Prayer in like measure: nor all that have
it in a great measure at one time, can find it so at pleasure. Desires rise and
fall, and these earnest Groans be not in every Prayer where the Holy Ghost does
assist. I believe there is never a Prayer that ever a Believer did put up to
God for things lawful and useful, but it was put up by the help of the spirit.
For the weakest Prayer has some degree of good Desire in it, and addresses to
God with an endeavor to express them: and these can come from none but only
from the spirit: Mere words without desires are no more Prayer, then a suit of
apparel hanged on a stake is a man. You may have the spirit of Prayer, and yet
have it in a very weak degree.

Yet still I would encourage you to bewail your defect herein as your sin, and
seek earnestly the supply of your wants: But what is that to the questioning or
denying your sincerity, or right to salvation?

DOUBT X.
I Have no Gifts to make me useful to my self or others. When I should profit
by the Word, I cannot Remember it: When I should Reprove a Sinner, or Instruct
the Ignorant, I have not words: If I were called to give an account of my
Faith, I have not words to express that which as in my mind: And what Grace can
here be then?

ANSWER:
THis needs no long Answer. Lament and amend those sins by which you have been
disabled. But know, that these Gifts depend more on Nature, Art, Industry and
Common Grace, then upon special saving Grace. Many a bad man is excellent in
all these, and many a one that is truly godly is defective. Where has God laid
our salvation upon the strength of our Memories, the Readiness of our Tongues,
or measure of the like Gifts? That were almost as if he should have made a Law,
that all shall be saved that have found Complexions, and healthful and youthful
bodies; and all be damned that are sickly, aged, weak, children, and most women.

DOUBT. XI.
O But I have been a grievous sinner, before I came home, and have fallen
foully since, and I am utterly unworthy of Mercy! Will the Lord ever save such
an unworthy wretch as I? Will he ever give his Mercy and the blood of his Son,
to one that has so abused it?

ANSWER.
1. THe Question is not, with God, what you have been, but what you are? God
takes men as they then are, and not as they were. 2. It is a dangerous thing to
object the greatness of your Guilt against Gods mercy and Christ's Merits! Do
you think Christ's satisfaction is not sufficient? or that he dyed for small
sins and not for great? Do you not know that he has made satisfaction for all,
and will pardon all, and has given out the pardon of all in his Covenant, and
that to all men, on Condition they will Accept Christ to pardon and heal them
in his own way? Has God made it his great design in the work of man's
Redemption, to make his Love and Mercy as Honorable and wonderful, as he did
his Power in the work of Creation? and will you after all this oppose the
greatness of your sins against the greatness of this Mercy and Satisfaction?
why, you may as well think your self to be such a one that God could not or did
not Make you, as to think your sins so great that Christ could not or did not
satisfy for them, or will not pardon them, if you Repent and Believe in him.
3. And for Worthiness, I pray you observe: There is a twofold Worthiness and
Righteousness. There is a Legal Worthiness and Righteousness, which consists
in a perfect obedience, which is the performance of the Conditions of the Law
of Pure Nature and Works. This no man has but Christ: and if you look after
this Righteousness or Worthiness in your self, then do you depart from Christ,
and make him to have dyed and satisfied in vain; you are a Jew and not a
Christian, and are one of those that Paul so much disputes against, that would
be Justified by the Law. Nay you must not to much as once imagine that all your
own Works can be any part of this Legal Righteousness or Worthiness to you.
Only Christ's Satisfaction and Merit is in stead of this our Legal Righteousness
and Worthiness. God never gave Christ and Mercy to any but the unworthy in this
sense: If you know not your self to be unworthy and unrighteous in the sense of
the Law of Works, you cannot know what Christ's Righteousness is. Did Christ
come to save any but sinners, and such as were lost? what need you a Savior,
if you were not Condemned? and how come you to be condemned if you were not
unrighteous and unworthy. But then 2. there is an Evangelical personal
Worthiness and Righteousness, which is the Condition on which God bestows
Christ's Righteousness upon us: and this all have that will be saved by Christ.
But what is that? Why it has two parts: 1. The Condition and Worthiness
required to your Union with Christ and pardon of all your sins past, and your
Adoption and Justification; it is no more but your hearty thankful Acceptance
of the Gift that is freely Given you of God by his Covenant-grant, that is,
Christ and Life in him, 1 John 5.10, 11, 12. There is no worthiness required in
you before Faith as a Condition on which God will give you Faith: but only
certain means you are appointed to use for the obtaining it: And Faith it self
is but the Acceptance of a free Gift. God requires you not to bring any other
Worthiness or Price in your hands; but that you consent unfeignedly to have
Christ as he is offered, and to the ends and uses that he is offered: that is,
as one that has satisfied for you by his blood and merits, to put away your
sins, and as one that must illuminate and Teach you, Sanctify and Guide and
Govern you by his Word and Spirit; and as King and Judge will fully and finally
Justify you at the day of Judgment, and give you the Crown of Glory. Christ
on his part 1. Has merited your pardon by his satisfaction, and not properly
by his sanctifying you: 2. And sanctifies you by his Spirit, and Rules you by
his Laws, and not directly by his bloodshed: 3. And he will justify you at
Judgment as King and Judge, and not as Satisfier or Sanctifier: But the
Condition on your part of obtaining Interest in Christ and his benefits, is
that our Faith which accepts him in all these respects (both as King, Priest
and Teacher) and to all these ends conjunctly. But then 2. The Condition and
Worthyness required to the Continuation and Consummat on of your Pardon,
Justification, and right to Glory, is both the Continuance of your faith, and
your sincere obedience, even your keeping the Baptismal Covenant that you made
with Christ by your Parents, and the Covenant which you in your own person made
with him in your first true Believing. These indeed are called Worthiness and
Righteousness frequently in the Gospel: but it is no worthiness consisting in
any such works which make the Reward to be of Debt, and not of Grace (of which
Paul speaks) but only in faith, and such Gospel works as James speaks of which
make the Reward to be wholly of Grace and not of Debt.

Now if you say you are unworthy in this Evangelical sense, then you must mean
(if you know what you say) that you are an Infidel or Unbeliever, or an
Impenitent obstinate Rebel that would not have Christ to reign over him: For
the Gospel calls none Unworthy (as non-performers of its Conditions) but only
these. But I hope you dare not charge your self with such Infidelity and wilful
Rebellion.

DOUBT XII.
THough God has kept me from Gross sins, yet I find such a searedness of
Conscience, and so little aversness from sin in my mind i^ that I fear that I
should Commit it if I lay under Temptations: and also that I should not hold
out in Trial if I were called to suffer Death or any grievous Calamity. And
that obedience which endures merely for want of a Temptation, is no true
Obedience.

ANSWER.
1. I Have fully answered this before. If you can overcome the temptations of
Prosperity, you have no cause to doubt distrustfully whether you shall overcome
the temptations of Adversity: And if God give you Grace to avoid Temptations to
sin, and fly occasions as much as you can, and to overcome them, where you
cannot avoid them; you have little reason to distrust his preservation of you,
and your stedfastness thereby, if you should be cast upon greater Temptations
Indeed if you feel not such a Belief of the evil and danger of sinning, as to
possess you with some sensible hatred of it, you have need to look to your
heart for the strengthening of that Belief and Hatred: and fear your heart with
a godly preserving Jealousy; but not with tormenting, disquieting doubts.
Whatever your Passionate Hatred be, if you have a settled well-grounded
Resolution, to walk in obedience to the death, you may confidently and
comfortably trust him for your preservation, who gave you those resolutions.

2. And the last sentence of this Doubt, had need of great Caution, before you
conclude it a certain Truth. Its true, that the Obedience which by an ordinary
Temptation, such as men may expect, would be overthrown, is not well grounded
and rooted before it is overthrown. But its a great Doubt whether there be not
Degrees of Temptation Possible, which would overcome the Resolution and Grace
of the most Holy, having such assistance as the Spirit usually gives Believers
in Temptation? And whether some Temptations which overcome not a strong
Christian, would not overcome a weak one, who yet has true Grace? I conclude
nothing of these Doubts. But I would not have you trouble your self upon
confident conclusions on so doubtful Grounds. This I am certain of, 1. That the
strongest Christian should take heed of Temptations, and not trust to the
strength of his Graces, nor presume on Gods preservation while he wilfully
casts himself in the mouth of dangers; nor to be encouraged hereunto upon any
persuasion of an Impossibility of his falling away. O the falls, the fearful
falls that I have known (alas, how often) the eminentest men for Godliness that
ever I knew, to be Guilty of, by casting themselves upon Temptations. I confess
I will never be confident of that man's perseverance, were he the best that I
know on earth, who casts himself upon violent Temptations, espe^^^^^^ (...)
^mptations of Sensuality, Prosperity, and Seducement. 2. I know God has taught
us daily to watch and pray, that we enter not into Temptation; and to pray,
Lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from evil. (I never understood the
necessity of that Petition feelingly, till I saw the examples of these seven or
eight years last past.) This being so, you must look that your perseverance
should be by being preserved from Temptation; and must rather examine, Whether
you have that Grace which will enable you to avoid Temptations, then whether
you have Grace enough to overcome them, if you rush into them. But if God
unavoydably cast you upon them, keep up your Watch and Prayer, and you have no
Cause to trouble your self with distrustful fears.

DOUBT XIII.
I Am afraid lest I have committed the unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost:
and then there is no hope of my salvation.

ANSWER.
IT seems you know not what the sin against the Holy Ghost is; It is this, When
a man is convinced that Christ and his Disciples did really work those glorious
Miracles which are recorded in the Gospel, and yet will not Believe that Christ
is the Son of God, and his Doctrine true, though sealed with all those Miracles
and other holy and wonderful works of the Spirit, but do Blasphemously maintain
that they were done by the Power of the Devil. This is the sin against the Holy
Ghost: And dare you say that you are guilty of this? If you be, then you do not
Believe that Christ is the Son of God, and the Messiah, and his Gospel true.
And then you will sure oppose him, and maintain that he was a Deceiver, and
that the Devil was the Author of all the Miraculous and Gracious workings of
his Spirit. Then you will never fear his displeasure, nor call him seriously
either Lord or Savior! nor tender him any service, any more then you do to
Mahomet. None but Infidels do commit the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost: Nor
but few of them. Unbelief is eminently called [ Sin] in the Gospel: and that [
Vnbelief] which is maintained by Blaspheming the Glorious Works of the Holy
Ghost, which Christ and his Disciples through many years time did perform for a
Testimony to his Truth, that is called singularly [ The sin against the Holy
Ghost!] You may meet with other Descriptions of this sin, which may occasion
your terror: but I am fully persuaded that this is the plain Truth.

DOUBT XIV.
BUT I greatly fear lest the time of Grace be past: and lest I have out sit the
day of mercy, and now mercy has wholly forsaken me. For I have often heard
Ministers tell me from the Word: Now is the Accepted time: Now is the day of
your visitation: To day, while it is called to day, harden not your hearts,
lest God swear in his wrath that you shall not enter into his Rest. But I have
stood out long after. I have resisted and quenched the Spirit, and now it is I
fear departed from me.

ANSWER.
HEre is sufficient matter for Humiliation: but the Doubting arises merely
from Ignorance: The day of Grace may in two respects be said to be over: The
first (and most properly so called) is, When God will not Accept of a sinner,
though he should Repent and Return. This is never in this life for certain. And
he that imagines any such thing, as that it is too late while his soul is in
his body, to Repent and Accept of Christ and Mercy, is merely ignorant of the
Tenor and sense of the Gospel: For the New Law of Grace does limit no time on
earth for Gods Accepting of a Returning sinner. True Faith and Repentance do as
surely save at the last hour of the day, as at the first. God has said, that
whosoever Believes in Christ, shall not perish, but have everlasting life. He
has no where excepted late Believers or Repenters: Show any such Exception if
you can.

2. The second sense in which it may be said that the day of Grace is over, is
this: When a man has so long resisted the Spirit, that God has given him over
to wilful obstinate Refusals of Mercy, and of Christ's Government, resolving
that he will never give him the prevailing Grace of his Spirit. Where note, 1.
That this same man might still have Grace as soon as any other, if he were but
Willing to Accept Christ, and Grace in him. 2. That no man can know of himself
or any other, that God has thus finally forsaken him: For God has given us no
sign to know it by; (at least who sin not against the Holy Ghost.) God has not
told us his secret intents concerning such. 4. Yet some men have far greater
cause to fear it then others; especially those men, who under the most
searching lively Sermons, do continue secure and wilful in known wickedness;
either hating godliness and godly persons, and all that do Reprove them, or at
least being ^^^^pified, that they feel no more then a Post the force of Gods
terrors, or the sweetness of his promises; but make a jest of sinning, and
think the life of godliness a needless thing. Especially if they grow old in
this course, I confess such have great Cause to fear lest they are quite
forsaken of God: For very few such are ever recovered. 5. And therefore it may
well be said to all men, To day if you will hear his voice harden not your
hearts, etc. and, This is the Acceptable time: this is the day of salvation;
both as this life is called, The day of salvation; and because no man is
certain to live another day, that he may Repent; nor yet to have Grace to
Repent, if he Live. 6. But what is all this to you that do Repent? Can you have
Cause to fear that your day of Grace is over, that have Received Grace? Why,
that is as foolish a thing, as if a man should come to the Market, and buy
Corn, and when he has done, go home lamenting that the Market was past before
he came? Or as a man should come and hear the Sermon, and when he has done,
lament that the Sermon was done before he came. If your day of Grace be past,
tell me, (and do not wrong God) Where had you the Grace of Repentance? How came
you by that Grace of holy Des^res? Who made you Willing to have Christ for your
Lord and Savior? So that you had rather have him, and Gods favor, and a Holy
heart and life, then all the glory of the World? How came you to desire that
you were such a one as God would have you to be? and to desire that all your
sins were dead, and might never live in you more? and that you were able to
Love God, and Delight in him, and please him even in perfection? and that you
are so troubled that you cannot do it? Are these signs that your day of Grace
is over? Does Gods Spirit breath out Groans after Christ and Grace, within you?
and yet is the day of Grace over? Nay, what if you had no Grace? Do you not
hear God daily offering you Christ and Grace? does he not entreat and Beseech
you to be Reconciled unto him (2 Cor. 5.19, 20.) and would he not compel you to
come in? ( Mat. 22.) Do you not feel some unquietness in your sinful Condition?
and some motions and strivings at your heart to get out of it? Certainly
(though you should be one that has yet no Grace to salvation) yet these
continued offers of Grace, and strivings of the Spirit of Christ with your
heart, do show that God has not quite forsaken you; and that your day of Grace
and Visitation is not past.

DOUBT XV.
But I have sinned since my Profession, and that even against my Knowledge and
Conscience: I have had Temptations to sin, and I have considered of the Evil
and Danger, and yet in the very soberest deliberations, I have Resolved to sin.
And how can such a one have any true Grace: or be saved?

ANSWER.
1. IF you had not true Grace, God is still offering it, and ready to work it.
2. Where do you find in Scripture that none who have true Grace, do sin
knowingly or Deliberately? Perhaps you will say in Heb. 10.24. If we sin
wilfully after the knowledge of the Truth, there Remains no more sacrifice
for sin, but a fearful looking for of Judgment, and fire which shall devour
the adversaries. Ans. But you must know that it is not every wilful sin which
is there mentioned; but, as even now I told you, Unbelief is peculiarly called
Sin in the New Testament: And the true meaning of the Text is, If we utterly
renounce Christ by Infidelity, as not being the true Messiah, after we have
known his Truth, then etc. Indeed, none sin more against knowledge then the
Godly when they do sin: For they know more, for the most part, then others do.
And Passion and Sensuality (the remnant of it which yet remains) will be
working strongly in your very Deliberations against sin, and either perverting
the Judgment to doubt whether it be a sin, or whether there be any such danger
in it? or whether it be not a very little sin? Or else blinding it, that it
cannot see the Arguments against the sin in their full vigor: Or at least,
prepossessing the Heart and Delight, and so hindering our Reasons against sin,
from going down to the Heart and working on the Will, and so from Commanding
the Actions of the Body. This may befall a godly man And moreover, God may
withdraw his Grace, as he did from Peter and David in their sin: and then our
Considerations will work but faintly, and sensuality and sinful Passion will
work effectually. It is scarce Possible, I think, that such a man as David
could be so long about so horrid a sin, and after contrive the murder of
Vriah* and all this without deliberation, or any reasonings in himself to the
contrary.

3. The truth is, though this be to good cause for any Repenting sinner to
doubt of Salvation, yet it is a very grievous aggravation of sin, to commit it
against Knowledge and Conscience, and upon consideration. And therefore I
advise all that Love their Peace or Salvation to take heed of it. For as they
will find that no sin does deep^ier wound the Conscience, and plunge the
sinner into fearful perplexities; which often times hang on him very long; so the
oftener such (...) Zeal and Passion. But let me tell you, that you may grow in
these, and not grow in the body of your Graces. Doubtless Satan himself may do
much to kindle your Zeal, if he do but see it void of sound Knowledge, (as he
did in James and John when they would have called for Fire from Heaven, but
knew not what spirit they were of.) For the doleful Case of Christ's Churches in
this age has put quite beyond dispute, that none do the Devils work more
effectually, nor oppose the Kingdom of Christ more desperately, then they that
have the hottest Zeal with the weakest Judgments: And as Fire is most
excellent and necessary in the Chimney, but in the thatch it is worse then the
vilest dung; so is Zeal most excellent when guided by sound Judgment; but more
destructive then profane sensuality when it is let loose and misguided.

On the other side, you may decay much in feeling and fervor of Affections,
and yet Grow in Grace, if you do but grow in the Understanding and the Will.
And indeed this is the Common Growth which Christians have in their Age:
Examine therefore whether you have this or no. Do you not understand the things
of the Spirit better then you formerly did? Do you not value God, Christ, Glory
and Grace at higher rates then formerly? Are you not more fully Resolved to
stick to Christ to the death then formerly you have been? I do not think but it
would be a harder work for Satan to draw you from Christ to the flesh then
heretofore. When the tree has done growing in visible greatness, it grows in
rootedness. The fruit grows first in bulk and quantity, and then in mellow
sweetness. Are not you less Censorious, and more Peaceable then heretofore? I
tell you, that is a more noble growth then a great deal of austere and bitter,
youthful, censorious, dividing Zeal of many will prove. Mark most aged
experienced Christians, that walk uprightly, and you will find that they quite
outstrip the younger, 1. In experience, knowledge, prudence and foundness of
Judgment. 2. In well-setled Resolutions for Christ, his Truth and Cause. 3. In
a Love of Peace, especially in the Church, and a hatred of dissentions,
perverse contendings and divisions. If you can show this growth, say not that
you do not grow.

3. But suppose you do not grow? should you therefore deny the sincerity of
your Grace? I would not persuade any soul that they grow, when they do not. But
if you do not, be humbled for it, and endeavor it for the future. Make it your
desire and daily business, and spare not. Lie not still complaining, but rouse
up your soul, and see what is amiss, and set upon neglected duties, and remove
those Corruptions that hinder your Growth: Converse with Growing Christians,
and under quickening means: Endeavor the Good of other men's souls as well as
your own: and then you will find that growth, which will silence this Doubt, and
do much more for you then that.

DOUBT XVII.
I Am troubled with such Blaspemous thoughts and Temptations to Unbelief, even
against God, and Christ, and Scripture, and the Life to come, that I doubt I
have no faith.

ANSWER.
TO be Tempted is no sign of Gracelesness, but to yield to the Temptation: nor
every yielding neither; but to be overcome of the Temptation! Most Melancholy
people, especially that have any knowledge in Religion, are frequently haunted
with Blasphemous Temptations. I have often wondered that the Devil should have
such a power and advantage in the predominancy of that distemper. Scarce one
person of ten, who ever was with me in deep Melancholy, either for the Cure of
body or mind, but has been haunted with these Blasphemous thoughts; and that
so impetuously and violently set on and followed, that it might appear to be
from the Devil; yea even many that never seemed Godly, or to mind any such
thing before. I confess it has been a strengthening to my own faith, to see
the Devil such an Enemy to the Christian faith, yea to the Godhead it self.

But perhaps you will say, It is not mere Temptation from Satan that I complain
of; but it takes too much with my sinful heart: I am ready to doubt oft-times
whether there be a God, or whether his Providence determine of the things here
below? or whether Scripture be true, or the Soul immortal? etc.

Answ. This is a very great sin, and you ought to bewail and abhor it, and in
the Name of God make not light of it, but look to it betime: But yet let me
tell you, that some degree of this Blasphemy and Infidelity may remain with the
truest saving Faith. The best may say, Lord I believe, help thou mine unbelief.
But I will tell you my Judgment; When your unbelief is such as to be a sign of
a Graceless soul in the state of damnation: If your Doubtings of the Truth of
Scripture and the Life to come, be so great that you will not let go the
pleasures and profits of sin, and part with all, if God call you to it, in Hope
of that Glory promised, and to escape the Judgment threatened, because you look
upon the things of the life to come but as uncertain things; then is your
Belief no saving Belief; but your unbelief is prevalent. But if, for all your
staggerings, you see so much probabil^ty of the Truth of Scripture and the Life
to come, that you are resolved to venture (and part with, if called to it) all
worldly Hopes and Happiness for the Hope of that promised Glory, and to make it
the chiefest business of your life to attain it, and do deny your self the
pleasures of sin for that end; this is a true saving Faith, as is evident by
its Victory; notwithstanding all the Infidelity, Atheism and Blasphemy that is
mixed with it.

But again, let me advise you to take heed of this heinous sin, and bewail and
detest the very least degree of it. It is dangerous when the Devil strikes at
the very root and heart and foundation of all your religion. There is more
sinfulness and danger in this then in many other sins. And therefore let it
never be motioned to your soul without abhorrence. Two ways the Devil has to
move it. The one is by his immediate inward suggestions: these are bad enough.
The other is by his Accursed Instruments: and this is a far more dangerous way:
whether it be by books, or by the words of men: And yet if it be by notorious
wicked men or fools, the Temptation is the less: but when it is by men of
cunning wit, and smooth tongues, and hypocritical lives (for far be that
wickedness from me, as to call them Godly, or wise or honest) then it is the
greatest snare that the Devil has to lay. O just and Dreadful God! did I think
one day that those that I was then praying with, and rejoicing with, and that
went up with me to the house of God in familiarity, would this day be
blasphemers of thy sacred Name? and deny the Lord that bought them? and deride
thy holy word as a fable? and give up themselves to the present pleasures of
sin, because they Believe not thy promised Glory! Righteous and Merciful God!
that have preserved the humble from this Condemnation! and have permitted only
the Proud and Sensual Professors to fall into it! and have given them over to
Hellish Conversations according to the nature of their Hellish opinions! that
they might be rather a terror to others then a snare! I call their Doctrine and
Practice Hellish, from its Original, because it comes from the Father of Lies:
but not that there is any such opinion or practice in Hell. He that tempts
others to Deny the Godhead, the Christian faith, the Scripture, the Life to
come, does no whit doubt of any one of them himself, but believes and Trembles.
O fearful blindness of the professors of Religion, that will hear, if not
receive these Blasphemies from the mouth of an Apostate Professor, which they
would abhor if it came immediately from the Devil himself. With what sad
complaints and trembling do poor sinners cry out (and not without Cause) O I am
haunted with such Blaspemous temptations, that I am afraid lest God should
suddenly destroy me, that ever such thoughts should come into my heart: But if
an Instrument of the Devil come and plead against the Scripture or the Life to
come, or Christ himself, they will hear him with less detestation. The Devil
knows that familiarity will cause us to take that from a man, which we would
abhor from the Devil himself immediately. I intend not to give you now a
particular preservative against each of these Temptations: Only let me tell
you, that this is the direct way to Infidelity, Apostasy, and the sin against
the Holy Ghost: and if by any Seducers the Devil do overcome you herein, you
are lost for ever, and there will be no more sacrifice for your sin, but a
fearful expectation of judgment, and that fire which shall devour the
adversaries of Christ.

DOUBT XVIII.
I Have so great fears of Death, and unwillingness to be with God, that I am
afraid I have no Grace: for if I had Paul's spirit, I should be able to say with
him, I desire to depart and to be with Christ: Whereas now no news would be to
me more unwelcome.

ANSWER.
THere is a loathness to Dye that comes from a Desire to do God more service;
and another that comes from an Apprehension of unreadiness, when we would fain
have more Assurance of Salvation first: or would be fitter to meet our Lord.
Blame not a man to be somewhat backward, that knows it must go with him for
ever in Heaven or Hell according as he is found at death. But these two be not
so much a loathness to Dye, as a loathness to Dye now, at this time. 3. There
is also in all men living, Good and bad, a natural abhorrence and fear of
death. God has put this into man's nature (even in I^nocency) to be his great
means of Governing the World. No man would live in ord^^ or be kept in
obedience, but for this. He that cares not for his own Life, is Master of
another. Grace does not root out this abhorrency of Death, no more then it
unmanneth us: Only it restrains it from excess, and so far overcomes the
violence of the Passion, by the apprehensions of a better life beyond death,
that a Believer may the more quietly and willingly submit to it. Paul himself
desires not Death, but the Life which follows it; He desires to depart, and
to be with Christ: that is, He had rather be in Heaven then on earth, and
therefore he is contented to submit to the penal sharp passage. God does not
command you to Desire death it self; nor forbid you fearing it as an evil to
nature and a punishment of sin: Only he requires you to Desire the Blessedness
to be enjoyed after Death, and that so earnestly as may make Death it self the
easier to you. Thank God, if the fear of death be somewhat abated in you,
though it be not sweetened. Men may pretend what they please, but nature will
abhor death as long as its nature, and as long as man is man: else temporal
death had been no punishment to Adam, if his Innocent nature had not abhorred
it* it was an evil to it. Tell me but this: If Death did not stand in your way
to Heaven, but that you could travel to Heaven as easily as to London, would
not you rather go thither, and be with Christ, then stay in sin and vanity here
on earth, so be it you were certain to be with Christ? If you can say Yea to
this, then it is apparent that your loathness to dye is either from the
uncertainty of your salvation, or from the natural averseness to a dissolution,
or both; and not from an unwillingness to be with Christ, or a preferring the
vanities of this world before the Blessedness of that to come. Lastly, it may
be God may lay that affliction on you, or use some other necessary means with
you, yet before you dye, that may make you willinger then now you are.

DOUBT XIX.
GOd lays upon me such heavy Afflictions, that I cannot believe he Loves me:
He writteth bitter things against me, and takes me for his enemy: I am
afflicted in my health, in my name, in my children, and nearest friends, and in
my state: I live in continual poverty, or pinching distress of one kind or
other: yea my very soul is filled with his terorrs, and night and day is his
hand heavy upon me.

ANSWER.
I Have said enough to this before: Nor do I think it needful to say any more,
when the Holy Ghost has said so much: but only to desire you to read what he
has written in Heb. 12. and Job throughout: and Psalm. 37. and 73. and diverse
others. The next doubt is contrary.

DOUBT. XX.
I Read in Scripture that through many tribulations we must enter into heaven;
and that all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution: and
that he that takes not up his Cross, and so follows Christ, cannot be his
Disciple: and that if we are not corrected, we are bastards, and not sons: But
I never had any Affliction from God, but have lived in constant prosperity to
this day. Christ says, Woe to you, when all men speak well of you:: but all men
for ought I know speak well of me: and therefore I doubt of my sincerity.

ANSWER.
I Would not have mentioned this Doubt, but that I was so foolish as to be
troubled with it my self: and perhaps some others may be as foolish as I:
though I think but few in these times; our great friends have Done so much to
Resolve them more effectually then words could have done. 1. Some of those
Texts speak only of man's duty of bearing persecution and tribulation, when God
lays it on us, rather then of the Event, that it shall certainly come. 2. Yet I
think it ordinarily certain and to be expected as to the Event: Doubtless
Tribulation is Gods common road to Heaven: Every ignorant person is so well
ware of this, that they delude themselves in their sufferings, saying, That God
has given them their punishment in this life, and therefore they hope he will
not punish them in another. If any soul be so silly as to fear and doubt, for
want of Affliction; if none else will do the Cure, let them but follow my
Counsel, and I dare warrant them for this, and I will advise them to nothing
but what is honest, yea and necessary, and what I have tried effectually upon
my self: and I can assure you, it cured me, and I can give it a Probatum est.
And first, see that you be faithful in your Duty to all sinners within your
reach; be they great or small, Gentlemen or Beggars, do your duty in Reproving
them meekly and lovingly, yet plainly and seriously, telling them of the danger
of Gods everlasting wrath; and when you find them obstinate, tell the
Church Officers of them, that they may do their duty; and if yet they are
unreformed, they may be excluded from the Churches Communion, and all Christian
familiarity. Try this course a while, and if you meet with no Afflictions, and
get no more fists about your ears then your own, nor more tongues against you
then formerly, tell me I am mistaken. Men basely bawk and shun almost all the
displeasing ungrateful work of Christianity of purpose, lest they should have
sufferings in the flesh, and then they doubt of their sincerity for want of
sufferings. My second Advice is, Do but stay a while in Patience (but prepare
your Patience for a sharper encounter) and do not tie God to your time. He has
not told you when your Afflictions shall come: If he deal easier with you then
others, and give you a longer time to prepare for them, be not you offended at
that, and do not quarrel with your mercies. It is about seventeen years since I
was troubled with this Doubt, thinking I was no son, because I was not
afflicted; and I think I have had few days without pain for this sixteen years
since together, nor but few hours, if any one, for this six or seven years: And
thus my scruple is removed.

And if yet any be troubled with this Doubt, if the Churches and Common trouble
be any trouble to them, shall I be bold to tell them my thoughts? (only
understand, that I pretend not to Prophesy, but to Conjecture at Effects by the
position of their Moral Causes.) I think that the Righteous King of Saints is
even now, for our over-admiring rash zeal, and high profession, making for
England so heavy an Affliction and sharp a scourge, to be inflicted by seduced,
proud, self-conceited Professors, as neither we nor our Fathers did ever yet
bear: Except it should prove the merciful intent of our Father, only to suffer
them to ripen for their own destruction, to be a standing Monument for the
effectual warning of all after-ages of the Church, Whether pride and heady Zeal
may bring Professors of holiness; And when they are full ripe, to do by them as
at Munster and in New England, that they may go no further, but their folly may
be known to all: Amen. I have told you of my thoughts of this long ago in my
Book of Baptism.

ALL these Doubts I have here answered, that you may see how necessary it is
that in all your troubles you be sure to distinguish between Matter of
Doubting, and Matter of Humiliation. Alas, what soul is so holy on the Earth,
but must daily say, Forgive as our trespasses? and cry out with Paul, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? But at
the same time we may thank God through our Lord Jesus Christ. If every sin
should make us Doubt, we should do nothing but doubt. I know you may easily
tell a long and a sad story of your sins, how you are troubled with this and
that, and many a distemper, and weak and wanting in every Grace and Duty, and
have committed many sins: But does it follow that therefore you have no true
Grace? Learn therefore to be Humbled for every sin, but not to Doubt of your
sincerity and salvation for every sin.

DIRECTION XXX.
30. Whatsoever New Doubtings do arise in your soul, see that you carefully
discern whether they are such as must be resolved from the Consideration of
General Grace, or of Special Grace: And especially be sure of this, that when
you want or lose your Certainty of sincerity and salvation, you have presently
recourse to the Probability of it, and lose not the Comforts of that: Or if you
should lose the sight of a Probability of Special Grace, yet see that you have
recourse at the utmost to General Grace, and never let go the Comforts of that
at the worst.

THis Rule is of unspeakable Necessity and use for your Peace and Comfort. Here
are three several Degrees of the Grounds of Comfort. It is exceeding weakness
for a man that is beaten from one of these holds, therefore to let go the other
too: and because he cannot have the highest Degree, therefore to conclude that
he has none at all.

I beseech you in all your Doubtings and Complainings still Remember the two
Rules here laid down. 1. All Doubts arise not from the same Cause, and
therefore must not have the same Cure. Let the first thing which you do upon
every doubt, be this: To consider Whether it come from the Unbelieving or low
Apprehensions of the General Grounds of Comfort, or from the want of evidence
of special Grace? For that which is a fit Remedy for one of these, will do
little for the cure of the other. 2. If your Doubting be only Whether you be
sincere in Beli^ving, Loving, Hoping, Repenting and Obeying? then it will not
answer this Doubt, though you discern never so much of Gods Merciful Nature, or
Christ's Gracious Office, or the Universal sufficiency of his Death and
Satisfaction, or the freeness and extent of the Promise of Pardon. For I
profess considerately, that I do not know in all the Body of Popery concerning
Merits, Justification, Humane Satisfactions, Assurance or any other point about
Grace, for which we unchurch them, that they err half so dangerously, as
Saltmarsh and such Antinomians do in this one point, when they say, That Christ
has Repented and Believed for us; meaning* it of that Faith and Repentance
which he has made the Conditions of our salvation: and that We must no more
question our own faith, then we must question Christ the Object of it. It will
be no saving Plea at the day of Judgment to say, Though I Repented not, and
Believed not, yet Christ dyed for me, or God is merciful, or Christ Repented
and Believed for me, or God made me a free Promise and Gift of salvation, if I
would Repent and Believe. What Comfort would such an Answer give them? And
therefore doubtless it will not serve now to quiet any knowing Christian
against those Doubts that arise from the want of particular evidence of special
Grace: though in their own place, the General Grounds of Comfort are of
Absolute Necessity thereto.

2. On the other side, if your Doubts arise from any Defect in your
Apprehensions of General Grace; it is not your looking after Marks in your self
that is the way to Resolve them. I told you in the beginning, that the General
Grounds of Comfort lie in four particulars (that square Foundation which will
bear up all the Faith of the Saints.) First, Gods merciful and unconceivably
Good and Gracious Nature, and his Love to mankind. Secondly, the Gracious
Nature of the Mediator God and Man, with his most Gracious undertaken Office
of Saving and Reconciling. Thirdly, the sufficiency of Christ's Death and
satisfaction for all the world, to save them if they will Accept him and his
Grace: I put it in terms beyond dispute, because I would not build up Believers
Comforts on points which godly Divines do contradict (as little as may be:) Yet
I am past all Doubt my self, that Christ did actually make satisfaction to Gods
Justice for All; and that no man perishes for want of an Expiatory sacrifice,
but for want of faith to believe and apply it, or for want of Repentance, and
yielding to Recovering Grace. The fourth is, The Universal Grant of pardon, and
Right to salvation, on Condition of Faith and Repentance. If your Doubt arise
from the Ignorance or overlooking of any of these, to these must you have
recourse for your Cure.

Where Note, that all those Doubts which come from the greatness of your sin,
as such that you think will not therefore be forgiven, or that come from the
sense of Unworthiness, (in a Legal sense) or want of Merit in your self, and
all your Doubts whether God be willing to accept and forgive you, though you
should Repent and believe; or whether any sacrifice was offered by Christ for
your sins; I say, all these come from your Ignorance or Unbelief of some or all
of the four General Grounds here mentioned; and from them must be cured.

Note also in a special manner, That there is a great difference between these
four General Grounds, and your particular Evidences in point of Certainty: For
these four Corner-stones are fast founded beyond all possibility of Removal; so
that they are always of as undoubted Certainty as that the Heaven is over your
head; and they are immutable; still the same. These you are commanded strictly
to Believe with a Divine Faith, as being the clearly revealed Truths of God;
and if you should not Believe them, yet they remain firm and true, and your
unbelief should not make void the Universal promise and Grace of God. But your
own Evidences of special Grace, are not so Certain, so Clear, or so Immutable;
nor are you bound to Believe them, but to search after them that you may know
them: You are not bound by any Word of God strictly to Believe that you do
Believe, or Repent, but to try and discern it. This then is the first part of
this Direction, That you always discover whether your troubles arise from low
unbelieving or ignorant thoughts of Gods Mercifulness, Christ's Gracious nature
and office, General Satisfaction, or the universal Promise: or whether they
arise from want of evidence of sincerity in your self? and accordingly in your
thoughts apply the Remedy.

The second part of the Direction is, that you hold fast Probabilities of
Special Grace when you lose your Certainty, and that you hold fast your General
Grounds when you lose both the former. Never forget this in any of your Doubts.

You say, your faith and obedience have such breaches and sad defects in them,
that you cannot be Certain that they are sincere. Suppose it be so: Do you see
no great Likelihood or hopes yet that they are sincere? If you do (as I think
many Christians easily may, that yet receive not a proportionable comfort)
remember that this is no small Mercy, but matter of great consolation.

But suppose the worst, that you see no Grace in your self: yet you cannot be
sure you have none: For it may be there, and you not see it. Yea suppose the
worst, that you were sure that you had no true* Grace at all, yet remember that
you have still abundant cause of Comfort in Gods General Grace. Do you think
you must needs Despair, or give up all Hope and Comfort, or conclude your self
irrecoverably lost, because you are Graceless? why be it known to you there is
that ground of Consolation in general Grace that may make the hearts of the
very wicked to leap for joy. Do I need to prove that to you? You know that the
Gospel is called Glad tidings of salvation, and the Preachers of it are to tell
those to whom they preach it. Behold we bring you tidings of great Joy, and
glad tidings to all People. And you know before the Gospel comes to men they
are miserable. If then it be glad tidings and tidings of great joy to all the
unconverted where it comes, why should it not be so to you? and where is your
great joy? If you be Graceless, is it nothing to know that God is exceeding
merciful, slow to anger, ready to forgive, pardoning iniquity, transgression
and sin? loving mankind? Is it nothing to know that the Lord has brought
Infinite Mercy and Goodness down into humane flesh? and has taken on him the
most blessed office of Reconciling, and is become the Lamb of God? Is it
nothing to you, that all your sins have a sufficient Sacrifice paid for them,
so that you are certain not to perish for want of a Ransom? Is it nothing to
you, that God has made such an universal Grant of Pardon and Salvation to all
that will Believe: and that you are not on the terms of the mere Law of Works,
to be judged for not obeying in perfection? Suppose you are never so certainly
Graceless, is it not a Ground of unspeakable Comfort, that you may be certain
that nothing can condemn you, but a flat refusal or unwillingness to have
Christ and his Salvation. This is a certain truth, which may comfort a man as
yet unsanctified, that sin merely as sin shall not Condemn him; nor any thing
in the World, but the final obstinate Refusal of the Remedy, which thereby
leaves all other sin unpardoned.

Now I would ask you this Question in your greatest fears that you are out of
Christ: Are you Willing to have Christ to pardon, sanctify, guide and save
you? or not? If you are; then you are a true Believer, and did not know it. If
you are not; if you will but wait on Gods Word in Hearing and Reading, and
Consider frequently and seriously of the necessity and excellency of Christ and
Glory, and the evil of sin, and the vanity of the world, and will but beg
earnestly of God to make you Willing, you shall find that God has not
appointed you this means in vain, and that this way will be more profitable
then all your complainings. See therefore when you are at the very lowest, that
you forsake not the Comforts of General Grace.

And indeed those that deny any General Grace or Redemption, Do leave poor
Christians in a very lamentable Condition. For, alas, Assurance of Special
Grace (yea or a high probability) is not so common a thing as mere Disputers
against Doubting have imagined. And when a poor Christian is beaten from his
Assurance (which few have) he has nothing but Probabilities: and when he has
no confident probable persuasion of special Grace, where is he then? and what
has he left to support his soul? I will not so far now meddle with that
Controversy, as to open further how this opinion tends to leave most
Christians in desperation, for all the pretenses it has found? and I had done
more, but that General Redemption or Satisfaction is commonly taught in the
maintaining of the General Sufficiency of it, though men understand not how
they contradict themselves.

But perhaps you will say, This is cold comfort: for I may as well argue thus,
Christ will damn sinners: I am a sinner, therefore he will damn me: as to argue
thus, Christ will save sinners: I am a Sinner: therefore he will save me. I
answer: There is no show of soundness in either of these Arguments. It is not a
certainty that Christ will save you, that can be gathered from General Grace
alone: that must be had from assurance of of special Grace superadded to the
General. But a conditional certainty you may have from General Grace only: and
thus you may soundly and infallibly argue, God has made a Grant to every
sinful man, of Pardon and salvation through Christ's Sacrifice, if they will but
Repent and Believe in Christ: but I am a sinful man, therefore God has made
this Grant of Pardon and Salvation to me.

DIRECTION XXXI.
If God do bless you with an able, faithful, prudent, judicious Pastor, take
him for your Guide under Christ in the way to Salvation; and open to him your
Case and desire his advice in all your extraordinary pressing necessities,
where you have found the advice of other godly friends to be insufficient: And
this not once or twice only, but as often as such pressing necessities shall
return. Or if your own Pastor be more defective for such a work, make use of
some other Minister of Christ, who is more meet.

HEre I have these several things to open to you. 1. That it is your Duty to
seek this Direction from the Guides of the Church. 2. When and in what cases
you should do this. 3. To what end, and how far. 4. What Ministers they be that
you should choose thereto. 5. In what manner you must open your Case, that you
may receive satisfaction.

1. The first has two parts. 1. That you must open your Case. 2. And that to
your Pastor. 1. The Devil has great advantage while you keep his Counsel: Two
are better then one; for if one of them fall he has another to help him. It is
dangerous Resisting such an enemy alone. An uniting of forces often procures
victory. God gives others knowledge, prudence, and other gifts for our good:
that so every member of the body may have need of another, and each be useful
to the other. An Independency of Christian upon Christian, is most unchristian:
much more of people on their Guides. It cease to be a Member, which is
separated from the body: and to make no use of the body or fellow members, is
next to separation from them. Sometime bashfulness is the cause, sometimes
self-confidence (a far worse cause;) but whatever is the cause of Christians
smothering their Doubts, the effects are often sad. The disease is often gone so
far, that the Cure is very difficult, before some bashful or proud or tender
Patients will open their disease. The very opening of a man's grief to a
faithful friend, does often ease the heart of it self. 2. And that this should be
done to your Pastor, I will show you further anon.

2. But you must understand well when this is your Duty. 1. Not in every small
infirmity, which accompanies Christians in their daily most watchful
Conversation: Nor yet in every lesser Doubt, which may be otherways resolved.
It is a folly and a wrong to Physicians to run to them for every cut finger or
prick with a pin. Every neighbor can help you in this. 2. Nor except it be a
weighty case indeed, go not first to a Minister. But first study the case your
self, and seek Gods direction: If that will not serve, open your case to your
nearest bosom friend that is godly and judicious. And in these two cases always
go to your Pastor: 1. In case privater means can do you no Good: then God calls
you to seek further. If a cut finger so fester that ordinary means will not
cure it, you must go to the Physician. 2. If the case be weighty and dangerous:
For then none but the more prudent advice is to be trusted. If you be struck
with a dangerous disease, I would not have you delay so long, nor wrong your
self so much as to stay while you tamper with every woman's medicine, but go
presently to the Physician. So if you either fall into any grievous sin, or any
terrible pangs of Conscience, or any great streights and difficulties about
matters of Doctrine or Practice, go presently to your Pastor for advice. The
Devil, and Pride, and Bashfulness will do their utmost to hinder you; but see
that they prevail not.

3. Next consider to what End you must do this. Not 1. either to expect that a
Minister can of himself create Peace in you: or that all your Doubts should
vanish as soon as ever you have opened your mind. Only the great Peacemaker,
the Prince of Peace, can create Peace in you: Ascribe not to any the office of
the Holy Ghost, to be your effectual Comforter. To expect more from man then
belongs to man, is the way to receive nothing from him, but to cause God to
blast to you the best endeavors. 2. Nor must you resolve to take all merely
from the word of your Pastor, as if he were Infallible: Nor absolutely to
Judge of your self as he Judges. For he may be too rigorous, or more commonly
too charitable in his opinion of you: There may be much of your disposition and
conversation unknown to him, which may hinder his right Judging. But 1. You
must use your Pastor as the ordained Instrument and Messenger of the Lord
Jesus and his Spirit, appointed to speak a word in season to the weary, and to
show to man his Righteousness, and to strengthen the weak hands and feeble
knees, yea and more, to bind and loose on Earth, as Christ does bind and loose
in Heaven. As Christ and his Spirit do only save in the principal place, and
yet Ministers save souls in subordination to them as his Instruments. Act.
26.17, 18. 1 Timothy 4.15, 16. Jam. 5.20. So Christ and the Spirit are as
Principal Causes the only Comforters: but his Ministers are Comforters under
him. 2. And that which you must expect from them is these two things. 1. You
must expect those fuller discoveries of Gods Will, then you are able to make
your self, by which you may have assurance of your duty to God, and of the
sense of Scripture, which expresses how God will deal with you: That so a
clearer discovery of Gods mind may Resolve your Doubts. 2. In the mean time
till you can come to a full Resolution, you may and must somewhat stay your
self on the very Judgment of your Pastor: Not as Infallible; but as a
discovery of the Probability of your Good or bad estate: and so of your duty
also. Though you will not renounce your own understanding, and believe any man
when you know he is deceived, or would deceive you, yet you will so far suspect
your own reason, and value another, as to have a special regard to every man's
Judgment in his own Profession. If the Physician tell you that your disease is
not dangerous, or the Lawyer that your Cause is good, it will more Comfort you
then if another man should say as much. It may much stay your heart till you
can reach to clear Evidences and Assurance, to have a Pastor that is well
acquainted with you, and is faithful and Judicious to tell you that he verily
thinks that you are in a safe Condition. 3. But the chief use of his Advice is,
not so much to tell you what he thinks of you, as to give you Directions how
you may Judge of your self, and come out of your trouble: Besides the benefit
of his Prayers to God for you.

4. Next let me tell you what men you must choose to open your mind to: And
they must be, 1. Men of Judgment and Knowledge, and not the Ignorant, be they
never so honest: Else they may deceive you, not knowing what they do: either
for want of understanding the Scripture, and the nature of Grace and Sin; or
for want of skill to deal with both weak Consciences, and deep deceitful
hearts. 2. They must be truly fearing God, and of experience in this great
work. For a Troubled soul is seldom well resolved and comforted merely out of a
Book; but from the Book and Experience both together. Carnal or formal men will
but make a Jest at the Doubts of a Troubled Christian; or at least will give
you such formal Remedies as will prove no Cure: Either they will persuade you,
as the Antinomians do, that you should trust God with your soul, and never
Question your Faith: Or that you do ill to trouble your self about such things:
Or they will direct you only to the Comforts of General Grace, and tell you
only that God is Merciful, and Christ dyed for sinners: which are the
necessary Foundations of our Peace; but will not answer particular Doubts of
our own sincerity and of our Interest in Christ: Or else they will make you
believe that Holiness of heart and life (which is the thing you look after) is
it that troubles you and breeds all your scruples: Or else with the Papists,
they will send you to your Merits for Comfort; or to some Vindictive Penance in
Fastings, Pilgrimages, or the like; or to some Saint departed, or Angel, or to
the Pardons or Indulgencies of the Pope: or to a certain, formal, carnal
Devotion, to make God amends. 3. They must be men of downright Faithfulness,
that will deal plainly and freely, though not cruelly: and not like those
tender Surgeons that will leave the Cure undone for fear of hurting: Meddle not
with men-pleasers and daubers, that will presently speak Comfort to you as
Confidently as if they had known you twenty years, when perhaps they know
little of your heart or Case. Deal not with such as resolve to humor you. 4.
They must be men of fidelity, and well tried to be such, that you may trust
them with those secrets which you are called to Reveal. 5. They must be men of
great stayedness and wisdom, that they may neither rashly pass their Judgment,
nor set you upon unsound, unwarrantable or dangerous Courses. 6. It is
suspicious if they be men that are so Impudent as to draw out your secrets, and
scrue themselves deeper into your privatest thoughts and ways then is meet: Yet
a compassionate Minister, when he sees that poor Christians do endanger
themselves by keeping secret their Troubles, or else that they hazard
themselves by hiding the greatest of their sins, like Achan, Saul, or Ananias
and Saphira, and so play the Hypocrites; in these Cases he may and must urge
them to deal openly. 7. Above all be sure that those that you seek advice of be
sound in the Faith, and free from the two desperate plagues of notorious false
doctrine, and separating dividing inclinations, that do but hunt about to make
Disciples to themselves. There are two of the former sort, and three of the
latter, that I would charge you to take heed of (and yet all is but four) 1.
Among those that err from the Faith (next to Pagans, Jews and Infidels,
whether Ranters, Seekers or Socinians, which I think few sober godly men are so
much in danger of, because of their extreme vileness) I would especially have
you avoid the Antinomians, being the greatest pretenders to the right
comforting afflicted Consciences in the world: but upon my certain knowledge I
dare say they are notorious subverters of the very nature of the Gospel, and
that free Grace which they so much talk of, and the great dishonorers of the
Lord Jesus, whom they seem so highly to extol. They are those Mountebanks and
Quacksalvers that delude the world by vain ostentation, and kill more then they
well Cure. 2. Next to them, take heed of the Papists, who will go to Rome, to
Saints, to Angels, to Merits, to the most carnal delusory means for Comfort,
when they should go to Scripture and to Heaven for it.

And then take heed that you fall not into the hands of separating dividers of
Christ's Church. The most notorious and dangerous of them are of these three
sorts: 1. The last mentioned, the Papists: They are the most notorious
Schismatics and Separatists that ever Gods Church did know on Earth: For my
part, I think their Schism is more dangerous and wicked then the rest of their
false Doctrine. The unmerciful, proud, self-seeking wretches would like the
Donatists, make us believe that God has no true Church on Earth but they: and
that all the Christians in Ethiopia, Asia, Germany, Hungary, France, England,
Scotland, Ireland, Belgia, and the rest of the World that acknowledge not their
Pope of Rome to be Head of all the Churches in the World, are none of Christ's
Churches, nor ever were. Thus do they separate from all the Churches on Earth,
and confine all Religion and Salvation to themselves, who so notoriously depart
from Christ's way of salvation. Indeed the extreme diligence that they use in
visiting the sick, and soliciting all men to their Church and way, is plainly
to get themselves followers; and they are everywhere more industrious to
enlarge the Popes Kingdom, then Christ's. So far are they from studying the
Unity of the Catholic Church which they so much talk of, that they will admit
none to be of that Church, nor to be saved, but their own party, as if indeed
the Pope had the Keys of Heaven. Indeed they are the most impudent Sectaries
and Schismatics on Earth. 2. The next to them are the Anabaptists, whose
Doctrine is not in it self so dangerous as their Schism and gathering Disciples
so zealously to themselves: And so strange a curse of God has followed them
hitherto, as may deter any sober Christian from rash adventuring on their way.
Even now when they are higher in the world then ever they were on earth, yet do
the judicious see Gods heavy judgment upon them, in their Congregations and
Conversations. 3. Lastly, meddle not with those commonly called Separatists;
for they will make a prey of you for the increase of their party. I do not mean
that you should separate from these two last, as they do from us, and have
nothing to do with them, nor acknowledge them Christians. But seek not their
advice and make them not of your counsel. You will do as one that goes to a
Physician that has the plague, to be cured of a cut finger, if you go for your
comfort to any of these Seducers. But if you have a Pastor that is sound in the
main Doctrines of Religion, and is studious of the Unity and Peace of the
Church, such a man you may use, though in many things mistaken; for he will not
seek to make a Prey of you by drawing you to his party. Let him be Lutheran,
Calvinist, Arminian, Episcopal, Independent, or Presbyterian, so he be sound in
the main, and free from Division. Thus I have showed you the Qualifications of
these men that you must seek advice of.

2. Let me next add this: Let them be rather Pastors then private men, if it
may be: And rather your own Pastor then others, if they are fit. For the first
consider, 1. It is their office to be Guides of Christ's Disciples under him,
and to be spiritual Physicians for the curing of souls. And experience tells
us (and sadly of late) what a curse follows those that step beyond the bounds
of their calling by invading this office; and that God blesses means to them
that keep within his order, 1 Thessalonians. 5 12, 13. Heb. 13.7.17. Not but that
private men may help you in this, as a private neighbor may give you a
Medicine to cure your disease; but you will not so soon trust them in any
weighty case as you will the Physician. 2. Besides Ministers have made it the
study of their lives, and therefore are liker to understand it then others. As
for those that think long study no more conducible to the knowledge of
Scriptures, then if men studied not at all, they may as well Renounce Reason,
and dispute for preheminency of beasts above men, as renounce study which is
but the use of Reason. But it appears how considerately these men speak
themselves, and whence it comes, and how much credit a sober-Christian should
give them! Let them read Psalm. 1.2, 3. Heb. 5.11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Timothy 4.13, 14,
15, 16. and 2 Timothy 2.15. and let them return to their wits. Paul commands
Timothy, though he was from his youth acquainted with the Scriptures, Meditate
upon these things: Give thy self Wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear
to all: How much need have we to do so now? 3. Also Ministers are usually most
experienced in this work: And wisdom requires you no more to trust your soul
then you would do your body with an unexperienced man.

2. And if it may be (he being fit) let it be rather your own Pastor then
another: 1 Because it belongs to his peculiar place and charge, to Direct the
souls of his own Congregation. 2. Because he is likelier to know you, and to
fit his advice to your estate, as having better opportunity then others to be
acquainted with your conversation.

5. Next consider, in what manner you must open your Grief, if you would have
Cure. 1. Do it as truly as you can. Make the matter neither better nor worse
then it is. Specially take heed of dealing like Ananias; pretending to open all
(as he did to Give all) when you do but open some common infirmities, and hide
all the most disgraceful distempers of your heart and sins of your life. The
Vomit of Confession must work to the bottom and fetch up that hidden sin, which
is it that continues your Calamity. Read Mr. T. Hooker in his Souls
Preparation, concerning this Confession; who shows you the danger of not going
to the bottom.

2. You must not go to a Minister to be cured merely by Good words, as Wizards
do by charms; and so think that all is well when he has spoken comfortably to
you: But you must go for Directions for your own Practice, that so the cure may
be done by liesure when you come home. Truly most even of the godly that I have
known, do go to a Minister for comfort, as silly people go a Phys^cian for
Physic. If the Physician could stroke them whole, or give them a penny worth
of some pleasant stuff, that would cure all in an hour, then they would praise
him. But alas, the cure will not be done 1. Without cost. 2. Nor without time
and patience. 3. Nor without taking down unpleasing medicines; and so they let
all alone. So you come to a Minister for advice and comfort; and you look that
his words should comfort you before he leaves you, or at least, some short
small direction to take home with you: But he tells you, if you will be cured
you must more Resolve against that disquieting Corruption and Passion; you must
more meekly submit to Reproof: you must walk more watchfully and conscionably
with God and men; and then you must not give ear to the Tempter, with many the
like; he gives you, as I have done here, a bill of thirty several Directions,
and tells you, you must practice all these. O this seems a tedious course; You
are never the nearer comfort for Hearing these: it must be by long and diligent
practicing them. Is it not a foolish Patient that will come home from the
Physician, and say, I have heard all that he said: but I am never the better?
So you say, I have heard all that the Minister said, and I have never the more
comfort. But have you Done all that he bid you? and Taken all the Medicines
that he gave you? Alas, the cure is most to be done by your self (under Christ)
when you come home: The Minister is but the Physician to direct you what course
to take for the cure. And then, as silly People run from one Physician to
another, hearing what all can say, and desirous to know what every man thinks
of them, but thoroughly follow the advice of none, but perhaps take one medicine
from one man, and one from another, and let most even of those lie by them in
the box, and so perish more certainly then if they never meddled with any at
all: so do most troubled souls, hear what one man says, and what another
says, and seldom thoroughly follow the advice of any: but when one man's words
do not cure them, they say, This is not the man that God has appointed to cure
me: And so another, and that is not the man: When they should rather say, This
is not the way, then This is not the man: This lazy complaining is not it that
will do the work; but faithful practicing the Directions given you.

But I know some will say, That it is near to Popish Auricular Confession which
I here persuade Christians to, and it is to bring Christians under the Tyranny
of the Priests again, and make Them acquainted with all men's secrets, and
Masters of their Consciences.

Answ. 1. To the last, I say, to the railing Devil of this age, no more but,
The Lord Rebuke thee. If any Minister have wicked ends, let the God of heaven
convert* him, or root him out of his Church, and cast him among the weeds and
briars. But is it not the known voice of Sensuality and Hell, to cast
reproaches upon the way and ordinances of God? who knows not that it is the
very Office of the Ministry, to be Teachers and Guides to men in matters of
salvation? and Overseers of them? and that they watch for their souls, as those
that must give an account? and the people therefore bound to obey them? Heb.
13.7, 17. should not the shepherd know his sheep, and their strayings and
diseases? How else shall he cure them? should not the Physician hear the
Patient open all his disease, yea study to discover to the utmost every thing
he knows; and all little enough to the cure? A disease unknown is unlike to be
cured: and a disease well known is half cured. Mr. Tho. Hooker says truly, It
is with many people as with some overmodest Patients, who having a disease in
some secret place, they will not for shame reveal it to the Physician, till it
be past cure, and then they must lose their lives by their modesty: So do many
by their secret and more disgraceful sins. Not that every man is bound to open
all his sins to his Pastor: but those that cannot well be otherwise cured, he
must: either if the sense of the guilt cannot be removed, and true Assurance of
pardon obtained: or else, if power against the sin be not otherwise obtained,
but that it still prevails: In both these cases we must go to those that God
has made our Directors and Guids: I am confident many a thousand souls do long
strive against Anger, Lust, Flesh-pleasing. Worldliness* and Trouble of
Conscience to little purpose, who if they would but have taken Gods way, and
sought out for help, and opened all their case to their Minister, they might
have been delivered in a good measure long ago. 2. And for Popish confession, I
detest it: We would not persuade men that there is a necessity of confessing
every sin to a Minister before it can be pardoned. Nor do we do it in a
perplexed formality only at one time of the year: nor in order to Popish
pardons, or Satisfactions: But we would have men go for Physic to their souls,
as they do for their bodies; when they feel they have need; And let me advise
all Christian Congregations to practice this excellent duty more. See that you
knock oftener at your Pastors door, and ask his advice in all your pressing
necessities: Do not let him sit quiet in his study for you: Make him know by
experience that the tenth part of a Ministers labor is not in the Pulpit. If
your sins are strong, and you have wounded Conscience deep, go for his advice
for a safe cure: Many a man's sore festers to damnation for want of this: And
poor ignorant and scandalous sinners have far more need to do this then
troubled Consciences. I am confident, if the people of my Congregation did but
do their duty for the good of their own souls in private seeking advice of
their Ministers and opening their cases to them, they would find work for ten
Ministers at least: And yet those two that they have, have more work then they
are able to do already. Especially Ministers in small Country Congregations,
might do abundance of Good this way: And their people are much too blame that
they come not oftener to them for advice: This were the way to make Christians
indeed. The Devil knows this, and therefore so envies it, that he never did
more against a design in the world: he has got the Maintenance alienated that
should have maintained them, that so they may have but one Minister in a
Congregation, and then among the greater Congregations this work is impossible
for want of Instruments: yea he is about getting down the very Churches and
settled Ministry, if God will suffer him. He sets his Instruments to rail
at Priests and Discipline, and to call Christ's yoke Tyranny; because while the
Garden is hedged in, he is fain with envy to look over the hedge. What if a man
(like those of our times) should come to a Town that have an Epidemical
Pleurifie or Fever, and say, Do not run l^ke fools to these Physicians; they
do but cheat you, and rob your purses, and seek themselves, and seek to be
Lords of your lives. Its possible some do so: But if by these persuasions the
silly people should lose their lives, how well had their new preacher
befriended them? such friends will those prove at last to your souls, that
dissuade you from obeying the Guidance and Discipline of your Overseers, and
dare call the Ordinances of the Lord of Glory Tyrannical, and reproach those
that Christ has set over them. England will not have Christ by his officers
Rule over them; nor the several Congregations will not obey him. But he will
make them know before many years are past, that they refused their own mercy;
and knew not the things that belong to their Peace; and that he will be master
at last in spite of Malice, and the proudest of his foes. If they get by this
bargain of Refusing Christ's Government, and Despising his Ministers, and making
the Peace, Unity and Prosperity of his Church, and the souls of men, a Prey to
their Proud misguided Phansies and Passions, then let them boast of the
bargain, when they have tried it. Only I would entreat one thing of them: Not
to judge too confidently till they have seen the end.

And for all you tender Conscienc'd Christians, whom by the Ministry the Lord
has begotten or confirmed to himself, as ever you will show your selves
thankful, for so great a mercy, as ever you will hold that you have got, or
grow to more perfection, and attain that blessed Life to which Christ has
given you his Ministers to conduct you, see that you stick close to a
judicious, godly, faithful Ministry; And make use of them while you have them.
Have you strong lusts? or deep wounds in conscience, or a heavy burden of
doubtings or distress? seek their advice. God will have his own ordinance and
officers have the chief instrumental hand in your cure. The same means often
times in another hand shall not do it. Yet I would have you make use of all
able private Christians help also.

I will tell you the reason why our Ministers have not urged this so much upon
you, nor so plainly acquainted their Congregations with the necessity of
opening your case to your Minister, and seeking his advice.

1. Some in opposition to Popery have gone too far on the other extreme;
perhaps sinning as deeply in neglect, as the Papists do in formal excess. It is
a good sign that an opinion is true, when it is near to error. For truth is
the very next step to error. The small thread of Truth, runs between the close
adjoining extremes of error.

2. Some Ministers knowing the exceeding greatness of the burden, are loath to
put themselves upon it. This one Work of giving advice to all that ought to
come and open their case to us, if our people did but what they ought do for
their own safety, would it self in great Congregations, be more then preaching
every day in the week. What then is all the rest of the work? And how can one
man, yea or five, do this to five thousand souls? And then when it lies
undone, the malicious Reproachers rail at the Ministers, and accuse the people
of unfitness to be Church Members; which howsoever there may be some cause of,
yet not so much as they suggest; and that unfitness would best be cured by the
diligence of more Laborers, which they think to cure by removing the few that
do remain.

3. Also some Ministers seeing that they have more work then they can do
already, think themselves incapable of more, and therefore that its vain to put
their people on it, to seek more.

4. Some Ministers are over-modest, and and think it to be unfit to desire
people to open their secrets to them; in confessing their sins and corrupt
inclinations, and opening their wants: And indeed any ingenuous man will be
backward to pry into the secrets of others. But when God has made it our
office under Christ to be Physicians to the souls of our People, it is but
bloody cruelty to connive at their Pride and Carnal Bashfulness, or
Hypocritical Covering of their sins, and to let them dye of their disease
rather then we will urge them to disclose it.

5. Some Ministers are loath to tell People of their duty in this, lest it
should confirm the world in their malicious conceit, that we would be Masters
of Men's Consciences, and would lord it over them. This is as much folly and
cruelty, as if the Master and Pilot of the Ship should let the Mariners govern
the Ship by the Major Vote, and run all on shelves, and drown themselves and
him, and all for fear of being thought Lordly and Tyrannical in taking the
Government of the Ship upon himself, and telling the Mariners that it is their
duty to obey him.

6. Most godly Ministers do tell People in General of the Necessity of such a
Dependence on their Teachers, as Learners in the School of Christ should have
on them that are Ushers under him the chief Master; and they do gladly give
advice to those that do seek to them: But they do not so particularly and
plainly acquaint People with their duty in opening to them the particular sores
of their souls.

It is also the Policy of the Devil to make People Believe that their Ministers
are too stout, and will not stoop to a compassionate hearing of their case:
especially if Ministers carry themselves strangely at too great a distance from
their People. I would earnestly entreat all Ministers therefore to be as
familiar and as much with their People as they can. Papists and other Seducers
will insinuate themselves into their familiarity, if we be strange: If you
teach them not in their Houses, these will Creep into their Houses, and lead
them Captive. I persuade others of my Brethren to that which my self am
disabled from performing; being by constant weakness (besides unavoydable
business) confined to my Chamber. But those that can perform it, will find this
a most necessary and profitable work. And let not poor People believe the
Devil, who tells them that Ministers are so proud, only to discourage them from
seeking their advice. Go try them once before you believe it.

Lastly, Remember this, that it is not enough that you once opened your case to
your Pastor; but do it as often as Necessity urges you to call for his
advice: though not on every light occasion. Live in such a Dependence on the
advice and guidance of your Pastor (under Christ) for your soul, as you do on
the advice of the Physician for your body. Read Mal. 2.7. and let Ministers
read 6, 8, 9.

DIRECTION XXXII.
32. As ever you would live in Peace and Comfort, and well-pleasing unto God,
be sure that you understand and deeply consider wherein the height of a
Christian life, and the greatest part of our Duty does consist; To wit, In a
loving Delight in God, and a Thankful and Cheerful Obedience to his Will: And
then make this your Constant aim; and be still aspiring after it, and let all
other affections and endeavors be subservient unto this.

THis one Rule well practiced, would do wonders on the souls of poor
Christians, in dispelling all their fears and troubles, and helping not only
to a settled Peace, but to live in the most comfortable state that can be
expected upon earth. Write therefore these two or three words deep in your
understandings and Memory; that the life which God is best pleased with, and we
should be always endeavoring, is, A Loving Delight in God through Christ; and
a thankful and cheerful obedience to him. I do not say, that godly sorrows, and
fears, and jealousies, are no Duties: but these are the great Duties, to which
the rest should all subserve. Misapprehending the state of Duty and the very
Nature of a Christian life must needs make sad distempers in men's hearts and
conversations. Many Christians look upon Broken-heartedness, and much grieving
and weeping for sin, as if it were the great thing that God Delights in and
requires of them: and therefore they bend all their endeavors this way; and
are still striving with their hearts to break them more, and wringing their
Consciences to squeez out some tears; and they think no Sermon, no Prayer, no
Meditation speeds so well with them, as that which can help them to grieve or
weep. I am far from persuading men against Humiliation and Godly sorrow and
tenderness of heart: But yet I must tell you, that this is a sore error that
you lay so much upon it, and so much overlook that great and noble work and
state to which it tends. Do you think that God has any Pleasure in your
sorrows as such? Does it do him Good to see you dejected, afflicted and
tormented? Alas, it is only as your sorrows do kill your sins, and mortify
your fleshly lusts, and prepare for your Peace and Joys, that God regards them:
Because God does speak comfortably to troubled drooping spirits, and tells them,
that he delights in the contrite, and loves the humble, and binds up the
brokenhearted; therefore men misunderstanding him, do think they should do
nothing but be still breaking their own hearts: Whereas God speaks it but
partly to show his hatred to the proud, and partly to show his tender
compassions to the humbled, that they might not be overwhelmed or despair. But,
O Christians, understand and consider, that all your sorrows are but
preparatives to your joys: and that it is a higher and sweeter work that God
calls you to, and would have you spend your time and strength in. 1. The first
part of it is Love. A work that is wages to it self. He that knows what it is
to live in the Love of God, does know that Christianity is no tormenting and
discontented life. 2. The next part is, Delight in God, and in the Hopes and
fore-thoughts of everlasting Glory. Psalm. 37.4. Delight thy self in the Lord,
and he shall give thee the Desires of thy heart: This is it that you should be
bending your studies and endeavors for, that your soul might be able to
Delight it self in God. 3. The third part is Thankfulness and Praise? Though I
say not as some, that we should be moved by no fears or desires of the Reward
(that is, of God) but act only from Thankfulness (as though we had all that we
expect already) yet let me desire you to take special notice of this Truth;
that Thankfulness must be the main principle of all Gospel-Obedience: And this
is not only true of the Regenerate after faith; but even the wicked themselves
who are called to Repent and Believe, are called to do it in a glad and
Thankful sense of the mercy offered them in Christ. All the world being fallen
under Gods wrath and deserved condemnation, and the Lord Jesus having become a
Sacrifice and Ransom for all, and so brought all from that Legal Necessity of
perishing which they were under, the Gospel which brings them the News of this,
is glad tidings of great Joy to them; and the very justifying Act which they
are called to, is, Thankfully to Accept Christ as one that has already
satisfied for their sins, and will save them, if they Accept him, and will
follow his saving Counsel, and use his saving means: and the saving work which
they must proceed in, is Thankfulness to obey that Redeemer whom they Believe
in. So that as General Redemption is the very Foundation of the new world and
its Government, so Thankfulness for this Redemption is the very life of
Justifying faith, and Gospel obedience. And therefore the denial of this
universal Redemption (as to the Price and Satisfaction) does both disable
wicked men (if they receive it) from coming to Christ by true Justifying Faith
(which is, The Thankful Acceptance of Christ as he is offered with his
benefits;) and this Thankfulness must be for what he has done in Dying for us,
as well as for what he will do in pardoning and saving us; and it does disable
all true Believers from Gospel Grateful Obedience, when ever they lose the
sight of their Evidences of special Grace (which, alas, how ordinary is it with
them!) For when they cannot have special Grace in their eye to be Thankful for,
according to this doctrine they must have none; because they can be no surer
that Christ dyed for them, then they are that themselves are sincere Believers
and truly sanctified. And when Thankfulness for Christ's Death and Redemption
cease, Gospel obedience cease, and Legal and slavish terrors do take place:
Though the same cannot be said of Thankfulness for special renewing, pardoning
Grace.

4. The fourth part of the Christian Life, is Cheerful Obedience. God loves a
cheerful Giver, and so he does in every part of obedience, Deuteronomy. 28.47. Because
thou servedst not the Lord thy God with Joyfulness and with Gladness of heart
for the abundance of all things, thou shall serve thy enemies in hunger and
thirst, etc.

Will you now lay all this together, and make it for the time to come your
business? and try whether whether it will not be the truest way to comfort? and
make your life a blessed life? will you make it your end in hearing, reading,
praying and meditation to raise your soul to Delight in God? Will you strive as
much to work it to this Delight as ever you did to work it to sorrow? Certainly
you have more reason? and certainly there is more matter of Delight in the face
and Love of God, then in all the things in the world besides. Consider but the
Scripture Commands, and then lay to heart your Duty, Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the
Lord always, and again I say Rejoice. Phil. 3.1. Zech. 10.7. Joel 2.23. Isa.
41.16. Psalm. 33.1. Rejoice in the Lord O ye Righteous, for praise is comely for
the upright. Psalm. 97.12. 1 Thessalonians. 5.16. Rejoice evermore. 1 Pet. 1. 6, 8, Romans
5.2. John 4.36. Psalm. 5.11. and 33.21. and 35.9. and 66.6. and 68.3, 4. and
71.23. and 89.16. and 105.3. and 149.2. and 49.4. and 27.6. John 16.24. Romans 15
13. and 14.17. The Kingdom of God is in Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the
Holy Ghost. Gal. 5.22 Psalm. 32.11. Be glad in the Lord and Rejoice O ye
Righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart. Psalm. 132.9, 16.
and 5.11. and 35.27. Hab. 3.18. with a hundred more the like. Have you made
conscience of this great duty according to its excellency and these pressing
Commands of God? Have you made Conscience of the Duties of Praise, Thanksgiving
and Cheerful Obedience, as much as of Grieving for sin? Perhaps you will say, I
cannot do it for want of Assurance: If I knew that I were one of the Righteous,
and upright in Heart, then I could be Glad and shout for Joy. Ans. 1. I have
before showed you how you may know that; when you discover it in your self, see
that you make more Conscience of this duty. 2. You have had Hopes and
Probabilites of your sincerity: Did you endeavor to answer those Probabilities
in your Joys? 3. If you would but labor to get this Delight in God, it would
help you to Assurance: for it would be one of your clearest evidences.

O how the subtle enemy disadvantageth the Gospel, by the misapprehensions and
dejected spirits of Believers! It is the very Design of the ever-blessed God,
to Glorify Love and Mercy as highly in the Work of Redemption, as ever he
Glorified Omnipotency in the Work of Creation: And he has purposely unhindged
the Sabbath which was appointed to Commemorate that work of Power in Creation,
to the first day of the week, That it might be spent as a weekly day of
Thanksgiving and Praise for the now more Glorious work of Redemption, that Love
might not only be equally admired with power, but even go before it. So that he
has laid the foundation of the Kingdom of Grace in Love and Mercy: and in Love
and Mercy has he framed the whole Structure of the Edifice: and Love and Mercy
are written in legible indelible Characters upon every piece: And the whole
frame of his Work and Temple-service, has he so composed, that all might be
the resounding Eccho's of Love; and the Praise and glorious Commerations of
Love and Mercy might be the great business of our solemn Assemblies: And the
new Creation within us, and without us, is so ordered, that Love, Thankfulness
and Delight, might be both the way and the end. And the Serpent who most
opposes God where he seeks most Glory, especially the Glory of his Grace,
does labor so succesfully to obscure this Glory, that he has brought
multitudes of poor Christians to have poor low thoughts of the Riches of this
Grace: and to set every sin of theirs against it, which should but advance it:
and even to question the very foundation of the whole building, whether Christ
has Redeemed the World by his Sacrifice? yea he puts such a vail over the
Glory of the Gospel, that men can hardly be brought to Receive it as Glad
tidings, till they first have Assurance of their own Sanctification! And the
very nature of Gods Kingdom is so unknown, that some men think it to be
Unrighteousness and Libertinism, and others to be Pensive Dejections, and
Tormenting Scruples and fears; and but few know it to be Righteousness and
Peace and Joy in the Hoy Ghost: And the very business of a Christians life and
Gods service is rather taken to be Scrupling, Quarrelling and Ve^^^ our selves
and the Church of God, then to be Love and Gratitude and a Delighting our souls
in God and cheerfully obeying him. And thus when Christianity seems a Thr^^dom
and Torment: and the service of the world, the flesh and the Devil, seems the
only freedom, and quiet and delight, no wonder if the Devil have more
unfeigned servants then Christ; and if men tremble at the name of Holiness, and
fly away from Religion as a Mischief. What can be more contrary to its nature,
and to Gods design in forming it, then for the Professors to live such dejected
and dolorous lives? God calls men from Vexation and Vanity, to high Delights
and Peace! And men come to God as from Peace and Pleasure, to Vexation. All our
preaching will do little to win souls from Sensuality to Holiness, while they
look upon the sad lives of the Professors of Holiness; As it will more deter a
sick man from meddling with a Physician, to see all that he has had in hand to
lie languishing in continual pains to their death, then all his words and
promises will encourage them. O what blessed lives might Gods people live, if
they understood the love of God in the mystery of man's Redemption; and did
addict themselves to the consideration and improvement of it, and did
believingly eye the promised Glory, and hereupon did make it the business of
their lives, to Delight their souls in him that has Loved them! And what a
wonderful success might we expect to our Preaching, if the Holy Delights and
Cheerful Obedience of the Saints did preach as clearly to the eyes of the
world, as we preach loudly to their ears?

But flesh will be flesh yet a while! and unbelief will be unbelief! we are all
too blame! The Lord forgive our overlooking his Loving kindeness, and our
dishonouring the Glorious Gospel of his Son; and our seconding Satan in his
contradicting of that Design which has contrived Gods Glory in so sweet a way.

And now Christian Reader, let me entreat thee in the name and fear of God,
hereafter better to understand and practice thy Duty. Thy heart is better a
thousand times, in Godly sorrow then in Carnal mirth (and by such sorrows it is
often made better, Eccles. 7.2, 3, 4.) But never take it to be Right till it be
Delighting it self in God. When you kneel down in prayer, labor so to conceive
of God, and bespeak him that he may be your Delight: so do in Hearing and
Reading: so do in all your Meditations of God: So do in your feasting on the
flesh and blood of Christ at his Supper. Especially improve the happy
opportunity of the Lords Day, wherein you may wholly devote your selves to this
work. And I advise Ministers and all Christ's Redeemed ones, that they spend
more of those days in Praise and Thanksgiving, especially in Commemoration of
the whole work of Redemption (and not of Christ's Resurrection alone) or else
they will not answer the Institution of the Lord: And that they keep it as the
most solemn day of Thanksgiving, and be briefer on that day in their
Confessions and Lamentations, and larger at other times! O that the
Congregations of Christ through the world were so well informed and animated,
that the main business of their solemn Assemblies on that day might be to sound
forth the high Praises of their Redeemer; and to begin here the Praises of God
and the Lamb which they must perfect in Heaven, for ever! How sweet a foretaste
of Heaven would be then in these solemnities! And truly, let me tell you, my
Brethren of the Ministry, you should by private Teaching and weekday Sermons
so further the knowledge of your People, that you might not need to spend so
much of the Lords Day in Sermons as the most godly use to do: but might bestow
a greater part of it in Psalms and solemn Praises to our Redeemer. And I could
wish that the Ministers of England to that end would unanimously agree on some
one Translation of the English Psalms in meeter, better then that in common
use, and if it may be, better then any yet extant (not neglecting the poetical
sweetness under pretense of exact translating) or at least to agree on the best
now extant: (the London Ministers may do well to lead the way) lest that
blessed part of Gods solemn worship, should be blemished for want either of
Reformation or Uniformity. And in my weak judgment, if Hymns and Psalms of
Praise were new invented, as fit for the state of the Gospel Church and Worship
(to Laud the Redeemer come in the flesh, as expressly as the work of Grace is
now express) as David's Psalms were fitted to the former state and infancy of
the Church, and more obscure revelations of the Mediator and his Grace, it
would be no sinful humane Invention or addition; nor any more want warrant,
then our Inventing the form and words of every Sermon that we preach, and every
prayer that we make, or any Catechism or Confession of faith: Nay it may seem
of so great usefulness, as to be next to a Necessity. (Still provided that we
force not any to the use of them that through ignorance may scruple it.) And if
there be any Convenient parcels of the Ancient Church that are fitted to this
use, they should deservedly be preferred. I do not think I digress all this
while from the scope of my Discourse. For doubtless if Gods usual solemn
worship on the Lords Days were more fitted and directed to a Pleasant,
Delightful, Praising way, it would do very much to frame the spirits of
Christians to Joyfulness and Thankfulness and Delight in God: then which there
is no greater cure for their Doubtful, Pensive, self-tormenting frame. O try
this, Christians, at the request of one that is moved by God to importune you
to it! God does pity you in your sorrows! but he Delights in you when you
Delight in him. See Isa. 58.14. compared with Zeph. 3.17. And if sin interpose
and hinder your Delights, believe it, a Cheerful Amendment and Obedience is
that which will please God better then your self-tormenting fears: Do not you
like that servant better that will go cheerfully about your work, and do it as
well as he can, accounting it a Recreation, and will endeavor to mend where he
has done amiss, then him that will at every step fall a crying, O I am so weak
I can do nothing as I should. An humble sense of failings you will like; but
not that your servant should sit still and complain when he should be working;
nor that all your service should be performed with weeping, disquietness and
lamentations; You had rather have your servant humbly and modestly cheerful,
and not always dejected, for fear of displeasing you. O how many poor souls are
overseen in this! You might easily perceive it even by the Devils opposition
and temptations! He will further you in your self-vexations (when he cannot
keep you in security and presumption) but in amending he will hinder you with
all his might. How often have I known poor passionate Creatures, that would vex
and rage in anger, and break out in unseemly language, to the disquieting of
all about them; and others that would drop into other the like sins, and when
they have done, lament it, and condemn themselves; and yet would not set upon a
resolute and cheerful Reformation! Nay, if you do but reprove them for any sin,
they will sooner say, If I be so bad, God will condemn me for an Hypocrite; and
so lie down in disquietness and distress; then they will say, I see my sin, and
I resolve to resist it, and I pray you warn me of it, and help me to watch
against it. So that they would bring us to this pass, that either we must let
them alone with their sins for fear of Tormenting them, or else we must cause
them to lie down in terrors. Alas, poor mistaken souls! It is neither of these
that God calls for! Will you do any thing save what you should do? Must you
needs be esteemed either Innocent, or Hypocrites, or such as shall be damned?
The thing that God would have, is this; That you would be glad that you see
your fault, and thank him that shows it you, and resolvedly do your best to
amend it, and this in faith and cheerful confidence in Christ, flying to his
Spirit for help and victory. Will you please the Devil so far, and so far
contradict the gracious way of Christ, as that you will needs either sin still,
or Despair? Is there not a middle between these two? to wit, Cheerful
Amendment? Remember that it is not your Vexation or Despair, but your Obedience
and Peace that God desires That life is most Pleasing to him, which is most
safe and sweet to you.

If you say still, You cannot Delight in God: I say again; Do but acknowledge
it the great work that God requires of you, and make it your daily aim, and
care, and business, and then you will more easily and certainly attain it. But
while you know not your work, or so far mistake it, as to think it consists
more in sorrows and fears; and never endeavor in your Duties or Meditations to
raise your soul to a Delight in God, but rather to cast down your self with
still poaring on your miseries, no wonder then if you be a stranger to this
life of holy Delight!

By this time I find my self come up to the subject of my Book of the Saints
Rest; wherein having said so much to Direct and Excite you, for the attainment
of these Spiritual and Heavenly Delights, I will referr you to it, for your
help in that work; and add no more here, but to Desire you through the course
of your life to remember, That the true Love of God in Christ, and Delight in
him and Thankful, Cheerful Obedience to him, is the great work of a Christian,
which God is best pleased with, and which the blessed Angels and Saints shall
be exercised in for ever.

And O thou the Blessed God of Love, the Father of Mercy, the Prince of Peace,
the Spirit of Consolation, compose the Disquieted spirits of thy People, and
the tumultuous, disjoynted state of thy Churches; and pardon our Rashness,
Contentions and Blood-guiltiness, and give us not up to the state of the
wicked, who are like the raging Sea, and to whom there is no Peace! Lay thy
command on our winds and waves, before thy shipwrackt vessel perish: And Rebuke
that evil spirit whose name is Legion, which has possessed so great a part of
thine Inheritance: Send forth the spirit of Judgment and Meekness into thy
Churches* and save us from our Pride and Ignorance with their effects: And
bring our feet into the way of Peace, which hitherto we have not known. O close
all thy People speedily in loving consultations, and earnest enquiries after
Peace. Let them Return from their Corruptions, Contentions and Divisions, and
jointly seek thee, asking the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying,
Come, let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that shall not
be forgotten: Blast all opposing Policies and Powers: Say to these Dead and Dry
bones, Live. And out of these Ruins do thou yet erect a City of Righteousness,
where thy People may dwell together, in Peaceable habitations; and in the midst
thereof, A Temple to thy Holiness: Let the materials of it be Verity and
Purity: Let the Redeemer be its Foundation: Let Love and Peace cement it into
Unity: Let thy Laver and Covenant be the Doors: and Holiness to the Lord be
engraved thereon; that buyers and sellers may be cast out, and the common and
unclean may know their Place; and let no desolating Abomination be there set
up: But let thy People all in one name, in one faith, with one mind, and one
soul, attend to thine Instructions, and wait for thy Laws, and submit unto
thine Order, and Rejoice in thy Salvation: that the troubled spirits may be
there exhilerated, the dark enlightened, and all may offer thee the sacrifice of
Praise (without dis-affections, discords or divisions:) that so thy People may
be thy Delight, and thou may be the chiefest. Delight of thy People; ^^d they
may Please thee through him that has perfectly pleased thee. Or if our
expectations of this Happiness on earth be too high, yet give us so much as may
enlighten our eyes, and heal those corruptions which estrange us from thee, and
may propagate thy Truth, increase thy Church, and honor thy Holiness, and may
quicken our desires, and strengthen us in our way, and be a fore-tast to us of
the Everlasting Rest.

Luke 2.14. Glory to God in the Highest, on earth Peace* Good will toward men.

Ecles. 12.12, 13, 14. Of making many Books there is no end: and much study is
a weariness to the flesh. Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole matter: Fear
God, and keep his Commandments: for this is the whole [Duty] of man, etc.

FINIS.

