A Treatise of DEATH; The last ENEMY to be Destroyed.

Showing wherein its Enmity consists, and how it is destroyed.

Part of it was preached at the Funerals of Elizabeth the late Wife of Mr.
Joseph Baker, Pastor of the Church at Saint Andrews in Worcester.

By Rich. Baxter.

With some few passages of the life of the said Mrs. Baker, observed.

Psalm 15.4. In whose eyes a vile person is contemned: but he honors them
that fear the Lord.]

1 Cor. 15*55, 56, 57. O death, where is thy sting! O grave, where is thy
victory? The sting of Death is sin; and the strength of sin is the Law. But
thanks be to God which gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.]

Lond^n Printed by R.W. for Nev Simmons Book-sel^er in Kederminster, and are to
be sold by him there, and by Tho. Johnson at the Golden Key in Paul's
Churchyard. 1660. at 1^. bound.

To the Worshipful the Major, Aldermen and Sheriff of the City of Worcester,
with the rest of the Inhabitants, especially those of the Parishes of Andrews
and Hellens.
Worshipful, and the rest Beloved,
THE chief part of this following Discourse, being preached among you, and that
upon an occasion which you are obliged to consider, ( Isa. 57.1.) being called
to publish it, I thought it meet to direct it first to your hands, and to take
this opportunity, plainly and seriously to exhort you in some matte^s that your
present and everlasting peace is much concerned in.

Credible fame reports you to be a people not all of one mind, or temper in
the matters of God: but that 1. Some of you are Godly, Sober and Peaceable: 2.
Some well-meaning and zealous, but addicted to divisions: 3. Some Papists: 4.
Some Hiders, seduced by your late deceased neighbor Clement Writer, (to whom
the Quakers do approach in many opinions.) 5. And too many profane and
obstinate persons, that are heartily and seriously of no Religion, but take
occasion from the divisions of the rest, to despise or neglect the Ordinances
of God, and join themselves to no Assemblies.

1. To the first sort (having least need of my exhortation,) I say no more,
but, As you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him: rooted and
built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been taught, abounding
therein with thanskgiving: and beware lest any man spoil you by deceit, etc.]
Col. 2.6, 7, 8. Walk as a chosen g^neration, a royal Priesthood, a holy
Nation, a peculiar People, to show forth the praises of him that has called
you out of darkness into his mavelous light; having your conversation honest
among the ungodly, that whereas they are apt to speak against you as evil
doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the
day of visitation: For so is the will of God, that with well doing you may put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men, 1 Pet. 2.9, 11, 12, 15. Your labor
and patience is known to the Lord; and how ye cannot bear them which are evil,
but have tried them which say they speak from the Lord, and are Apostles, and
are not, and have found them liars; even the woman Jezabel, that is suffered to
teach and seduce the people, calling her self a Prophetess, who shall be cast
into a bed of tribulation, and all that commit adultery with her, except they
repent; and her children shall be killed with death; and all the Churches shall
know that Christ is he which searches the reins and hearts; and will give to
every one according to their work. As for your selves, we put upon you no other
burden, but that which you have already, Hold fast till the Lord come, Rev. 2.
Be watchful, that ye fall not from your first Love: and if any have declined
and grown remiss, remember how you have received and heard, and hold fast, and
repent, and strengthen the things that remain, which are ready to die, lest
your Candlestick should be removed, Rev. 3.2, 3, etc.] And beware lest ye also
being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness;
but grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2
Pet. 3.17, 18. And I beseech you brethren, do all things without murmurings and
disputings, that ye may be blameless, and harmless, the Sons of God without
rebuke, and in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, among whom you (and
your brethren) shine as lights in the world, Phil. 2.14, 15. And if in weldoing
yo^ suffer, think it not strange, but rejoice that ye are partakers of the
sufferings of Christ, that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad
also with exceeding joy: If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, ye are
happy, for the Spirit of glory and of God rests upon you, being glorified on
your part, while he is evil spoken of on theirs, 1 Pet. 4.12, 13, 14.

2. To the second sort (inclinable to divisions) let me tender the Counsel of
the holy Ghost, Jam. 3.1. My brethren, be not many Masters (or Teachers)
knowing that ye shall receive the greater condemnation. The wisdom that is from
above, is first pure, and then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated,
full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy: And
the fruit of Righteousness is sown in peace, of them that make peace. Who then
is the wise and knowing man amongst you? Let him show out of a good
conversation, his works with meekness of wisdom: But if ye have bitter envying
and strife in your hearts, glory not; and lie not against the truth: This
wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish: For where
envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work.] Look on those
Assemblies, where the people professing the fear of God, are of one heart and
mind, and walk together in Love and holy Order, and people give due honor and
obedience to their faithful Guides; and compare them with the Congregations
where professors are self-conceited, unruly, proud, and addicted to ostentation
of themselves, and to divisions; and see which is likest to the Primitive
pattern, and in which it is that the power of godliness prospers best, and
the beauty of Religion most appears, and Christians walk as Christians indeed.
If pride had not brought the heavy judgment of infatuation or insensibility on
many, the too clear discoveries of the fruits of divisions in the numerous and
sad experiences of this age, would have caused them to be abhorred as odious
and destructive, by those that now think they do but transcend their lower
brethren in holiness and zeal. [I beseech you therefore brethren, by the name
of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same thing, and that there be
no divisions among you, but that you be perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and in the same judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10.] The God of patience and
consolation grant you to be like minded one toward another, according to
Christ Jesus; that ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God,] Romans 15.5,
6. And I beseech you brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are
over you in the Lord, and admonish you: And esteem them very highly in love for
their works sake, and be at peace among your selves, 1. These. 5.12, 13. And
mark those that cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye
have learned, and avoid them, Romans 16.17. And if there be any consolation in
Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels
and mercies, fulfill ye our joy, that ye may be like minded, having the same
love, being of one accord, of one mind: Let nothing be done through strife or
vain glory, but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better then
themselves. Look not every man on his own things, (his own gifts and graces)
but every man also on the things (the graces and gifts) of others; Let this
mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus; who being in the form of God, thought
it not robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of no reputation (or,
emptied himself of all worldly glory: as Isa. 53.2, 3, 4. as if he had had no
form or comeliness, and no beauty to the eye for which we should desire him:
but was despised and rejected of men, and not esteemed,) Phil. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7. It is not (as you imagine) your extraordinary Knowledge, Zeal and
Holiness, that inclines you to divisions; and to censuring of your brethren;
but it is Pride, and Ignorance, and want of Love: and if you grow to any
ripeness in Knowledge, Humility, Self-denial and Charity, you will bewail your
dividing inclinations and courses, and reckon them among the greater and
grievous of your sins, and cry out against them as much as your more charitable
and experienced brethren do.

3. To the third sort, (the Papist) I shall say nothing here, because I cannot
expect they should read it and consider it: and because we are so far disagreed
in our Principles that we cannot treat with them on those rational terms as we
may do with the rest of the inhabitants of the world, whether Christians,
Infidels or Heathens. As long as they build their faith and salvation on the
supposition that the eyes, and taste, and feeling of all the sound men in the
world, are deceived in judging of Bread and Wine; and as long as they deny the
certain experience of true believers (telling us that we are void of Charity
and unjustified, because we are not of their Church,) and as long as they fly
from the judgment and Tradition of the ancient and the present Church (unless
their small part may be taken for the whole, or the major Vote,) and as long as
they reject our appeal to the holy Scriptures, I know not well what we can say
to them, which we can expect they should regard, any more then music is
regarded by the deaf, or light by the blind, or argument by the distracted. If
they had the moderation and charity impartially to peruse our writings, I durst
confidently promise the recovery of multitudes of them, by the three writings
which I have already published, and the more that others have said against them.

4. And for the fourth sort, (the Hiders, and the Quakers) I have said enough
to them already (in my Book against Infidelity, and those against Popery and
Quakers:) but in vain to those that have sinned unto death.

5. It is the fifth sort therefore that I shall chiefly address my speech to;
who, I fear, are not the smallest part. It is an astonishing consideration to
men that are awake, to observe the unreasonableness and stupidity of the
ignorant, careless, sensual part of men; How little they Love or Fear the God,
whom their tongues confess; How little they value, or mind, or seek the
everlasting glory, which they take on them to believe; How little they fear and
shun those flames which must feed for ever on the impenitent and unholy; How
little they care or labor for their immortal souls, as if they were of the
Religion of their beasts: How bitterly many of them hate the holy ways
commanded by the Lord: while yet they pretend to be themselves his Servants,
and to take the Scriptures to be his word: How sottishly and contemptuously
they neglect and slight the Holiness without which there is no salvation; Heb.
12.14. How eagerly they desire and seek the pleasing of their flesh, and the
matters of this transitory life, while they call them vanity and vexation; How
madly they will fall out with their own salvation, and from the errors and sins
of hypocrites or others, will pick quarrels against the Doctrine, and
Ordinances, and ways of God; as if other men's faults should be exceeded by
you, while you pretend to loath them. If it be a sin to crack our faith by some
particular error, what is it to dash it all to pieces? If it be odious in your
eyes, to deny some particular Ordinance of God, what is it to neglect or
profane them all? If it be their sin that quarrel in the way to heaven, and
walk not in company as love requires them; what is it in you to run toward
hell, and turn your backs on the holy Laws and ways of God? If it be so
lamentable to the Nation and themselves, that so many have fallen into schism and
disorder; what is it then that so many are ungodly, sensual and worldly, and
have no true Religion at all, in sincerity, life and power? Ungodliness is all
Heresy transcendently in the lump, and that in practice. A man that is so
foolish as to plead that Arsenick is better then bread, may yet live himself if
he do not take it: but so cannot he that eats it instead of bread. Heretics
only in speculation may be saved: but practical heretics cannot. You think it
heinous to deny with the mouth that there is a God, who made us, and is our
only Lord and Happiness (and so it is.) And is it not heinous then to deny him
with the heart and life; and to deny him the love and obedience that is
properly due to God? It is odious Idolatry to bow to a creature as to God; and
is it not odious to love, and honor, and obey a creature before him, and to
seek it more eagerly, and mind it more seriously then God? If it be damnable
Infidelity to deny Christ to be the Redeemer, it is not much less to turn away
from him, and make light of him and refuse his grace, while you seem to honor
him. If it be damnable blasphemy to deny the Holy Ghost; what is it to resist
and refuse him when he would ^anctifie you, and perhaps to make a scorn of
holiness? If ^t be Heresy to deny the holy Catholic Church, and the Communion
of Saints; what is it to hate the Holy members of the Church, and to avoid, if
not deride, the Communion of Saints? Be not deceived, God is not mocked: A
mock-Religion, and the name of Christianity will never save you. Do you know
how near you are to judgment, and will you fearlesly thus heap up wrath, and
lay in fuel for the everlasting flames? Do you know how speedily you shall
wish in the bitterness of your souls, that you had heard, and prayed, and
labored as for your lives, and redeemed your time, and obeyed your Teachers;
and yet will you now stand loytering, and quarrelling, and jeasting, and
dallying in the matters of salvation? and will you live as if you had nothing
but the world to mind, when you are even ready to step into the endless world?
O Sirs, do you know what you are doing? You are abusing the living God, and
wronging the Lord Jesus, and trampling upon that mercy which would comfort you
in your extremity, a drop of which you would then be glad of: You are grieving
your poor Friends, and Teachers, and preparing for your endless grief. A^as,
what should a faithful Minister do, for the saving of your souls? He sees you
befooled in your security, and carelessly passing on toward Hell, and cannot
help it: He sees you posting to your misery, where you will be out of the reach
of all our exhortations, and where mercy will not follow you to be accepted or
rejected: and though he see you almost past remedy he cannot help you. He
knows not when he speaks to you, whether ever he shall speak unto you more,
and whether ever you shall have another call and offer; and therefore he would
fain speak effectually if he could; but it is not in his power. He knows that
the matter sticks all at your own wills, and that if he could but procure your
own consent, to the most reasonable and necessary business in the world, the
work were done, and you might escape the everlasting flames: And yet this is it
that he cannot procure! O wonderful, that any man should be damned; yea that
many men, and most men should be damned, when they might be saved if they
would, and will not! Yea that no saying will serve to procure their consent,
and make them willing! That we must look on our poor miserable neighbors in
Hell, and say, they might have been saved once, but would not! they had time,
and leave to turn to God, and to be holy and happy as well as others, but we
could never prevail with them to consent, and know the day of their visitation!
O what should we do for the saving of careless, senseless souls? Must we let
them go? Is there no remedy? Shall Ministers study to meet with their
necessities, and tell them with all possible plainness and compassion, of the
evil that is a little before them, and teach them how they may escape it? Why,
this they do from day to day, and some will not hear them, but are tippling, or
idling or making a jest of the Preacher at home, and others are hearing with
prejudice and contempt, and most are hardened into a senseless deadness, and all
seems to them but as an empty sound: and they are so used to hear of Heaven and
Hell, that they make as light of them as it there were no such States! Alas,
that while millions are weeping and wailing in utter desperation, for the
neglecting of their day of grace, and turning away from him that called them,
our poor hearers at the same time should wilfully follow them, when they are
told from God what others suffer! Alas, that you should be sleepy and dead
under those means, that should waken you to prevent eternal death! and that
ever you should make merry so near damnation, and be sporting your selves with
the same kind of sins that others at the same hour are tormented for? And is
such madness as this remediless, in people that seem as wise as others for
worldly things! Alas, for any thing that we can do, experience tells us that
with the most it is remediless! Could we remedy it, our poor people should not
wilfully run from Christ, and lie in the flames of Hell for ever. Could our
persuasions and entreaties help it, they should not for ever be shut out of
Heaven, when its offered to them as well as others. We bewail it from our
hearts before the Lord, that we can entreat them no more earnestly, and beg not
of them as for our lives to look before them, and hearken to the voice of grace
that they may be saved. And a thousand times in secret we call our selves
hard-hearted, unmercifull, and unfaithful, (in too great a measure) that speak
no more importunately for the saving of men's souls, when we know not whether we
shall ever speak to them any more. Is this all that we can say or do in so
terrible a case, and in a matter of such weight as men's salvation! The Lord
forgive our great insensibility, and awaken us, that we may be fit to waken
others; But yet for all this, with grief we must complain, that our people feel
not when we feel, and that they are senseless or asleep when we speak to them
as seriously as we can, and that tears and moans do not prevail; but they go
home and live as stupidly in an unconverted sta^e, as if all were well with
them, and they were not the m^n we speak to.

O tha^ you knew wha^ ^ fearful judgment it is, to be forsaken of God because
you would have none of him, and to be given up to your hearts lust^, ^o walk in
your o^^ Counsels, be^ ^s^ you wo^ld not hearken to his voice, Psalm. 81.11,
12, 13. and to have God say, Let those wretches be ignorant, and careless, and
fleshly, and worldly, and filthy still, Rev. 22.11. O that you knew (but not by
experience) what a heavy plague it is to be so forsaken, as to have eyes that
see not, or seeing do not perceive, and to have ears that hear not, or to hear
and not understand, and so to be unconverted and unhealed, Mark 4.12. and to be
hardened and condemned by the word, and patience, and mercies that do soften
and save others, and should have saved you! Take heed lest Christ say, [I have
lent them my messengers long enough in vain; From henceforth never fruit grow
on them? because they would not be converted, they shall not.] Take heed lest
he take you away from means, and quickly put an end to your opportunities. You
see how fast men pass away, but little do you know how many are lamenting that
they made no better use of time, and helps, and mercies while they had them. O
hear while you may hear, for it will not be long: Read while you may read, and
pray while you may pray, and turn while you may turn, and go to your Christian
friends an^ Teachers, and enquire of them, what you must do to be saved, before
enqui^ing be too late. Spend the Lords Day, and what other time you can redeem,
in holy preparations for your endless Rest, while you have such a happy day to
spend. O sleep no longer in your sins, while God stands over you, lest before
you a^e aware you awake in Hell. Patience and mercy have their appointed time,
and will not always wait and be despised. O let not your Teachers be forced to
say, [We would have taught them publicly and privately, but they would not: We
would have Catechized the ignorant, and exhorted the negligent, but some of
them would not come near us, and others of them gave us but the hearing, and
went away such as they came.] If once by forefeiting the Gospel the Teachers
whom you slight be taken from you, you may then sin on, and take your course,
till time, and help and hope are past.

The Providence that called me to this work, was so^e warning to you. Though it
was not the calling away your Teacher, it was a removing of his Helper, a
pattern of meekness, and godliness, and charity, and he is left the more
disconsolate in the prosecution of his work. God has made him faithful to
your souls, and careful for your happiness. He walks before you in humility
and self-denial, and patience, and peaceableness, and in an upright
inoffensive life: He is willing to teach you publicly and privately, in season
and out of season: He manageth the work of God with prudence and moderation,
and yet with Zeal, carefully avoiding both ungodliness and schism, or the
countenancing of either of them: Were he not of eminent wisdom and integrity,
his name would not be so unspotted in a place where Dividers, and Disputers,
Papists, and Quakers, and so many bitter enemies of godliness, do watch for
matter of accusation and reproach against the faithful Ministers of Christ. As
you love the safety and happiness of your City, and of your souls, undervalue
not such mercies, nor think it enough to put them off with your commendations
and good word: It is not that which they live, and preach, and labor for; but
for the Conversion, Edification and salvation of your souls. Let them have
this, or they have nothing, if you should give them all you have. The enemies
of the Gospel have no wiser Cavil against the painful Laborers of the Lord,
then to call them ^^^elings, and blame them for looking after Tithes, and great
matters in the world. B^t as among all the faithful Ministers of this Country
through the great merry of God th^se adversaries are now almost ashamed to open
their mouths with an accusation of Covetousness? So this your Reverend,
faithful Teacher, has stopped the mouth of all such calumny, as to him. When I
invited him from a place of less work, and a competent maintenance, to accept
of less then half that maintenance, with a far greater burden of work among
you, he never stuck at it, as thinking he might be more servic^able to God, and
win that which is better then the rich^s of this world. And if now you will
frustrate his expectations, and disappoint his labors and hopes of your
salvation, it will be easier for Sodom in the day of judgment then for you.
Alas how sad is it to see a faithful Minister longing and laboring for men's
salvation, and many of them neglecting him, and others picking groundless
quarrels, and the proud unruly selfish part, rebelling and turning their backs
upon their Teachers, when ever they will not humor them in their own ways, or
when they deal but faithfully with their souls! Some (even of those that speak
against disobedience, conventicles and schism,) turn away in disdain, if their
Children may not be needlessly baptized in private houses, and if that solemn
Ordinance may not be celebrated in a Parlour Conventicle. How many refuse to
come to the Minister in private to be Instructed or Catechized, or to confer
with him about their necessary preparation for death and judgment! Is not this
the case of many among you? Must not your Teacher say, He sent to you, and was
willing to have done his part, and you refused? Little will you now believe how
heavy this will lie upon you one day, and how dear you shall pay for the
causless grieving and disappointment of your guides. It is not your surliness
and passions that will then serve turn to answer God. Nor shall it save you to
say, that Ministers were of so many minds and ways, that you knew not which of
them to regard: For it was but one way, that God in the holy Scripture did
prescribe you: and all faithful Ministers were agreed in the things which you
reject, and in which you practically differ from them all. What? are we not all
agreed, that God is to be preferred before the world? and that you must first
seek the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness? and that no man can be saved
except he be converted and born again? and that he that has not the Spirit of
Christ is none of his? Mat. 6.33. John 3.3, 5. Mat. 18.3. Romans 8.9. and that
you and your households should serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. Are we not all
agreed that the Law of the Lord must be your delight, and that you must
meditate disable Death to terrify and discourage us; and raises us above our
Natural fears, and shows us (though but in a glass) the exceeding eternal
weight of glory which churlish Death shall help us to. So that when the eye of
the unb^liever looks no further then the grave, believing souls can enter
into Heaven, and see their glorified Lord, and thence fetch Love, and Hope, and
Joy, notwithstanding the terrors of interposing death. The eye of Faith
foreseeth the salvation ready to be revealed in the last time, and causes us
therein greatly to rejoice, though now for a season (if need be) we are in
heaviness through manifold temptations. And so vic^orious is this Faith against
all the storms that do assault us, that the trial of it, though with fire, does
but discover that it is much more precious then Gold that perishes, and it
shall be found unto praise and honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus
Christ; whom having never seen in the flesh we Love, and though now we see him
not, yet believing we rejoice with unspeakable glorious joy, 1 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7,
8, 9. and shall shortly receive the end of our Faith, the salvation of our
souls. Thus Faith, though it destroy not Death it self, destroys the
malignity and enmi^y of death: while it sees the things that are beyond it,
and the time when death shall be destroyed, and the Life where death shall be
no more. Faith is like David's three mighty men, that brake through the host of
the Philistines, to fetch him the waters of Bethlehem, for which he longed, 2 Samuel 23.15, 16. When the thirsty soul says, O that one would give me drink of
the waters of Salvation! Faith breaks through death which stands in the way,
and fetches these living waters ^o the soul. We may ever, Psalm. 15.4. and have
contemned the ungodly as vile persons, though they had been of your side. The
Catholic Church is One, and contains all that heartily and practically
believe in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, the Creator, Redeemer, and
Sanctifier, and live a holy heavenly life. Leave off your siding, and keep this
blessed simple Unity, and you will then be wiser then in a passion to cast your
selves into Hell, because some fall out in the way to Heaven.

Nor will it serve your turn at the bar of God, to talk of the miscarriages or
scandalls of some, that took on them to be godly, no more then to run out of
the Ark for the sake of Cham, or out of Christ's family for the sake of Judas.
What ever men are, God is just, and will do you no wrong; and you are called to
believe in God, and to serve him, and not to believe in men. Nothing but
wickedness could so far blind men, as to make them think they may cast off
their love and service to the Lord, because some others have dishonored him:
Or that they may cast away their souls by carelessness, because some others have
wounded their souls by particular sins. Do you dislike the sins of the
Professors af Godliness? So much the better: We desire you not to agree with
them in sinning: Join with them in a Holy life, and imitate them so far as they
obey the Lord; and go as far beyond them in avoiding the sins that you are
offended at, as you can; and this is it that we desire. Suppose they were
Covetous, or Liars, or Schismatic: Imitate them in holy duties, and fly as
far from Covetousness, Lying and Schism, as you will.

You have had Learned and Godly Bishops of this City: Search the writings of
those of them that have left any of their labors to posterity, and see whether
they speak not for the same substantials of faith and godliness, which are now
preached to you, by those that you set so light by. Bishop Latimer, Parrey,
Babington, etc. while they were Bishops; and Rob. Abbot, Hall, etc. before they
were Bishops, all Excellent, Learned, Godly ^en, have here been Preachers ^o
your Ancestors: Read their ^ooks, and you will find that ^hey call men to that
strictness and holiness of life, which you cannot abide. Read your Bi^hop
Babington on the Commandments, and see there how zealously he condemns the
Prophaners of the Lords day, and those that make it a day of idleness or
sports. And what if one man think that one Bishop should have hundreds of
Churches under his sole jurisdiction, and another man think that every full
Parish Church should have a Bishop of their own, and that one Parish will find
him work enough, be he what he will be, (which is the difference now among us,)
is this so heinous a disagreement, as should frighten you from a holy life
which all agree for?

To conclude, remember this is the day of your salvation: Ministers are your
Helpers: Christ and Holiness are your way: Scripture is your Rule: the Godly
must be your company, and the Communion of Saints must be your desire: If now
any scandals, divisions, displeasures, or any seducements of secret or open
adversaries of the truth, or temptations of Satan, the world, or flesh
whatsoever, shall prevail with you to lose your day, to refuse your mercies,
and to neglect Christ and your immortal souls, you are conquered and undone,
and your enemy has his will; and the more confidently and fearlesly you brave
it out, the more is your misery; for the harder are your hearts, and the harder
is your cure; and the sure^ and sorer will be your damnation. I have purposely
avoided the enticing words of worldly wisdom, and a style that tends to claw
your ears, and gain applause with aerie wits, and have chosen these familiar
words, and dealt thus plainly and freely with you, because the greatness of the
cause persuaded me, I could not be too serious. Whether many of you will read
it, or how those that read it will take it, and what success it shall have upon
them, I cannot tell: but I know that I intended it for your good, and that
whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear, the Ministers of Christ
must not forbear to do their duty, nor be rebellious themselves: but our
Labors shall be acceptable with our Lord, and you shall know, that his
Ministers were among you, Ezekiel. 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. [Yet a little while is the
Light with you: Walk while ye have the Light, lest darkness come upon you; for
he that walks in darkness, knows not whither he goes.] John 12.35. O take
this warning from Christ, and from

An earnest desirer of your everlasting Peace, Rich. Baxter.

The Contents.
THE Introduction, p. 1 What is meant by [an Enemy,] and how death is an Enemy
to Nature, p. 6, 7 How Death is an Enemy to Grace, and to our salvation:
discovered in ten particulars, p. 15 How Christ conquereth this Enemy, p. 35
Four Antidotes given us against the Enmity of Death, at our Conversion, p. 39.
How Death is made a destruction of it self, p. 56 The full destruction at the
Resurrection, p. 60 The first Use, to resolve the doubt, Whether Death be a
punis^ment to believers, p. 63 Use 2. To show us the malignity of sin, and how
we should esteem and use it. p. 66 Use 3. To teach us that man has now a need
of Grace for difficulties which were not before him in his state of innocence,
p. 72 Use 4. To inform us of the Reasons of the sufferings and death of Christ,
p. 77 Use 5. To rectify the mistakes of some true believers, that think they
have no saving grace, because the fears of death deter them from desiring to be
with Christ, p. 83 ^se 6. To teach us to study and magnifi^ our Redeemers
conquering grace, that overcomes death, and makes it our advantage, p. 96 Use
7. To direct us how to prepare for Death, and overcome the en^ity, and fear of
it, p. 110 Direct. 1. Make sure that conversion be sound, p. 115 Direct. 2.
Live by faith, on Christ the Conqueror, p. 116 Direct 3. Live also by faith on
the Heavenly Glory, p. 120 Direct. 4. Labor to increase and exercise Divine
Love, p. 124 Direct. 5. Keep conscience clear: or if it be wounded, presently
seek the cure, p. 127 Direct. 6. Redeem and improve your precious time, p. 130
Direct. 7. Crucify the flesh, and die to the world, p. 132 Direct. 8. A
conformity to God in the hatred of sin, and love of holiness: and especially in
the point of justice, p. 134 Direct. 9. The due consideration of the
restlesness, and troubles of this life, and of the manifold ^vils that end at
death, p. 13 Direct. 10. Resign your wills entirely to the will of God, and
acquiesce in it, as your safety, felicity and Rest. p. 159 Use 8. Great comfort
to believers, that they have no enemy b^t what they are sure shall be conquered
at last. p. 165 Object. But what comfort is all this to me that know not
whether I have part in Christ or no? Answered, to satisfy the doubts, and
further the assurance of the tr^ubled Christian, p. 173 Use 9. What a mercy the
Resurrection of Christ was to the world, and how we should use it to strengthen
our faith, p. 199 The Lords day honorable, p. 201 Use 10. How earnestly we
should pray for the second coming of Christ, though Death be terrible p. 207
SOME imitable passages of the Life of Elizabeth, late Wife of Mr. Joseph Baker,
whose Funerals occasioned this discourse, p. 225
ERRATA.

1 Cor. 15.26. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is Death.


DEATH is the occasion of this days meeting: and Death must be the Subject of
our present meditations. I must speak of that which will shortly silence me;
and you must hear of that which speedily will stop your ears: and we must
spend this hour on that which waits to cut our thread, and take down our glass,
and end our time, and tell us we have spent our last* But as it has now done
good by doing hurt; so are we co consider, of the accidental benefits, as well
as of the natural evil, from which the heavenly wisdom does extract them. Death
has now bereaved a Body of its Soul; but thereby it has sent that Soul to
Christ; where it has now experience how good it is to be absent from the body
and present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8. It has separated a faithful wife from a
beloved husband: but it has sent her to a husband dearlyer beloved; and taught
her now by experience to say, that to be with Christ is best of all, Phil 1.23.
It has deprived a sorrowful husband of a wife, and deprived us all of a
faithful friend: but it has thereby brought us to the house of mourning, which
is better for us then the house of feasting, (a Paradox to the flesh, but an
undoubted truth:) for h^re we may see the end of all men, and we that are yet
living may lay it to our hearts, Eccl. 7.2, 3. Yea it has brough us to the
house of God, and occasioned this serious address unto his Holiness, that we
may be instructed by his Word, as we are warned by his works, and that we may
be wise to understand, and to consider our latter end, Deuteronomy. 32.29.

Its like you will think that to tell men of the evil or enmity of Death, is as
needless a ^iscourse as any could be chosen: For who is there that is not
naturally too sensible of this? and who does not dread the name, or at least
the face of Death? But there is accidentally a greater evil in it, then that
which nature teaches men to fear: And while it is the King of terrors to the
world, the most are ignorant of the great^st hurt that it does them, or can do
them; or at least it is but little thought on; which has made me think it a
needful work, to tell you yet of much more evil, in that which you abhor as
the greatest evil: But so as withal to magnify our Redeemer, that
overshooteth death in its own bow; and causes it, when it hits the mark, to
miss it: and that causes health by loathsome medicines; and by the dung of our
bodily corruption manureth his Church to the greater felicity.

Such excellent skill of our wise Physician, we find expressed and exercised in
this Chapter: where an unhappy error against the Resurrection, has happily
occasioned an excellent discou^se on that weighty Subject, which may stablish
many a thousand souls, and serve to shame and destroy such heresies, ^ill the
Resurrection come, and prove it self. The great Argument which the Apostle most
insisteth on, to prove the Resurrection, is Christ's own Resurrection: where he
enters into a comparison between Christ and Adam; showing that as Adam first
brought death upon himself, and then upon his posterity; so Christ (that was
made a quickening spirit) did first Rise himself as the first fruits, and th^n
at his coming will raise his own: And as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall
all be made alive. And this Christ will do, as our victorious King, and the
Captain of our salvation, who when he has subdued every enemy, will then
deliver up the Kingdom to the Father: And the last enemy which he will subdue,
is Death, and therefore our Resurrection is his final conquest.

The terms of the Text have no difficulty in them. The D^ctrin^ which they
express, must be thus unfolded. 1. I must show you that Death is an Enemy, and
what is meant by this Expression, and wherein its Enemy does consist. 2. I
shall show you that it is an Enemy to be d^stroyed, though l^st, and how and by
what degrees it is destroyed. And then we shall make application of it to your
further Instruction and Edification.

1. That you may know what is meant by an En^my here, you must observe, that
man being fallen into sin and misery, and Christ having undertaken the work of
our Redemption, the Scripture often speaks of our misery and recovery
Metaphorically in military terms: And so Satan is said to take us captive, and
we to be his slaves, and Christ to be the Captain of our Salvation, and to
redeem us from our bondage: And thus our sin and misery, and all that hinders
the blessed Ends of his undertaking, are called Enemies. Death therefore is
called an Enemy to be destr^yed, that is, a penal evil to be removed by the
Redeemer in order to our recovery and the glory of his grace. 1. It is an Evil.
2. A punishment procured by our sin, and executed by Gods Justice. 3. It is an
evil that hinders our felicity. These three things are included in the Enmity.

That Death is an Enemy to Nature, is a thing that all understand: but all
consider not how it is an Enemy to our Souls, to the exercise of grace, and
consequently to the attainment of glory. I shall therefore having first spoken
briefly of the former, insist a little longer upon the latter.

1. How great an Enemy Death is unto Nature does easily appear, in that 1. It
is the Dissolution of the Man: It makes a Man to become No man; by separating
the Soul from the Body, and dissolving the Body into its principles. It pulls
down in a moment a curious frame, that Nature was long building, and tenderly
cherishing and preserving. The mother long nourishes it in her bowels, and
painfully brings it forth, and carefully brings it up; what labor does it cost
our Parents, and our selves to make provision for this Life? And death in a
moment cuts it off. How careful are we to keep in these lamps, and to maintain
the oil? and Death extinguisheth them at a blast. How noble a creature does it
destroy? To day our parts are all in order, and busy about their several
tasks; our Hearts are moving, our Lungs are breathing, our Stomachs are
digesting, our Blood and Spirits by assimilation making more: and to morrow
death takes off the poise, and all stands still; or draws the pins, and all the
frame does fall to pieces. We shall breath no more; nor speak, nor think, nor
walk no more: Our pulse will beat no more: Our eyes shall s^e the light no
more: Our ears shall hear the voice of man, delightful sounds and melody, no
more: we shall taste no more our meat or drink: Our appetite is gone: Our
strength is gone: Our natural warmth is turned into an earthly cold: Our
comelyness and beauty is turned into a ghastly loathsome deformity: Our white
and red does soon turn into horrid blackness: Our tender flesh has lost its
feeling; and is become a s^nseless lump, that feels not whith^r it is
carried, nor how it is use^: that must be hidden in the earth, lest it annoy
the living: that quickly turns to loathsome putrefaction; and after that to
common earth. Were all the once-comely bodies that now are rotting in one
Churchyard, uncovered, and here presented to your view, the sight would tell
you more effectually then my words do, what an enemy Death is to our Nature.
When corruption has finished its work, you see the earth that once was flesh:
you see the bones; you see the skuls; you see the holes where once were brains
and eyes and mouth: This change Death makes: And that universally and
unavoidably. The Prince cannot resist it by his Majesty: for he has sinned
against the highest Majesty: The strong cannot resist it by their strength: For
it is the Messenger of the Allmighty. The commanders must obey it: The
Conquerours must be conquered by it. The Rich cannot bribe it. The Learned
Orator cannot persuade it to pass him by. The skilful Physician cannot save
himself from the mortal stroke. Neither fields nor gardens, earth or sea
affords any medicine to prevent it. All have sinned, and all must die: Dust
we are, and to dust we must return, Gen 3.19. And thus should we remain, if the
Lord of life should not revive us.

2. And it is not only to the Body, but to the Soul also that Death is
naturally an Enemy. The Soul has naturally a Love and Inclination to its Body:
and therefore it fears a separation before, and desires a Restoration
afterward. Abstracting Joy and Torment, Heaven and Hell, in our consideration,
the state of Separation as such, is a natural evil: even to the humane Soul of
Christ it was so, while his Body remained in the grave: which separated state
is the Hades, that our English calls Hell, that Christ is said to have gone
into. And though (the Soul of Christ, and) the souls of those that die in him,
do pass into a far more happy state, then they had in flesh, yet that is
accidentally, from Rewarding Justice, and the Bounty of the Lord, and not at
all from Death as Death: the separation as such is still an evil. And therefore
the Soul is still desirous of the Bodies Resurrection; and knows that its
felicity will then be greater, when the reunion, and glorification has
perfected the whole man. So that Death as Death is unwelcome to the soul it
self, though Death as accidentally gainful may be desired.

3. And to the unpardoned unrenewed soul, Death is the passage to everlasting
misery, and in this regard is far more terrible, then in all that hitherto has
been spoken. O could the guilty soul be sure that there is no Justice to take
hold on it after death, and no more pain and sorrow to be felt, but that man
dies as a beast, that has no more to feel or lose, then Death would seem a
tolerable evil. But its the Living death, the dying life, the endless woe, to
which death leads the guilty soul, that makes it to be unspeakably terrible.
The utter darkness, the unquenchable fire, the worm that dies not, the
everlasting flames of the wrath of God, these are the chief horror and sting of
death, to the ungodly. O were it but to be turned into Trees, or Stones, or
earth, or nothing, it were nothing in comparison of this. But I pass by this,
because it is not (directly) intended in my Text.

4. The Saints themselves being sanctified but in part, are but imperfectly
assured of their Salvation; And therefore in that measure as they remain in
doubt, or unassured, Death may be a double terror to them. They believe the
threatenings, and know more then unbelievers do, what an unsufferable loss it
is to be deprived of the celelestial glory! and what an unspeakable misery it
is, to bear the endless wrath of God. And therefore so far as they have such
fears, it must needs make death a terror to them.

5. But if there were nothing but Death it self to be our Enemy, the
foreknowledge of it would increase the misery. A Beast that knows not that he
must die, is not tormented with the fears of death (though nature has
possessed them with a self-preserving fear, for the avoiding of an invading
evil.) But man foreknoweth, that he must die: He has still occasion to
anticipate his terrors: that which will be, and certainly and shortly will be,
is in a manner as if it were already. And therefore foreknowledge makes us as
if we were always dying: We see our Graves, our weeping Friends, our
fore-described corruption and dismal state, and so our life is a continual
Death. And thus Death is an enemy to Nature.

2. But this is not all, nor the greatest enmity that Death has to the godly.
It is a lamentable hinderance to the work of Grace, as I shall show you next in
ten particulars.

I. The fears of Death do much abate our Desires after God, as he is to be
enjoyed by the separated soul. Though every believing holy soul, do love God
above all, and take heaven for his home, and therefore sincerely longs after
it; yet when we know that Death stands in the way, and that there is no coming
thither, but through this dreadful narrow passage, this stops and
lamentably dulleth our desires: And so the Natural enmity, turns to a
Spiritual sorer enmity. For let a man be never so much a Saint, he will be
still a Man; and therefore as Death will still be death, so nature will still
be nature: And therefore death as death will be abhorred. And we are such
timorous Sluggards, that we are easily discouraged by this Lion in the way. The
ugly Porter affrighteth us from those grateful thoughts of the New Jerusalem,
the City of God, the heavenly inheritance, which otherwise the blessed object
would produce. Our sanctified affections would be mounting upwards, and holy
Love would be working toward its blessed object: but Death standing in the
way, suppresseth our desires, and turns us back, and frighteneth us from our
Fathers presence. We look up to Christ and the Holy City, as to a precious
Pearl in the bottom of the Sea, or as to a dear and faithful Friend, that is
beyond some dreadful gulf: Fain we would enjoy him, but we dare not venture;
we fear this dismal enemy in the way. He that can recover his health by a
pleasant medicine, does take it without any great reluctance: But if a leg or
an arm must be cut off, or a stone cut out by a painful dangerous Incision,
what a striving does it cause between the contrary passions? the love of life,
and the love of ease; the fear of death, and the fear of suffering?

Could we but come to Heaven as easily as innocent Adam might have done if he
had conquered, what wings would it add to our desires? Might we be translated
as Henoch, or conveyed thither in the Chariot of Elias, what Saint is there
that would not long to see the face and glory of the Lord? Were it but to go to
the top of a Mountain, and there see Christ with Moses and Elias, in a glimpse
of Glory, as did the three Disciples, who would not make haste, and say, It is
good for us to be here, Matthew. 17.1, 4. But to travel so cheerfully with
Abraham to the Mount of M^riah, to sacrifice an only Son, or with a Martyr to
the flames, is a harder task. This is the principal enmity of death; it
deterreth our desires and thoughts from heaven: and makes it a far harder
matter to us, to long after God, then otherwise it would be: Yea it causes us
to fly from him, even when we truly love him: And where Faith and Love do work
so strongly as to overcome these fears, yet do they meet with them as an enemy,
and must fight before they overcome.

2. And as this Enemy dulleth our Desires, so does it consequently cool our
Love, as to the exercise, and it hinders our hope, and much abateth the
complacency and Joy, that we should have in the believing thoughts of Heaven:
when we should be rejoicing in hope of the glory of God ( Romans 5.2.) the face
of death appearing to our thoughts, is naturally an enemy to our joy! When we
think of the grave, and of dissolution and corruption, and of our long abode in
the places of darkness, of our contemned dust and scattered bones, this damps
our joyful thoughts of heaven, if supernatural grace do not make us Conquerors.

But if we might pass from earth to heaven, as from one room to another, what
haste should we make in our desires? How joyfully should we think and speak of
Heaven? Then we might live in the joy of the Holy Ghost, and easily delight our
selves in God, and Comfort would be our daily food.

3. Moreover, as our Natural Enemy does thus occasion the abatement of Desire,
and Love, and Joy, so also of our Thankfulness for the Glory that is promised
us. God would have more praise from us, if we had more pleasing joyful
thoughts of our inheritance. We should magnify him from day to day, when we
remember how we shall magnify him for ever. Our hearts would be turned into
thankfulness, and our tongues would be extolling our dear Redeemer, and
sounding forth his praise whom we must praise for ever, if dreadful Death did
not draw a veil, to hide the heavenly glory from us.

4. And thus the dismal face of Death, does hinder the heavenliness of our
Conversation. Our Thoughts will be diverted, when our complacency and desire is
abated: Our minds will be willinger to grow strange to Heaven, when Death still
mingleth terror in our meditations: Whereas if we could have come to God in the
way that was first appointed us, and could be clothed with glory, without
being stripped of our present clothing, by this terrible hand, how familiarly
should we then converse above? How readily would our Thoughts run out to
Christ? meditation of that Glory would not be then so hard a work: Our hearts
would not be so backward to it, as now they are.

5. Faith is much hindered, and Infidelity much advantaged by Death: Look
either to the state of soul or body, and you will easily perceive the truth of
this. The state of a Soul incorporated, we know, by long experience: what kind
of apprehensions, volitions, and affections belong to a soul while it acts in
the Body, we feel or understand: But what manner of knowledge, will or Love,
what Joy, what sorrow, belong to souls that are separated from the Bodies, it
is not possible for us now distinctly and formally to conceive. And when men
find themselves at a loss about the manner, they are tempted to doubt of the
thing it self. The swarms of irreligious Infidels, that have denied the
Immortality and separated existence of the soul, are too full a proof of this:
And good men have been haunted with this horrible temptation. Had there been no
death, we had not been liable to this dangerous assault. The opinion of the
sleeping of the soul, till the Resurrection, is but a step to flat Infidelity;
and both of them hence receive their Life, because a soul in flesh, when it
cannot conceive to its satisfaction, of the being, state, or action of a
separated soul, is the easier drawn to question or deny it.

And in regard of the Body the difficulty and trial is as great: That a corpse
resolved into dust; and perhaps first devoured by some other body, and turned
into its substance, should be reunited to its soul, and so become a glorified
body, is a point not easy for unsanctified nature to believe. When Paul
preached of the Resurrection, to the learned Athenians, some mocked, and others
turned off that Discourse, Acts 17.32. It is no easier to believe the
Resurrection of the Body, then the Immortality or separated Existence of the
Soul. Most of the world, even Heathens and Infidels do confess the later, but
few of them comparatively believe the former. And if sin had not let in Death
upon our Nature, this perilous difficulty had been prevented: Then we should
not have bin puzzled with the thoughts of either a corrupted Body, or a
separated Soul.

6. And consequently by all this already mentioned, our Endeavors meet with a
great impediment. If Death weaken Faith, Desire, and Hope, it must needs dull
our Endeavors. The deterred, discouraged soul moves slowly in the way of life:
Whereas if Death were not in our way, how cheerfully should we run toward
Heaven? Our thoughts of it would be still sweet, and these would be a powerful
Spring to action? When the Will goes with full Sails, the commanded faculty
will the more easily follow. We should long so earnestly to be in Heaven, if
Death were not in the way, that nothing could easily stop us in our course? How
earnestly should we pray? How seriously should we meditate and conser of
Heaven? and part with any thing to attain it? But that which dulls our Desires
of the End, must needs be an Enemy to holy Diligence, and dull us in the use of
means.

7. This Enemy also does dangerously tempt us to fall in love with present
things, and to take up the miserable Portion of the worldling: when it has
weakened faith, and cooled our desires to the life to come, we shall be tempted
to think that its best take such pleasure as may here be had, and feed on that
where a sensual mind has less discouragement. Whereas, if Death did not stand
in the way, and darken Heaven to us, and turn back our desires, how easily
should we get above these trifles, and perceive the vanity of all below, and
how unworthy they are to be once regarded!

8. Moreover it is much long of this last Enemy, that God is so dishonored by
the Fears and droopings of believers. They are but imperfectly yet freed from
this bondage: and accordingly they walk. Whereas if the King of terrors were
removed, we should have less of Fear, and more of Love, as living more in the
sight and sense of Love: And then we should glorify the God of Love, and
appear to the world as men of another world, and show them the faith and hope
of Saints, in the heavenly cheerfulness of our lives; and no more dishonor the
Lord and our profession, by our uncomfortable despondencies as we do.

9. Moreover it is much long of this last Enemy that many true Christians
cannot perceive their own sincerity, but are overwhelmd with doubts and
troublesome fears, lest they have not the faith and hope of Saints, and lest
the Love of God abide not in them, and lest their hearts are more on earth then
Heaven. When they find themselves afraid of dying, and to have dark amazing
thoughts about eternity, and to think with less trouble and fear of earth then
of the life to come, this makes them think that they are yet but worldlings,
and have not placed their happiness with God: when perhaps it is but the fear
of death that causes these unjust: conclusions. Christian, I shall tell thee
more anon, that God may be truly loved and desired by thee, and Heaven may be
much more valued then Earth, and yet the natural fears of death that stands
in thy way may much perplex thee, and make thee think that thou art averse from
God, when indeed thou art but averse from Death, because yet this Enemy is not
overcome.

10. Lastly, this Enemy is not the smallest cause of many of our particular
sins, and of the apostacy of many hypocrit^s. Indeeed it is one of the
strongest of our temptations. Before man sinned, none could take away his life
but God, and God would not have done it for any thing but sin. So that man had
no temptation from the malice of enemies, or the pride of Conquerours, or the
fury of the passionate, or the power of Tyrants to be afraid of death, and to
use any unlawful means to escape it. An avoidable death from the hand of God,
he was obliged moderately to fear; that is, to be afraid of sinning lest he die
(else God would not have threatened him, if he would not have had him make use
of a preventing fear.) But now we have an unavoidable death to fear, and also
an untimely death from the hand of man by Gods permission: And the fear of
these is a powerful temptation. Otherwise Abraham would not have distrustfully
equivocated as he did to save his life, Genesis 20.11. and Isaac after him do the
same, when he sojourned in the same place, Genesis 26.7. If the fear of Death were
not a strong temptation, Peter would not have thrice denied Christ, and that
after so late a warning and engagement: nor would all his Disciples have
forsaken him and fled, Matthew. 26.56. Nor would Martyrs have a special reward,
nor would Christ have been put to call upon his Disciples, that they Fear not
them that can kill the body, Luke 12.4. and to declare to men the necessity of
self-denial in this point of Life, and that none can be his Disciple, that
loves his Life before him, Matthew. 16.39. Luke 14.26. He is a Christian indeed
that so Loves God, that he will not sin to save his Life. But what is it that
an hypocrite will not do to escape Death? He will equivocate and forswear
himself with the Jesuit and Familist: He will forsake not only his dearest
friend, but Christ also and his Conscience. What a multitude of the most
heinous sins are daily committed through the fears of death? Thousands where
the Inquisition rules are kept in Popery by it: And thousands are kept in
Mahometanism by it: Thousands are drawn by it to betray their Countries; to
deny the truth; to betray the Church and cause of Christ; and finally to betray
their souls unto perdition: some of them presume to deny Christ wilfully,
because that Peter had pardon that denied him through surprise, and through
infirmity: But they will not Repent with Peter, and die for him after their
repentance. He that has the power of an Hypocrites life, may prescribe him
what he shall b^lieve and do; may write him down the Rule of his Religion, and
tell him what changes he shall make, what oaths he shall take, what party he
shall side with, and command him so many sins a day, as you make your horse go
so many miles. Satan, no doubt, had much experience of the power of this
temptation, when he boasted so confidently of it against: Job (2.4.) Skin for
skin, and all that a man has he will give for his life: And its true, no
doubt, of those that love nothing better then their lives. Satan thought that
the fear of Death would make a man do any thing; And of too many he may boldly
make this boast [Let me but have power of their Lives, and I will make them say
any thing, and swear any thing, and be for any cause or party, and do any thing
against God or man.] When less^r matters can do so much, as common sad
experience shows us, no wonder if the fear of death can do it.

In brief, you may see by what is said, that Death is become an Enemy to our
Souls, by being first the Enemy of our Natures: The Interest of our Bodies
works much on our Souls, much more the Interest of the whole man. The principle
of self-love was planted in Nature in order to self-preservation, and the
government of the world: Nature does necessarily abhor its own destruction. And
therefore this destruction standing in the way, is become an exceeding great
hindrance to our affections, which tak^s them off from the life to come.

1. It is a very great hindrance to the Conversion of those that are yet
carnal, imprisoned in their unbelief. It is hard to win their hearts to such a
state of Hap^in^ss, that cannot be obtained but by yielding unto death?

2. And to the truly godly it is naturally an impediment, and a great
temptation in the points before expressed: And though it prevail not against
them, it exceedingly hinders them. And thus I have showed you, that Death is
an Enemy, further then, I doubt, the most consider of.

If the unbeliever shall here tell me, that Death is not the fruit of sin, but
natural to man, though he had never sinned, and therefore that I lay all this
on God: I answer him, that Mortality, as it signifies a posse mori, a natural
capacity of dying, was natural to us in our innocence: or else Death could not
be threatened as a penalty: And if I grant as much of a natural disposition in
the Body to a dissolution, if not prevented by a Glorifying change, it will no
whit advantage their impious cause. But withal man was then so far Immortal,
as that he had a posse non mori, a natural capacity of not dying; and the
morietur vel non morietur, the actual event of Life or Death, was laid by the
Lord of Life and Death, upon his obedience or disobedience. And man having
sinned, Justice must be done, and so we came under a non posse non mori, an
impossibility of escaping death (ordinarily,) because of the peremptory
sentence of our Judge: But the day of our deliverance is at hand, when we shall
attain a non posse mori, a certain consummate Immortality, when the last Enemy
Death shall be destroyed: And how that is done I shall next enquire.

SECT. II.
YOU have seen the ugly face of Death; you are next to see a little of the Love
of our great Redeemer. You have heard what sin has done: you are next to hear
what Grace has done, and what it will do. You have seen the strength of the
Enemy: you are now to take notice of the victory of the Redeemer, and see how
he conquereth all this strength.

1. The Beginning of the conquest is in this world: 2. The perfection will not
be till the day of Resurrection, when this Last Enemy shall be destroyed.

1. Meritoriously Death is conquered by Death. The Death of sinners, by the
Mediators Death. Not that he intended in his Meritorious work, to save us from
the stroke of death by a prevention; but to deliver us from it after by a
Resurrection. For since by man came death, by man also came the Resurrection
from the dead, I Cor. 15.21. Forasmuch as the children were partakers of flesh
and blood, he also himself likewise took part with them; that he might destroy
him through death, that had the power of death, that is the Devil; and deliver
them who through fear of death were all their life time subject unto bondage,
Heb. 2.14, 15. Satan as Gods Executioner, and as the prosperous tempter, is
said to have had the power of death: The fears of this dreadful Executioner
are a continual bondage, which we are liable to through all our lives, till we
perceive the deliverance Which the Death of the Lord of Life has purchased us.
1. By Death Christ has satisfied the Justice that was armed by sin against us.
2. By Death he has showed us, that Death is a tolerable Evil, and to be
yielded to in hope of following life.

2. Actually he conquered Death by his Resurrection. This was the day of
Grace's triumph: This day he showed to Heaven, to Hell, and to Earth, that
Death was conquerable; yea that his personal Death was actually overcome. The
blessed souls beheld it to their Joy, beholding in the Resurrection of their
Head, a virtual resurrection of their own Bodies. The Devils saw it, and
therefore saw that they had no hopes of holding the Bodies of the Saints in the
power of the grave. The damned souls were acquainted with it, and therefore
knew that their sinful bodies must be restored to bear their part in
suffering. The Believing Saints on earth perceive it, and therefore see that
their bonds are broken, and that to the righteous there is hope in death; and
that our Head being actually risen, assures us that we shall also Rise. For if
we believe that Jesus dyed and Rose again; even so them also which steep in
Jesus, will God bring with him, 1 These. 4.14. And as Christ being raised from
the dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion over him: So shall we Rise
and die no more. This was the beginning of the Churches Triumph. This is the
day that the Lord has made (even the day which the Church on Earth must
celebrate, with joy and praise, till the day of our Resurrection) We will be
glad and rejoice therein, Psam 118.24. The Resurrection of our Lord has 1.
Assured us of the consummation of his satisfaction. 2. Of the truth of all his
Word, and so of his promises of our Resurrection. 3. That Death is actually
conquered, and a Resurrection possible. 4. That believers shall certainly Rise,
when their Head and Savior is Risen, to prepare them an everlasting Kingdom,
and to assure them, that thus he will Raise them at the last. A bare promise
would not have been so strong a help to faith, as the actual Rising of Christ,
as a pledge of the performance: But now Christ is Risen and become the first
fruits of them that sleep. 1. Cor. 15.20. For because he Lives, we shall live
also, John 14.19.

3. The next degree of destruction to this Enemy, was by the gift of his
Justifying and Sanctifying grace. Four special benefits were then bestowed on
us, which are Antidotes against the Enmity of Death. 1. One is, the gift of
Saving Faith, by which we look beyond the grave, as far as to eternity. And
this does most powerfully disable Death to terrify and discourage us; and
raises us above our Natural fears, and shows us (though but in a glass) the
exceeding eternal weight of glory which churlish Death shall help us to. So
that when the eye of the unb^liever looks no further then the grave,
believing souls can enter into Heaven, and see their glorified Lord, and thence
fetch Love, and Hope, and Joy, notwithstanding the terrors of interposing
death. The eye of Faith foreseeth the salvation ready to be revealed in the
last time, and causes us therein greatly to rejoice, though now for a season
(if need be) we are in heaviness through manifold temptations. And so
vic^orious is this Faith against all the storms that do assault us, that the
trial of it, though with fire, does but discover that it is much more precious
then Gold that perishes, and it shall be found unto praise and hoour, and
glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ; whom having never seen in the flesh we
Love, and though now we see him not, yet believing we rejoice with unspeakable
glorious joy, 1 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and shall shortly receive the end of our
Faith, the salvation of our souls. Thus Faith, though it destroy not. Death it
self, destroys the malignity and enmity of death: while it sees the things
that are beyond it, and the time when death shall be destroyed, and the Life
where death shall be no more. Faith is like David's three mighty men, that brake
through the host of the Philistines, to fetch him the waters of Bethlehem, for
which he longed, 2 Samuel 23.15, 16. When the thirsty soul says, 0 that one
would give me drink of the waters of Salvation! Faith breaks through death
which stands in the way, and fetches these living waters to the soul. We may
say of death, as it is said of the world, 1. John 5.4, 5. Whatsoever is born of
God overcomes the world: and this is the victory that overcomes the world,
even our Faith: who is he that overcomes, but he that believes? etc. For
greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the world: 1 John 4.4. The
believing Soul foreseeing the day when Death shall be swallowed up in Victory,
may sing beforehand the triumphing song, O Death, where is thy sting? O grave
where is thy Victory? 1 Cor. 15.54, 55. For this cause we faint not; though our
outward man perish, our inward man is renewed day by day: For our light
affliction (though it reach to death) which is but for a moment, works for us
a far more exceeding eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the things
that are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are
seen are temporal (and therefore not worthy to be looked at) but the things
that are not seen are eternal, and therefore more prevalent with a believing
Soul, then either the enticing pleasures of sin for a season, or the light and
short afflictions, or the death that stands in our way, 2 Cor. 5.16, 17, 18.
Heb. 11.24, 25, 26.

2. A second Antidote against the Enmity of Death, that is given us at the time
of our Conversion, is, The Pardon of our sins, and Justification of our
persons, by the blood and merits of Jesus Christ. When once we are forgiven, we
are out of the reach of the greatest terror, being saved from the second death;
Though we must feel the killing stroke, we are delivered from the damning
stroke. Yea more then so, it shall save us by d^stroying us: It shall let us
into the glorious presence of our Lord, by taking us from the presence of our
mortal friends: It shall help us into Eternity, by cutting off our Time. For in
the hour that we were justified, and made the Adopted s^ns of God, we were also
made the Heirs of Heaven, even Coheirs with Christ, and shall be glorified with
him, when we have suffered with him, Romans 8.17. As Death was promoting the Life
of the world, when it was killing the Lord of Life himself: So is it hastening
the deliverance of believers, when it seems to be undoing them. No wonder if
Death be that man's terror, that must be conveyed by it into Hell, or that
imagines that he shall perish as the beast: But to him that knows it will be
his passage into Rest, and that Angels shall convey his Soul to Christ, what an
Antidote is there ready for his faith to use against the enmity and excess of
fears? Hence faith proceeds in its triumph, 1 Cor. 15.56, 57. The sting of
death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law: But thanks be to God that
gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Let him inordinately fear
death, that is loath to be with Christ, or that is yet the heir of death
eternal: Let him fear that is yet in the bondage of his sin, and in the power
of the prince of darkness, and is not by Justification delivered from the
curse: But joy and holy triumph are more seemly for the Justified.

3. A third Antidote against the Enmity of death, is the Holiness of the soul:
By this the Power of sin is mortified; and therefore the fears of death cannot
actuate and use it, as in others they may do: By this the Interest of the flesh
is cast aside as nothing, and the flesh it self is crucified with Christ: and
therefore the destruction of the flesh will seem the more tolerable, and the
fears of it will be a less temptation to the Soul. By this we are already
crucified to the world, and the world to us: and therefore we can more easily
leave the world: We now live by another Life then we did before; being dead in
our selves, our life is hid with Christ in God; and being crucified with
Christ, we now so Live, as that it is not we, but Christ Lives in us: the life
which we Live in the flesh is by the faith of the Son of God that has loved
us, Gal. 2.20. The things that made this life too dear to us, are now as it
were annihilated to us; and when we see they are Nothing, they can do nothing
with us. Sanctification also makes us so weary of sin, as being our hated
enemy, that we are the more willing to die, that it may die that causes us to
die. And especially, the Holy Ghost, which we then receive, is in us a Divine
and heavenly Nature, and so inclines us to God and Heaven. This Nature
principally consists in the superlative Love of God. And Love carries out
the soul to the beloved. As the Nature of a prisoner in a dungeon carries him
to desire Liberty and light; so the Nature of a holy Soul in flesh, inclines
it to desire to be with Christ. As Love makes husband and wife, and dearest
friends to think the time long while they are asunder; so does the Love of the
Soul to God. How fain would the holy loving Soul behold the pleased face of
God, and be glorified in the beholding of his glory, and live under the fullest
influences of his Love! This is our conquest over the Enmity of death. As
strong as Death is, Love is stronger, Eccles. 8.6, 7. Love is strong as death
-- the coals thereof are coals of fire, a most vehement flame (which will not
by the terrible face of death be hindered from ascending up to God.) Many
waters cannot quench Love, neither can the floods drown it: if a man would give
all the substance of his house for Love (that is, to bribe it and divert it
from its object) it would utterly be contemned. If the Love of David could
carry Jonathan to hazard his life and deny a Kingdom for him, and the Love of
David to Absalom made him wish that he had dyed for him, and the Love of
friends, (yea lustful love) has carried many to cast away their lives; no
wonder if the Love of God in his Saints prevail against the fear of death. The
power of holy Love made Moses say, Else let my name be blotted out of the book
of life. And it made Paul say, that he could wish that he were accursed from
Christ, for his brethren and kindred according to the flesh.] Romans 9.3. And
doubtless he felt the fire burning in his breast, when he broke out into that
triumphant challenge, Romans 8.35, 36. to the end [Who shall separate us from the
love of God? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? (As it is written, For thy sake we are killed
all the day long; we are counted as Sheep to the slaughter.) Nay in all this we
are more then Conquerours through him that loved us: For I am persuaded that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God; which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.] You see here what it is that conquereth the enmity of death, in our
sanctification; even that powerful love of God that is then given us, which
will go to him through the most cruel death.

4. A fourth Antidote that is given us by Christ, against the Enmity of Death,
is the Holy Ghost, as he is the Comforter of the Saints. He made it his work to
corroborate and confirm them: As sin has woven calamities into our lives, and
filled us with troubles, and griefs, and fears; so Christ does send his spirit
to undo these works of Satan, and to be a Comforter as well as a Sanctifier to
his members. As the Sanctifying Spirit striveth against the enticing sinful
flesh, so the Comforting Spirit striveth against the troubling flesh; as also
against the persecuting, as well as the tempting world, and the vexing as well
as the tempting Devil. And greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the
world, 1 John 4.4. The Spirit of Christ overcomes the disquieting as well as
the tempting Spirit: But with some difference; because our comforts are not in
this life so necessary to us as our Holiness: Joy being part of our Reward, is
not to be expected certainly or constantly, in any high degree, till we come to
the state of our Reward: And therefore though the Holy Ghost will carry on the
work of Sanctification, universally, constantly and certainly in the Elect; yet
in many of them his Comforting work is more obscure, and interrupted: And yet
he is a Conqueror here. For his works must be judged of in reference to their
ends: And our comfort on earth is given us for our encouragement in holy ways,
that we be not stopped or diverted by the fear of enemies; and also to help on
ou^ love to God, and to quicken us in thanks, and praise, and draw up our
hearts to the life to come, and make us more serviceable to others: And such a
measure of comfort, we shall have as conduces to these ends, and is suitable
to our present state, and the employment God has for us in the world, if we do
not wilfully grieve our Comforter, and quench our joys.

So that when Death and the Grave appear before, and our flesh is terrified
with the sight of these Anakims, and says, [We are not able to overcome them]
and so brings up an evil report upon the promised Land, and casts us sometime
into murmuring, lamentation and weakning-discouragements, yet does the Holy
Ghost cause Faith and Hope (as Caleb and Joshua) to still the soul, ( Numb.
13.) and causes us to contemn these Giants, and say [Let us go up and possess
it, for we are well able to overcome it.] Ver. 30. The Comforting Spirit
shows us his death that conquered death, ( Heb. 2.14, 15.) even the Cross on
which he triumphed openly, when he seemed to be conquered, Col. 2.15. He
shows us the glorious Resurrection of our Head, and his promise of our own
Resurrection: He shows us our glorified Lord, to whom we may boldly and
confidently commend our departing souls, Acts 7.59. And he shows us the
Angels that are ready to be their Convoy: And he makes all these
Considerations effectual, and inwardly exciteth our Love and heavenly desires,
and gives us a triumphing Courage and Consolation: So that Death does not
encounter us alone, and in our own strength, but finds us armed and led on by
the Lord of life, who helps us by a sling and stone to conquer this Goliath. If
a draught of Wine, or some spiritfull reviving liquor can take off fears and
make men bold; what then may the Spirit of Christ do by his powerful
encouragements and comforts on the soul? Did we but see Christ or an Angel
standing by our sick-beds, and saying [Fear not: I will convey thy soul to God:
this day shall thou be with me in Paradise.] What an unspeakable comfort would
this be to a dying man? Why, the Spirit is Christ's Agent here on earth: and
what the Spirit speaks, Christ speaks: And therefore we may take its comforting
words, as spoken to us by Christ himself; who spoke the like to the penitent
Thief, to show believers the virtue of his Cross, and what they also may expect
from him in their extremity. And our Physician is most wise, and keeps his
Cordials for a fainting time: The Spirit uses to sustain and comfort us most,
in our greatest necessities. We need not comforts against death, so much in the
time of prosperity and health, as when Death draws near. In health we have
ordinarily more need of quickening then of comforting: and more need to be
awakened from security to a due preparation for death, then to be freed from
the terrible fore-thoughts of it: though inordinate fears of Death be hurtful
to us, security and deadness hurt us more. And therefore the spirit works
according to our necessities: And when Death is nearest, and like to be most
dreadful, he usually gives the liveliest sense of the Joys beyond it, to
abate the enmity, and encourage the departing soul. And if the comfort be but
small, it is precious, because it is most pure, as being then mixed with no
carnal joys; and because it is most seasonable in so great a strait. If we
have no more but mere support, it will be yet a precious mercy. And thus I have
done with the third degree of the destruction of Deaths Enmity, by these four
Antidotes, which we receive at our Conversion, and the Consequents thereof.

4. The fourth degree of this Enemies destruction is, by it self, or rather by
Christ at the time, and by the means of death, which contrary to its nature,
shall advantage our felicity. When Death has done its worst, it has half
killed it self in killing us: It has then dismissed our imprisoned souls, and
ended even our fears of death, and our fears of all the evils of this life. It
has ended our cares, and griefs, and groans. It has finished our work, and
ended all our weariness and trouble. And more then this, it ends our sinning,
and so destroys that which caused it, and that which the inordinate fears of
it self, had caused in us. It is the time when sin shall gasp its last, and so
far our Physician will perfect the cure; and our greatest enemy shall follow us
no further. It is the door by which the soul must pass to Christ in Paradise.

If any Papist shall hence plead that therefore all men must be perfect without
sin before death, or else go to Purgatory to be cleansed, because as we die, so
Christ will find us: or if they ask, How death can perfect us? I answer them:
It is Christ our Physician that finisheth the cure, and Death is the time in
which he does it. And if he undertake then to do it, it concerns not us to be
too inquisitive, how he does it. What if the patient understand not how blood
letting cures the infected blood that is left behind? must he therefore plead
against his Physician, and say, It will not be done, because he knows not how
its done? We feel that here we have our sinful imperfections: we have for all
that a promise that we shall be with Christ, when death has made its
separation; and we are assured that no sin does enter there. And is not this
enough for us to know?

But yet I see not why the difficulty of the Objection should trouble us at
all. Death does remove us from this sinful flesh, and admits the soul into the
sight of God. And in the very instant of its remove, it must needs be
perfected, even by that remove, and by the first appearance of his blessed
face. If you bring a candle into a dark room, the access of the light expels
the darkness, at the same instant: And you cannot say that they consist
together one moment of time. So cold is expelled by the approach of heat. And
thus when death has opened the door, and let us into the immortal light,
neither before nor after, but in that instant all the darkness and sinful
imperfections of our souls are dissipated. Throw an empty Bottle into the Sea,
and the emptiness cease by the filling of the water; neither before nor
after, but in that instant.

If this should not satisfy any, let it satisfy them, that the Holy Ghost in
the instant of death can perfect his work.

So that we need not assert a perfection on earth, (which on their grounds,
must be the case of all that will escape Hell and Purgatory;) nor yet any
Purgatory torments after death, for the deliverance of the soul from the
relicts of sin; seeing at the instant of death, by the the spirit, or by the
deposition of the flesh, or by the sight of God, or by the sight of our
glorified Redeemer, or by all, this work will be easily and infallibly
accomplished.

5. The last degree and perfect conquest will be at the Resurrection. And this
is the victory that is mentioned in my Text. All that is forementioned does
abate the enmity, and conquer death in some degree: But the enmity, and the
enemy it self is conquered at the Resurrection, and not till then. And
therefore Death is the last enemy to be destroyed. The Body lies under the
penal effects of sin, till the Resurrection. And it is penal to the soul to be
in a state of separation from the Body, though it be a state of glory that its
in with Christ: For it is deprived of the fullness of glory, which it shall
attain at the Resurrection, when the whole man shall be perfected and glorified
together. Then it is that the Mediators work will be accomplished; and all
things shall be restored; All that are in the graves shall hear the voice of
the Son of God and shall come forth, John 5.28. For this is the Fathers will
that sent him, that of all that he has given him; he should lose nothing, but
should raise it up at the last day; John 6.39, 40. We have hope toward God,
that there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust,
Acts 24.15. As by man came death, so by man came also the Resurrection from the
dead, I Cor. 15.21. Then shall there be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying,
nor pain, Rev. 21.4. No more diseases, or fears of death, or grave, or of
corruption. No terrible enemy shall stand betwixt us and our Lord, to frighten
our hearts from looking toward him. O what a birthday will that be! when
Graves shall bring forth so many millions of sons for Glory! How joyfully will
the soul and body meet, that were separated so long? Then sin has done its
worst and can do no more! Then Christ has done all, and has no more to do, as
our Redeemer, but to justify us in judgment, and give us possession of the
joy that he is preparing. And then he will deliver up the Kingdom to the Father.

If you expect now that I should give you Reasons why Death is the last Enemy
to be destroyed, though much might be said from the nature of the matter, the
Wisdom and Will of God shall be to me instead of all other Reasons, being the
fountain and the sum of all. He knows best the Order that is agreeable to his
Works and Ends, to his honor, and to our good: and therefore to his Wisdom we
submit, in the patient expectance of the accomplishment of his promises.

SECT. III.
Use 1.
I Now come to show you the Usefulness of this Doctrine for the further
Information of our understandings, the well ordering of our hearts, and the
reforming of our lives. And first, you may hence be easily resolved, Whether
Death be truly penal to the godly? which some have been pleased to make ^
Controversy of late: though I am past doubt; but the hearts of those men do
apprehend it as a punishment, whose tongues and pens do plead for the contrary.
Dust thou art, and to dust shall thou return, was part of the sentence past on
Adam and all his posterity; which then proved it a punishment, and it was not
remitted to Adam, that at the same time had the promise of a Redeemer, nor is
it remitted to any of us all. Were it not for sin, God would not inflict it;
who has sworn that he takes no pleasure in the death of sinners; And that he
afflicts not willingly, nor grieves the sons of men. But my text it self
decides the Controversy: Sin and punishment are the evils that Christ
removes; And if death were no punishment (as it is no sin,) how could it be an
Enemy, and the last enemy to be destroyed by the Redeemer? when we feel the
Enmity before described against our souls, and also know its Enmity to our
bodies, we cannot think that God would do all this, were it not for sin:
esp^cially when we read, that death passes upon all, for that all have sinned,
Romans 5.11, 12. and that death is the wages of sin, Romans 6.23. Though Christ do
us good by it, that proves it not to be no punishment: For castigatory
punishments are purposely to do good to the chastised. Indeed we may say, O
Death, where is thy sting? because that the mortal evil to the Soul is taken
out; and because we foresee the Resurrection by faith, when we shall have the
victory by Christ. But thence to conclude that Death has no sting now to a
believer, is not only besides, but against the text; which telling us that the
sting of death is sin, and that the strength of sin is the Law, does inform us,
that Death could not kill us, and be Death to us, if sin gave it not a sting to
do it with: as sin could not oblige us to this punishment, if the threatening
of the Law were not its strength. But Christ has begun the conquest, and will
finish it.

SECT. IV.
Use 2.
FROM all this Enmity in Death, we may see what it is that sin has done: and
consequently how vile and odious it is, and how we should esteem and use it.
Sin has not only forfeited our Happiness, but laid those impediments in the
way of our recovery, which will find us work, and cause our danger and sorrow
while we live. And Death is not the least of these impediments. O foolish man,
that still will love such a mortal Enemy! If another would rob them but of a
groat, or defame them, or deprive them of any accommodation, how easily can
they hate them, and how hardly are they reconciled to them? But sin depriveth
them of their lives, and separates the soul and body asunder, and forfeiteth
their everlasting happiness, and sets death betwixt them and the Glory that is
purchased by Christ, and yet they love it, and will not leave it. Though God
have made them, and do sustain them, and provide for them, and all their hope
and help is in him, they are not so easily drawn to love him; And yet they can
love the sin that would undo them. Though Christ would deliver them, and bring
them to everlasting blessedness, and has assumed flesh, and laid down his
life, to testify his Love to them, yet are they not easily brought to love
him; but the sin that made them enemies to God, and has brought them so near
to everlasting misery, this they can love, that deserves no love. A Minister or
other friend that would draw them from their sin to God, and help to save them,
they quarrel against, as if he were their enemy: but their foolish companions,
that can laugh and jest with them at the door of Hell, and clap them on the
back, and drive away the care of their salvation, and harden them against the
fear of God, these are the only acceptable men to them. O Christians, leave
this folly to the world, and do you judge of sin by its sad effects. You feel
(if you have any feeling in you) in some measure, what it has done against
your Souls! the weakness of your faith and love; the distance of your hearts
from God; your doubts and troubles tell you that it is not your friend: You
must shortly know what it will do to your bodies. As it keeps them in pain, and
weariness, and weakness, so it will ere long deliver them up to the jaws of
death; which will spare them no more then the beasts that perish. Had it not
been for sin, we should have had no cause to fear a dissolution; nor have had
any use for a coffin or a winding sheet, nor been beholden to a grave, to hide
our carkesses from the sight and smell of the living. But as Henoch and Elias
were translated when they had walked with God, even so should we: as those
shall that are alive and remain at the coming of Christ, shall be caught up
together in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall they ever be
with the Lord, 1 These. 4.17.

Use sin therefore as it will use you. Spare it not, for it will not spare you.
It is your murderer, and the murderer of the world: Use it therefore as a
murderer should be used. Kill it before it kills you; and then though it kill
your bodies, it shall not be able to kill your souls; and though it bring you
to the grave, as it did your Head, it shall not be able to keep you there. If
the thoughts of death, and the grave, and rottenness be not pleasant to you,
let not the thoughts of sin be pleasant. Hearken to every temptation to sin, as
you would hearken to a temptation to self-murder: And as you would do if the
Devil brought you a knife, and tempted you to cut your throat with it; so do
when he offers you the bait of sin. You love not Death: Love not the cause of
Death. Be ashamed to stand weeping over a buried friend, and never to weep over
a sinning or ungodly friend, nor once to give them a compassionate earnest
exhortation, to save their Souls. Is it nothing to be dead in sins and
trespasses? Ephesians. 2.1, 5. Col. 2.13. Yea, it is a worse Death then this, that
is, the wages of sin, and the fruit which it brings forth, Romans 6.21, 23. and
7.5. Surely God would never thus use men's bodies, and forsake them soul and
body for ever, if sin were not a most odious thing; what a poison is this that
kills so many millions, and damneth so many millions, and cannot be cured but by
the blood of Christ! that killed our Physician that never casted it, because he
came so near to us! (...) O unbelieving stupid so^ls, that smart and sin, and
groan and sin, and weep and lament our bodily sufferings, and yet sin still!
that fear a grave and fear not sin! that have heard, and seen, and felt so much
of the sad effects, and yet sin still, Psalm 78.32. Alas that murderers should
be so common, and that we should be no wiser, when we have paid so dear a price
for wisdom!

SECT. V.
Use 3.
FROM the Enmity of Death we may further learn, that Man has now a need of
Grace for such exceeding difficulties, which were not before him in his state
of innocence. Though Adam was able to have obeyed perfectly, without sin, and
had Grace sufficient to have upheld him, and conquered temptations, if he had
done his part, which by that Grace he might have done; yet whether that Grace
was sufficient to the works that we are called to, is a doubt that many have
been much troubled with. It is certain that he was able to have done any thing
that was suitable to his present state, if it were commanded him: And it is
certain tha^ much that is now our duty, would have been unsuitable to his
state. But whether it belonged to his perfection, to be able and fit for such
duties (that were then unsuitable to him) or supposition they had been suitable
and duties, this is the difficulty: which some make use of to prove that such
works cannot now be required of us, without suitable help, because we lost no
such grace in Adam. But this need not trouble us: For 1. Though Adam was put on
no such difficulty in particular, as to encounter death: yet the perfect
obedience to the whole Law, required a great degree of internal Habitual
holiness: and to determine the case, whether our particular difficulties, or
his sinless perfect ob^dience, required greater s^rength and help, is a matter
of more difficulty then use. For 2. It is but about the Degrees of Holiness in
him and us, and not about the Kind, that the difficulty lies. For it is the
same End that he was created for and disposed to by Nature, and that we are
redeemed for and disposed to supernaturally.

But yet it is worthy our observation, what a difficulty sin has cast before
us in the way of life, which Adam was unacquainted with* that so we may see the
nature of our works, and the excellency of the Redeemers grace. Adam was but to
seek the continuance of his life, and a translation to Glory, without the
terrors of interposing death: He was never called to prepare to die; nor to
think of the state of a separated Soul; nor to mind, and love, and seek a glory
to which there is no (ordinary) passage but by death. This is the difficulty
that sin has caused, against which we have need of the special assistance, of
the example, and doctrine, and promise, and Spirit of the Redeemer. Adam was
never put to study how to get over this dreadful gulf. The threatening of death
was to raise such a fear in him as was necessary to prevent it: But those fears
did rather hold him closer to the way of life, then stand between him and life
to his discouragement. But we have a death to fear that must be suffered, that
cannot be avoided. The strange condition of a separated soul (so unlike to its
state while resident in the body) does require in us, a special Faith to
apprehend it, and a special revelation to discover it. To desire, and love, and
long for, and labor after such a time as this, when one part of us must lie
rotting in the grave, and the separated Soul must be with Christ alone till the
Resurrection, and to believe and hope for that Resurrection, and to deny our
selves, and forsake all the world, and lay down our lives when Christ requires
it, by the power of this faith and hope, this is a work that innocent Adam
never knew: This is the high employment of a Christian. To have our hearts and
conversations in Heaven, ( Matthew. 6.21 Phil. 3.20.) when Death must first
dissolve us, before we can possess it, here is the noble work of faith.

SECT. VI.
Use 4.
MOreover this Enmity of Death may help us to understand the reason of the
sufferings and Death of Christ. That he gave his life a Ransom for us, and a
Sacrifice for sin, and so to make satisfaction to the offended Majesty, is a
truth that every Christian does believe. But there was another reason of his
death, that all of us do not duly consider of, and improve to the promoting of
our Sanctification as we ought. Death is so great an Enemy, as you have heard,
and so powerful to deter our hearts from God, and dull our desires to the
heavenly felicity, that Christ was fain to go before us, to embolden the hearts
of believers to follow him: He suffered Death (with the rest of his
afflictions) to show us that it is a tolerable evil: Had he not gone before and
overcome it, it would have detained us its Captives: Had he not me^ited and
purchased us a blessed Resurrection, and opened heaven to all bel^evers, and by
Death overcome him that had the power of death (as Gods executioner) that is,
the Devil, we should all our life time have been still subjected unto bondage
by the fears of Death, Heb. 2.14. But when we see that Christ has led the way,
as the victorious Captain of our Salvation, and that he is made perfect by
sufferings (in his advancement unto glory) and that for the sufferings of death
(which by the grace of God he tasted for every man) he is crowned with glory ad
honor, Heb. 2.9, 10. this puts a holy valor into the soul, and causes us
cheerfully to follow him. Had we gone first, and the task of conquering Death
been ours, we had been overcome. But he that has led us on, has hewed down
the enemy before him, and first prepared us the way, and then called us to
follow him, and to pass the way that he has first made safe, and also showed
us by his example that it is now made passable. For it was one in our Nature,
that calls us his Brethren, that took not the nature of Angels, but of the
seed of Abrah^m, that is one with us, as the Sanctifier and the sanctified are,
and to whom as children we are given, Who has passed through Death and the
Grave before us, and therefore we may the boldlier follow him, Heb. 2.11, 12,
13.16. Being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient
unto death, even the death of the Cross, and therefore God h^th highly exalted
him, and given him a name above every name, Phil. 2. 8, 9. Hereby ^e has
showed us that Death is not so dreadful a thing, but that voluntary obedience
may and must submit unto it. As Abraham's faith and obedience was tried, in the
offering up his Son to death, at Gods command: so the children of Abraham and
the heirs of the promise, must follow him in offering up themselves, if God
require it, and in submitting to our natural death (for that he does require of
all.) Examples work more then bare precepts: and the Experiments of others, do
take more with us then mere directions. It satisfies a s^ck man more to read a
Book of Medicinal Observations, where he meets with many that were in his own
case, and finds what cured them, then to read the Praxis of medicinal receipts
alone. It encourages the patient much, when the Physician tells him, [I have
cured many of your disease, by such a medicine, nay I was cured thus of the
same my self.] So does it embolden a believer to lay down his Life, when he
has not only a promise of a better life, but sees that the promiser went that
way to Heaven before him. O therefore let us learn and use this choice remedy,
against the immoderate fear of Death! Let Faith take a view of him that was
dead and is alive, that was buried and is risen, that was humbled and is now
exalted! Think with your selves, when you must think of dying, that you are but
following your Conquering Lord, and going the way that he has gone before you,
and suffering what he underwent and conquered: And therefore though you walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, resolve that you will fear no evil,
Psalm. 23.4. And if he call you after him, follow him with a Christian boldness;
As Peter cast himself into the Sea, and walked on the waters, when he saw Christ
walk there, and had his command; so let us venture on the jaws of death, while
we trace his steps, and hear his encouraging commands and promises, John 21.7.
Mat. 14.28, 29.

SECT. VII.
Use 5.
MOreover from this Doctrine we may be informed, of the mistakes of many
Christians, that think they have no saving grace, because they are afraid of
dying, and because these fears deterr their soul^ from desiring to be with
Christ: And hence they may perceive that there is another cause of these
distempers, even the Enmity of Death that stands in the way. You think that
if you had any Love to Christ, you should more desire to be with him; and that
if your treasure were in heaven, your hearts wou^d be more there; and that if
you truly took it for your felicity, you could not be so unwilling to be
removed to it; for no man is unwilling to be happy, or to attain his end. But
stay a little, and better consider of your Case. Is it Christ that your heart
is thus averse to, or is it only Death that stands in the way? You are not, I
hope, unwilling to see the face of God, nor unwilling to be translated from
earth to heaven, but unwilling to die. It is not because you love the creature
better then the Creator, but because you are afraid of Death. You may love God,
and long to be perfected in holiness, and to see his Glory, and to have the
most near Communion with him, and yet at the same time you may fear this Enemy
that stands in your way: I mean not only the Pain of death, but principally
the dissolution of our natures, and the separation of the soul from the body,
and its abode in a separated state, and the bodies abode in dust and darkness.
Grace it self is not given us to reconcile us to corruption, and make death as
death to seem desirable, but to cause us patiently to bear the evil, because of
the good that is beyond it. It is not our duty to love death as death. Had it
not been naturally an evil to be dreaded and avoided, God would not have made
it the matter of his threatening; nor would it have been a fit means to restrain
men from transgression. To threaten a man with a benefit as such, is a
contradiction. Enquire therefore into your hearts, whether there be not a
belief of heaven, a love to God, a desire to enjoy and please him, even while
you draw back and seem to be averse? and whether it be not only lothness to
die, and not a lothness to be with Christ?

For the fuller discovery of this, (because I find that our comfort much
depends on it) I shall try you by these following Questions.

Quest. 1. What is it that is ungrateful to you in your meditations of your
change? Is it God and heaven, or is it Death? If it be only Death, it seems it
is not the want of Love to God, and heaven, that causes your aversness: If it
be God himself that is ungrateful to your thoughts, is it because you desire
not his nearer presence, or communion with him in the state of glory? or is it
only because you fear lest you have no interest in his Love, and shall not
attain the blessedness which you desire? If it be the first, I must confess it
proves a graceless soul, and signifies the want of Love to God. But if it be
the latter only, it may stand with grace: For Desire is a true signification of
Love, though there be doubts and fears lest we shall miss the attainment of
those desires.

Quest. 2. Would you not gladly hear the news of your removal, if you might be
changed without Death; and translated to heaven as Henoch and Elias were, and
as Christ at his Ascension? Had you not far rather be thus changed then abide
on earth? If so, then it seems it is not God and Heaven that you are against,
but death. Nay if you could reach Heaven by traveling a thousand miles, would
you not gladly take the journey as soon as you had got assurance of your title
to it, and done the work of God on earth? If it were but as Peter, James and
John, to go with Christ into an exceeding high Mountain, and there to see him
in glory, ( Mat. 17.12.) would you not gadly do it? It seems then that thou
desire to see the Lord, and thy love is to him, though thou be afraid of
death.

Quest. 3. Consider of the Nature of the Heavenly felicity, and try whether
thou love it in the several parts. One part is our personal perfection; that
our souls shall be free from ignorance, and error, and sin, and sorrow, and
enlarged for the perfect Love of God; and our bodies at the Resurrection, made
like the glorious body of our Lord, Phil. 3.21. and would thou not be thus
perfected in soul and body? Another part is, that we shall live with the
heavenly society of Angels and glorified Saints: And would thou not have such
company; rather then the company of sinners, and enemies, and imperfect Saints
on earth? Another part is, that we shall see our glorified Head, and be with
him where he is, that we may behold his glory. And does not thy heart desire
this? But the perfection of our Happiness is, that we shall see the face of the
glory of God, which is the light of that world, as truly as the Sun is the
light of this: and that we shall be filled up with the feeling of his Love, and
abound with Love to him again, and perfectly delighted in this Communion of
Love, and express it in the Praises of the Lord, and thus make up the New
Jerusalem, where God will place his glorious presence, and in which he will for
evermore take pleasure. And is there any thing in this that thy soul is
against, and which thou do not value above this world? If thou find that all
the parts are sweet, and the Description of Heaven is most grateful to thee,
and that this is the state that thou would be in, it seems then it is not
Heaven but Death that thou art averse from, and that makes thee so loath to
hear the tidings of thy change.

Quest. 4. Could thou not joyfully see the coming of Christ, if it were this
day (if thou have done thy work, and art assured of his love?) The Apostle has
told us by the word of the Lord, that the Lord himself shall des^end from
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of
God; and the dead in Christ, shall rise first: and then they which are alive
and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the
Lord in the air; and so shall we ever be with the Lord,] 1 These. 4. 15, 16, 17.
And this is the doctrine that comfort believers, verse 18. Would it not
rejoice your hearts, if you were sure to live, to see the coming of the Lord,
and to see his glorious appearing and retinue? If you were not to die, but to
be caught up thus to meet the Lord, and to be changed immediately into an
immortal, incorruptible, glorious state, would you be averse to this? would it
not be the greatest joy that you could desire? For my own part, I must confess
to you, that death as death appears to me as an enemy, and my nature does
abhor and fear it: But the thoughts of the Coming of the Lord are most swe^t
and joyful to me, so that if I were but sure that I should live to see it, and
that the Trumpet should sound, and the dead should rise, and the Lord appear
before the period of my age, it would be the joyfullest tidings to me in the
world. O that I might see his Kingdom come! It is the Character of his Saints
to love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8. and to look for the blessed hope, and the
glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.13.
The Spirit and the Bride say Come: Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly.] is the voice
of faith, and hope, and love, Rev. 22.17, 20. But I find not that his servants
are thus Characterized, by their desires to die. It is therefore the presence
of their Lord that they desire: But it is Death that they abhor: And therefore
(though they can submit to death)it is the coming of Christ that they Love and
long for; and it is interposing death that causes them to draw back. Let not
Christians be discouraged by mistakes, and think that they love not God and
glory, because they love not this enemy in the way; nor think that they are
graceless or unbelieving worldlings, because they are afraid of death as death.

But perhaps you will say, that if grace prevail not against the fears of
death, then fear is predominant, and we are not sincer^. To which I answer,
that you must distinguish between such a prevailing as maintains our
sincerity, and such a prevailing as also procures our fortitude and joy. If
grace prevail not to keep us upright in a holy life, renouncing the world, and
crucifying the flesh, and devoting our selves entirely to God, though the fear
of death would draw us from it, then it is a sign that we are not sincere. But
if grace do this much, and yet prevail not against all fears and unwillingness
to die, but leave us under uncomfortable hideous thoughts of death, this proves
us not to be unsound. For the soul may savingly love God, that is afraid of
death: And he may truly love the End, that fears this dark and di^mall way, Yet
must there be so much to prove our uprightness, as that in our deliberate
choice, we will rather voluntarily pass through death (either natural or
violent) then lose the happiness beyond it: Though we love not death, yet we
love God and heaven so well, that we will submit to it: And though we fear it
and abhor it, yet not so much as we fear and abhor the loss of heaven. Let not
poor Christians therefore wrong themselves, and deny the graces of the Spirit,
as if they had more mind of earth then heaven, and of things temporal then of
things eternal, because they are afraid to die. All suffering is grievous, and
not joyous to our nature, Paul himself desired not to be unclothed, but clothed
upon with our house which is from heaven, that mortality might be swallowed up
of life, 2 Cor. 5.2, 4. it ^eing better to be absent from the body, and present
with the Lord. Even Christ himself had a will that desired that the Cup might
have passed from him, if it had been agreeable to his Fathers will, and the
ends of his undertaken Office, Matthew 26.41, 42. Raise therefore no unjust
conclusions from these natural fears, nor from the imperfection of our
conquest: but praise him that relieveth us, and abateth the enmity of death,
and furnishes us with his Antidotes, and will destroy this enemy at last.

SECT. VIII.
Use 6.
FRom the Enmity of Death we may further learn to study and magnify the
victorious grace of our Redeemer: which overcomes the enemy, and turns our
hurt into our benefit, and makes death a door of life. Though death be the
enemy that seems to conquer us, and to destroy and utterly undo us, yet being
conquered it self by Christ, it is used by him to our great advantage, and
sanctified to be a very great help to our salvation. The suffering of Christ
himself was in the hour of his enemies, and the power of darkness, Luke 22.53.
which seemed to have prevailed against him; when yet it was but a destroying of
death by death, and the purchasing of life and salvation for the world. So also
in our death, though sin and Satan seem to conquer, it is they that are
conquered, and not we, who are supervictors through him that has loved us,
Romans 8.37. They destroy themselves when they seem to have destroyed us. As the
Serpent bruised but the heel of Christ, who bruised his head; so does he bruise
but our heel, who in that conflict, and by the means of his own execution,
through the strength of Christ, do bruise his head, Genesis 3.15. And this is
upshot of all his enmity, against the woman's holy seed. Though Death was
unsuitable to innocent man, and is still a natural enemy to us all, yet unto
sinners it is an evil that is suitable and fit to destroy the greater evil that
did cause it, and to prevent the everlasting evil. The foreknowledge of our
certain death, is a very great help to keep us humble, and disgrace all the
seducing pleasures of the flesh, and all the profits and honors of the world,
and so to enervate all temptations. It is a singular help to quicken a stupid
careless sinner, and to waken men to prepare for the life to come, and to
excite them to seek first the Kingdom of God, and to give all diligence to make
their calling and election sure; and to consider, seeing all these things must
be dissolved, what manner of persons they ought to be, in all holy conversation
and godliness, looking for, and hastening to the coming of the day of God, 2
Pet. 3.11, 12. When we drop asleep, the remembrance of death may quickly awake
us; when we grow slack, it is our spur to put us on, to mend our pace. Who is
so mad as wilfully to sin with Death in his eye? or who so dead as with death
in h^s eye, to refuse to live a godly life, if he have any spiritual light and
feeling? Experience te^leth us, that when health and folly cause us to promise
our selves long life, and think that death is a great way off, it lamentably
cools our zeal, and strentheneth our temptations, and duls our souls to holy
operations: and the approach of death pu^s life into all our apprehensions and
affections. It is a wonderful hard thing to maintain our lively apprehensions,
and str^ng affections, and tenderness of conscience, and self-denial, and easy
contempt of earthly things, when we put far from us the day of death. We see
what a stir men make for the profits and honors of this world, and how fast
they hold their fleshly pleasures, while they are in health, and how
contemptuously they speak of all, and bitterly complain of the vanity and
vexation, when they come to die. And if our lives and the world be brought
hereby into such disorders, when men live so short a time on earth, what
monsters of ambition, and covetousness, and luxury would men be, if they lived
as long as before the flood, even to eight hundred, or nine hundred years of
age? Doubtless long life was so great a temptation then to man, (in his
corrupted state) that it is no wonder if his wickedness was great upon ^he
earth, and if it prepared for that great destruction of the universal deluge.
Should men live now but to the age of three hundred, or four hundred years, I
fear it would so tempt them to overvalue the world, and so embolden them to
delay repentance, that one would be as Wolf to another, and the weak but be a
prey to the strong, and wickedness would overwhelm the world, despising the
reins, and bearing down Religious and civil opposition. But when we stand over
the grave, and see our friends laid in the dust, how mortified do we seem? how
do we even shake the head at the folly of ambitious and covetous worldlings,
and are ashamed to think of fleshly lusts! So far are men from owning their
vanities, when that silent teacher stands by. It is Death that helps to
humble the proud, and abate the arrogan^y and obstinacy of the wicked, and make
them regard the messengers of Christ, that before despised them and their
message. It is death that allayeth the ebullition of distracting thoughts and
passions, and helps to bring men to themselves, and fixes giddy discomposed
minds, and helps to settle the light and the unsettled; and to restrain the
worst. As we are beholden to the Gallows for our purses and our lives; so are
we to the grave and hell, for much of the order that is in the world, and our
peace and freedom procured thereby. But it is a greater good that it procures
to believers.

If you ask, How is all this to be ascribed to Christ? I answer, many ways: 1.
It is he that has now the Keys or power of death and hell, even he that
lives and was dead, and that lives for evermore, Rev. 1.18. and therefore is
to be feared by the world. 2. It is he that has by his Blood and Covenant
brought us the Hope of everlasting life; which is it that gives the efficacy to
death. Without this men would be but desperate, and think that it is better
have a little pleasure then none at all, and so would give up themselves to
sin, and desperately gratify their flesh by all the wickedness they could
devise. 3. And it is Christ that teaches men the right use of death, by his
holy doctrine, having brought life and immortality to light by his Gospel. 4.
And it is Christ that sends forth the holy Spirit, which only does so
illuminate the mind, and quicken and dispose the heart, that Death may be
savingly improved. The poison is our own: but it is his skill and love that
has made a Sovereign antidote of it. And let our bodies die, so our sin may
die. If the foresight of Death destroy our sin, and further our sanctification,
and the hour of death does end our fears and enter us into the state of glory,
though we will love death as death never the better for this, much less the sin
that caused it; yet must we admire the love of our Redeemer.

And it is not only the Peril but also the Terrors of Death that we are in part
delivered from. Though Christ himself was in a bloody sweat, in his agony
before his death, and cried out on the Cross, My God, why have thou forsaken
me; because he bore the sins of the world; yet death is welcome to many of his
followers, that drink of his cup, and are baptized with his baptism: For they
taste not of these dregs which he drunk up, and they are strengthened by his
supporting grace. He that does comfort them against sin and Hell, does also
comfort them against Death. So great is the glory that he has promised them,
and so great is his comforting, confirming grace, that dreadful ^eath is not
great enough to prevail against them. As it was too weak to conquer Christ, so
is it too weak to conquer his Spirit in his peoples souls. Without Christ we
could not live, and we durst not die: but through him we can do and suffer all
things, and can boldly pass through this dark and shady vale of death; yea we
can desire to depart and to be with Christ as best f^r us: for to Live is
Christ, and to die is gain, Phil. 1.21, 23. For we know that if our earthly
house of this Tabernacle were dissolved; we h^ve a building of God, an house
not made with h^nds, eternal in the heavens. And therefore sometimes we can
earnestly groan, d^siring to be clothed upon with our house which is from
heaven. And we are always confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in
the body, we are absent from the Lord: we are confident, I say, and willing
rather to be absent from the body and present with the Lord: and therefore
labor, that whether present or absent, we may be accepted of him: For we walk
by faith and not by sight: and it is God that has wrought us for the self same
thing, who also has given us the earnest of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 5.1. to 10.
Though we long not to die, yet we long to see the face of God. And though we
lay down our bod^^s with natural unwillingness, yet we lay down our sin and
sorrows with gladness and spiritual delight. And though our hearts are ready to
faint, as Peter's when he walked to Christ upon the waters, yet Christ puts
forth his hand of love, and soon recovereth us from our fear and danger.

Melancholy and impatience may make men weary of their lives, and rush upon
death with a false conceit that it will end their sorrows: But this is not to
conquer death, but to be conquered by a lesser evil: and it is not an effect of
fortitude, but of an imbecility and impotency of mind. And if a Brutus, a
Cato, or a Seneca be his own Executioner, th^^ do but choose a lesser evil, (in
their conceits) even a death which they accounted honorable, before a more
ignominious death, or a life of shame, and scorn, and misery. But the true
believer is raised above the fears of death, by the love of God, and the hopes
of Glory; and Death (though ungrateful in it self) is welcome to him, as the
way to his felicity.

Le^ Tyrants and Soldiers take it for their glory, that they can take away
men's liver, (that is, they have the power of a Serpent, or of Rats-bane) as if
it were their honor to be their Countries pestilence: and a Ruler and a Dose
of poison, were things of equal strength and use: But it is the Glory of Christ
to enable h^s Disciples to conquer Death, and bear the fury of the most cruel
persecutors. The Martyrs have been more joyful in their sufferings, then the
Judges that condemned them in their Pomp and glory. When we are pressed above
strength, and despair of life, and have the sentence of death in our selves; we
are then taught to trust in the living God that raises the dead, 2 Cor. 1.8,
9, 10. The Saints by faith have been tortured, not accepting deliverance, that
they might obtain a better resurrection: they have had trial of cruel mockings
and scourgings, yea moreover of bonds and imprisonment; they were stoned, they
were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword, Heb. 11.35, 36, 37.
Thanks be to God which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 15.57. They overcome by the blood of the Lamb -- and love not their lives
unto the death, Rev. 12.11. They fear not them that kill the body, and after
that have no more that they can do, Luke 12.4. They trust upon his promise that
ha^h said, [ I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem
them from death. O death, I will be thy plagues! O grave, I will be thy
destruction, Hos. 13.14. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his
Saints, Psalm, 116.15. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from
henceforth, yea says the spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and
their works do follow them, Rev. 14.13.

SECT. IX.
Use 7.
MOreover from the Enmity of Death, we may be directed which way to bend our
cares; and seeing where our difficulty most lies, we may see which way our
most diligent preparations must be turned. Death cannot be prevented: but the
malignant influence of it on our souls may be much abated. If you let it work
without an Antidote, it will make you live like unbelieving worldlings: It will
deter your hearts from heaven, and dull your love to God himself, and make your
meditations of him, and of your Everlasting Rest, to be seldom and ungrateful
to you; And it will make you say, Its good to be here; and have sweeter
thoughts of this present life, then of your inheritance. It will rob you of
much of your heavenly delights, and fill you with slavish fears of death, and
subject you unto bondage all your lives, and make you die with agony and
horror, so that your lives and deaths will be dishonorable to your holy faith,
and to your Lord. If it were merely our own suffering by fears and horrors; or
merely our loss of spiritual delights, the matter were (great, but) not so
great: But it is more then this. For when our joys are overwhelmed with the
fears of death, and turned into sorrows, our love to God will be abated, and we
shall deny him the thanks and cheerful praises, which should be much of the
employment of our lives: and we shall be much discomposed and unfitted for his
service, and shall much dishonor him in the world, and shall strengthen our
temptations to the overvaluing of earthly things. Think it not therefore a
small or an indifferent matter, to fortify your souls against these malignant
fears of death. Make this your daily care and work; your peace, your safety;
your innocence, and usefulness, and the honor of God, do much lie on it. And
it is a work of such exceeding difficulty, that it requires the best of your
skill and diligence; and when all is done, it must be the illuminating
quickening beams of grace, and the shining face of the Eternal Love, that must
do the work; though yet your diligence is necessary, to attend the spirit, and
use the means, in subserviency to grace, and in expectation of these celestial
rays.

And above all take heed lest you should think, that carnal mirth, or mere
security, and casting away the thoughts of death will serve to overcome these
fears; or that it is enough that you resolve against them. For it is your
safety that must be looked to, as well as your present ease and peace: and fear
must be so overcome, as that a greater misery may not follow: Presumption and
security will be of very short continuance. To die without fear, and pass into
endless desperation, which fear should have wakened you to prevent, is no
desirable kind of dying. And besides, resolving against the Terrors of death,
will not prevent them. When Death draws near, it will amaze you, in despite of
all your resolutions, if you are not furnished with a better Antidote. The more
jocund you have been in carnal mirth, and the more you have presumptuously
slighted death, its likely your horror will be the greater when it comes. And
therefore see that you make a wise and safe preparation; and that you
groundedly and methodically cure these fears, and not securely cast them away.
Though I have given you to this end, some Directions in other writings (in the
Saints Rest, and in the Treatise of Self-denial, and that of Crucifying the
world,) yet I shall add here these following helps, which faithfully observed
and practiced, will much promote your victory over death, which conquereth all
the strength of flesh, and glory of this world.

DIRECTION I.
IF you would overcome the danger and the fears of Death, Make sure of your
Conversion, that it is sound; and see that you be absolutely devoted unto God,
without reserves. Should you be deceived in your foundations, your life, and
hopes, and joys would all be delusory things. Till sin be mortified, and your
souls reconciled to God in Christ, you are still in danger of worse then death:
and it is but the senslesness of your dead condition, that keeps you from the
terrors of damnation. But if you are sure that you are quick^ed by renewing
grace, and possessed by the sanctifying spirit, and made partakers of the
Divine nature, you have then the earnest of your inheritance, Ephesians. 1.14. 2 Cor.
1.22. and 5.5. and the fire is kindled in your breast, that in despite of
Death, will mount you up to God.

DIRECTION II.
TO Conquer the Enmity of Death, you must live by faith in Jesus Christ: as men
that are emptied of themselves, and ransomed from his hands that had the power
of death, and as men that are redeemed from the curse, and are now made heirs
of the grace of life, being made his members who is ^he Lord of life, even the
second Adam, who is a quickening spirit. The serious believing study of his
design and office, (to destroy sin and death, and to bring many sons to glory,)
and also of his voluntary suffering, and his obedience to the death of the
Cross, may raise us above the fears of death. When we live by faith as branches
of this blessed Vine, and are righteous with his righteousness, justified by
his blood and merits, and sanctified by his Word and Spirit, and find that we
are united to him, we may then be sure that death cannot conquer us, and
nothing can take us out of his hands: For our life being hid with Christ in
God, we know that we shall live, because he lives, Col. 3.3. John 14.19. and
that when Christ who is our life appears, we shall also appear with him in
glory, Col. 3.4. And that he will change our vile bodies, and make them like to
his glorious body, by his mighty power, by which he is able to subdue all
things to himself, Phil. 3.20, 21. In our own stren^th we dare not stand the
charge of death, and with it the charge of the Law, and of our Consciences: How
dreadfully should we then be foiled and non-plust, if we must be found in no
other righteousness, but what we have received from the first Adam, and have
wrought by the strength received from him! But being gathered under the wings
of Christ, as the chickens under the wings of the hen ( Mat. 23.37.) and being
found then in him, having the righteousness which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith, we may boldly answer to all
that can be charged on us to our terror! If we know him and the power of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, and are made conformall^ to
his death, (Phil. 3.9, 10.) if ^e are dead with him to the world, and risen
with him to a holy life; if we have believingly traced him in his sufferings
and conquest, and perceive by faith how we participate in his victories, we
shall then be able to grapple with the hands of death; and though we know the
grave must be for a while the prison of our flesh we can by faith foresee the
opening of our prison doors, and the loosing of our bonds, and the day of our
last and full Redemption. It strengthens us exceedingly to look unto Jesus,
the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the throne of God.] When we consider what he endured against himself, we shall
not be weary: nor faint in our minds, Heb. 12.2, 3.

DIRECTION III.
LIve also by faith on the Heavenly Gl^ry. As one eye of faith must be on an
humbled crucified Christ, so must the other be on heaven, on a glorified
Christ, and on the glory and everlasting Love of God, which we shall there
en^oy. This is it that conquereth the fears of death, when we believe that we
shall pass through it into everlasting life. If a man for health will take the
most ungrateful potion, (the bitterness being short, and the benefit long;)
and if he will suffer the Surgeon to let out his blood, and in case of
necessity to out off a member; how light should we make of death, that have the
assured hopes of glory to encourage us! what door so straight that we would not
pass through if we could, to our dearest friend! What way so ^owl that we would
not travail, to our beloved home? And shall death seem intolerable to us, that
lets in our souls to Christ? Well might Paul say [To die is gain,] Phil.
1.21. When we gain deliverance from all those sins that did here beset us, and
all those sorrows that sin had bred: We gain the accomplishment of our desires,
and the end of our faith, the salvati^n of our souls: We gain the Crown that
fades not away; a place before the Throne of Christ, in the Temple of God, in
the City of God, the New Jerusalem; to eat of the hidden Manna, and of the Tree
of life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, Rev. 2. and 3. We gain
the place prepared for us by Christ, in his Fathers house, John 14.1, 2. For we
shall be with him where he is, that we may behold his glory, John 17.24. We
shall gain the sight of the glory of God, and the feeling of his most precious
love, and the fullness of joy that is in his presence, and the everlasting
pleasures at his right hand, Psalm. 16.11. And shall we think much to die for
such a gain? we will put off our clothes, and welcome sleep, which is the Image
of death, that our bodies may have rest, and refuse not thus to die every
night, that we may rise more refreshed for our employments in the morning. And
shall we stick at the uncloathing of our souls, in order to their everlasting
Rest? Set but the eye of faith to the Prospective of the promise, and take a
serious frequent view of the promised Land, and this if any thing will make
death more welcome, then Physic to the sick, then uncloathing to a beggar,
that puts on new or better clothes. Shall a poor man cheerfully ply his labor
all day in hope of a little wages at night; and shall not a believer cheerfully
yie^d to death, in hope of everlasting glory? so far as heaven is foundly
be^ieved, and our conversations, and hearts are there, the fears of Death will
be assuaged, and nothing else will well assuage them.

DIRECTION. IV.
MOreover, if you will conquer the enmity of death, do all that you can to
increase and exercise the love of God in you. For love will so incline you to
the blessed object of it, that Death will not be able to keep down the flame.
Were God set as a seal upon our hearts, we should find that Love is as strong
as death, and the coals thereof are coals of fire, and the flame is vehement:
many waters cannot quench it, nor can the fl^ods drown it, Cant. 8.6, 7. If
carnal Love have made the amorous to choose death that they might passionately
express it, especially when they have heard of the death of their beloved; and
if natural fortitude and love to their Country, have made many valient men,
though Heathens, to contemn death, and readily lay down their lives; and if the
love of fame and vain glory in a surviving name, have caused many to die
through pride: how much more will the powerful love of God, put on the soul to
leave this flesh, and pass through death, that we may see his face, and fully
enjoy the object of our love? So much as you love God, so much will you be
above the terrors of the grave, and pass through death for the enjoyment of
your beloved. Perf^ct Love casts out fear: and h^ ^h^t fears is not made
perfect in l^ve: in death and judgment, we shall have boldness, if our love be
perfect, 1 John 4.17, 18. This makeeth the Martyrs cheerfully lay down their
lives for Christ; and love is glad of so precious an opportunity for its
exercise and manifestation. Love is a restless working thing, that will give
you no rest, till your desires are attained, and you be with God. Nothing is so
valiant as Love! It rejoices when it meets with difficulties which it may
encounter for the sake of our beloved! It contemns dangers: It glories in
sufferings: Though it be humble, and lays by all thoughts of merit, yet it
rejoices in sufferings for Christ, and glories in the Cross, and in the
participation of his sufferings, and in the honorable wounds and scars* which
we receive for him that died for us.

DIRECTION. V.
TO overcome the terrors and enmity of death, it is necessary that we keep the
Conscience clear from the guilt of wilful sin, and of impenitency. If it may
be, see that you wound it not; If you have wounded it, presently seek a cure:
and live not in a wounded state. The face of death will waken conscience, and
cause it to speak much louder then it did in health and in prosperity: And then
sin will seem another thing, and wrath more terrible then it did in your
security. Conscience will do much to make your burden light or heavy. If
Conscience groundedly speak peace, and all be sound and well at home, death
will be less terrible, the heart being fortified against its enmity. But to
have a pained body, and a pained soul, a dying body, and a scorched Conscience
that is afraid of everlasting death, this is a terrible case indeed. Speedily
therefore get rid of sin, and get your Consciences thoroughly cleansed, by sound
repentance and the blood of Christ: For so much sin as you bring to your
deathbed, so much bitterness will there be in death. Away then with that sin
that Conscience tells you of, and touch the forbidden fruit (...) more, and
kindle not the spar^s of Hell in your souls, to make the sting of death more
venomous. As it will quiet a believing soul through Christ, when he can say
with Hezekiah, Isa, 38.3. Remember now O Lord I beseech thee, how I have walked
before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight:] and it will be our rejoicing if we have the testimony of
our Consciences, that in simplicity and godly sincerity we have had our
conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1.12. So will it be most terrible to die in
the fears of unpardoned sin, and to have Conscience scourging us with the
remembrance of our folly, when God is afflicting us, and we have need of a well
composed mind, to bear the troubles of our flesh. A little from without is
grievous, when any thing is amiss within: Get home therefore to Christ without
delay, and cease not till you have peace in him, that death may find your
consciences whole.

DIRECTION VI.
REdeeming time, is another means to prevent the hurtful fears of death. When
we foreknow that it will shortly end our time, let us make the best of time
while we have it. And then when we find that our work is done, and that we did
not loyter nor lose the time that God vouchsafed us, the end of it will be less
grievous to us. A man that studieth his duty, and spares for no cost or pains,
and is as loath to lose an hours time, as a covetous man is to lose an hundred
pound, will look back on his life, and look before him to his death, with
greater peace and less perplexity, then another man. But the thoughts of death
must needs be terrible, to a man that has trifled away his life, and been an
unthrift of his time. To think when you must die, that now you are at your last
day or hour, and withal to think, how many hours you vainly lost, and that you
knew not the worth of time till it was gone, will make death more bitter then
now you can imagine. What else is Death but the ending of our Time? and what
can be more necessary to a comfortable end, then faithfully to use it while we
have it?

DIRECTION VII.
ANother help against the Enmity of Death, is the Crucifying of the flesh, with
its affections and lusts: and the conquest of the world by the life of faith,
and crucifying it by the Cross of Christ; and dying daily by the patient
suffering of the Cross our selves. When we are loose from all things under the
Sun, and there is nothing that entangleth our affections on earth, a great part
of the difficulty is then removed. But death will tear the heart that is glued
to any thing in this world. Possess therefore as if you possessed not, and
rejoice as if you rejoiced not, and use the world as not abusing it: for the
fashion of this world does pass away, I Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. It is much for the
sake of our flesh that must perish, that death does seem so bitter to us: If
therefore we can thoroughly sudue the flesh, and live above its pleasure and
desires, we shall the more esily bear its dissolution. Shut up your senses then
a little more, and let your hearts grow stranger to this world; and if you have
known any persons, relations, accomodations after the flesh, from henceforth
know them so no more. How terrible is death to an earthly-minded man that had
neglected his soul for a treasure here, which must then be dissipated in a
moment? How easy is death to a heavenly-mind, that is thoroughly weaned from
this world, and takes it but for his pilgrimage or passage unto life, and has
made it the business of his days, to lay up for himself a treasure in heaven?
He that has unfeignedly made heaven his end in the course of his life, will
most readily pass to it on the hardest terms: For every man is willing to
attain his end.

DIRECTION VIII.
IT will much help us against the Enmity of death, to be duly conformed to the
Image of God, in the hatred of sin, and love of holiness, and in special in the
point of Justice. When we hate sin thoroughly, and find it so incorporated into
our flesh, that they must live and die together, it will make death the more
easy to us* because it will be the death of sin, even of that sin which we
most hate, and that God hates, and that has cost us so dear as it has done.
When we are in love with holiness, and know that we shall never be perfect in
it, till after death; it will make death the more welcome, as the passage to
our desired life. When the Justice, even the castigatory and vindictive Justice
of God, is more amiable in our eyes, and we are not blinded by self-love, to
judge of God and of his ways, according to the interest of our flesh, we shall
then consent to his dissolving stroke, and see that the bitterness of death
proceeds from that which is good in God, though from that which is evil in
our selves. Doubtless as Justice is one of the blessed Attributes of God, so
should it be amiable to man, there being nothing in God but what is lovely. It
is the prevalency of self-love that makes men so insensible of the excellency
of Divine Justice, while they speak so respectfully of his mercy. So far as men
are carnal and selfish, they cannot love that by which they smart, or of which
they are in danger. But the soul that is got above it self, and is united unto
God in Christ, and has that Image of God, which contains the impress and
effect of all his Attributes, has such an habit of impartial justice in
himself, and such a hatred of sin, and such a desire that the honor of God
should be vindicateed and maintained, and such an approbation of the Justice of
God, that he can the more easily consent or submit to the dissolving stroke of
death: He hates his own sin, and loatheth himself for all his abominations,
and is possessed with that Justice that provokes him to self-revenge in an
ordinate sort, and therefore does love and honor that Justice that inflicteth
on him the penalty of death; (Especially since Mercy has made it a useful
Castigation.) As some penitent malefactors have been so sensible of their
crimes, that they have not deprecated death, but consented to it as a needful
work of Justice, (as its written of the penitent Murderer lately hanged at
London.) So Holiness does contain such a hatred of our own sins, and such
impartial Justice on Gods behalf; that it will cause us to subscribe to the
righteousness of his sentence, and the more quietly to yield to the stroke of
death.

DIRECTION IX.
IT will somewhat abate the fears of Death, to consider the Restlesness and
troubles of this life, and the manifold evils that end at death. And because
this Consideration is little available with men in prosperity, it pleases God
to exercise us with adversity, that when we find there is no hope of Rest on
earth, we may look after it where it is, and venture on death by the impulse of
necessity. Here we are continually burdened with our selves, annoyed by our
corruptions, and pained by the diseases of our souls, or endangered most when
pained least. And would we be thus still? We live in the continual smart of the
fruit of our own folly, and the hurts that we catch by our careless or
inconsiderate walking, like children that often fall and cry; and would we
still live such a life as this? The weakness of our faith, the darkness of our
minds, the distance and strangeness of our souls to God, are a continual
languishing and trouble to our hearts. How grievous is it to us that we can
love him no more, nor be more assured of his love to us? that we find
continually so much of the creature, and so little of God upon our hearts? that
carnal affections are so easily kindled in us, and the Love of God will scarce
be kept in any life, by the richest mercies, the most powerful means, and by
our greatest diligence? O what a death is it to our hearts, that so many odious
temptations should have such free access, such ready entertainment, such small
resistance, and so great success? that such horrid thoughts of unbelief should
look into our minds, and stay so long, and be so familiar with us? that the
blessed mysteries of the Gospel, and the state of separated souls, and the
happiness of the life to come, are known so slightly, and believ^d so weakly
and imperfectly, and meet with so many carnal questionings and doubts? that
when we should be solacing our souls in the fore-thoughts of heaven, we look
toward it with such strangeness and amazement, as if we staggered at the
promise of God through unbelief; and there is so much Atheism in our
Affections, God being almost as no God to them sometime, and Heaven almost as
no Heaven to them, that it shows there is too much in our understandings. O
what a death is it to our minds, that when we should live in the Love of
Infinite Goodness, we find such a remnant of carnal enmity, and God has such
resistance, and so narrow, so sh^^^, so cold, so unkind entertainment in those
hearts that were made to love him, and that should know and own no love but
his? What a bondage is it, that our souls are so entangled with the creatures?
and so detained from the love of God? and that we draggle on this earth, and
can reach no higher, and the delightful Communion with God, and a Conversation
in Heaven, are things that we have so small experience of? Alas, that we that
are made for God, and should live to him, and be still upon his work, and know
no other, should be so byased by the flesh, and captivated by self-love, and
lost at home, that our affections and intentions do hardly get above our
selves, but there we are too prone to terminate them all; and lose our God,
even in a seeming Religiousness, while we will be Gods to our selves! How
grievous is it, that such wonders and glorious appearances of God, as are
contained in the incarnation, life and death of Christ, and in all the parts of
the work of our Redemption, should no more affect us then they do, nor take up
our souls in more thankful admiration, nor ravish us into higher joys! Alas,
that Heaven commands our souls no more from earth! that such an infinite glory
is so near us, and we enjoy so little of it, and have no more savor of it upon
our souls! That in the hands of God, and before his face we do no more regard
him! That the great and wonderful matters of our faith, do so little affect
us, that we are tempted thereby to question the sincerity of our faith, if not
the reality of the things believed: and that so little of these great and
wondrous things appears in our lives, that we tempt the world, to think our
faith is but a fancy. Is not all this grievous to an honest heart? and should
we not be so far weary of such a life as this, as to be willing to depart and
be with Christ?

If it would so much rejoice a gracious soul, to have a stronger faith, a more
lively hope, a more tender conscience, a more humble self-abhorring heart, to
be more fervent in prayer, more resolute against temptations, and more
successfully to fight against them; with what desire and joy then should we
look toward Heaven, where we shall be above our strongest faith and hope, and
have no more need of the healing graces, or the healing Ordinances, nor be put
upon self-afflicting work, nor troubled with the temptations, nor terrified by
the face of any enemy.

Now if we will vigorously appear for God, against a sinful generation, how
many will appear against us? how bitterly will they reproach us? how falsely
will they slander us, and say all manner of evil against us? and it is well if
we escape the violence of their hands! and what should be our joy in all these
sufferings, but that Great is our reward in heaven, Mat. 11, 12.

Alas, how we are continually here annoyed, by the presence, and the motions,
and the succ^ss of sin in our selves and others! It dwells in us night and
day; we cannot get it stay behind, no not when we address our selves to God,
not in our public worship, or our secret prayers: not for the space of one
Lords Day, or one Sermon, or one Sacrament, in ordinary or extraordinary duty.
O what a blessed day and duty would it be, in which we could leave our sin
behind us, and converse with God in spotless innocence, and worship and adore
him without the darkness, and strangeness and unbelief, and dullness, and
doubtings, and distractions, that are now our daily, miseries? Can we have
grace and not be weary of these corruptions? Can we have life, and not be
pained with these diseases? And can we live in daily pain and weariness, and
not be willing of release? Is there a gracious soul, that groaneth not under
the burden of these miseries? yea, in every prayer, what do we else but confess
them, and lament them, and groan for help, and for deliverance? And yet shall
we fear our day of freedom, and be loath that death should bring us news, that
our prayers are heard, and our groans have reached up to heaven and that the
bonds of flesh and sin shall be dissolved, and we shall have need to watch, and
strive, and fear, and complain, and sigh, and weep no more? Shall the face of
death discourage us from desiring such a bessed day? When we have so full
assurance, that at last this enemy also shall be destroyed? The Lord heal and
pardon the Hypocrisy of our complaints, together with the unbelief and
cowardliness of our souls! Do we speak so much, and hear so much, and seem to
do so much against sin, and yet had we rather keep it still, then be stripped of
it, together with the rags of our mortality? and yet had we rather dwell with
sin, in tempting, troubling, corruptible flesh, then lay them by, and dwell
with Christ? O Lord how lamentably have we lost our wisdom, and drowned our
minds in flesh and folly, by forsaking thee our light and life! How come our
reasonable souls to be so bewitched, as after all our convictions, complaints
and prayers, to be still more willing of our sickness then of the remedy, and
more afraid of this bitter Cup, then of the poison that lodges in our bowels,
which it would expel! and that after all the labor we have us^d, we had yet
rather dwell with our greatest enemy, then by a less to be transmitted to our
dearest friend! and had rather continue in a troublesome, weary, restless life,
then by the sleep of death to pass to Rest.

And this sin in others also is our trouble, though not so much as in our
selves. It makes those our bitter enemies, whose good we most desire and
endeavor, and causes the unthankful world to requite us with malicious
usage, for telling them the ungrateful truth, and seeking their salvation. it
makes our friends to be but half-friends; and some of them too like our
enemies. It puts a sting into the sweetest friendship, and mixeth smart with
all our pleasures; It works us grief from precious mercies; and abateth the
comfort of our near Relations; So that our smart by the pricks, is often
greater then our pleasure in the sweetness of the Rose. No friend is so
smoothed, and squared to the temper and interest of another, but that some in
equality and unevenness does remain, which makes the closure to be less near
and steadfast. Even family relations, are usually so imperfectly jointed and
cemented, that when the winds of trial are any thing high, they shake the
frame; and though they are but low, they find an entrance, and cause such a
coldness of affections, as is contrary to the nature and duty of the relations.
Either a contrariety of opinions, or of natural temperature and humors, or
else of the dispositions of the mind; Sometime cross interests, and sometime
passions and cross words, do cause such discontents and sowrness, such frowns
or jealousies, or distances, that our nearest friends are but as sackloth on
our skins, and as a shoo too strait for us, or as a garment that is unmeet,
which pinch and trouble us in their use, and those that should be to us as the
Apple of our eyes, are as the dust or smoke to them, that vex or blind them.
And the more we Love them, the more it greiveth us to be crossed in our love.
There is scarce any friend so wise, so good, so suitable to us, or so near,
that we can always please. And the displeasure of a friend is as gravel in
our shoos, or as Nettles in our bed, oft-times more grievous then the malice of
an enemy. There is no such doing as this in heaven: because there is no such
guest as sin. We shall love each other far more then we do here; and yet that
Love shall never be inordinate, nor in the least divert our love from God, but
every Saint and Angel in the Society, shall be loved with most chaste and pure
affections, in a perfect subordination to the love of God; and so as that God
himself in them, shall be the chiefest object of that love. It is there that
our friends being freed from all their imperfections, do neither tempt us to a
carnal Love, nor have any thing in them to discourage the love that is
spiritual and pure. We have here our passionate friends, our self-conceited
friends, our unkind, unthankful selfish friends; our mutable and unfaithful
friends; our contentious friends that are like to enemies: and who have used us
more hardly then our friends? But when we come to God, we shall have friends
that are like God, that are wholly good, and are participatively turned into
Love; and having left behind them all that was unclean and noisome, and
troublesome to themselves, they have also cast off all that could be
troublesome to us. Our love will be there without suspicions, without
interruptions, unkindnesses and discontents, without disappointments,
frustrations and dissatisfactions: For God himself will fully satisfy us; and
we shall love his goodness and glory in his Saints, as well as immediately in
himself. Our friends are now lost at the turning of a straw: the change of
their interest, their company, their opinions, the slanders of back-biters, and
mis-representations of malicious men, can cool their Love, and kill their
friendship. But Heaven is a place of constant Love: The Love of Saints, as all
things else, is there eternal: And yet it decline^h not with age. It is a world
of Love that we are hasting to: It is a life of love that we must there live,
and a work of love, and perfect love that we must be there employed in for
ever. If here we have a pure, a dear, a faithful friend, that is without
false-heartedness and deceit, that loves us as his own soul, how quickly is he
snatched away by death? and leaves us melted into tears, and mourning over his
earthly relicts, and looking upward with grieved hearts, as the Disciples did
after their ascending Lord, Acts 1. 9, 10, 11. We are left almost as lifeless
by such friends, as the body is left by the departed soul: We have nothing but
grief to tell us that we live, and that our souls are not departed with them:
we are left in greater lamentation, then if we had never known a faithful
friend. And alas, how quickly are they gone, when once God sees them ripe for
heaven? when Droans and Dullards live much longer. If we see a Saint that's
clear of judgment, and low in humility, and naked-hearted in sincerity, and
that abounds in love to God and man, that's faithful and constant to their
friend, and is above the pride and vanities of this world, and does converse by
a life of faith above, and is useful and exemplary in their generation; alas
how soon are they snacht away! and we are left in our temptations, repining and
murmuring at God, as Jonah, when his gourd was withered, as if the Lord had
destinated this world to be the dwelling of unfaithful, worthless men, and
envied us the presence of one eminent Saint, one faithful friend, and one that
(as Moses when he had talked with God) has a face that shines with the
reflected rays of the heavenly glory: when inde^d it is because this world is
unworthy of them, ( Heb. 11.38.) not knowing their worth, nor how to use them,
nor how to make use of them for their good: and because when they are ripe and
mellow for eternity, it is fit that God be served before us, and that Heaven
have the best, and that be left on earth that is earthly: Must Heaven be
deprived of its inhabitants? Must a Saint that is ripe be kept from Christ, and
so long kept from his inheritance, from the company of Angels, and the face of
God, and all lest we should be displeased, and grudge at God for glorifying
those, whom he destinated to glory before the foundations of the world; and
whom he purchased and prepared for Glory? Must there a place be empty, and a
voice be wanting in the Heavenly Chore, lest we should miss our friends on
earth? Are we not hasting after them at the heels, and do we not hope to live
with them for ever? and shall we grudge that they are gone a day, or week, or
year before us? O foolish unbelieving souls! We mourn for them that are past
mourning: and lament for our friends that are gone to Rest, when we are left
our selves in a vexatious, restless, howling wilderness! as if it were better
to be here! we mourn and weep for the souls that are triumphing in their
Masters joy! And yet we say, we believe, and hope, and labor, and wait for the
same felicity ^ Shall the happiness of our friends be our sorrow and
lamentation? O did we but see these blessed souls, and where they are, and what
they are enjoying, and what they are doing, we should be ashamed to mourn thus
for their change! Do you think they would wish themselves again on earth? or
would they take it kindly of you, if you could bring them down again into this
world, though it were to reign in wealth and honor? O how would they disdain
or abhor the motion, unless the commanding will of God did make it a part of
their obedience! And shall we grieve that they are not here, when to be here,
would be their grief?

But thus our lives are filled with griefs. Thus smiles and frowns, desires and
denyals, hopes and frustrations, endeavors and disappointments, do make a
quotidian ague of our lives. The persons and the things we love, do contribute
to our sorrows, as well as those we hate. If our friends are bad, or prove
unkind, they gall and grieve us while they live: If they excel in holiness,
fidelity and suitableness, the dart that kills them, deeply wounds us; and
the sweeter they were to us in their lives, the bitterer to us is their death*
We cannot keep a mercy, but sin is ready to take it from us, or else to mar
it, and turn it into Vinegar and Gall. And does not Death (accidentally)
befriend us, that puts an end to all these troubles, and lands us safe on the
Celestial shore, and puts us into the bosom of perpetual Rest, where all is
calm, and the storms and billows that tossed us here, shall fear or trouble us no
more? And thus Death shall make us some recompense at last, for the wrong it
did us; and the mortal blow shall hurt us less then did the dreadful
apparition of it in our fore-thoughts. Let not our fears then exceed the cause;
Though we fear the pangs and throws of travel, let us withal remember, that we
shall presently rejoice, and all the holy Angels with us, that a soul is born
into the world of glory: And Death shall gain us much more then it deprived us
of.

DIRECTION X.
THE last Direction that I shall give you, to conquer the enmity of Death, is
this: Give up your wills entirely to the will of God, as knowing that his will
is your beginning and your end, your safety, your felicity and rest, in which
you should gladly acquiesce. When you think of Death, remember who it is that
sends it; It is our Fathers messenger, and is sent but to execute his will. And
can there be any thing in the will of God, that his servants should
inordinately fear? Doubtless his Will is much safer and better for us then our
own. And if in general it were offered to our choice, Whether all particulars
of our lives should be disposed of by Gods will or by ours, common reason might
teach us to desire, to be rather in Gods hands then our own. The fulfilling of
his will, is the care and business of our lives: and therefore it should be a
support and satisfaction to us at our death, that it is but the fulfilling of
his will. His Justice and punishing will is good, though selfishness makes it
ungrateful to the offender. But his children that are dear to him, and taste
no evil but that which works for their good, have no cause to quarrel at his
will: Whatsoever our surest dearest friends would have us take, or do, or
suffer, we are ready to submit to, as being confident they will do nothing for
our hurt, (if they do but know what is for our good.) And shall we not more
boldly trust the will of God then of our dearest friend? He knows what he has
to do with us, and how he will dispose of us, and whether he will bring us; and
his interest in us is more then ours in our selves; and shall we then distrust
him, as if we had to do with an enemy, or one that were evil, and not with love
and infinite goodness? It is the will of God that must be the everlasting Rest,
the Heaven, the pleasure of our souls: And shall we now so fear it, and fly
from it, as if it were our ruin? Look which way you will through all the
world, your souls will never find repose, nor satisfying quietness and content
but in the will of God. Let us therefore commit our souls to him, as to a
faithful Creator; and desire unfeignedly the fulfilling of his will, and
believe that there is no ground of confidence more firm. Abraham may boldly
trust his Son, his only Son, on the will of God: And Christ himself when he was
to drink the bitter Cup, submits his own natural love of life to his
Fathers will, saying, Not my will, but thine be done. It is a most unworthy
abuse of God, that we could be quiet and rejoice, if our own wills, or our
dearest friends might dispose of our lives, and yet are distress^d when they
are at the dispose of the will God.

But perhaps you will say, It is the error of my own will that has procured my
Death: if it had been merely the fruit of the will of God, It could be easily
satisfied. Answ. Woe to us, if we had not ground of comfort against the errors
of our own wills. When our destruction is of our selves, our help is of God. So
much as is of our selves in it is evil: but so much as is of God is good. I do
not say that you should rest in your own wills, nor in your own ways, but in
the will and ways of God. The rod is good, though the fault that makes it
necessary, be bad. The Chastising will is good, though the sinning will be
evil: And it is good that is intended to us, and shall be performed in the
event.

Object. But how can we rest in the angry afflicting will of God, when it is
this that we must be humbled under: and it is the will of God that is the
condemnation of the wicked. Answ. The effect being from a twofold cause (the
sinning will of man, and the punishing will of God) is accordingly good as from
the latter, and so far should be loved and consented to by all; and evil as
from the former, and so may be abhorred: But to the Saints there is yet greater
Consolation: Though affliction is their grief, as it signifies Gods
displeasure, and causes the smart or destruction of the flesh; yet it is their
mercy, as as it proceeds from the Love of God, and prepares them for the
greatest mercies. And therefore seeing God never brings evil on them that
Love him, but what is preparatory to a^ far greater good, we may well take
comfort in our Death, that it is our Fathers will it should be so.

Use 8.
IF Death shall be conquered as the last enemy, from hence Christians may
receive exceeding consolation, as knowing that they have no enemy to their
happiness, but such as shall be conquered by Christ; sooner or later he will
overcome them all. Let faith therefore foresee the conquest in the conflict;
and let us not with too much despondency hang down our heads before any enemy
that we know shall be trodden down at last. We have burdensome corruptions,
that exercise our graces, and grieve the spirit, and wrong our Lord; but all
these shall be overcome. Though we have heard, and read, and prayed, and
meditated, and yet our sins remain alive, they shall be conquered at last. Our
Love, and Joy, and Praise shall be everlasting; but our ignorance, and
unbelief, and pride, and passion shall not be everlasting: Our Holiness shall
be perfected and have no end: but our sin shall be abolished, have an end. Our
friends shall abide with us for ever, and the holy love and communion of Saints
shall be perfected in heaven: But our enemies shall not abide with us for ever,
nor malice follow us to our, Rest. The wicked have no comforts but what will
have an end; and the forethought of that is sufficient to imbitter even the
present sweetness. And the godly have no sorrows but such as are of short
continuance: And me thinks the foresight of their end, should sweeten the
present bitter Cup, and make our sorrows next to none: We sit weeping now in
the midst of manifold afflictions: But we foresee the day when we shall weep no
more, but all tears shall be wiped from our eyes, by the tende^ hand of our
merciful Redeemer. We are now afraid of love it self, even of our dear and
blessed Father, lest he should hate us, or be angry with us for ever. But
heaven will banish all these fears, when the perfect fruition of the eternal
love has perfected our Love. Our doubtings and perplexities of mind are many
and grievous, but they will be but short. When we have full possession, we
shall be past our doubts. Our work is now to pour out. our grieved souls into
the bosom of some faithful friend; or ease our troubled minds by complaining
of our miseries to our faithful Pastors, that from them we may, have some
words of direction and consolation: But O how different a work is it that we
shall have in heaven? where no more complainings shall be heard from our
mouths, for no more sorrow shall possess our hearts; and we shall have no need
of men to comfort us; but shall have comfort as naturally from the face of God,
as we have light and heat in the summer from the Sun. When we all make one
celestial Chore, to sing the praises of the King of Saints, how unlike will
that melody be to the broken music of sighs, and groans, and lamentations,
which we now take to be almost our best! We are now glad when we can find but
words, and groans, and tears, to lament our sin and misery: But then our joy
shall know no sorrow, nor our voice any sad and mournfall tune. And may we not
bear a while the sorrows that shall have so good an end? We shall shortly have
laid by the hard, unprofitable, barren hearts, that are now our continual
burden and disease. Love not your corruptions, Christians; but yet be patient
under the unavoidable relicts that offend you; remembering that your conflict
will end in conquest, and your faith, and watchfulness, and patience will be
put to it but a little while. Who would not enter willingly into the fight,
when he may before hand be assured, that the field shall be cleared of every
enemy? All this must be ascribed to our dear Redeemer. Had not he wrought the
conquest, the enemies that vex us would have destroyed us, and the Serpent that
now does but bruise our heel, would have bruised our head: and the sorrows that
are wholesome, sanctified and short, would have been mortal, venomous and
endless.

What suffering then can be so great, in which a believer should not rejoice,
when he is before hand promised a gracious end? What though at the present it
be not joyous, but grievous (in it self?) We should bear it with patience, when
we know that at last it shall bring forth the peaceable fruits of righteousness
to all them that are exercised thereby, Heb. 12.11. If we should be always
abused, and always unthankfully and unkindly dealt with, or always under the
scorns, or slanders, or persecutions of unreasonable men, or always under our
poverty, and toilsome labors, o^ always under our pains and pining
sicknesses, we might then indeed dismiss our comforts: But when we know that it
will be but a little while, and that all will end in Rest and Joy, and that our
sorrows are but preparing for those Joys, even Reason it self is taught by
Faith, to bid us rejoice in all our tribulations, and to lift up the hands that
hang down, and the feeble knees, Heb. 12.12. We make nothing to endure a sudden
prick, that by blood-letting we may prevent a long disease. The short pain of
pulling out a tooth, is ordinarily endured, to prevent a longer. A woman does
bear the pains of her travail, because it is short, and tends to the bringing
of a child into the world. Who would not submit to any labor or toil for a
day, that he might win a life of plenty and delight by it? Who would not be
spit upon, and made the scorn of the world for a day, if he might have his will
for it as long as he lives on earth? And should we not then cheerfully submit
to our momentany afflictions, and the troubles of a few days, (which are
light, and mixed with a world of mercies,) when we know that they are working
for us, a far more exceeding eternal weight of glory? 2 Cor. 4.17. Our
clamorous and malicious enemies, our quarlelsome brethren, our peevish friends,
our burdensome corruptions and imperfections will shortly trouble us no more.
As our life is short, and but a dream and shadow, and therefore the pleasures
of this world are no better; so our troubles also will be no longer, and are
but sad dreams, and dark shadows, that quickly pass away: Our Lord that has
begun and gone on so far, will finish his victories, and the last enemy shall
shortly be destroyed.

And if the fearful doubting soul shall say, I know this is comfort to them
that are in Christ; but what is it to me, that know not whether I have any part
in him? I answer, 1. The foundation of God still stands sure: the Lord
knows his own, even when some of them know not that they are his own. He
knows his mark upon his sheep, when they know it not themselves. God doubts
not of his interest in thee, though thou doubt of thy interest in him: And thou
art faster in the arms of his Love, then by the arms of thy own faith: as the
child is surer in the Mothers arms, then by its holding of the Mother. And
moreover your doubts and fears are part of the evil that shall be removed, and
your bitterest sorrows that hence proceed, shall with the rest of the enemies
be destroyed.

2. But yet take heed that you unthankfully plead not against the mercies which
you have received, and be not friends to those doubts and fears which are your
enemies, and that you take not part with the enemy of your comforts. Why do
thou doubt (poor humbled soul) of thy interest in Christ, that must make the
conquest? Answer me but these few Questions from thy heart.

1. Did Christ ever show himself unkind to thee? or unwilling to receive thee,
and have mercy on thee? Did he ever give thee cause to think so poorly of his
Love and grace, as thy doubts do intimate thou do? Have thou not found him
kind when thou wast unkind, and that he thought on thee when thou did not
think on him? and will he now forget thee, and end in wrath that begun in Love?
He desired thee when thou did not desire him, and give thee all thy desires
after him: and will he now cross and deny the desires which he has caused? He
was found of thee, (or rather found thee) when thou soughtest not after him:
and can be reject thee now thou criest and call for his grace? O think not
hardly of his wondrous grace, till he give thee cause. Let thy sweet
experiences be remembered, to the shame of thy causeless doubts and fears; and
let him that has loved thee to the death, be thought on as he is, and not as
the unbelieving flesh would misrepresent him.

Quest. 2. If thou say that it is not his unkindness, but thy own that feeds
thy doubts; I further ask thee, Is he not kind to the unkind? especially when
they lament their own unkindness? Thou art not so unkind to him as thou wast in
thy unconverted state: and yet he then expressed his Love in thy conversion: He
then sought thee when thou wentest astray, and brought thee carefully home into
his Fold; and there he has kept thee ever since: And is he less kind, now when
thou art returned home? Do thou not know that all his children have their
frowardness, and are guilty of their unkindnesses to him? And yet he does not
therefore disown them, and turn them out of his family; but is tender of them
in their froward weakness, because they are his own? How dealt he with the
peevish prophet Jonah, that was [exceedingly displeased and very angry,] that
God spared Nineve, lest it should be a dishonor to his Prophecy; in so much
that he wished that he might die and not live: and after repined at the
withering of his gourd, and the scorching of the Sun that beat upon him? The
Lord does gently question with him [Dost thou well to be angry?] and after
hence convince him that the mercy which he valued to himself, he should not
envy to so many, Jonah 4. How dealt he with the Disciples, that fell asleep,
when they should have watched with Christ in the night of his great agony? He
does not tell them, [You are none of mine, because you could not watch with me
one hour;] but tenderly excuses that which they durst not excuse themselves,
[The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak,] When he was on the Cross,
though they all forsook him and fled, he was then so far from forsaking them,
that he was manifesting to admiration that exceeding love, that never would
forsake them; and know thou not poor complaining soul, that the kindness of
Christ overcomes all the unkindness of his children? and that his blood and
grace is sufficient to save thee, from greater sins then those that trouble
thee? If thou had no sin, what use had thou of a Savior? Will thy
Physician therefore cast thee off, because thou art sick?

Quest. 3. Yea has not Christ already subdued so many of thy enemies, as may
assure thee he will subdue the rest? and begun that life in thee, which may
assure thee of eternal life? Once thou wast a despiser of God and his holy
ways: but now it is far otherwise with thee? Has he not broken the heart of
thy pride and worldliness, and sensuality and made thee a new creature? and is
not this a pledge that he will do the rest? Tell me plainly, had thou rather
keep thy sin, or leave it? Had thou rather have liberty to commit it, or be
delivered from it? Do thou not hate it, and set thy self against it as thy
enemy? Art thou not delivered from the reign and tyranny of it, which thou wast
once under? And will not he perfect the conquest which he has begun? He that
has thus far delivered thee from sin, thy greatest enemy, will deliver thee
from all the sad effects of it. The blessed work of the Spirit in thy
Conversion, did deliver thee from the bondage of the Devil, from the power of
darkness, and translated thee into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; Then did thou
enter the holy warfare, under his banners that was never overcome, in the
victorious Army that shall shortly begin their everlasting triumph. The sin
which thou hate and longest to be delivered from, and art willing to use Gods
means against it, is the conquered enemy, which may assure thee of a full and
final conquest, supposing that thy hatred is against all known sin, and that
there is none so sweet or profitable in thy account. which thou had not far
rather leave then keep.

Quest. 4. Moreover art thou not truly willing to yield to all the terms of
grace? Thou have heard of the yoke and burden of Christ, and of the conditions
of the Gospel, on which peace is offered to the sinful world: and what Christ
requires of such as will be his Disciples. What says thy heart now to those
terms? Do they seem so hard and grievous to thee, that thou will venture thy
soul in thy state of sin, rather then accept of them? If this were so, thou
had yet no part in Christ indeed. But if there be nothing that Christ
requires of thee, that is not desirable in thy eyes: or which thou do not
stick at, so far as to turn away from him, and forsake him, and refuse his
Covenant and grace rather then submit to such conditions, thou art then in
Covenant with him, and the blessings of the Covenant belong to thee. Can thou
think that Christ has purchased, and offered, and promised that which he will
not give? Has he sent forth his Ministers, and commanded them to make the
motion in his name, and to invite and and compel men to come in, and to
beseech them to be reconciled to God, and that yet he is unwilling to accept
thee when thou do consent? If Christ had been unwilling, he had not so dearly
made the way, nor begun as a suitor to thy soul, nor so diligently sought thee
as he has done. If the blessings of the Covenant are thine, then Heaven is
thine, which is the chiefest blessing: And if they be not thine, it is not
because Christ is unwilling, but because thou art unwilling of his blessings on
his terms: Nothing can deprive thee of them but thy refusal: Know therefore
assuredly, whether thou do consent thy self to the terms of Christ, and
whether thou art truly willing that he be thy Savior; and if thy conscience
bear thee faithful witness, that it is so, dishonor not Christ then so far as
to question, whether he be willing, who has done so much to put it out of
doubt. The stop is at thy will, and not at his. If thou know that thou art
willing, thou may know that Christ and his benefits are thine. And if thou be
not willing, what makes thee wish, and groan, and pray, and labor in the use
of means? Is it not for Christ and his benefits that thy heart thus works,
and thou do all this? Fear not then if thy own hand be to the Covenant, it is
most certain that the hand of Christ is at it.

Quest. 5. Moreover, I would ask thee, Whether thou see not a beauty in
Holiness, which is the Image of Christ, and whether thy soul do not desire it
even in perfection? So that thou had rather, if thou had thy choice, be
more Holy, then more rich or honorable inm the world! If so, be assured that
it is not without Holiness, that thou choosest and preferrest Holiness? Had
thou not rather have more faith, and hope, and love to God, and patience and
contentment, and communion with Christ, then have more of the favor and
applause of many, or of the riches or pleasures of this world? If so, I would
know of thee, whether this be not from the spirit of Christ within thee? and be
not his Image it self upon thee? and the motions of the new and heavenly
nature, which is begotten in thee by the Holy Ghost? Undoubtedly it is. And the
spirit of Christ thus dwelling in thee, is the earnest of thy inheritance. Do
thou find the spirit of Christ thus working in thee, causing thee to love
Holiness, and hate all sin, and yet can thou doubt of thy part in Christ?

Quest. 6. Moreover can thou not truly say, that Christ's friends, so far as
thou know them, are thy friends, and that which is against him, thou take
as against thy self? If so, undoubtedly, thy enemies also are to him as his
enemies, and he will lay them at thy feet. Thy troubles are as his troubles,
and in all thy afflictions he is as careful of thy good, as if he himself were
thereby afflicted. Fear not those enemies that Christ takes as his own. It is
he that is engaged to overcome them.

And now when Conscience it self bears witness, that thus it is with thy
soul, and that thou would fain be what God would have thee be, and desire
nothing more then to be more like him, and nearer to him, and desire no kind
of life so much, as that in which thou may be most serviceable to him:
Consider what a wrong it is then to Christ, and to the honor of his Covenant
and grace, and to thy poor dejected soul, that thou should lie questioning
his love and thy part in him, and looking about for matter of accusation or
causeless suspicion against his spirit working in thee? and that thou should
cast away the joy of the Lord which is thy strength, and gratify the enemy of
thy peace? When sickness is upon thee, and death draws nigh, thou should then
with joy lift up thy head, because thy warfare is almost accomplished, and thy
Savior ready to deliver thee the Crown. Is this a time to fear and mourn, when
thou art entering into endless joy? Is it a time of lamentation, when thou art
almost most at thy journeyes end, and ready to see thy Saviors face, and to
take thy place in the Heavenl^ Jerusalem, amongst those millions of holy souls
that are gone before thee? Is it seemly for thee to lament thus at the door,
when they are feasted with such unconceivable joys within? Do thou know what
thy Brethren are now enjoying, and what the Heavenly Host are doing? how full
they are of God, and how they are ravished with his Light and Love? and can
thou think it seemly to be so unlike them, that art passing to them? I know
there is such difference between imperfection and perfection, and between earth
and heaven, that it justifies our moderate sorrows, and commands us to take
up infinitely short of their delights, till we are with them. But yet let there
not be too great a disproportion between the members of Jesus Christ. We have
the same Lord: and the same spirit; and all that is theirs in possession is in
right and title ours. They are our elder brethren, and being at age, have
possession of the inheritance: but we that are yet in the lap of the Church on
earth, our mother, and in the arms of our Fathers grace, are of the same
family, and have the same nature in our low degree. They were once on earth as
low as we: and we shall be shortly in heaven, as high as they: Am I now in
flesh, in fears, in griefs? so was David, and Paul, and all the Saints, awhile
ago: yea and Christ himself. Am I beset with sin, and compassed with
infirmities, and racked by my own distempered passion? so were the many Saints
now glorified, but the other day. Elias was a man subject (says James,) to
like passions as we are, Jam. 5.17. Am I maliced by dissenting adversaries? Do
they privily lay snares for me, and watch my halting, and seek advantage
against my name, and liberty and life? so did they by David, and many other now
with Christ? But now these enemies are overcome. Art thou under pains, and
consuming sicknesses? are thine eyes held waking, and does trouble and sorrow
waste thy spirit? does they flesh in thy heart fail thee, and thy friends prove
silly comforters to thee? So was it with those thousands that are now in
Heaven, where the night of calamities is past, and the just have dominion in
the morning, and glory has banished all their griefs, and joys have made them
forget their sorrows, unless as the remembrance of them does promote those
joys. Are thy friends lamenting thee, and grieved to see the signs of thy
approaching death? do they weep when they see thy pale face, and consumed body,
and when they hear the sighs and groans? Why thus it was once with the millions
that are now triumphing with their Lord? They lay in sickness, and underwent
the pains, and were lamented by their friends, as thou art now. Even Christ
himself was once in his agony, and some shakt the head at him, and other
pitied him, who should rather have wept for themselves, then for him: This is
but the passage from the womb of mortality, into the life of immortality, which
all the Saints have past before thee, that are now with Christ. Do thou fear
the dreadful: face of death? Must thy tender flesh be turned t^ rotness and
dust? and must thou lie in darkness till the Resurrection, and thy body remain
as the Common earth? And is not this the case of all those millions, whose
souls now see face of Christ? Did they not lie as thou do, and die as thou
must, and pass by death to the life which they have now attained? O then commit
thy soul to Christ, and be quiet and comforted in his care and love. Trust him
as the Midwife of thy departing soul, who will bring it safe into the light
and life, which thou art yet such a stranger to. But it is not strange to him,
though it be strange to thee.

What was it that rejoiced thee all thy life, in thy prayers, and sufferings,
and labors? was it not the hopes of heaven? And was Heaven the spring and
motive of thy obedience, and the comfort of thy life? and yet will thou pass
into it with heaviness? and shall thy approaches to it be thy sorrows? Did
thou pray for that which thou would not have? Have thou labored for it, and
denied thy self the pleasures of the world for it? and now art thou afraid to
enter in? Fear not poor soul! Thy Lord is there; Thy husband, and thy head, and
life is there. Thou have more there, a thousand fold more then thou have here.
Here thou must leave poor mourning friends, that languish in their own
infirmities, and troubled thee as well as comforted thee, while thou wast with
them, and that are hasting after thee, and will shortly overtake thee. But
there thou shall find the souls of all the blessed Saints, that have lived
since the Creation till this age: that are all uncloathed of the rags of their
mortality, and have laid by their frailties with their flesh, and are made up
of holiness, and prepared for joy, and will be suitable companions for thee in
thy joys. Wy should thou be afraid to go the way that all the Saints have
gone before thee? Where there is one on earth, how many are there in Heaven?
And one of them is worth many of us. Art thou better then Noah, and Abraham,
and David? then Peter and Paul and all the Saints? Or do thou not love their
names, and would thou not be with them? Art thou loath to leave thy friends
on earth? And have thou not far better and more in heaven? Why then art thou
not as loath to stay from them? Suppose that I, and such as I, were the friends
that thou art loath to leave: What if we had dyed long before thee? If it be our
company that thou love, thou should then be willing to die, that thou may
be with us. And if so, why then should thou not be more willing to die, and
be with Christ and all his holy ones, that are so much more excellent then we?
Would thou have our company? Remove then willingly to that place, where thou
shall have it to everlasting: and be not so loath to go from hence, where
neither thou nor we can stay. Had thou rather travail with us, then dwell
with us? and rather here suffer with us then reign in heaven with Christ and us?

O what a brutish thing is flesh? What an unreasonable thing is unbelief? Shall
we believe, and fly from the end of our belief? Shall we hope, and be loath to
enjoy our hopes? Shall we desire and pray, and be afraid of attaining our
desires, and lest our prayers should be heard? Shall we spend our lives in
labor and travail, and be afraid of coming to our journeys end? Do you love
l^fe, or do you not? If not, why are you afraid of death? If you do, why then
are you loath to pass into everlasting life? You know there is no hope of
immortality on earth: Hence you must pass whether you will or not, as all your
fathers have done before you, It is therefore in heaven or nowhere, that
endless life is to be had. If you can live here for ever, do. Hope for it, if
any have done so before you Go to some man of a thousand years old, and ask him
how he made shift to draw out his life so long: But if you know that man
walks here in a vain show, and that his life is as a shadow, a dream, a post,
and that all these things shall be d^ssolved, and the fashion of them passes
away, is it not more reasonable that we should set our hearts on the place
where there is hopes of our continuance, then where there is none ^^ and where
we must live for ever, then where we must be but for so short a time?

Alas, poor darkened, troubled soul! Is the presence of Christ less desirable in
thy eyes, then the presence of such sinful worms as we, whom thou art loath to
part with? Is it more grievous to thee to be absent from us, then from thy
Lord; from earth then from heaven; from sinners, then from blessed Saints: from
trouble and frailty, then from glory? Have thou any thing here that thou shall
want in Heaven, Alas, that we should thus draw back from Happiness, and follow
Christ so heavily and sadly into life! But all this is long of the enemies that
now molest our peace: Indwelling sin, and a flattering world, and a brutish
flesh, and interposing death, are our discouragments that drive us back. But
all these enemies shall shortly be overcome.

Fear not death then, let it do its worst. It can give thee but one deadly
gripe that shall kill it self, and prove thy life: as the Wasp that leaves its
sting behind, and can sting no more. It shall but snuff the Candle of thy life,
and make it shine brighter when it seems to be put out. It is but an
undressing, and a gentle Sleep. That which thou could not here attain, by all
our preaching, and all thy prayers, and cares, and pains, thou shall speedily
attain by the help of death. It is but the messenger of thy gracious Lord, and
calls thee to him, to the place that he has prepared.

Hearken not now to the great deceiver, that would draw thee to unbelief, and
cause thee to stagger at the promises of God, when thou have followed him so
far, and they are near to the full performance. Believe it as sure as thou
believe that the Sun does shine upon thee, that God cannot lie; he is no
deceiver: it was his mere love and bounty that caused him to make the promises,
when he had no need for himself to make them: and shall he be then unfaithful,
and not fulfill the promises which he has freely made? Believe it, faith is no
delusion: It may be folly to trust man; but it is worse then folly not to trust
God. Believe it, Heaven is not a shadow, nor the life of faith and holiness a
dream. These sensible things have least reality: These grosser substances, are
most drossy, delusory and base. God is a Spirit, who is the prime being, and
the cause of all created beings. And the Angels amd other celestial
inhabitants, that are nearest to him, are furthest from corporeity; and are
spirits likest unto God. The further any thing is from spirituality, the
further from that excellency and perfection, which the creatures nearest God
partake of. The earth is baser then the air and fire: The drossy flesh is baser
then the soul. And this lumpish, dirty visible world, is incomparably below
that Spiritual world, which we believe and wait for: And though thy conceptions
of spirits and the spiritual world, are low, and dark, and much unsatisfying;
remember still that thy head is there; and it belongs to him to know what
thou shall be, till thou art fit to know it, which will not be till thou art
fit to enjoy it. Be satisfied that thy Father is in Heaven, and that thy Lord
is there, and that the Spirit that has been so long at work within thee,
preparing thee for it, dwells there: And let it suffice thee that Christ
knows what he will do with thee, and how he wilt employ thee to all eternity.
And thou shall very shortly see his face, and in his light thou shall b^hold
that light that shall fully satisfy thee, and shame all thy present doubts and
fears, and if there were shame in heaven, would shame thee for them.

Use 9.
FROM the Enmity of Death, and the necessity of a Conquest, we may see what a
wonderful mercy the Resurrection of Christ himself was to the Church, and what
use we should make of it for the strengthening of our faith. It was not only
impossible to man to conquer death by his own strength, and therefore it must
be conquered by Christ; but it was also beyond our power to believe it, that
ever the dead should rise to life, if Christ had not risen as the first fruits,
and convinced man, by eyesight, or certain testimony, that the thing is
possible and already done. But now what a pillar is here for faith? What a word
of Hope and Joy is this, that [ Christ is risen?] With this we will answer a
thousand Cavils of the tempter, and stop the mouth of the enemies of our faith,
and profligate our infidelity. As unlikely as it seems to flesh and blood,
shall we ever doubt whether we shall rise again, when the Lord came down in
flesh among us, that he might die and rise again himself, to show us as to our
faces that we shall rise? This is the very Gospel which we preach, and by which
we must be saved; that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures,
and was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the
Scriptures; and that he was seem of Cephas, then of the twelve, and after that
he was seen of above five hundred Brethren at once, of wh^m the greater part
remained alive, when Paul wrote this, who was the last that saw him, 1 Cor.
15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Read over this Chapter again and again, where our
Resurection is proved by the Resurrection of Christ.

No wonder therefore that the Chruch in all ages ever since the very day of
Christ's Resurrection, has kept the first day of the week as a holy festival,
in remembrance of it: Wherein though they commemorated the whole work of our
Redemption, yet was it from the Resurrection as the most glorious part, that
the spirit of Christ did choose the day, This has been the joyful day to the
Church this 1625. years, or thereabouts: in which the ancicient Christians
would assemble themselves together, saluting one another with this joyful
word, [The Lord is risen.] And this is the day that the Lord has blessed, with
the new birth and resurrection of millions of souls. So that it is most
probable that all the six days of the week have not begot half so many souls
for heaven, as this blessed day of the Lords Resurrection has done. Let
Infidels then despise it, that believe not Christ's Resurrection; but let it
still be the Churches joyful day. This was the Lords doing, and it is
marvelous in our eyes: This is the day which the Lord has made: we will be
glad and rejoyc^ there in, Psalm. 118.23, 24. In it, Let us sing unto the Lord;
let us make a joyful noise to the Rock of our salvation. Let us come before
his pres^nce with thanksgiving, and make a joyful noise to him with Psalms,
Psalm. 95.1, 2. Every day let us remember the Lords Resurrection: but on this
day let the joyful commemoration of it be our work.

We may see by the witness of the Apostles, and their frequent preaching the
Resurrection of Christ, as if it were the sum of all the Gospel, that this is
a point that faith must especially build and feed upon, and that we must make
the matter of our most frequent meditations* O what vigor it adds to our
faith, when we are encountered by the sight of death, and of a grave, to
remember seriously that [Christ is risen.] Did he take flesh purpose^y that he
might die and rise, and show us how he will raise his members? and will he
after all this break his promise, and leave us in the dust for ever? it cannot
be. Has he conquered death for himself alone, and not for us? Has he taken
our Nature into Heaven, to be there alone and will he not have all his members
with him? Remember then Christian, when thou look on thy grave, that Christ
was buried, and has made the grave a bed of rest, that shall give up her
trust, when his Trumpet sounds: And that his Resurrection is the pledge of
ours. Keep therefore thy rising and glorified Lord continually in the eye. If
Christ were not risen, our preaching were vain, and your faith were vain, and
all men were miserable, but we most miserable, that suffer so much for a life
which we had no ground to hope for, 1 Cor. 15.14, 17, 19. But now we have an
Argument that infidelity it self is ashamed to encounter with; that has been
the means of the conversion of the Nations unto Christ; by which we may put
even death it self to a defiance; as knowing it is now a conquered thing. If it
could have held Christ captive, it might also have held us. But he being Risen,
we shall surely rise. Write it therefore Christians upon your hearts; mention
it more in your conference for the encouragement of your faith; Write it on the
gravestones of your friends, that [CHRIST IS RISEN,] and that [BECAUSE HE
LIVES WE SHALL LIVE ALSO,] and that [OUR LIFE IS HID WITH CHRIST IN GOD]
though we are dead; and when he shall appear who is our Life, we shall also
appear with him in glory,] John 14.19. Col. 3.3, 4. Though we must be sown in
corruption, in weakness, and dishonor, we shall be raised in incorruption,
strength, and honor, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. While our souls behold the Lord in
glory, we may bear with the winter that befalls our flesh, till the spring of
Resurrection come. [ Knowing that he that raised up the Lord Jesus, shall also
raise us up by Jesus. -- For which cause we faint not; but though our outward
man perish, yet the inner man is renewed day by day, -- while we look not at
the things whic are seen, but at the things which are not seen: For the things
which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal, 2
Cor 4.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.] As we are risen with Christ to newness of life, so
well shall rise with him to glory.

Use 10.
LAstly, if Death be the last enemy to be destroyed at the Resurrection, we may
learn hence, how earnestly believers should long and pray for the second coming
of Christ, when this full and final conquest shall be made. Death shall do
much for us; but the Resurrection shall do more. Death sends the separated soul
to Christ: but at his coming, both soul and body shall be glorified. There is
somewhat in death that is penal, even to believers: but in the coming of
Christ, and their Resurrection, there is nothing but glorifying grace. Death is
the effect of sin, and of the first sentence passed upon sinners: but the
Resurrection of the just is the final destruction of the effects of sin. And
therefore though the fears of Death may perplex us, me thinks we should long
for the coming of Christ, there being nothing in that, but what tends to the
deliverance and glory of the Saints. Whether he will come before the general
Resurrection, and reign on earth a thousand years, which some expect, I shall
not presume to pass my determination. But sure I am, it is the work of faith,
and Character of his people to love his appearance, 2 Timothy 4.8 and to wait for
the Son of God from Heaven, whom be raised from the dead, even Jesus who
delivered us from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10. and to wait for the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.7. and t^ wait for the adoption, the
redemption of our bodies, with inward gr^anings, Romans 8.23. O therefore let us
pray more earnestly for the coming of our Lord! and that [the Lord would direct
our hearts into the love of God, and into the patient waiting for Christ,] 2
These. 3.5. O blessed day, when the glorious appearing of our Lord shall put
away all his servants shame, and shall communicate Glory to his members, even
to the bodies that had lain so long in dust, that to the eye of flesh there
seemed to be no hope! Though the Majesty and glory will cause our Reverence,
yet it will not be our terror, to the diminution of our joy. It is his enemies
that would not have him rule over them, whom he comes to destroy, Luke 19.27.
[ Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment
upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly
deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him, as Henoch the seventh from Noah
prophesied, Jud. 14.15. But the precious faith of the Saints, shall be found,
to praise, and honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.7.
When the chief Shepherd shall appear, we shall receive a crown of glory that
fades ^ot away, 1. Pet. 5.4. He that was once ^ffered to bear the sins of
many, (and n^w appears for us in the presence of God) shall unto them that
look for him appear the second time, without sin, to salvation.] Heb. 9.24, 28.
And when Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with
him in glory, Col. 3.4. The Lord shall then come to be glorified in his Saints,
and admired in all them that believe in that day, 2 These. 1.10. This is the day
that all believers should long, and hope, and wait for, as being the
accomplishment of all the work of their redemption, and all the desires and
endeavors of their souls. It is the hope of this day that animateth the holy
diligence of our lives, and makes us turn from the carelessness and sensuality
of the world: [For the grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared unto
all men; teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world: looking for that
blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of our great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ,] Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. The heavens and the earth that are now, are
kept in store by the word of God, reserved unto fire, against the day of
judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. And though the Lord seem to delay, he
is not slack of his promise (as some men count slackness:) for a day is with
him as a thousand years, and a thousand years but a^ a day. But the day of the
Lord will come as a Thief in the night, in the which the heavens shall pass
away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat: the
earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. Seeing then all
these things shall be diss^lved, what manner of persons ought we to be in all
holy conversation and godliness; looking for, and hasting unto the coming of
the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the
elements melt with fervent heat! But we according to his promise, look for new
heavens; and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness,] 2 Pet. 3.7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13.

Beza marvelleth at Tertullia^ for saying that the Christians in their holy
assemblies prayed pro mora finis ( Apologet. c. 39.) And so he might well
enough, if it were not that to Christians the Glory of God is dearer then their
own felicity, and the salvation of millions more precious then the mere
hastening of their own; and the glory of the Church more desirable then our
personal glory; and the hallowing of Gods name were not to be prayed for
before the coming of his Kingdom; and the Kingdom of grace must not necessarily
go before the Kingdom of glory. But as much as we long for the coming of our
Lord, we are content to wait till the Elect be gathered; and can pray that he
will delay it, till the Universal Body be made up, and all are called that
shall be glorified. But to our selves, that are brought out of Egypt into the
Wilderness, how desirable is the promised Land? When we think on our own
interest, we cry [Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly:] The sooner the better. Then
shall our eyes behold him, in whom we have believed: Not as he was beheld on
earth in his despised state; but as the glorious King of Saints, accompanied
with the Celestial Host, coming in flaming fire to render vengeance to the
rebellious, and Rest and Joy to believing souls, that waited for this day of
his appearance. Then faith and patience shall give up their work* and sight,
and fruition, and perfect love, shall everlastingly succeed them. The rage of
persecutors shall no more affright us: the folly of the multitude shall no more
annoy us: the falseness of our seeming selfish friends shall no more betray us:
the pride of self-conceited men shall no more distu^b us: the turbulency of men
distracted by ambition shall cast us no more into confusions. The Kingdom that
we shall possess shall not be liable to mutations, nor be tossed with pride and
faction as are these below. There is no monthly (or annual) change of
Governors and Laws, as is in Lunatic Commonwealths: but there will be the
same Lord and King, and the same Laws and Government, and the same Subjects and
obedience, without any mutinies, rebellions, or discontents, to all eternity.
The Church of which we shall then be members, shall not be divided into
parties, and factions, nor the members look strangely at each other, because of
difference of opinions, or distance of affections, as now we find it, to our
daily grief, in the militant Church. We shall then need no tedious debates to
reconcile us: Unity will be then quickly and easily procured. There will be no
falling out in the presence of our Lord. There will be none of that darkness,
uncharitableness, selfishness, or passion left, that now causes our
dissentions. When we have perfect Light, and perfect Love, the perfect Peace
will be easily attained, which here we labor for in vain. Now there is no
peace in Church or State, in Cities or Countries, in families, or scarce in our
own souls. But when the glorious King of peace has put all his enemies under
his feet, what then is left to make disturbance? Our enemies can injure us no
more, for it is then their portion to suffer for all their former injuries to
Christ and us: Our friends will not injure us (as here they do;) because their
corruption and weakness is put off, and the relicts of sin, that caused the
trouble, are left behind. O that is the sight that says prepares for, that is
the day, the blessed day, that all our days are spent in seeking, and waiting,
and praying for; then shall the glory of holiness appear, and the wisdom of the
Saints be justified by all, that now is justified by her children! Then it
shall be known, Whether faith or unbelief, whether a heavenly or earthly mind
and life, was the wiser and more justifiable course: then shall all the world
discern between the righteous and the wicked, between them that serve God, and
them that serve him not, Mal. 3.18. Then sin (that is now so obstinately
defended, and justified by such foolish cunning) shall never more find a tongue
to plead for it, or a Patron to defend it more. Then where is the man that will
stand forth and break a jest at godliness, or make a scorn of the holy
diligence of believers? How pale then will those faces look, that here were
wont to jear at piety* What terror will seize upon those hearts, that here were
wont to make themselves sport at the weaknesses of the upright servants of the
Lord? That is t^^ day that shall rectify all judgments, and cure the errors
and contemptuous thoughts of an holy life, which no persuasions now can cure;
that is the day that shall set all straight, that now seems crooked; and shall
satisfy us to the full, that God was just, even when he prospered his enemies,
and afflicted the souls that loved him* and walked in their integrity before
him. We shall then see that which shall fully satisfy us of the reason and
equity of all our sufferings, which here we underwent; we shall marvail no more
that God lets us weep, and groan, and pray, and turns away his face, and seems
not to regard us. We shall then find that all our groans were heard, and all
our tears and prayers did succeed, which we suspect^d had been lost. We shall
then find that a duty performed in sincerity, through all our lives, was never
lost; no nor a holy thought; nor a Cup of cold water that from holy love we
gave to a Disciple. We shall then see that our murmurings, and discontents, and
jealous unbelieving thoughts of God, which sickness, or poverty, or crosses did
occasion, were all injurious to the Lord, and the fruit of infirmity; and that
when we questioned his Love on such accounts, we knew not what we said. We
shall then see that Death, and grave, and Devils, were all but matter for the
glorifying of grace, and for the triumph of our Lord and us.

Up then my soul, and shake off thy unbelief and dullness; Look up, and long,
and meet thy Lord. The more thou art afraid of death, the more desire that
blessed day, when mortality shall be swallowed up of life, and the name of
death shall be terrible no more. Though death be thy enemy, there is nothing
but friendly in the coming of thy Lord. Though death dissolve thy nature, the
Resurrection shall restore it, and make thee full reparation with advantage.

How glad would I have been to have seen Christ, but with the Wise Men in the
Manger! or to have seen him disputing with the Doctors in his Childhood in the
Temple, or to have seen him do his Miracles, or heard him Preach; much more to
have seen him as the three Disciples, in his transfiguration; or to have seen
him after his resurrection, and when he ascended up to heaven. But how far is
all this below the sight that we shall have of him when he comes in glory! when
the brightness of his shining face shall make us think the Sun was darkness:
and the glory of his attendance shall make us think what a sordid thing, and
childish foolery was all the glory of this world! The face of Love shall be
then unvailed, and ravish us into the highest Love and Joy, that our natures
are capable of. Then doubt, and fear, and grieve if thou can! What then will thou think of all these disquieting distrustful thoughts that now so wrong thy
Lord and thee? If going into the Sanctuary, and foreseeing the end, can cure
our brutish misapprehensions of Gods providence, ( Psalm. 73.17.) how perfectly
will they be cured, when we see the glorious face o^ Christ, and behold the New
Jerusalem in its glory, and when we are numbered with the Saints that judge the
world? We shall never more be tempted then, to condemn the generation of the
just, nor to think it vain to serve the Lord, nor to envy the prosperity of the
wicked, nor to stagg^r at the promise through unbelief; nor to think that our
sickness, death and grave, were any signs of unkindness or unmercifulness in
God. We shall then be convinced that sight and flesh were unfit to censure the
ways of God, or to be our guides.

Hasten O Lord, this blessed day! Stay not till Faith have left the earth; and
infidelity, and impiety, and tyranny have conquered the rest of thine
inheritanc^! Stay not till selfish uncharitable pride has vanquished love and
self-denial, and planted its Colonies of Heresy, confusion and cruelty in thy
dominions: and Earth and Hell be turned into one. Stay not till the eyes of thy
servants fail, and their hearts and hopes do faint and languish with look^ng
and waiting for thy salvation. But if yet the day be not at hand, O keep up
Faith, and Hope, and Love, till the Sun of perfect Love arise, and Time has
prepared us for Eternity, and Grace for Glory.

FINIS.
Some imitable passages of the life of Elizabeth, late Wife of Mr. Joseph Baker.
THough I spoke so little as was next to n^thing, of our de^r deceased friend,
it was not because I w^nted ma^ter, or thought it unmeet: But I use it but
seldom, lest I raise expectations of the like, where I cannot conscionably
perform it. But he that has promised to honor those that serve and honor
him, (John 12.26. 1 Samuel 2.30.) and will come at l^st to be glorified in his
Saints, and admired in all them that do believe, (2 These. 1.10) I know, will
take it as a great and acceptable act of service, to proclaim the honor of his
grace, and to give his servants their due on earth, whose souls are glorified
with Christ in heaven; though Serpentine enmity will repine and play the
envious accuser.

It is not the history of the Life of this precious servant of the Lord which I
intend to give you: (for I was not many years acquainted with her:) but only
some passages, which either upon my certain knowledge, or her own Diurnall of
her course, or the most credible rest imony of her most intimate judicious
godly friends, I may boldly publish as true, and imitable in this untoward
distempered generation.

She was born November. 1634. in Southwark near London: the only child of Mr.
John Godeschalk, alias, Godscall. Her Father dying in her Childhood, she was
left an Orphane to the Chamber of London. Her Mother after married Mr. Isaac
Barton, with whom she had the benefit of Religious Education. But between
sixteen and seventeen years of age, by the serious reading of the Book called
The Saints Everlasting Rest, she was more thoroughly awakened, and brought to
set her heart o^ God, and to seek salvation with her chiefest care: From that
time forward she was a more const^nt, diligent, serious hearer of the ablest
Minist^rs in London* rising early, and going far to hear them on the
Week-dayes, waiting on God for his confirming grace in the use of those
Ordinanees, which empty unexperienced hypocrites are easily tempted to despise:
The Sermons which she constantly wrote, she diligently repeated at home for the
benefit of others; and every week read over some of those that she had heard
long before, that the fruit of them might be retained and renewed: it being not
novelty that she minded.

In the year 1654. being near one and twenty years of age, after seeking God,
and waiting for his resolving satisfying directions, she consented to be joined
in marriage to Mr. Joseph Baker, by the approbation of her nearest friends: God
having taken away her Mother the year before. With him she approved her self
indeed such a Wife as Paul (no Papist) describes as meet for a Bishop or
Pastor of the Church, 1 Timothy 3.11. [Even so must their Wives be grave, not
slanderers, sober, faithful in all things.] Some instances I shall give, for
the imitation of others.

1. She was very Exemplary in self-denial and humility: And having said this
much, what abundance have I comprehended? O what a beauty does self-denial and
humility put on souls! Nay what a treasure of everlasting consequence, do these
two words express? I shall give you a few of the discoveries. 1. It appeared in
her accompanying in London with the holiest, how mean soever, avoiding them
that were proud, and vain, and carnal: She desired most to be acquainted with
those that she perceived were best acquainted with God, neglecting the pomp and
vain glory of the world.

2. When she was called to a married state, though her portion and other
advantages invited persons of greater estates in the world, she chose rather to
marry a Minister of known integrity, that might be a near, and constant guide,
and stay and comfort to her, in the matters which she valued more then riches.
And she missed not of her expectations, for the few years that she lived with
him. Even in this age when the Serpent is hissing in every corner at faithful
Ministers, and they are contemned both by Profane and Heretical Malignants,
she preferred a mean life with such ^ one, for her spiritual safety and
solace, before the Grandeur of the world.

3. When some inhabitants of the City of Worcester were earnest with me to help
them to an able Minister, Mr. Baker then living in Kent had about an hundred
pound per annum: and when at my motion he was readily willing to take a great
charge in Worcester, upon a promise from two men to make the maintenance fifty
pounds a year by a voluntary Contribution, of the continuance of which he had
no security; his Wife was a promoter, and no discourager of his self-denial,
and never tempte^ him to l^^k after greater things. And afterward, when I was
afraid lest the smalness and uncertainty of the means, together with his
discour^gements from some of his people, might have occasioned his remove; and
have heard of richer places mentioned to him, as he still answ^red that he had
enough, and minded not removing without necessity; so was she ever of the same
mind, and still seconded and confirmed him in such resolutions, even to follow
Gods work while they had a competency of their own, and to mind no more.

4. Her very speech and behavior did so manifest meek^ess, and humility, that
in a little converse with her it might e^sily be discerned.

5. She thought nothing too mean for her, that bel^nged to her in her family
and r^lation, no employment, food, etc. saying often, that [What God had made
her duty, was not too low a work for her.] And indeed, when we kn^w ^nce that
it is a work that God sets us upon, it signifies much forgetfulness of him and
our selves, if we think it too base, or think our s^lves too good to stoop to
it.

6. No neighbor did seem too mean or poor for her familiar converse, if they
were but willing.

7. She had a true esteem, and cheerful love for the mean^st of her husbands
Relations, and much rejoiced in her comfort in his kindred, recording it among
her experienced mercies.

2. She was very constant and diligent in doing her part of family duties:
teaching all the inferiors of her family, and laboring to season them wi^h
principles of holiness, and admonishing them of their sin and danger: never
failing on the L^rds day at night to hear them read the Scriptures, and recite
their Catechisms, when public duty, and all other family duty was ended: and
in her Husbands absence praying with them. How much the imitation of such
examples would conduce to the sanctifying of families, is easy to be
apprehended?

3. In secret duty she was very constant, and lived much in those two great
soul-advancing works, Meditation and Prayer: in which she would not admit of
interruptions. This inward holy diligence was it that maintained spiritual
life within, which is the spring ^f outward acceptable works. When communion
with God, and daily labor upon our own hearts is laid a^ide, or negligently
and remisly followed, grace languisheth first within, and then unfruitfulness,
if not disorders and scandalls appear without.

4. Her Love to the Lord Jesus was evidenced by her great affection to his
Ordinances, and ways, and ser^ants: A very hearty Love she manifested to those
on whom the Image of God did appear, even the poorest and meanest, as well as
the rich or eminent in the world: Nor did a difference in lesser matters, or
any tolerable mistakes, alienate her affections from them.

5. She was a Christian of much plainness, simplicity and singleness of heart:
far from a subtle crafty dissembling frame, and also from loquacity or
ostentation. And the world was very low in her eyes, to which she was long
crucified, and on which she looked as a lifeles^ thing: Sensuality and
pampering the flesh, she much loathed: When she was invited to feasts, she
would often complain, that they occasioned a difficulty in maintaining a sense of
the presence of God, whose company in all her company she preferred.

6. She was a very careful esteemer and redeemer of her time: At home in her
family, the works of her general and particular calling took her up: When
necessary business and greater duties gave way, she was seldom without a Book
in her hand, or some edifying disc^urse in her mouth, if there were
opportunity. And abroad she was very weary of barren company that spent the
time in common chatt and dry discourses.

7. She used good company practically and profitably, making use of what she
heard for her own spiritual advantage. When I understood out of her Diary,
that she wrote down some of my familiar discourses, with serious application to
her self, it struck exceeding deep to my heart, how much I have sinned all my
days, (since I undertook the person of a Minister of Christ) by the slightness
and unprofitableness of my discourse; and how exceeding careful Ministers
should be of their words, and how deliberately, wisely and seriously they
should speak ab^ut the things of God, and how diligently they should take all
fit opportunities to that end, when we know not how silent ^earers are affected
with what we say: For ought we know there may be some that will write down what
we say in their Books, or hearts, or both: And God an conscience write down all.

8. In her course of Reading she was still laying in for use and practice. Her
course was, when she read the Scriptures, to gather out passages, and sort and
refer them to their several uses, as some that were fit subjects for her
Meditations: Some for encouragement to prayer, and other duties: Promises
suited to various conditions and wants: as her papers show.

And for other Books, she would meddle with none but the sound and practical,
and had no itch after the empty Books, which make ostentation of Novelty, and
which Opinionists are now so taken with; not did she like writing or preaching
in envy and strife. And of good Books, she chose to read but few, and those
very often over, that all might be well digested. Which is a course (for
pr^vate Christians) that tends to avoid luxuriancy, and make them sincere, and
solid, and established.

9 She had the great blessing of a tender conscience. She did not slightly pass
over small sins without penitent observation. Her Diary records her trouble,
when causelessly she had neglected any Ordinance; ^r was hindered by rain or
small occasions: or if she had overslept her self, and lost a morning-exercise
in London, or came to late, ^r if she were distracted in secret duty: And if
she mist of a Fast through misinformation and disappointments, and f^und not
her heart duly s^nsible of the loss, that also she recorded. So did she her
stirrings of anger, and her very angry look^; res^lving to take more heed
against them. Though all ought not to spend so much time in writing down their
failings, yet all should watch, and renew repentance.

10. She was very solicitous for the souls of her friends: As for instance, her
Brothers in Law; over whom she exercised a motherly care, instructing them, and
watching ^ver them, and telling them of misc^rria^es, and counselling them:
Causing them to keep a constant course of reading the holy Scriptures, and
meditating on it (as far as she could:) Causing them to learn many Chapters
without Book: and to read other good Books in season: E^rnestly praying for
them in particular: Much desiring one or both should be Ministers: And when her
Father-in-law appointed the eldest to go to France, she was much troubled for
fear of his miscarriage among strangers, especially those of the Romish Way.

11. She was a serious Mourner for the sins of the time and place she lived in.

12. In sum, for strict, close, watchful, holy walking with God, ^ven her
Hu^band professes that she was a p^ttern to him. As I hi^ted before, she kept
a daily account in writing, (which is now to be see^ from the beginning of the
year 1654.) especially of these particulars.

1. Of the frame of her heart in every days duty, in Meditation, Prayer,
Hearing, Reading, etc. whether lively, or dull, etc.

2. Of those sins which she h^d especially to repent of, and watch against.

3. Of her Resolutions and Promises, and how she kept them.

4. Of all special Providence to her self, Husband, Brothers, and others, and
the improvement of them. As at the death of her Son, who died with great sighs
and groans, she recorded her sense of the special nec^ssity of holy armor,
and great preparation for that encounter when her turn should come to be so
removed to the everlasting habitation.

5. Of her returns of prayer, what answers, and grant of them she found.

6. Of the state of her soul upon examination: how she found it, and what was
the issue of each examination; and in this it seems she was very exact and
punctual. In which though many times fears and doubtings did arise, yet has
she frequent records of the discovery of evidences, and comfortable assurance
of sincerity. Sometime when she has heard Sermons in London, that helped her
in her search: and sometime when she ^ad been reading writings that tended that
way, she records what evidences she found, and in what degree the discovery
was: If imperfect, resolving to take it up and follow the search further: And
if she had much joy, she received it with jealousy and expectation of some
humbling consequent. When any grace languished, she presently turned to some
apt remedy. A^ for instance, its one of her Notes, November. 1658. [I found
thoughts of Eternity slight and strange, and ordinary employments very
desirable: at which I read Mr. Bs. Crucifixion, and was awakened to
Mortification and Humiliation, etc.]

The last time that she had opportunity for this work, was two or t^ree days
before her delivery in Childbearing; where she finally recorded the
apprehensions she had both of her bodily and spiritual State, in these words,
[Drawing near the time of my delivery, I am fallen into such weakness, that my
life is in great hazard. I find some fears of death, but not very great,
hoping (through grace) I die in the Lord.] I only mention these hints, to show
the Method she used in her daily Accounts. To those Christians that have full
leisure this course is good: But I urge i^ not all, upon those that have so
great dutie^ to t^ke up that time* that they cannot spare so much to record
their ordinary passages; Such must remember what others record, and daily renew
re^entance for their daily failings, and record only the extraordinary,
observable, and more remarkable and memorable passages of their lives, lest
they lose time from works of greater moment. But this exc^llent work of
Watchfulness must be performed by all.

And I think it was a considerable expression of her true wisdom, and care of
her immortal soul, that when any extraordinary necessity required it, and she
found such doubts as of her self she was not ^ble to deal with, she would go to
some able experienced Minister, to open her case, and seek assistance (as she
did more then on^e to my dear and ancient friend, Mr. Cross, who in a full age
is since gone after her to Christ.) And therefore chose a Minister in Marriage,
that he might be a ready assistant in such cases of necessity, as well as a
continual help.

At last came that death to summon her soul away to Christ, for which she had
so seriously been preparing, and which she often called a dark entry to her
Fathers Palace. After the death of her children, when she seemed to be some
what repaired after her last delivery, a violent Convulsion suddenly surprised
her, which in a few days brought her to her end. Her understanding by the fits
being at last debilitated, she finding it somewhat hard to speak sensibly,
excused it, and said, [I shall ere long speak another language,] Which were the
last words which she spoke with a tongue of flesh, and lying speechless
eighteen hours after, she departed, August 17. 1659. Blessed are the dead that
die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea says the spirit, that they may rest from
their labors and their works do follow them.

Our turn is coming: Shortly we shall also lay by flesh: this is our day of
preparation: There is no preparing time but this. Did men but know the
difference between the death of the holy and the unholy, which does not appear
to fleshly eyes, how speedily would they turn? how seriously would they
meditate? how fervently would they pray? how carefully would they live? how
constantly, painfully and resolvedly would they labor? Did they well consider
the difference between dying prepared and unprepared, and of what difficulty
and yet everlasting consequence it is to die well; O then what manner of
persons would men be, in all manner of holy conversation and godliness? and all
their lives would then be a continued preparation for death; as all their life
is a hasting toward it.

And now I shall only desire you, for the right understanding of all that I
have here said, and to prevent the cavils of blinded malice, to observe these
three or four p^rticulars.

1. That though I knew so much ^f her as easily makes me believe the rest,
upon so sure a testimony, and saw her Diary; yet the most of this History of
her life, is the collection and observation of such faithful witness, as had
much better opportunity then I, to know the secrets of her soul and life.

2. That it is no wonder if many that knew her, perceived not all this by her,
that is here expressed: For that knowledge of our outward carriage at a
distance, will not tell our Neighbors what we do in our Closets, where God
has commanded us to shut our door upon us, that our Father which sees in
secret, may reward us openly. And many of the most humble and sincere servants
of the Lord are so afraid of hypocrisy, and hate ostentation, that their
Justification and Glory is only to be expected from the searcher of hearts,
(and a few of their more intimate acquaintance:) Though this was not the case
before us; the example described being more conspicuous.

3. That I overpass the large expressions of her charity, which you may hear
from the poor and her intimate acquaintance, as I have done; that I may not
grate upon the modesty of her surviving friends, who must participate in the
commendations.

4. That it is the benefit of the living that is my principal end; Scripture
it self is written much in History, that we may have matter of imitation before
our eyes.

5. If any say that here is no m^ntion of her faults, I answer, Though I had
acquaintance with her, I knew them not, nor ever heard from any other so much
as might enable me to accuse her, if I were her enemy. Yet I doubt not but she
was imperfect, and had faults, though unknown to me: The example of holi^ess I
have briefly proposed: They that would see examples of iniquity, may look
abroad in the world, and find enough: I need not be the accuser of the Saints
to furnish them. And I think if they enquire here of any thing ^etable, they
will be hard put to it to find eno^gh to cover the acc^sers shame.

6. It is the honor of Christ and grace in his members, more the^ the honor
of his servant that I seek.

7. And I would not speak that in commendation of the living, which I do of the
dead, who are out of the reach of all temptations, of being lifted up with
pride thereby: Unless it be such whose reputation the interest of Christ and
the Gospel commands me to vindicate.

8. Lastly, I am so far from lifting up one above the rest of the members of
Christ, by these commendations, and from abasing others whose names I mention
not, that I intend the honor of all in One, and think that in the substance I
describe all Saints, in describing one. I am not about a Popish work, of making
a wonder of a Saint, as of a Phaenix or some rare unusual thing. Saints with
them must b^ Canonized, and their names put in the Calendar: and yet their
blind malice tells the world, that there are no such things as Saints among us.
But I rejoice in the many that I have communion with, and the many that have
lately stepped before me into Heaven, and are safe there out of the reach of
malice, and of sin, and all the enemies of their peace; and have left me
mourning and yet rejoicing, fearing and yet hoping, and with some desires,
looking after them here behind: And the faster Christ calls away his chosen
ones, whose graces were amiable in mine eyes, the more willing he makes me to
follow them, and to leave this world of darkness, confusion, wickedness,
danger, vanity and vexation, and to meet these precious souls in Life, where we
shall rejoice that we are past this howling wilderness, and shall for ever be
with the Lord.

FINIS.
Baxters Treatise of DEATH.
A Catalogue of Books written and published by the same Author.
These next following are to be sold by Nevil Simmons Bookseller in
Kederminster.
1 True Christiantiy, or Christ's Absolute dominion, and man's necessary
self-resignation and Subjection, in two Assize Sermons preached at Worcester, in
12o.

2 A Sermon of Judgment preached at Paul's, before the Honorable Lord Major and
Aldermen of the City of London, December. 17. 1654. and now enlarged, in 12o.

3 Making light of Christ and Salvation too often the Issue of Gospel
Invitations, manifest in a Sermon preached at Lawrence Jury, in London, in 8o.

4 The Agreement of diverse Ministers of Christ in the County of Worcester for
Catechizing or personal Instructing all in their several Parishes that will
Consent thereunto; containing 1. The Articles of our Agreement. 2. An
Exhortation to the people to submit to this necessary work. 3. The Profession
of Faith and Catechism, in 8o.

5 Guildas Salvianus, The Reformed Pastor, showing the nature of the Pastoral
work, especially in private instruction and Catechizing, in 8o.

6 Certain Disputations of Right to Sacraments, and the True Nature of Visible
Christianity, in 4o.

7 Of Justification: four Disputations clearing and amicably defending the
Truth, against the unnecessary Oppositions of diverse Learned and Reverend
Brethren, in 4o.

8 A Treatise of Conversion, preached and now published for the use of those
that are strangers to a true Conversion, especially the grossly Ignorant and
Ungodly, in 4o.

9 One sheet for the Ministry against the Malignants of all sorts.

10 A Winding Sheet for Popery.

11 One sheet against the Quakers.

12 A second sheet for the Ministry, Justifying our Calling against Quakers,
Seekers, and Papists, and all that deny us to be the Ministers of Christ.

13 D^rections to Justices of Peace, especially in Corporations, to the
discharge of their duty to God; written at the request of a Magistrate, and
Published for the use of others that need it. An open street.

14 The Crucifying of the world, by the Cross of Christ: With a Preface to the
Nobles, Gentlemen, and all the Rich, directing them how they may be Richer, in
4o.

15 A Call to the Unconverted to Turn and Live, and accept of mercy, while
mercy may be had, as ever they would find mercy in the day of their extremity:
From the Living God: To be read in Families where any are unconverted, in 12o.

16 Of Saving Faith: That it is not only gradually, but specifically distinct
from all Common Faith.

The Agreement of Richard Baxter with that very Learned consenting Adversary,
that has maintained his Assertion by a pretended Confutation in the end of
Sergeant Shepherds Book of Sincerity and Hypocrisy: With the Reasons of his
Dissent in some passages that came in on the by, in 4o.

17 Directions and Persuasions to a sound conversion. For Prevention of that
Deceit and Damnation of Souls, and of those Scandals, Heresies, and desperate
Apostasies, that are the Consequents of a Counterfeit or Superficial Change, in
8o.

18 The Grotian Religion Discovered, At the invitation of Mr. Thomas Pierce in
his Vindication: With a Preface, vindicating the Synod of Dort from the
calumnies of the new Tilenus; and David, Peter, etc. and the Puritans, and
Sequestrations, etc. from the censures of Mr. Pierce, in 8o.

Confirmation and Restoration, the necessary means of Reformation, and
Reconcil^ation; for the Healing of the Corruptions and Divisions of the
Churches; Submissively, but earnestly tendered t^ the Consideration of the
Sovereign Powers, Magistrates, Ministers, and People, that they may awake, and
be up and doing in the Execution of so much as appears to be necessary, as
they are true to Christ, his Church and Gospel, and to their own and others
Souls, and to the Peace and Welfare of ^he Nations; and as they will answer the
neglect to Christ, at their Peril, in 8o.

19 Five Disputations of Church Government, in 4o.

20 A Key for Ca^holicks, To open the Juggling of the Jesuits, and satisfy all
that are but truly willing to understand, whether the Cause of the Roman or
Reformed Churches be of God; and to leave the Reader utterly unexcusable that
after this will be a Papist.

The first Part, Containing some Arguments by which the meanest may see the
Vanity of Popery; and 40. Detections of their Fraud; with Directions, and
Materials sufficient for the Confutation of their Voluminous Deceits:
particularly refelling B^verius, Richlieu, H. T. Manual, some Manuscripts, etc.
with some Proposals for a (hopeless) Peace.

The Second Part shows (especially against the French, and Grotians) that the
Catholic Church is not United in any merely Humane Head, either Pope or
Council, in 4o.

21 A Treatise of Self-denia^, in 4o.

These Books following are to be sold by Thomas Underhill, at the Bible and
Anchor in Paul's Churchyard, and by Francis Tyton, at the three Daggers in
Fleetstreet.
22 THe Saints Everlasting Rest: Or, A Treatise of the bl^ssed State of the
Saints in their enjoyment of God in Glory, in 4o.

23 His Apology, against the Exceptions of Mr. Blake.

And the digression of Mr. Kendall.

Animadversions on a late dissertation of Ludiomaeus Colvinus, alias, Ludovicus
Molina^us.

An admonition to Mr. Eyres: with Mr. Crand^ns Anatomy, in 4o.

24 The unreasonableness of Infidelity, in four parts.

1. The Spirits intrinsic witness to the truth of Christianity, with a
determination of this question, Whether the miracles of Christ and his Apostles
do oblige those to believe, who never saw them? 2. The Spirits internal Witness
of the truth of Christianity. 3. A Treatise of the sin against the Holy Ghost.
4. The Arrogance of Reason against divine Revelation, repressed, in 8o.
25 The Worcestershire Petition to the Parliament, for the Ministry of England,
defended, etc. in 4o.

26 His Holy Commonwealth, Or Political Aphorisms, opening the true Principles
of Government, etc. in 8o.

27 The right Method for a settled Peace of Conscience and Spiritual comfort, in
thirty two Directions, in 8o.

28 His Confession of Faith, Especially concerning the Interest of Repentance
and si^cere Obedience to Christ, in our Justification and Salvation, in 4o.

29 Christian Concord; or the Agreement of the Associated Pastors and Churches
of Worcestershire, with his Explication and desence of it, and his Exhortation
to Unity, in 4o.

30 His humble advice: Or the heads of those things which were offered to many
Honorable members of Parliament, in 4o.

31 The Quakers Catechism, or the Quakers questioned, Their questions answered,
and both published for the sake of those of them that have not sinned unto
death; And of those ungrounded Novices that are most in danger of their
seduction, in 4o.

32 An account of his present Thoughts concerning the Controversies about the
perseverance of the Saints, in 4o.

33 His Letter to Mr. Drury for Pacification, in 4o.

34 Plain Scripture proof of Infant Church Membership and Baptism: being the
Arguments prepared for (and partly managed in) the public dispute with Mr.
Tombs at Bewdly, Jan. 1. 1649, etc. in 4o.

35 The Sa^e Religion; or three Disputations for the Reformed Catholic
Religion, against Popery: Proving that Popery is against the Holy Scriptures,
the Unity of the Catholic Church, the consent of the ancient Doctors, the
plainest Reason and common judgment of sense it self, in 8o.

36 Catholic Unity: Or, the only way to bring us all to be of one Religion; To
be read by such as are offended at the differences in Religion, and are willing
to do their part to heal them, in 12o.

37 The true Catholic, and Catholic Church described: And the vanity of the
Papists, and all other Schismatics that confine the Catholic Church to their
Sect, discovered and shamed: With an Apologetical Postcript against the
factious Principles and Writings of Mr. T. Malpas, Mr. T. Pierce,
Philo-Tilenus, and such others, in 12o.

Besides his Aphorisms of Justifitation (suspended.)


