TWO DISPUTATIONS OF Original Sin.

I. Of Original sin, as from Adam.

II. Of Original Sin, as from our Nearer Parents.

Written long ago for a more private use; and now published (with a Preface)
upon the invitation of Dr. T. TVLLIE.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

Exodus 20. 5, 6. and 34. 7. [Visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the
children, (and upon the childrens children) unto the third and fourth
Generation of them that hate me.]

LONDON, Printed for Robert Gibbs, at the Golden-Ball in Chancery Lane, 1675.

To the Impartial Friends of Sacred Truth, who are above the dominion of carnal
Interest, Faction and false Prejudice, and are cured of the Malady of
PREFIDENCE and HASTY JVDGING before they have heard and weighed evidence, which
is the corrupter, confounder, and disquieter of the Church and World.
Sect. 1. IT has seemed good to a Doctor of the University of Oxford, Dr. I.
Tully, whose name is honored for Learning and Moderation, (I believe
deservedly, though I know him not,) newly to exercise his zeal, and pen, to
save men from the danger of some Doctrines which he takes to be mine. Of the
rest I shall, God willing, give a distinct account elsewhere: That which I am
here to consider of, is found, page 128. Justif. Paulin. in these words, [Vnum
vero praetereundum non censeo, licet ab argumento magis alienum videtur, estque
novum quoddam inter novissima: Praefatorem scilicet (nescio quo fortunante
Mercurio) aliud invenisse peccatum originale, multo citerius quam quod ab Adamo
traductum est: O caecos ante Theologos, quicunque unquam fuistis! Serio interim
monendi sunt juniores, ne temere illius Theologiae talia paradoxa parturienti
fidem habeant. Deus novit me nullo in personam Viri Rever. aut aestu, aut
praejudicio, nedum odio (cui ex animo sane fausta and foelicia precor omnia)
hoc monitum injicere; sed amore veritatis uno, utque satis conscientiae fiat,
ita liberasse animam.] Whereupon he next advertiseth me out of some words of my
own, etc.

Sect. 2. I have great reason to love his love to truth, and the souls of men
whom he would save from the danger of such errors as he supposes me to be
guilty of. And I have no reason to dislike his fidelity to his conscience: but
rather to wish that true conscientious tenderness and fidelity were more common
among the Teachers of the people, and the Teachers of those Teachers.

Sect. 3. And far be it from me to judge him so uncharitable as to doubt
whether we his ignorant brethren love not truth also, and the fouls of men, and
search not after it with some impartiality and industry; yea, and would buy it
at as dear a rate as others, though through our sin and weakness we may not
have had so good success. And it is a praise to our Creator rather than to us,
that we love that which by natural inclination we must needs love: Being and
Truth are necessarily good; and all evil is from good, and for good. Our good
intentions justify not our errors, nor the reasonings and considence by which
we set them off as truth. And by our bold and hasty judging of those things
which our reasonings show we never well digested or understood, and our
censures of those that perhaps better understand them, we should but call men
to suspect those understandings, as not very like to know much more than
others, which no better know themselves. Instead therefore of calling out to
the Academical youth to take heed of the Theology of those worthy eximious
persons who are my Censurers, I humbly entreat them, with candid impartiality,
to search after truth, and to receive all that deserves that name from the
Censurers, and to reject all that I or any other offers them which is against
it; and proving all things, to hold fast that which is true and good: yea, and
to help me to see my errors, that I may repent, and publish my retractation.
Which I shall not judge (any more than Augustine did) to be in vain, though it
should please others, as well as this learned Dr. to cull out for his
coufutation the first Book that ever I wrote, about four and twenty years after
I had publicly (for the crudity and unfitness of many expressions in it)
retracted it, and to pass by about sixty others, since written; and some, yea
many, much more largely and distinctly than that which I retracted, on the same
subject.

Sect. 4. But though I am more obliged than such knowing men as he, to suspect
my own understanding, that suspicion will not warrant me to resist the light,
nor to reject that which seems to me to be evidence of truth, nor to forbear
the rendering a reason of my judgment, that I may be better informed by a
confutation if I err, or if I do not, may not desert that which deserves a
just vindication.

And though I am one of those who never was worthy of his honorable
employment, to teach men to be Teachers of the Flocks of Christ, and these
fourteen years have been judged unworthy or unmeet to teach the most ignorant
Congregation in these Lands; yet I doubt not but I may have his leave and
concurrence in bewailing the lamentable condition of the poor people, by reason
of such ignorant and unhappy Teachers, as I and others of my rank have long
been! Alas, how great is their temptation! and what perplexities must they
needs be cast into! when we that have studied night and day with our most
earnest desire to know the truth whatever it cost us, and with our most
searching, serious thoughts, and with our daily prayers for divine
illumination, do yet remain not only ignorant, but so dangerously erroneous,
that if some did not silence us, and others call out to the people to take heed
of us, it seems we were like to be their deceivers, and to do them more hurt
than good! And if this were but I, and a few more such, or only the many
hundreds that now are silenced, the case were less lamentable: But, alas, it is
the case of almost all the Christian World, for the people to be cast by their
Teachers weaknesses into such distracting perplexities as these! The Greeks
call to their people to take heed of the Romans; and the Romans to theirs to
take heed of the Greeks: As also to take heed of the Protestants, and all (as
Heretics or Schismatics) that are not the subjects of the King of Rome: And
the Protestants requite them. The Lutherans say, take heed of the Calvinists;
and the Calvinists say, take heed of the Lutherans and Arminians. The
Conformist says, take heed of the Nonconformist; and some Non-Conformists
say, take heed of the Conformists: till the poor people know not when they are
safe, but are tempted to live as we did in the great Plague in 1665, when each
one fled from the face of others, lest every man that approached them should
infect them. Whom to fear they know, but whom to trust they know not: unless
they must be of the side and Religion which is uppermost, and think their
Rulers always in the right; and so that there are as many right Religions in
the World, as there are Rulers of different Religions. And what now shall the
poor people do? Can they hope to be wiser than all these Teachers, to discern
which of them is in the right? What is their remedy?

Sect. 5. In this straight I am ready (yea resolved) so far to abate my
reverence to learned Contenders, as to hope that we are more agreed than they
seem willing that the people should believe, (and therefore than they
understand themselves.) All true Christians are agreed in that which made a
Christian when the name of Christians was first known: and in that which was
then thought necessary to their mutual love and communion. They are united in
those many necessary things, which I long ago mentioned in a popular discourse
called Catholic Unity: And Protestants are agreed in much more than absolutely
necessary things. And as it is not the part of a good man to set the Churches
together by the ears, and to make people believe that they differ where they do
not, or further than they do; and thereby to tempt them to suspect, censure,
reproach, or hate each other: so it is not the part of a wise Teacher to think
himself, that agreeing men are not agreed; and that different terms, or orders
of expression, make different or contrary Doctrines or Religions: and to be
skilful in making one difference to seem many, and verbal ones to seem real,
and small ones to seem great, instead of being skilful, by discussing ambiguity
of words, in helping men better to understand one another. And for my part, I
have so much experience of the commonness of the mistake, both of the matter,
and of each others minds, by reason of the lamentable ambiguity of words, and
the common weakness of mankind in the ordering, digesting, and expressing their
conceptions, and also in the reception of other men's expressions, that I am
resolved to be still suspicious of ambiguities, and not to be easily and
negligently deceived by a word unexplained, though men of never so great name
or self-esteem should deride me for it, as a troublesome distinguisher: And I
am resolved to endeavor, to the utmost of my little skill and opportunity, to
undeceive them that think a different name, or method, is a different or
contrary Doctrine; and that all are Heretics that speak not in their language,
and sing not in their tune, or pray not in their form of words, though for so
doing the over-orthodox zeal do accuse me of tepidity, noxious Syncretism,
Arminianism, yea, or of as much compliance with Popery, or Socinians, as this
excellent Doctor does.

Sect. 6. Though I know that Heresy may (as Arianism once did) creep in, and
hide it self in the addition of one letter; yet I know also, that the confusion
of tongues has made it hard to express our selves so as easily to be
understood, unless by such with whom we have had long leisure to open our
meaning, and hard to understand the mind of others: And that they who agree in
all that Christ, his Apostles, and the ancient Symbols of Faith and Concord
made necessary to the agreement of Believers, should not too hastily be
condemned as heretical; and that Church-tyranny and Schism, while they cry out
against each other, are nearer kin in principles and effects than their owners
are well aware of: And that over-doing as for orthodox Concord, by introducing
things arbitrary, difficult and numerous as the necessary terms, has been
Satan's great engine to tear the Churches: And had I been at Jerome's elbow
when he complained so much of them that accused him of Heresy, for rejecting
the term [Hypostasis,] and when he spoke himself so much against it, I might
perhaps have ventured to say to that learned angry Father, that it is possible
that neither his adversaries nor he were Heretics, nor erroneous in the matter
or sense at all; but that they meant by [Hypostasis,] the same that he did by
[Persona;] and that he mistakingly accused an innocent word, and they
mistakingly accused his innocent sense; and that the time might come, when
those that then contended were in the dust, that the Churches should
indifferently, without mutual condemnation, use either of the terms.

Sect. 7. Melancholy is a suspicious humor: Many a one have I known that could
not be persuaded, but that their best and nearest friends did plot their death,
or to poison them, or cut their throats; and every thing and person that is
near them, seems against them, and a cause of fear: As a good woman (yet
living,) caetera sana, dare let none come near her till the spiders be brusht*
off them, which she thinks she sees on them, having once been affrighted by a
spider. And, some otherwise worthy men, do so causelessly and frequently cry
out, This is Popery, and That is Arminianism, as if they were persuading the
World that the contumelious saying is true, Spiritus Calvinianus est spiritus
melancholicus, and that orthodox men's hearts must meditate terror, and fear
where no fear is, and their charity must suspect all things, and hardly believe
or hope of any good in others. And we have not been (yea, yet are not) without
some Sectaries, carried so swiftly in the the stream of prejudice, that before
they can stay to weigh and understand it, they cry out, O Antichristian,
Popish, Arminian, of many an unquestionable truth of God; as if they were
persuading men that the profane reproach is true, that A Puritan is a
Protestant frightened out of his wits.

Sect. 8. But to come to my present business; This worthy Dr. and Mr. Danvers,
the fervent defender of the Anabaptists, having both newly published their
suspicions and accusations of me, for my doctrine of Original sin, and both
called aloud to the World to take heed of me, I take my self obliged to give
them both some account of the reasons of what I hold, and humbly to leave them
to their leisurely judicious censure. And because God calls me, by the
messengers of death, to other kind of thoughts and works, than needless,
tedious, ungrateful contending for my own vindication against the suspicions
and words of others, I must take it as a sufficient discharge of this duty, to
publish an old Country disputation on that subject, used above twenty years ago
in one of our (by some derided) meetings of those humble, peaceable, laborious,
godly Ministers near Kederminster in Worcestershire, (who have most of them
been silenced these fourteen years.) And though I am much to be blamed, if my
maturer thoughts since then, have not helped me to clearer conceptions than I
had so long ago: yet finding by a hasty perusal, that I am still of the same
mind as then I was, I must crave the Readers acceptance of it as it is, from
one that has not time to amend it: And I thought it not amiss to add to it
another Disputation (then used) of original Sin as derived from Adam; and only
to assist the Reader's understanding of them by these following notes:
(entreating his pardon if he meet with some things repeated in one which were
in the other, seeing this twenty years silence may inform him that they were
not intended to speak out to the world, though this extortion now will justify
their publication).

Sect. 9. I. I do hold that the State of an Infant as a mere Child of Adam, is
not the worst that an Infant is capable of on earth: And that nature in such is
not in the utmost degree of its depravation. Custom in actual Sin may make it
worse in the adult; (for they are not so bad as those in hell): And Parents
Sins may make it worse in some Infants, than otherwise it would be.

Sect. 10. II. Therefore I hold with Wickliffe (Trialog. li. 4. c. 11, 12.)
which I cited to Mr. Danvers, that Original Sin is not equal in all as he
infers from his assertion, that the penalty is not equal.

Sect. 11. III. I do hold, that (besides all said in the following disputation
to prove the thing asserted) the true Nature and Tenor of the Law of Grace, and
the terms of Life and Death determined by it, will fully prove it.

Sect. 12. IV. And I may well here suppose that it is a Law of Grace that is
now Norma officii and Judicii to all the world: which obliges them as
Subjects, and by which they be judged. For, 1. Were it not a Digression, I
would prove that no man is under the mere Covenant or Law of Innocence (which
commands Innocence as the condition of life); it being now naturally
impossible to the guilty. 2. And that the World is not under the Jewish Law of
Moses as such. 3. And that those are not under the Gospel or Law of Grace in
the last Edition (by Christ incarnate) who never had it, nor could have. 4. And
that the World is not outlawed, or out of the relation of subjects to God. 5.
Nor yet are they as the damned, under a mere remediless sentence; but are under
an obligation to receive and improve mercies, and use some means which tend to
their recovery, (as such). 6. And therefore that all that never had or can have
the Law of Grace in the last edition, are under the first edition of it, which
was given to fallen mankind in Adam first, and afterward in Noah; (saving that
since the Messiah is come, none are bound to believe in him as yet to be
incarnate, as if he were not come.) But they are under the remaining part of
the Law of Grace; the tenor of which is plainly enough expressed in God's
proclaimed name, Exodus 34. 5, 6, 7. and in many other places of the Scripture.
7. For we were (and therefore are accordingly accounted) as truly in Adam when
the Law of Grace (or Promise) was made to him, as when the Law of Innocence was
given him. 8. And that Law is never since repealed, or nullified, (saving by a
more perfect edition to them that have the Gospel.) 9. And Christ that came not
to destroy or condemn the World, but to save them, came not to bring most of
the World (without their fault) into a worse condition than he found them in;
yea, so much worse, as to nullify the universal Law of Grace which was before
in force, and to leave them remediless, as the devils and damned are.

Sect. 13. V. All things being delivered now into the hands of Christ, and all
power given him in Heaven and Earth; and all men being his subjects as to
obligation, though not as to consent; and all being under the Law of Grace, (of
the first or second edition) (as made as truly with all mankind, as the Law or
Covenant of Innocence was,) as that by which they must live, and be judged; and
so Nature it self now being redeemed Nature, (and neither innocent, lawless,
nor utterly desperate,) accordingly all the World of sinners has some sort and
degree of Grace (or mercy contrary to merit) from and by the Redeemer: which
Grace or Mercy in the natural tendency and usefulness of it, is apt to diminish
and restrain their natural pravity; and does make them better by preparing them
for saving regeneration, usually before they are so regenerated, (if adult:)
And both adult and infants are capable of a commoner sort of Grace, who have
not special saving Grace. Besides, that even infants may have true saving Grace
it self.

Sect. 14. VI. And as thus it is evident, that even infants are not all in one
state or degree of pravity, but may some be worse, and some better; so it is
evident that now under a Law of Grace, not to be better than Adam makes them,
much more to become worse, (which may be, and often is,) is not a mere penalty or
fruit of the violated Law of Innocence, but a privation of that Grace which
they were capable of by Christ, and so may be a penalty of the Law of Grace.
Now the World has a Physician, not to be healed is a privation of Grace, and
not a mere negation only: For an infant now not to be regenerate, justified,
saved, is not only a negation of that which he never had any hopes or
possibility of, as it is to the damned: but it is a privation of that which he
was made capable of by Christ; yea, which was conditionally given by a sealed
Law of Grace to all mankind. And this privation is not causeless on his part:
God does not deprive infants of this mercy only as they are the seed of Adam;
for then all the seed of Adam should be so deprived of it. And to cast all upon
mere secret election and reprobation, as if infants were no subjects under Law,
as the rule of their right, I have in a Treatise now in the Press, proved to be
the inlet of Anabaptistry, and an opinion in which we ought not to symbolize
with the Anabaptists.

Sect. 15. VII. It follows therefore, that as God dealt with Adam and his
seed under the Law or Covenant of Innocence, and we have our guilt of violating
that Law from him, as being in his loins: so God joyneth children with their
Parents (variatis variandis) under the Covenant of Grace, and we are in infancy
de jure the better or worse for what our Parents were, are, or did. And that
not to be healed, not to be justified and saved, is not now to infants a
penalty of Adam's sin alone, but of those Parents (or pro-Parents) in whom the
Law of Grace does judge the infant to have been, or done, or not done what was
necessary.

Sect. 16. VIII. But no one was the universal Head and Father of all mankind
but Adam, (as none is the universal Head of the regenerate, but Christ the
second, Adam.) He was the first sinful man; in him all mankind sinned: And so
he was the original cause, and our participation of his guilt is our original
sin in a double sense, 1. As he was the original of all men's sin; 2. and as we
are guilty of it from the original of our being. But of Parents sin, not all
the world is guilty, but their own posterity; and that not as the first, but as
a secondary or nearer cause.

Sect. 17. IX. That God has made many promises to the seed of the faithful
above all others, is notorious in Scripture; in the case of the blessed seed,
and sons of God before the flood, and in the case of Sem, Japhet, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, and so on to the end: But were there no more than the second
Commandment, and Exodus 34. 6, 7, 8. it would be justly past controversy. And I
have largely proved it to Mr. Tombs, in two Books; my Plain Scripture Proof,
and my More proof of infants Church Membership.

Sect. 18. X. The Apostle expressly saying, else were your children unclean, but
now are they holy; and this very supposition being the reason of our baptizing
the children of some persons, but not of all the World, does yet more exclude
all reasonable do ubt, with those that are for Infants Baptism.

Sect. 19. XI. As to be baptized, and taken into the Church, is not the right
of any infant merely as a child of Adam redeemed, (for then we could make no
difference,) nor merely as they are elect, (for that we know not;) but as they
are children of Believers dedicating them to God, (which is the condition of
their right:) so not to have right to Baptism and its benefits, is not the mere
fruit of Adam's sin, but of the Parents privative not-believing, and
not-dedicating them to God; (the controversies about pro-Parents is not
pertinent to our business, and need not stop us.) Here therefore is notorious a
grand penalty of Parents sin on children; (for a penal privation it is.)

Sect. 20. XII. The true natural interest of Parents in their children now, is
as certain as Adam's in his offspring: We have our being as truly from them as
from him, and were as truly naturally in them as in him.

Sect. 21. XIII. The promises to the children of Believers are more numerous,
and plain in Scripture, than the promises to Adam's seed, if he had stood.

Sect. 22. XIV. The penal comminations against the seed of the wicked are so
numerous and notorious in Scripture, that it is a thousand pities that any
Minister should not acknowledge them, and the effects. Even from Cain to Cham,
and the children of all the old World, and of Sodom, and so to the end: And if
there were no Texts to prove it but the two beforementioned, the second
Commandment, and Exodus 34. with Matthew. 23. It Is sad that any Christian should
deny it.

Sect. 23. XV. It is notorious in Scripture also, as to the execution, that God
has punished the children not only for Adam's, but for the nearer Parents
sins: Which is true of all those drowned in the deluge, (as the assigned cause
shows;) and of the seed of Cham, and the Sodomites, and the infants of the
Amalekites, and all the Nations destroyed by the command of God; of Ishmael,
Esau, the Egyptians, Achan, Gebezi, and abundance more named after in this
Dispute, and recorded throughout the Scripture; and the Jews were not ignorant
of it, when they said, His blood be on us and our children: nor the Disciples,
when they said, Did this man sin, or his Parents, that he was born blind? Job.
9. The matter of fact is past all doubt, and therefore the right.

Sect. 24. XVI. It is daily notorious among us, that the children of some
wicked persons, (Adulterers, Drunkards, Gluttons, idle persons, etc.) have
their bodily temper vitiated by propagation from their Parents, by reason that
the Parents had first by sin corrupted their own nature: some have the pox,
some idiots, some decrepit, some otherwise diseased, etc. And to say that this
is no punishment to the children, or that it is only for Adam's sin, is that
which I will not do, whatever any other may.

Sect. 24. XVII. And it is certain that the minds of some such persons children
are extraordinarily depraved: some have natures extraordinarily lustful, some
furious, some senseless and inconsiderate, some slothful, some false, versatile
and untrusty, some mutable and unconstant; some have appetites hardly to be
restrained, etc. Yea, and all the foresaid diseases of the body, much tend to
the evil of the soul. And is all this no punishment? or of none but Adam's sin?

Sect. 26. XVIII. It is notorious that outward calamities in their estates, and
other accidents, befall children for the Parents sins: The sacrilegious,
perjured, murderers, and despisers of Parents seldom have a progeny that is not
notably plagued for their sin. And Divines should not teach Atheists to deny
such judgments of God.

Sect. 27. XIX. He that says that children have no guilt of the sins of any
Parents since Adam, does by consequence say that God neither ever did, or will
do, or justly can punish any child in the least degree, positively or
privatively, for any such Parents sin: But he that dare so say, is bolder and
blinder than I would have any wise and holy Teachers of Christ's Flocks to be.

Sect. 28. XX. Holy men in Scripture were used in their sufferings to confess
and lament the sins of their forefathers as the cause; as I have after cited
out of the Psalms, Ezra, Nehem. Daniel, etc.

Sect. 29. By this, and what follows, I have rendered to the Reader a true
account and reason of my (supposed dangerous) opinion. But nothing makes me
more wonder at my learned and worthy accuser, than his, O caecos ante
Theologos, quicunque unquam fuistis! I had almost said, It is more modest for
me to say, that my unacquaintedness with Grammar makes me (here) not
understand him, than to suspect that so Learned an Academical Doctor, among so
many Learned men and Libraries, can possibly mean as his words seem to import.
But modesty must not blind us: And yet I am loath here to be tempted to waste so
much of my little time to the wearying of my self and the Reader, as the
recital of the words of so many Divines, as concur with me in this opinion,
would require: but a taste may serve to cure his admiration, and, vindicate
Divines from his reproach.

Sect. 30. 1. Tertullian says, (advers. Marcion. li. 2. c. 15. p. 467. c. 1.)
1. Justitiam ergo primo judicis despice, cujus si ratio constiterit, tunc and
severitas, and per quae severitas decurrit, rationi and justitiae reputabuntur.
Ac ne pluribus immoremur, asserite causas, caeteras quoque ut sententias
condemnetis: excusate delicta, ut judicia reprobetis. Nolite reprehendere
judicem, sed revincite malum judicem: nam etsi patrum delicta ex filiis
exigebat, duritia populi talia remedia compulerat, ut vel posteritatibus suis
prospicientes, legi divinae obedirent. Quis enim non magis filiorum salutem,
quam suam curet? Sed and si benedictio patrum semini quoque eorum destinabatur,
sine ullo adhuc merito ejus, cur non and reatus patrum in filios quoque
redundaret? Sicut gratia ita and offensa; ut per totum genus and gratia
decurreret, salvo eo quod postea decerni habebat, non dicturos acidam uvam
patres manducasse, and filiorum dentes obstupuisse, id est, non sampturum
patrem delictum filii, nec filium delictum patris, sed unumquemque delicti sui
reum futurum; ut post duritiam populi, duritia legis edomita, justitia jam non
genus, sed persnas judicaret. Quanquam si evangelium veritatis accipias, ad
quos pertineat sententia reddentis in filios patrum delicta, cognosces: ad
illos scilicet, qui hano ultro sibi sententiam fuerant irrogaturi, Sanguis
illius super capita nostra and filiorum nostrorum. Hoc itaque omnis providentia
Dei censuit, quod jam audierat. Bona igitur and severitas quia justa, si bonus
judex, id est, justus. Item caetera bona, per quae opus bonum currit bonae
severitatis, sive ira, sive aemulatio, sive saevita. Debita enim omnia haec
sunt severitati, sicut severitas debitum est justitiae. Vindicanda erit
procacitas aetatis verecundiam debentis: atque ita non poterunt judici
exprobrari quae judici accidunt, carentia and ipsa culpa, sicut and judex.

Sect. 31. II. Cyprian de Lapsis, p. 279. Ac nequid deesset ad criminis
cumulum, infantes quoque parentum manibus vel impositi vel attracti, amiserunt
parvuli quod in primo statim nativitatis exordio fuerant consecuti. Nonne illi
cum judicii dies venerit, dicent; Nos nihil fecimus, nec derelicto cibo and
poculo Domini ad profana contagia sponte properavimus; perdidit nos aliena
perfidia; parents sensimus patricidas: Illi nobis ecclesiam matrem, illi
patrem Deum negaverunt, ut dum parvi and improvidi, and tanti facinoris ignari,
per alios ad consortium criminum jungimur, aliena fraud caperemur.

Sect. 32. III. Leonis magni Epist. Decret. 86. p. 156. Parentum quoque
peccatis parvulos obligari, non solum primorum hominum, sed etiam suorum de
quibus ipsi nati sunt, non improbabiliter dicitur. Illa quippe sententia Reddam
peccata patrum in filios, tenet eos utique antequam per regenerationem ad
testamentum novum incipiant pertinere: quod testamentum prophetabatur, cum
diceretur per Ezechielem, non accepturos filios peccata patrum suorum, nec
ulterius futuram in Israel parabolam illam, Patres manducaverunt uvam acerbam,
and dentes filiorum obstupescunt. Ideo enim quisque renascitur, ut solvatur in
eo, quicquid peccati est, cum quo nascitur. Nam peccata quae male agendo postea
committuntur, possunt and ponitendo sanari, sicut etiam post baptismum fieri
videmus. Ac per hoc non est instituta regeneratio, nisi quia vitiosa est
generatio, usque adeo ut etiam de legitimo matrimonio procreatus dicat, In
iniquitatibus conceptus sum, and in peccatis matter mea in utero me aluit. Neque
hic dixit, in iniquitate, vel in peccato, cum hoc recte dici posset; sed
iniquitates and peccata dicere maluit: quia and in illo uno, quod in omnes
homines pertransivit, quodque tam magnum est, ut eo mutaretur and converteretur
in necessitatem mortis humana natura (sicut supra disserui,) reperiuntur plura
peccata, and alia parentum, quae licet non possunt mutare naturam, reatu tamen
obligant filios, nisi gratuita gratia and misericordia divina subveniat. A
parvulo enim recens nato, usque ad decrepitum senem quamlibet corporis aetatem
gerant, sicut nullus prohibendus est a baptismo, ita nullus est, qui non
peccato moriatur in baptismo: sed parvuli tantum originali, majores autem etiam
his omnibus moriuntur peccatis, quaecunque male vivendo addiderunt ad illud
quod nascendo traxerunt.

Sect. 33. IV. Gregor. magni Expos. mor. li. 15. p. 90. Peccatum quippe
originale a parentibus trahimus, and nisi per gratiam baptismatis solvamur,
etiam parentum peccata portamus, quia unum adhuc videlicet cum illis sumus.
Reddit ergo peccata parentum in filios, dum pro culpa parentis, ex originali
peccato anima polluitur prolis. Et rursum non reddit parentum peccata in
filios, quia cum ab originali culpa per baptismum liberamur, jam non parentum
culpas, sed quas ipsi committimus, habemus.

Sect. 34. V. August. Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 46, 47. page (edit. Paris) 74.
Neque dixit in iniquitate, vel peccato, cum and hoc recte dici posset; sed
iniquitates and peccata dicere maluit: Quia and in illo uno quod in omnes
homines pertransiit reperiuntur plura peccata, and alia parentum, quae etsi non
ita possunt mutare naturam, reatu tamen obligant filios nisi gratuita gratia,
and misericordia divina subveniet. Sed de peccatis aliorum parentum quibus ab
ipso Adam usque ad Patrem suum, progeneratoribus suis quisque succedit, non
immerito disceptari potest, Vtrum omnium malis actibus and multiplicatis
delictis originalibus, qui nascitur implicetur, ut tanto pejus quanto posterius
quisque nascatur? an propterea Deus in tertiam and quartam generationem de
peccatis parentum eorum posteris comminetur, quia iram suam quantum ad
progeneratorum suorum culpas non extendit ulterius moderatione miserationis
suae, ne illi quibus regenerationis gratia non confertur, nimia sarcina in ipsa
aeterna damnatione premerentur, si cogerentur ab initio generis humani omnium
precedentium parentum suorum originaliter peccata contrabere, and poenas pro
eis debitas pendere? An aliud aliquid de re tanta in Scripturis sanctis
diligentius perscrutatis atque tractatis valeat vel non valeat reperiri, temere
non audeo affirmare.

Bellarmine speaking against this opinion, li. 4. de Amiss. Great. c. 18. says
thus of some Fathers, as speaking against him; [Et quidem S. Augustinus in
Enchiridio, ca. 46. sic ait Parentum quoque peccatis parvulos obligari non
solum primorum hominum, sed etiam suorum, etc. non improbabiliter dicitur. Idem
repetit in li. 6. adversus Julianum, cap. 2. ejusque sententiani iisdem verbis
tradit. S. Leo in Epist. 86. ad Nicetam: Sanctus etiam Gregorius, li. 15.
moral. cap. 22. ad eandem sententiam ut videtur accessit.] And Bellarmine' s
shift is a mere violence, [quod sancti illi patres fortasse non de contagione
culpae, sed de communicatione poenae loquuti sunt;] nor indeed can it be poena
fine culpa.

I would trouble my self and the Reader with more of the Ancients words, if I
thought it worth the cost.

Sect. 35. VI. Among the later Writers that were Papists, I will now give you
only the words of Guil. Parisiensis, de Vit, and Peccat. c. 5. (see more also,
c. 6, 7, 8.) who though he say that Peccatum originale non est culpa, nec
meritum poenae; yet calling it malum morale and vitium, I hope meant but that
it was not culpa in sensu famosiore: But however, what he thought of its
original, judge. Quia peccatum originale contrahitur and a carne, and a
parentibus ingeneratur, his solis exceptis, qui privilegio gratiae a Deo
protecti sunt, contrahitur inquam originaliter; si enim a divitiis, quae tam
longae sunt ab animabus nostris, pervenit ad eas corruption avaritiae and
superbiae, ut supra tetigimus, quanto fortius ab ipsis corporibus passiones,
quales infer possunt corpora, eisdem adhaerebunt? Amplius: Si a vino penetrat
ad ipsos ebrietas, ut eas in majorem, quam sit brutalis, insaniam transvertat,
quanto fortius corpus ipsum, quod eis adeo e vicino and immediate adhaeret, eas
obtenebrare poterit a lumine suo, and pervertere a rectitudine sua. Et quia
toti animales efficiuntur in opere hujusmodi, sive toti caro (ut dicit Aug.)
non est mirum, si semen viri vim imprimendi animalitatem recipit ex hujusmodi
dispositione; habet autem and ex part materiae propriae alias dispositiones,
per quas non permittitur, ut ex eo generetur aliud quam homo. Non enim totum
habent ex imaginatione, vel sensu parentum generantium. Hoc autem quod
praediximus de transfusione corruptionis and similitudinis, Aug. satis express
dicere videtur, ubi dicit, quod originale peccatum in omnes illos transit, qui
vitiosa lege nascendi nascuntur, and alibi dicit, in omnes concupiscentialiter
genitos. In quo videtur attribuere vitiosae legi nascendi, sive
concupiscentiali generationi contractionem, seu traductionem originalis
peccati; verum nos dicimus, quia si omne vitium nascendi, and tota
concupiscentia etiam tolleretur a parentibus, corrupta tamen caro non nisi
corruptam sibi similem generaret.

Sect. 36. VII. Pet. Martyr Loc. Com. p. 142, 143. Quod Deus ait, Se velle
persequi peccata patrum in filios in tertiam and quartam generationem, quum
alio loco dicat, Filium non portaturum iniquitatem patris: si filius, inquit,
non portat iniquitatem patris, sed suam, and tamen Deus persequitur in eo
peccatum patris, oportet ut filius ipse peccatum illud in se habeat: alioqui
haec loca inter se non convenirent. Peccatum itaque sua natura ita factum est,
ut non tantum animum hominis vastet, verum etiam corpus, carnem and membra
depravet. Itaque Paulus ad Corinthios ait, corporae nostra templa esse Spiritus
sancti, and graviter comminatur, si quis templum Dei destruat. Si ergo Deus
puniat peccata parentum in siliis, and filius alienam iniquitatem non portat
sed tantum suam: sequitur parvulos impiorum hominum, cum affliguntur ut patres
in illis puniantur, aliquid in se habere paternae pravitatis. Neque hic cuiquam
conquerendum est de justitia Dei; nam si Deus incorruptissima sua justitia
potest eos qui peccant in reprobum sensum tradere, and peccata peccatis punire:
cur non etiam just velit, peccati corruptionem non tantum animum perdere, sed
etiam ejus impuritatem in corpus quoque redundare? Vnde qui generantur ex
peccatoribus, talem naturam ex illis contrahunt, qualem in illis reperiunt.
Atque hac sententia homines admonentur ut sancte vivant, neve and animos suos
and corpora polluant, eademque opera filios quoque suos inficiant.

Si hoc ut jam diximus, constituatur, quaeret quispiam, quid discriminis sit
inter peccatum originis, and illud quod a proximis parentibus contrabitur?
Respondemus propagationem originalis peccati, esse perpetuam, quemadmodum
sacrae literae docent: aliorum vero peccatorum continuationem non esse
necessariam. Aliquando enim a proximis parentibus nihil vitii transmittitur ad
liberos, excepto peccato originis. Videtur enim Deus modum praefixisse, ne
malum grassetur in immensum, and hanc mali propagationem suspendere. -- Quare
quod ad hanc rem attinet, libenter assentior Augustino, probabile esse and
Scripturis consentaneum, (istamque sententiam Martinus Bucerus vir doctissimus
juxtaque sanctissimus probavit,) vitia privata in filios propagari a
parentibus: sed notandum, hoc esse contingens, non necessarium. Nam Deus
quandoque parentum peccata suspendit, and pro sua bonitate non patitur naturam
hominum prorsus perdi. Quando autem traducem istam peccatorum, aut reprimere
velit, aut sinere locum habere, ipse solus novit. Nobis tamen satis est, haec
duo considerare: primum peccatum a parentibus diffundi in liberos: alterum id
Dei beneficio interdum prohiberi, quod tamen de peccato originis dici nullo
modo potest. Omnes enim eo infecti nascimur. Atque bactenus ex Epistol. ad
Roman. cap. 5. in haec verbi, Quemadmodum per inobedientiam, etc. Vide similem
locum in Genesis 8. ver. 21.

Sect. 37. VIII. I forbear citing Bucer's words, seeing here you have Pet.
Martyr's testimony of his judgment, who was his intimate acquaintance.

Sect. 38. IX. Anton. Wallaeus Respons. ad censuram Corvini de peccati primi
poen. p. 257. Deinde quomodocunque tandem peccata parentum posteris imputentur,
imputationem peccati parentum in posteros esse proprie ex severitate foederis
operum, non ex (...) foederis evangelici. Nam maledictio foederis primi
manifesta est, Deuteronomy. 28. 15. Maledictus erit fructus ventris tui, etc. Quod
discrimen utriusque foederis perspicue proponitur, Jer. 31. 29, etc. See
further. And page 262, 263, 264. he reprehends Corvinus for making our guilt of
original sin to be merely from God's will; and the imputation of Adam's sin, to
be different from that of our other Parents; and shows that it is the same
thing that God threatened in the second Commandment, Exodus 20. and proclaimed
with his name, Exodus 24. and largely cites the sayings of Tertullian and
Augustine to the same purpose: all which is too large for me here to recite.

Sect. 39. X. Ursin. Catech. edit. Parei de Peccat. Orig. page 45. [Obj. 6. In
quos peccata omnium majorum transeunt, miseriores erunt illis, in quos tantum
aliquorum peccata propagantur: At si peccatum in posteros transit, in postremos
homines, omnia majorum, in priores eorum tantum qui precesserunt, peccata
derivantur; ergo posteriores erunt miseriores: Hoc vero absurdum videtur, and
eum justitia Dei pugnans. Respon. Non foret absurdum, etiamsi Deus posteriores
magis desereret ac puniret: nam quanto plura peccata a genere humano
cumulantur, tanto magis ira Dei accenditur and exasperatur poena, juxta illud,
Nondum completae sunt iniquitates Amorrhaeorum, etc. Vt veniat super vos omnis
sanguis justus, etc. Sed and minor negatur: etsi enim Deus propter justitiam
suam, peccatum originis, hoc est vitium naturae and reatum in omnes posteros
transire sinit, tamen simul ex misericordia metas figit peccato, ut non semper
majorum peccata actualia imitentur and luant posteri, nec semper malorum
parentum mali aut deteriores ac miseriores liberi existant.]

Sect. 40. XI. Mr. Gataker' s words Mr. Poole thus translateth in his Synops.
Crit. in Exodus 20. p. 403. Punit Deus sapenumero liberos propter peccata
Parentum ut constat exemplis and sanctionibus S. Scripturae; Vid. Exodus 4. 22,
23. and 12. 29. and 34. 7. Number. 14. 18. 2 Samuel 12. 14. 1 Reg. 13. 33. and 14.
1. 17. Rations, -- 1. Quod liberi sint res atque possessiones parentum, -- 2.
Liberi praeterea sunt parts sive membra parentum and sunt quasi una persona
cum Parentibus; ut recte Althus. Dicaeolog. l. 1. Vid. Genesis 20. 7. 18. Mat. 15.
22. Quod ad loca in contraria prolata, Deuteronomy. 24. Jer. 31. Ezekiel. 18. 1. Debent
(...) mortem Deo, etc. 2. Non sunt haec apud homines semper injusta, etc. where
he instaneth in similitudes. -- See his Sermon it self on 1 Kin. 14. 17.

Sect. 41. XII. If I thought it would be worth my own, and the Readers trouble,
I would undertake to produce abundance more of Protestant Writers; and let but
Expositors on the second Commandment be examined by him that doubts of it,
and he will be satisfied if he have store at hand. I only now say of many in
general, that the ordinary saying of such Expositors is, that temporal
punishments, and some spiritual, are often inflicted by God on children for their
Fathers sins: I will give you the sense of many in Deodate's words on Exodus 20.
5. [Visiting:] that is, I enquire after it, and punish it. [Of the Fathers*] As
concerning eternal judgment upon the soul, every one dies for his own
iniquity, Original sin is their own.
Jer. 31. 30. but for the Fathers sins the children are often punished in body,
in goods, and other things which they hold and derive from their Parents, Number.
14. 33. 2 Samuel 12. 11. and 21. 5. 15. And besides, God oftentimes curses the
generation of the wicked, withdrawing his grace spirit from it, whereby
imitating their Parents wickedness, they are punished in the same manner, 1 Samuel 15. 2. Matthew. 23. 32. 25.

Sect. 42. Here note, 1. that there can be no punishment (temporal or eternal)
where there is no imputed guilt. Therefore all those Divines who say that not
only Parents in their children, but children for their Parents sins, have the
least punishment, do thereby assert a guilt.

2. That there is no guilt of sin which deserves not great, yea perpetual
punishment, if not remitted.

3. That privation of Grace, and the spirit here mentioned, is a most heavy
punishment, tending to that which is perpetual.

4. That children are to derive from their Parents (or from God by them)
greater mercies than goods, health, etc. even Churchmembership, right to
Baptism, and so to pardon, and the other saving benefits of the Covenant, (as
being holy): Therefore by the same reason, as health, goods, etc. may be denied
them, because they are derived from Parents, (as Deodate speaks,) Baptism and
its benefits may be denied them.

5. And has not the universal Church given us their judgment of the case, who
have in all ages judged that Baptism is to be denied to the children of
Heathens and Infidels? (unless other men's owning them, make them no longer
theirs.) At least I may say, if as many be of my judgment concerning our guilt
of Parents sins, as hold that Baptism and its fruits are to be denied to such
children of Infidels, the number will be so great and honorable, that I would
wish this worthy Dr. no more to make them seem as none. And, as I have before
showed, not to be baptized is to them a penalty: and that not only in the
judgment of Papists, who shut such out of Heaven, but of the ancient Doctors,
who took Baptism to be our solemn investiture in a state of life, and the seal
of pardon and right to salvation; (as Gataker against Davenant de Bapt. has
proved by citing a multitude of their testimonies, as an useful Index to save
Readers much labor on that point.) And I have elsewhere proved at large
Disputat. of Right to Sacram.
that the Scripture mentions no Baptism of Christ's Institution, which was
not for the remission of sin. If any say that this is no new penalty, but a
leaving them under the old, and that it is not for the Parents unbelief, but
the Parents only do omit their duty needful to the child's liberation; I again
answer, that had there been no Savior, Covenant, Means, or Hope, it had indeed
been no penalty, because no privation, but a negation. And had not the child's
right and deliverance been laid on the Parents Faith and Consent as a
Condition, they had but negatively left them under the penalty of Adam's sin,
and their corruption, (with the guilt next to be mentioned.) But remember that
poena damni, the loss of Heaven is vere poena, and so is the loss of Pardon and
Grace, (not to an incapable, but to a capable subject): And that sins of
omission are truly sins: And that as a Father murders his child, if he feed him
not, so he does by omission do much to damn him, if he do not believingly
dedicate him to Christ; (for I speak not of unavoidable want of Baptism, which
Austin himself thought not to be damning, however mistaken herein by many.) A
man's own not-believing is nothing; but it is such a nothing as is punished with
a non-salvation, which is another nothing; yea, that and other omissions, with
positive damnation, and the pain of sense.

6. But further note, that this great instance shows that it is not only the
sins of Parents before Generation, and in it, but also after the child's birth,
while the child is void of the use of reason and will for himself, that the
child may be punished by and for, with this penal non-liberation. Much more
evident then is it that this, with his additional pravity and bodily
distempers, all together, are a penalty for the Parents former unbelief, and
other sins, with this omission.

7. And again I say, that if the very guilt and corruption derived from Adam,
had not been my next Parents first, it had never been mine, no more than my
nature: For I had it not immediately from Adam, but from them. And if I had
that as theirs first, I must by the same reason have more of theirs: And who
can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? And David's Mother is said to
conceive him in sin, Psalm. 51.

8. Let it be noted for answer to the objections, from Ezekiel. 18. etc. 1. That
there is by the Covenant of Grace, a pardon with right to Christ and Life,
freely given to all the faithful and their infant seed, as by them (having full
power thereto) in Covenant given up to Christ: Now, no one is damned for
pardoned sins. The infant is at once guilty of Adam's and his Parents sin; and
at once his nature receives pravity from both, (but immediately only by the
immediate Parents;) and at once both are pardoned to him, and this pardon
solemnly sealed and delivered in Baptism. Therefore well may God say to the
pardoned, to the penitent, and to the innocent, that he shall not die for his
Parents sins, (no, not for Adam's.) 2. For the Text speaks to the adult, and
to men that thought themselves innocent, and that they suffered for their
Parents sins, and not their own: And God assures them, 1. that if they are
innocent, they shall not die; 2. yea, if they be repenting persons, and
pardoned, and obedient evangelically, hating all the sins of their wicked
Parents, they shall live. 3. yea, this is true of their children also for their
sakes. But this is not because the Law never judged them guilty, and worthy of
death; but because the Grace of Christ forgiveth it: else the Text would exempt
all infants from the guilty of death, for Adam's sin.

But there is not a word in the Text to prove, 1. that children need no pardon
for their guilty of Parents sins: 2. or that those that are not pardoned, being
themselves unsanctified, (or if adult, live wickedly as their Parents did)
shall not die for them: 3. or that such sins of Parents are not the cause of
such guilt and pravity in the child, as that he is truly said to die for his
own sin.

Sect. 43. XIII. Yet further methinks, to a conformable Doctor, the judgment of
the Church of England in her Liturgy should not be insignificant; [Remember not
Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our Forefathers; neither take thou
vengeance on our sins:] In what sense do men subscribe this, and daily use it?
1. Do they think that the Church means only Adam's sin, by our
[fore-Fathers]? 2. Or that by [not-remembring,] they mean [not-pardoning, and
notpunishing]? 3. Or do they think that they pray for the dead, in Purgatory,
Hell, or Heaven? Or rather do they not imitate David, and the Jewish Church,
and Ezra, Nehemiah, Daniel, etc. who confessed that they were punished for
their Fathers sins?

Sect. 44. I conclude this subject with a second request to the Christian
Reader, to pity and pray for the poor distressed Church of Christ, which is
distracted and distressed thus, even by such as are most devoted to its
service, through the great weakness of our judgments, and the unhappy passions
and strivings that thence follow. Either I or this worthy person are mistaken,
or else we differ not: When I look to the Person only, and not to the Evidence,
nor to the Consenters, I have far greatest reason to suspect that I am liker to
err than he: And if it prove so, the evidence yet seems to me so full for
what I hold, that I am almost hopeless of being otherwise persuaded; And my
judgment is not at my command: How then shall I avoid the injury of souls? But
yet I think, that to hold our selves more guilty of our Parents sins than we
are, is no dangerous damning error: it may molest us, but not undo us; and I
never saw many much molested by it.

But if either we differ not, when yet he gives you so loud an Alarm, or if it
be he that erreth indeed; alas! what must the Church expect from the too great
number of ignorant and ungodly Teachers, when it must be thus used by the
Learned and the Godly? My thoughts are, 1. that it deserves tears from
faithful Ministers to observe, that so considerable a part of the common guilt
and misery of all mankind, should by godly men be no more confessed and
lamented! 2. And that by those that for any denial or extenuation of our
original sin as from Adam, are so heinously (and justly) offended with the
erroneous: yea, ready to vilify men as Arminians, if not Socinians, that they
think come near it! 3. That ever the stream of a Party, Reputation, Interest,
Example, or whatever else of that kind, should with so many good men, have so
great a power, in making truth or error, duty or sin, good or evil, orthodox or
heretical, in their conceits; and so much faction he found in their Religion!
4. That ever so many millions should be taught impenitency in so plain a case,
when repentance and confession have so considerable a place among the
requisites to remission! 5. That ever so many millions should by Preachers be
taught that they have no need of a Savior, nor of Pardon, nor to pray for
Pardon, for so much of their guilty and punishment! 6. That ever so much of the
plain stream of Scripture-evidence can be denied and made light of, by good men
that cry up the Scripture authority and sufficiency, even when they can lay a
great stress, in some unprofitable hurtful controversy, upon some one Text
whose sense is not to be certainly understood! 7. That ever good and learned
Teachers should be so conceited of their own conceptions, as in their
confidence in such a cause to brand God's truth with the name of error, and
their brethren as dangerous men for not erring as they do! 8. And finally, that
the poor people must be under such grievous perplexing temptations as I before
mentioned; and that the Papists should be thus hardened in their opinion that
we shall never be at peace and concord, unless we unite in their usurping,
tyrannical Peacemaker: And that Poor Scholars and young Ministers must be thus
frightened from Truth, Duty, Charity and Peace, and men made believe that the
Church is about to be set on fire, if we are told of that which is contrary to
our former opinions! This must be lamented, if it be not I, but others that
here err.

Sect. 45. But yet before I end, he calls me so loud to consider of another
matter, that I must not deny his invitation.

In my Direct. for Cure of Church-Divisions, Dir. 42. I said, [Your belief of
the necessary Articles of Faith must be made your own, and not taken merely on
the authority of any. And in all points of belief and practice, which are of
necessity to salvation, you must ever keep company with the universal Church,
(for it were not the Church, if it erred in these.) And in matters of peace and
concord, the greater part must be your guide, (that is, caeteris paribus.) In
matters of humane obedience, your Governors must be your guides. And in matters
of high and difficult speculation, the judgment of one man of extraordinary
understanding and clearness, is to be preferred before both the Rulers and the
major Vote.] And I instanced on the by, [Q. What is the object of
Predestination, or the nature of the Wills liberty, of the concurse of God, and
determining way of Grace, of the definition of Justification, Faith, etc.]
supposing the saving knowledge of the thing to differ from a logical skill of
defining.

Upon this, the Learned Dr. here thus accosteth me, [Vnum duntaxat a me
peramice (Deus novit) rogandus est, ut serio apud Deum and conscientiam suam se
excuteret, quo ista scripserit consilio quae occurrunt Reg. 42. Supponit (inter
alia) quaestionem nasci de Definitione Justificationis, Fidei, etc. (nec dubito
quin Imputatam quoque Christi Justitiam incluserit;) Quos hic adsciscendos vult
duces? Adverte Lector: Hic inquit, Theologorum pauci qui been docti and pollent
judicio, authoritati and plurimum [fors. plurimorum] suffragiis anteponendi,
quemadmodum vel unus aliquis, cui viget oculorum aciet; melius, longinsque
videt, quam mill quibus hebescit magis; Rogo, inquam, probe se excutiat, ut
secum sciamus quem quibus in doctrina justificationis anteponat; quis unus ille
oculatus, and (...); qui mill myopes; and quem tandem status five minorennis
sive precarii finem habiturae sint magnae veritates Dei, ut ab hominum
suffragiis aliquando pendere desinant, Deusque (ut cum Tertulliano loquar) Deus
sit? Eum spero a Papismi contagione tutum and immunem; utinam vero diligentius
apud se perponderet, quam belle sua operum justitia cum Papali conveniat:
Certe, ut mihi saltem videtur, (dijudicent alii,) Si facies non sit utrisque,
eadem,

Nec diversa tamen quadem decet esse sororum.

Answ. Worthy Sir, I accept your admonition: When God is so solemnly appealed
to, and I that am passing quickly to his judgment, am summoned so friendly to
make my serious preparatory examination before him and my conscience, neglect
would be my aggravated sin. But your call for [Diligence] tells me that you
know me not, who have little spared for labor these 37 years: And I am now
unfit for increased diligence.

1. As to the matter of Justification, (I will not summon you before God or
Conscience, but) What will the World think of your dealing, to bait (and that
by gross misreport) a small book above twenty years retracted, (after
voluminous Animadversions in MS. from many learned men) and purposely explained
in a larger Book called The Confession of my Faith about Justification, etc.
and much fullier in my Disputations about Justification, with Mr. Burges, Mr.
Blake, Mr. Tombs, Mr. Warner, etc. and the Doctrine there vindicated, and in
many other Books, (my Apology, Life of Faith, etc.) and to take no notice of
any of these Books, and yet call me before God and Conscience to a diligent
search? If my diligence produced never so much more, are you bound to take any
more notice of them than you did of all these?

2. How come you to know the mind of a man, whom I suppose you never, saw, so
well as to add your [Nec dubito quin Imputatam Christi Justitiam incluserit?]
Am I not fittest to tell you what I include?

3. Why turn you a Logical case of Defining, into a Theological de re? Justitia
Christi Imputata is one thing, and the Definition of Justice, or Imputation, is
another.

4. Are you in good sadness desirous to know whom I mean? I must think so: But
why did you not as earnestly ask of the rest, What Rulers I mean, and what
people I mean, etc. Is it not enough to describe them, unless I name them? But
I will tell you as much of my meaning as I know my self.

My meaning is, that if the question be, What is the signification of this or
that Hebrew, Arabic, Syriack, Persian, Greek word, in the Text and Versions of
the Scripture, or what such a proverbial speech does signify? and so of
Topography, Genealogy, Chronology, etc. one excellent Hebrician, etc. well seen
in those studies, should be believed before the majority of all the Boys,
Students, Preachers, that never understood those things: Must I name them? is
there no remedy? Why I mean such a one as Pagnine, Montanus, Buxtorf, etc. for
the Hebrew: such a one as Erpenius, Dr. Pocock, etc. for the Arabic: such a
one as Scaliger, Blondell, Usher, Broughton, etc. for Chronology, etc. If it be
a controversy in Geometry, I would believe Dr. Wallis, etc. if in Anatomy, Dr.
Willis, Dr. Lower, Dr. Needham, before a thousand that are therein unstudied:
yea, if it were a Magistrate, or Bishop, that were of another mind. In
Metaphysics, I will believe or regard one Suarez, Hurtado, Meurisse,
Schiebler, Dr. Barlow, before a thousand that are therein ignorant: in
Physics, I more regard one Aristotle, Scotus, Honoratus Faber, Campanella, Mr.
Boil, etc. before all them that never studied them: And in Logic, I regard
one Aristotle, Ramus, Dietericus, Burgersdicius, Hurtado, etc. before all that
never studied Logic, of what Coat or Calling soever. Accordingly in Method and
Defining, I prefer one such Divine as Sohnius, Cluto, Wendeline, Amesius, Dud
Fenner, Dr. Stoughton, Mr. G. Lawson, etc. before all those that are ignorant
of Method and Definition: while I prefer the happiness of many a poor woman
that has a strong Faith, and cannot define it, before some Doctors that can
define that which they have not. Thus your loud Call has drawn out an
exposition, which I once thought would have been vain.

Sect. 46. But it may be you would know what their names are whom I take to be
better [Definers of Justification, Faith and Imputation,] than all the
unskilful Students, or others, that want their Logical and Theological
sufficiency? You that are an Academical Doctor, should be better acquainted
with the best Logicians and School-Divines than I. I once thought you had been
one of them: If there be no remedy, I will tell you who I think have delivered
us far more judicious and digested thoughts of these things, (both definitions,
distinctions, and the matter it self,) than I find in this your Treatise:
namely, Vinc. le Blanc, Mr. Will. Bradshaw, and Mr. Anth. Wotton, (two old
Non-Conformists,) Placeus, Amyraldus, Dallaeus, Testardus, Conrad, and Johannes
Bergii, Lud. Crocius, Mastrickt, Matthew. Martinius, Camero, Grotius, Mr. Lawson,
Dr. Hammond, Mr. John Ball, Mr. Gibbons, (late of Blackfriars,) Mr. Truman,
(in his great Propitiat. etc.) (three Non-Conformists,) Mr. Gataker, etc. I
name them but as I remember them.

And now Sir, was this a task worthy so solemn an invitation before God, and
Conscience, and the World? If I should name Mr. Hotchkis of Pardon, Mr. Benj.
Woodbridge, and many more such Writers, I pray you say not that I send you to
School to them: I do but answer your earnest request.

Sect. 47. But, 4. I also entreat you to tell me, whether you differ from me in
the rule of counsel which I there gave the ignorant people, or not? If you did
not, you would never have given me such a summons. If you do; deal openly with
your Scholars and the World, and tell them, whether your meaning be, that the
major vote of those that never read Logic, Physics, Metaphysics, Law,
Medicine, etc. is to be believed before one Aristotle, Downame, Gassendus,
Zabarell, Grotius, Cook, Littleton, Cujacius, Fernelius, etc. Tell your
Scholars that you are but one, and they are many, and must believe themselves
before you, in defining Justification, Faith, etc. Tell all the University,
that thus they must use their Tutors. Should Mr. Ainsworth's Church of
Separatists have judged of all his critical expositions by the major vote? Tell
the World that all the Critics, and Dr. Walton's Labors and all such men's,
must stand or fall at the judgment of the majority of people or Ministers that
never studied those tongues. (If you think I take my self for one of these
Judges, you are quite mistaken.)

And I may ask you, Are you not herein a man singular even to admiration? And
yet will you plead thus, as if it were against singularity? Are not all
Protestants, Papists, Christians, learned Heathens, agreed of the Rule that I
gave? All your University, save your self, (I hope in charity) do think that
your Professors, and Readers, and Tutors, are to be believed in their several
Professions and Readings, before all their unlearned Pupils, or any others that
are ignorant. What sort of men in the World are more faulty in tying up men's
Faith too much to men, than the Papists are? And yet I presume you know that
they commonly acknowledge, that in Dogmatical difficulties, especially such as
depend on Arts and Sciences, (such as Defining for the most part is,) the
majority even in a Council that are therein unlearned, learned, are not so much
to be heard as one eminently learned in those things. One Gabriel, Ockam, Greg.
Arim: One Scotus, Rada, Lychetus: One Pennous, Vasqu^^, Ruiz: Or if you had
rather, one Bradwa^dine, Bannes, Alvarez, Twisse, is more to be heard in
telling us, what Concurse, Predetermination, Natural Free Will are, than many
that never studied the point; (though yet perhaps the best of them may deserve
little regard about unsearchable things.)

If you please but to read Mr. Femble his Vind. Great. you will find somewhere
almost the very words of the rule or saying of mine, which you exceptingly
recite.

Sect. 48. 5. But what mean you to bring in the intimation, that thus [the
great truths of God will depend on humane suffrages, even whether God shall be
God?] I beseech you consider, 1. Whether you do well to number Artificial,
Logical Definitions controverted by the greatest Divines, with [the great
truths of God?] How various are the Definitions of Justification, (considered
also variously, as Constitutive, Sentential, Executive, in this life, at the
last Judgment, in fore Dei, i^ foro Conscientiae, in foro Humano, Civili,
Ecclesiastico, etc) which are given by great Divines? And how various the
definitions of Faith (between that of Camero, and such others as place it in
the intellect Amesius, and such others as place it in the will; Davenant, and
such others as place it in both; Pemble, and such others as make them one
faculty?) The differences about the act, the formal object, the material
object, (as whether with Chamier we must hold, that the spirits inward
testimony that you are justified, be verbum Dei and Fidei objectum, with
abundance such) are too too many, when yet perhaps most mean the same thing,
and differ but in Logical notions. And do you well to frighten men into
suspicions and contentions, out of their charity and peace, by telling them
that these are the great truths of God, and likening them to the Question,
whether God shall be God? As if you knew not that by such melancholies and
phantasms, the Church has been brought into the unhappy, military, distracted
state that it is in. It is work fit for a Divine and Healer, to make the World
believe that the great truths of God, and the Godhead it self are at the stake,
in such Logical quarrels, and that men differ further than they do?

6. But did you not see that I before expressly excepted all matters necessary
to Salvation from humane trust? (Some will say, I doubt, too far, that see not
other explications.)

7. And I beseech you, is it all one for truth to depend on humane suffrages
(yea, God himself,) and for an ignorant man or Scholar to depend on his
Teacher, so far as fide humana to believe him before ten unlearned men? Is this
fit doctrine for a Doctor and Master of a Literate Society? Say then in your
Lectures, [Hearers and Scholars, this and that is the true definition of Faith
and Justification, (even of the various sorts of Faith and Justification;) but
while I tell you so, regard and believe what I and many such others say to you,
no more than you would do many unlearned men, or any dissenters that tell you
that I err, or speak heretically herein; lest God and his Truth depend on
humane suffrages.] And because I (fain would, but) cannot find any other
meaning in your words, without taking you to be guilty of what I would not
suspect, and consequently, that you expect no more regard or belief of this
your Treatise, as such, I cease from any further animadversions on it, as the
less necessary.

Only adding, that your conclusion that sounds loud with the name of Popery,
needs no other answer than what I have formerly given Mr. Crandon, Mr. Eyres,
Mr. Bagshaw, Mr. Danvers, and such others, who often cry out [Antichristian] (a
frightful word,) when they needed but awakening to convince them that they were
but frightened in a dream.

ERRATA.
Page 1. lin. antep. r. T. Tully. p. 191. l. 12. r. God. p. 215. l. 16. r.
integris. We

Quest. Whether Infants have Original Sin? Aff. (And of Original Righteousness.)
THat I may as briefly and yet as clearly as I can (considering that necessary
brevity) dispatch this Controversy, I must 1. tell you what original sin is;
and 2. assert and open the Affirmative proposition; and 3. give you some
Arguments for it.

I. In order to the first, we must 1. enquire What sin is; 2. What the word
[Original] here signifies; 3. What Original Righteousness was.

1. Sin is (...), an irregularity, or a dissonancy or disconformity to the Law
of God, in a subject. It is any defect, inclination or action contrary to the
rule of Righteousness. The form of it is Relative. Disconformity is a true
relation, as well as Conformity; as crooked is as well as straight, and
dissimile as well as simile.

2. We now call it [Original] sin, because it is in us ab origin, or by
propagation, and not only because it is the original of all other sin.

3. Concerning Original Righteousness (which must first be understood) we must
enquire, 1. Whether it was natural or supernatural; 2. Wherein it did consist.

For the first, 1. It must be understood that the Righteousness which we
enquire after, is, 1. Qualitative; the holy inclinations of the soul, called
the Image of God: 2. and Relative; the Innocence or Justifiableness of man: but
not, 3. the Active Righteousness: for that was, 1. after Creation, 2. freely
performed by man himself: and yet it may extend to that as it is denominated
from the inclining principle.

And for the question, 1. As [Natural] signifies, that which was created in
us; or which we had in the beginning, with our being, from God as our gracious
Creator, so Original Righteousness was Natural: that is, 1. It was not given
him at any time following his Creation, 2. Nor was it given at the same time,
as a thing distinct from the soundness, and rectitude, and integrity of his
nature: but was that rectitude it self, and as much concreated with man, as
health and beauty with the body.

2. As [natural] signifies that which belongs to the essence of man, and is
inseparable from him; so original righteousness was not natural; no more than
health and beauty are to the body.

3. As [Natural] signifies that which is now propagated and born with us, and
comes by generation to man in his lapst estate, so Original Righteousness is
supernatural.

4. Though as it signifies that which would have been propagated to posterity,
if the Parents had not sinned and lost it, so Original Righteousness is natural.

5. As [Natural] signifies that which may be recovered, or maintained by mere
natural means; so Original Righteousness is not Natural: for though to Adam it
was as natural to the soul as health and beauty to the body, yet 1. He was
commanded by supernatural revelation certain positive duties for the exercise
and maintaining of it, and for the attainment of salvation, which was its end.
2. And now we are deprived of it, we cannot expect the restoration but by means
supernatural: even by Christ, and the Spirit, and supernatural revelations.

And that Original Righteousness is [Natural] so far as I have said, that is,
concreated, and should have been propagated to posterity, if not lost by
Parents, I shall here prove by several Arguments; because I find Dr. Tailor and
others that deny Original sin, do build on this supposition, that Infants are
deprived of this Righteousness as some superadded thing; and yet be in puris
naturalibus without sin. But there is no such state, nor ever was, as a state
of pure nature in a rational creature, without holiness or sin; as I prove:

Arg. 1. Man was naturally able and disposed to know God to be God, and his
God: go. He was naturally able and disposed to love him as God, and his God:
which is the sum of his Original Righteousness.

By disposed, I mean morally inclined, and not void of that holy inclination to
love God, which is the life of morality, and rectitude of the will.

The Antecedent is undoubted: if the rational nature had not been disposed to
know God, it had been blind, deformed, and not fit for the ends of its creation.

The Consequence is proved thus. If the understanding had been disposed to know
God, and not the will to love him as God, then the will would have been created
lame, and deformed, and unfit for the ends of its creation; and there would
have been a disproportion, if not a conflict, between the faculties of the
soul: but the Consequent is not to be admitted: go. nor the Antecedent.

Arg. 2. God made not man without all moral good: go. He made him with the
inclination to God, (which we call Charity in habit, or disposition), which was
his Original Righteousness. We speak not of Active good; for that was to follow
his creation: but of inward Virtue in habit or disposition. The Antecedent is
proved: 1. In that else he had been imperfect, as to his end; 2. And not born
the Image of God's goodness: and by the other reasons hereafter following. And
if God made man without all moral virtue and goodness, then could he lose and
fall from none.

The consequence is proved, because there can be no proper moral good, where
the true principle and end are wanting: but where the love of God is wanting,
the true principle and end is wanting: go. etc. God is the end: Love is the
adhesion to God: Heathens and unregenerate men have no moral good, any further
than they have some kind of love to God, and respect him as the end: Which as
it is in them but analogically called love to God, so have they but an
analogical morality.

Arg. 3. Man was created in the Image of God: go. he was created in Original
Righteousness, which consisted in the inclination of the soul to God, as God.
The Antecedent is expressed in Genesis 1. 26, 27. The consequence is proved from
Ephesians. 4. 24. with Col. 3. 10. which show that the Image of God (besides that
which was in our Essentials, in power, understanding, and will) consisted in
wisdom righteousness, and true holiness. It Is impossible that the moral Image
of God should be without Original Righteousness, and the love of God.

Arg. 4. God looked on man when he had created him, and saw that he was very
good, Genesis 1. 31. go. he saw that he had an inclination to his Maker, or
habitual love to God: for the rational creature cannot be very good without it.

Arg. 5. If man was made for God as his ultimate end, then was he made with
Original Righteousness (or an holy inclination to love God): but man was made
for God as his ultimate end: go. etc. The minor is certain: Though it be
doubtful whether naturally man could know that he might enjoy God by immediate
vision of his Glory; and also whether it should be in Heaven or on Earth, or
where; and also whether he could obtain the beatifical vision without
supernatural revelation and assistance; yet it was plain, that he was made for
God as his end, that is, to please him, and to love him, and be beloved by him,
and enjoy him according to his capacity: 1. Else it had been no duty of man by
nature to intend God as his end, and to love him above all: 2. And it had been
no part of his sin or misery to take up short of God: which are false, as shall
be showed. The major is proved thus: All the works of God are disposed for the
attainment of their ends: go. so was man, and go. with Original Righteousness:
for without Charity, (in the habit or inclination), and so without Original
Righteousness, man had not been disposed to his end, but had been left in an
unfitness, and indifferency, inclined no more to God than to any creature.

Moreover, man was created with an inclination to good, as good, so far as he
perceived it; and go. with the greatest inclination to the greatest good: but
to man in his natural integrity God appeared as the greatest good; otherwise
the understanding could not have discerned that truth which the whole creation
manifested: which is not to be imagined.

Moreover, man by nature was inclined to his own felicity formally, and
objectively so far as he knew it: but by nature he knew God to be objectively
his felicity; (though he might not know the immediate vision, he could not but
know that it was his happiness to be accepted and beloved by his Maker, and
enjoy him according to his capacity); go. etc.

Moreover, no creature can satisfy the mind of man, or fulfill his desire: go.
Man in his natural integrity was inclined to God, who only can satisfy.

Moreover, it is natural for the creature to desire the perfection of that
which it had in imperfection: but it cannot be denied but Adam had some
knowledge of God, as God, and so as the chief good, and consequently some
inclination to him, (suppose it never so small): go. he naturally desired to
know and love him perfectly; and go. it must needs be that God was his end, and
he had Original Righteousness.

Arg. 6. Man was naturally obliged to love God above all, and serve and please
him with all his powers: go. he was naturally disposed hereunto. The Antecedent
is plain; in that God by mere Resultancy having made man a rational free agent,
was related to him as his Creator, Lord, and Ruler, and Benefactor; and man
related to him as his creature, as his own, as his subject, and as his
Beneficiary: and go. must needs be bound by virtue of this relation, to love
God with all his heart, and be thankful to him, and devoted to his will and
service. The consequence is proved; in that God fitteth all his creatures to
their use, not only by a naked power, but by a convenient inclination for the
actuating of that power: go. he did so by man: he did not lay all this duty on
him, without giving him an aptitude and disposition suitable thereto.

Arg. 7. The contrary Doctrine too much favors Infidelity, as to man's
immortal happiness with God.

For, 1. If man's nature, as completed by the Creator, was not made for, and
suited and disposed to the fruition of God in immortality, super-added Grace
and Redemption must be conceived to make man as it were another creature, and
give him another nature; and so that God should presently change the nature
that he had newly made; and that Grace were to make man holy, as if it were to
make a beast to be a man, and elevate him above the tendency of all his natural
perfections: which will seen improbable. 2. It denies all the arguments for
the immortality of the soul, that are fetched from nature: which is not to be
done. If the nature of the soul can prove its immortality, it must accordingly
prove its immortal happiness, or misery; for a neutral state cannot thence be
proved: and go. it must prove that happiness to be in the love of God; and so
that the soul was inclined to it.

Arg. 8. There is no word of God, that mentions the super-adding of Original
Righteousness, by any following gift of God, distinct from our creation: go. it
cannot by divine Faith be believed that such a following gift there was.

Arg. 9. Regeneration is man's reparation and restoration to God: go. man fell
from God; and so from the love of God: and it is the reparation of that Image
of God in which he was created, Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 24.

Arg. 10. It is expressly said, Eccl. 7. 29. that God made man upright: but his
righteousness was his uprightness: go. he also made him righteous. So much of
that question.

2. As to the next question, Wherein Original Righteousness does consist; 1. It
consists in the souls inclination to God as God; that is in the habit or
disposition, or propensity of the soul to love God for himself, as the infinite
good, and also as our felicity. 2. In the understandings disposition to know
God as one to be thus beloved. 3. In a holy vivacity Godward. 4. In the
ordination and subjection of all the inferior faculties to the understanding
and will thus inclined. 5. And relatively, in the innocence hence resulting.

And now we may hence see what original sin is. In Adam himself the first sin
was actual, and thence followed the habitual pravity: in us the first in order
of nature is Adam's sin imputed justly, because we were in him, and in our
immediate Parents, who derived it from him; and herewith is conjoined the
pravity or corruption of our nature, which contains these things following:
1. The privation of the true love of God, as our principal end, to be loved for
himself, and as our felicity; and herewith the privation of the love of
holiness, his image: and so of the rectitude of the will. 2. The privation of
the true and savoury knowledge of God and his image, and estimation of them.
Here note that it is the privation of the inclination, disposition or habit
that I speak of, and not of the act. 3. In a deadness and inactivity Godwards.
4. In the inordinate adhesion or inclination of the sensitive appetite to its
objects. 5. In the inordinate inclination of the will to our selves, especially
our carnal interest. The matter of original sin is in these.

II. For the explication of the Thesis, I desire that these things may be
noted, besides what is said.

1. It is original sin (increased by our sinful acts) that hinders us from
knowing original sin. As it is the ophthalmie, or gutta serena, or suffusion,
that hinders the eye, by the glass to see its own disease. Original sin lies
very much in an inordinate self-love, or selfish inclination: and the more any
man has of that, the more unwilling and unapt he is to know it: and much more
unapt to be truly humbled for it; and go. unsanctified men that are strangers
to true self-denial, are apt to plead against the being of original sin, and
are hardly brought to know it in themselves.

2. Sin is a word that is usually and properly taken so largely as to contain
all moral evil; or all defects, inclinations and actions contrary to the rule
of holiness and righteousness, and deserving any punishment: and thus we take
it in the question. But sometimes sin is taken more narrowly, as signifying
only the actual transgression of the Law; but we take it not so narrowly here
(for one kind of sin only).

3. Some sins have a greater degree of sinfulness, or malignity in them than
some others have: and so when we say that infants have original sin, we do not
equal it in degree of malignity with the sins of the adult. Materially there is
more malignity or opposition to God, in original, than in ordinary actual sins:
but formally there is more culpability in many actual sins, than in original
sin, because they are more fully voluntary, and in our power. Yet the confirmed
sinful habits of the adult, where original sin is strengthened by actual, are
worst of all: so that as Accidens is said to be called Ens but by analogy of
attribution, as having a less participation of the kind; and yet it is truly
Ens: so the original sin of infants is called sin by such an analogy, as having
a less participation of the common nature of sin, in the form and culpability.

4. In such a degree as infants are subjects of Christ's Kingdom, in such a
degree also their original pravity is properly sin.

5. In such a degree as their Parents righteousness would have been imputable
to them, if none of their Ancestors from the creation had sinned; and as their
own inherent holiness is imputable to the sanctified infants as a moral good:
in such a degree also is their progenitors sin imputed to them, and their
original pravity imputed to them as a moral evil.

6. We do not assert that any of the adult are damned for original sin alone;
nor that their original sin is a remediless evil: but that a remedy is
provided, and means appointed for men to use, in order to their deliverance
from the guilt and pravity; which if they refuse, they lie under a double guilt.

7. Original sin, and the misery deserved and due to the subject, is a
remediable evil in infants themselves: As their Parents have propagated a
sinful guilty nature to them, so if their Parents will unfeignedly dedicate
them to Christ, and offer and engage them to God in the holy Covenant, which
Baptism is the sign and seal of, they shall be accepted by God, according to
the tenor of his promise.

8. Our question extends not to the degree of infants punishment, whether
they shall have more or less? whether pain of loss only, or of sense also, or
how far?

9. An ordinary occasion of seducing many into the denial of original sin, is,
the equalling God's Laws with the Laws of man; (which yet afford much matter
for their confutation). Man's Laws meddle not so much with the heart, and are
not a rule for men's secret thoughts, dispositions and inclinations, as God's
Laws are; for man knows not the heart, nor is made the judge of it, further
than it is manifested by words or deeds: but the heart is as open to God as the
actions, and the distempers of it as loathsome to him: and go. his Laws condemn
even vicious dispositions and habits as such.

10. The will is the first defiled faculty and seat of sin: and all the rest of
the faculties are capable of sin, but secondarily, and by participation from
the will: and there is a threefold voluntariness. 1. There is an actual
voluntariness, or volition. 2. An habitual or dispositive voluntariness. 3. A
moral, that is, a reputative voluntariness. This last may be in several cases
distinct from the two former. 1. In case a man by contract engage himself to
stand to what another does: though that other do somewhat that is against his
will in the thing, yet his consent to the general has made him guilty, as
being reputatively willing of it. 2. In case a man will the cause of a
necessary effect, or any way promote that effect, when he should not, he is
reputatively willing of the effect. 3. In case a man by consent be a member of
a society, whose constitution engages all the members in a participation of
their acts, and the consequents; so that what is done by a major vote, is taken
as the act of all, as to the good or evil consequents: here every member is
reputatively an offender when the society offends, so far as that
constitution engaged them.

4. In case of a natural power that another has to choose or refuse for us:
and this is the case of Parents and their infants, and idiot children, that
having no capacity themselves to choose or refuse, their Parents wills are
reputatively their wills, in all cases wherein their Parents have power to
dispose of them; as it is in cases of inheritance among us. So in Baptism the
Parents have power to engage the child to Christ, as all the Jews had power
(and were bound) to engage their children in covenant to God: where the child
reputatively consents. So Adam having power to retain or reject that
righteousness of nature which then he was possessed of, and might have derived
to his posterity, and to choose life or death for himself, and (in some sort)
for his posterity, we reputatively refused life in his refusal or rejection.

III. I come now to the proof of the Thesis, [that infants have original sin].

Arg. 1. From Romans 5. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. If all have sinned, then
infants have sinned; (and that can be only by original sin). But all have
sinned: go. infants have sinned. Whether (...) be [in whom] or [in that] or
[forasmuch as] I make no great matter of. (Though I see no reason but with the
vulgar Latin, and others, we should turn it [in quo]). If infants have sin, it
is as much as I am proving. The minor is expressly affirmed in ver. 12. [all
have sinned]; which is rendered in other words, ver. 19. [many were made
sinners]. The consequence of the major can have nothing said against it, but
that by [All] is meant only [All the adult], and infants are excluded. But this
is such wilful violence to the Text, as that all Scripture may by such
interpretation be eluded, and words shall signify nothing. 1. The express
universal affirmation may not be expounded by restraining terms, without some
cogent reason: but here is no cogent reason brought, nor can be: all the reason
of the adversaries is but the point now in question, which if they may beg,
they may thence deny all Texts that be against them, because they are against
them.

2. It is all men that die that the Apostle speaks of: but infants die: go.
he speaks of infants. The major is plain, v. 12. [Death by sin; and so death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned]. Here the sinners and dyers are
made the same; and more than so, death is the effect of their [having sinned]:
it go. passes upon all men, for that all have sinned; go. not without their
sin. And the next verses fullier prove it purposely. Where death reigns,
there sin is imputed: but death reigns on infants; go. sin is imputed to
infants: and also the [All] before mentioned includes them; for it is the same
persons that the Apostle speaks of in these verses, 12, 13, 14. The major is
proved from the 13 and 14 verses, else the Apostle's argument were vain; for
this is his medium to prove that sin was imputed before the Law, viz. because
death reigned before the Law, even from Adam to Moses: go. the reign of death
will prove the imputation of sin; which is the same with [having sinned],
mentioned, ver. 12. It is the [all that have sinned] that are said to have sin
imputed to them.

3. The All that have sinned, ver. 12. are the same All that are made
righteous, and have the justification of life, and that shall reign in life by
Jesus Christ, ver. 16, 17, 18, 19. (This is plain in the Context, in the
opposition): But infants are included in the latter All [that shall reign in
life by Jesus Christ, etc.] go. infants are included in the former All [that
have sinned]. He that denies the minor, must deny not only the Baptism, but
the justification and salvation of all infants.

4. All old interpretations which the Churches have used, (that are now most
known), do show, that thus they understood the Text. The Syriack turns it by
[so death passed on all the sons of men, for that all have sinned]. The Arabic
[seeing all have now sinned] referring to that past sin. The Ethiopick thus,
[And as by the iniquity of one man sin entered into the World, and by that sin
death came upon all men, because that sin is imputed to all men, even to them
that knew not what that sin is]. Here is a Paraphrase instead of a Version,
more fully to express this sense. The [in quo] makes the sense of the Latin
Interpreter past doubt. This is the first argument from these verses.

Arg. 2. from the same verses, especially 18: They that are under condemnation
by Adam's sin, have original sin (at least the imputed part). But infants are
under condemnation for Adam's sin: go. infants have original sin. If I prove no
more but that [they are under condemnation] for the minor it is enough: for the
consequence is thence apparent. The major is plain, in that condemnation is
only for sin, (and infants have no sin but original): (...) is as essentially
related to culpa, as poena is. The minor is proved from ver. 18. [By the
offense of one judgment came on all men to condemnation]: or as the Syriack
rendereth it, [For the offense of one condemnation is on all]: or as the
Ethiopick, [All men are condemned]; so ver. 15. [Through the offense of one
many are dead.] That [All men] includes infants here, the former arguments
prove. This one 18 th. ver. of Romans 5. were there no more in all the Scripture,
is so plain for an imputation of Adams sin on all to condemnation, that it
might end the controversy.

Both major and minor I yet further confirm. 1. That it is a condemnation
proving the condemned to be sinners by just imputation, is manifest, 1. in that
ver. 13, 14. sin is hence said to be imputed to the sufferers: 2. ver. 12. they
are said to have sinned: 3. ver. 19. they are said to be made sinners. If any
say that this signifies but metonymically, [to be used as sinners]; I answer,
1. He that would make what his list of God's plain words by pretended unproved
metonymies, is not to be believed. 2. If it were true, yet it must mean such a
using men as sinners, as implies them to be justly so reputed, and their being
sinners must be connoted as the cause, as it is in all punishment. It is surely
a penal evil to the adult, by the adversaries confession: and here is no
distinction. 3. To be [made righteous], which is the opposite member, is more
than to be [used as righteous, though we have no sin at all inherent or
imputed: go. to be [made sinners] is more than to be [used as sinners, though
we have no sin at all inherent, or imputed]. 4. That evil interpretation does
but accuse God of injustice, of which anon.

2. And for the minor, it is sufficient to prove that infants are included; 1.
Because infants die on this account. 2. Because it is a [being made sinners by
one man's disobedience, ver. 19.] and a being [dead, and under condemnation
through one man's offence], as ver. 15. 18. that is mentioned; and those that
are now adult, had their relation in infancy to Adam's offense as well as
after. It is not actual sin that brings them to be thus related to Adam. It is
both by one offense, ver. 18. and by the offense of one, ver. 17. and ver. 15.
[(...)], in or by the sin of one. It is not go. the effect of actual sins of
the adult, that the Apostle here principally speaks of, (much less, only them):
but it is the participation and imputation of that one man's offense, which he
opposes to the righteousness of one.

Arg. 3. from the punishment of infants. If infants are punished, they have
original sin. But infants are punished, go. they have original sin; (for they
have no other). The consequence is certain, because it is essential to
punishment to be propter malum morale, the effect of sin as the meritorious
cause. All that requires proof is the minor, which I have proved at large in
another disputation (of the guilt of our immediate Parents sins). To which I
add; 1. God does not (ordinarily at least) afflict any rational creature with
death, but for their sin. But God does ordinarily afflict infants even with
death: go. he does it for their sin. The minor is too well known. The major I
prove thus: 1. In the lamentations of Jeremy, the pains of the sucking children
are mentioned often among the rest: and of all its said, chapter 3. 33. [For he
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men]; that is, He does
it not till he be provoked by their sins. But if he afflict even unto death,
all infants (that so die) in the World without their desert by sin, then he
does it willingly; even because he will do it, without their demerit. But
[wherefore does a living man complain? a man for the punishment of his sin?
ver. 39.] Though it be the adult that principally complain, yet this intimates
that all suffer for their sin.

Ezekiel. 18. 23. [Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die, says
the Lord God?] 32. [For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies,
says the Lord God]. Ezekiel. 33. 11. [Say unto them, As I live, says the Lord
God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked. Much less has he so much
pleasure in the death of innocents, as to kill them ordinarily without their
desert. Romans 6. 23. [The wages of sin is death:] Scripture speaks of no other
death to man, but what is the fruit of sin. 1 Cor. 15. [In Adam all die;] and
Genesis 3. 19. [Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return,] extends to all the
posterity of Adam (ordinarily); which shows some participation in the sin: or
else why should we all participate so much of the suffering for it. 1 Cor. 15.
26. [The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death]. By enemy is meant a
penal evil, which Christ was to remove as our Redeemer: go. even to infants,
death is a penal evil. 1 Cor. 15. 56. [The sting of death is sin, and the
strength of sin is the Law]; that is, As a serpent could not wound us without
its sting, so neither could death have any power over us to kill us, but for
sin: nor sin have any force to oblige us to this punishment, but by the Law.
This is spoken of the death of infants as well as others, (unless you will deny
their resurrection): go. sin is the sting, that is, the deserving cause, even
of their death. Mic. 1. 5. [For the transgression of Jacob is all this, and for
the sins of the house of Israel]. Hence Satan is said to have the power of
death, Heb 2. 14. as the executioner of God's wrath for sin; from whom Christ
delivers us.

2. If the death of infants be an act of God's justice on them, then it is a
punishment: (for it is no act of remunerative justice, go. it must be of
punitive justice, if of any). But it is an act of God's justice on them; as I
prove. 1. It is the execution of God's sentence, Genesis 3. 19. go. it is an act
of his justice on them that were sentenced: which was mankind.

2. It is their condemnation, Romans 5. 18. go. it is an act of justice on them.

3. Subjects are ordinarily secured from being by their Sovereigns put to death
without any desert of theirs, even by the justice of the Sovereign: but infants
are God's subjects: go. ordinarily they are secured by his justice from being
put to death by him without any desert of theirs.

The major is proved, 1. From the very nature of Government and Justice.
Governing Justice consists in giving to all the subjects according to their
deserts, ut bonis been sit, and malis male: go. to kill the innocent, and that
ordinarily, is contrary to Governing Justice. 2. From the Law of Nature and
Scripture; which constantly threatens the sinner, and only the sinner, and
promises good to them that sin not. Now the contrary opinion, 1. either
denies God to be a King to infants, (of which anon); or, 2. denies his
Justice, 3. and nullifieth the use of his Law, which is to be Norma judicii.

2. That infants are God's subjects, is proved, 1. In that they are of the
number of reasonable creatures, (though yet they have not the use of reason,
and go. are not perfect members of his Kingdom). 2. In that they are to be
entered into the holy Covenant with him, as his subjects, (Deuteronomy. 29. etc.) 3. In
that they have promises and threatenings in his Laws. 4. They are subjects in
all particular Commonwealths, which are but parts of his universal Kingdom.
But this I have proved at large in my Treatise of Infants Church Membership and
Baptism.

Obj. But God is an absolute Lord as well as a King or Ruler, and go. may do
with his own as he list. Answ. His dominion or propriety is in order of nature
antecedent to his Government or Kingdom, and so in that antecedent instant he
may do with his own what he will; and so he may still: but then by becoming a
Governor to the rational nature, he thereby signifies that he will give to all
according to their works, or moral aptitude; for God cannot be an unjust
Governor; nor without justice. And his Laws do signify this yet more.

Moreover, the contrary opinion overthrows all our consolation, and leaves
us uncertain whether God will not damn all the godly; at least it denies them
any comfort from the light or law of Nature, and the justice of God, though
they had no sin of their own. For if God notwithstanding all his Governing
Justice, may and do ordinarily kill the innocent because he is an absolute
Lord, then he may damn the innocent hereafter for ought we know notwithstanding
his governing justice: For instance, the adversaries must on the same grounds
say, that for ought they know all infants that die in infancy are damned. For
God may, no question, torment his own, as he is an absolute owner of them, as
well as kill them. And if his natural justice give no security from damnation
to the innocent, then neither can his righteous Laws, and then they can have no
security at all: which is false and injurious to God and man.

Obj. Bruits die without their desert. Answ. God is not the Rector of bruits,
nor are they his subjects, and go. he is not engaged by any relation to deal
with them in justice, nor are they capable of justice, remunerative or
vindictive, nor are they under any Law.

Arg. 4. Infants are capable of moral good, (and have such): go. infants are
capable of moral evil, (and have it). The capacity is the chief thing in
controversy: for if we prove that they are capable of having virtue or vice in
habit or disposition, without consent, then I find none that will deny the
consequence, that de facto they have it. That infants have moral good, is
proved thus: 1. Else they could not be inwardly sanctified: 2. Else they did
not morally differ one from another: 3. And so one were no more amiable to God
than another: 4. Nor one any more fit for Heaven than another: and so none
should be saved that die in infancy, as being unqualified for salvation: or if
holiness inherent be needless, then all might be saved as well as any. 5. And
then Baptism, nor any privileges of holy birth, or dedication to God, could
give no hope of any moral good upon them. 6. And thus they are made mere bruits
that are capable of no moral good or evil. All which are most absurd, and
disproved in my Treatise of Infant Baptism.

The consequence is undeniable. If they are capable of moral good, without
actual moral volitions, so are they of moral evil: for there is eadem ratio. If
a disposition to holy action be a moral good or virtue, then a disposition to
evil actions is vice or moral evil.

Arg. 5. Infants have a privation of moral good: but a privation of moral good
is a moral evil: go. infants have a moral evil. The major is proved, in that
Adam's posterity should have been born in original righteousness, or moral
goodness, if he had not sinned: go. it is a privation of a moral good to be
born without it, and not a mere negation. The minor is undeniable; privations
belonging by reduction to the kind of that which they are a privation of: else
a privation would be but a mere negation; that is, no privation at all.

Arg. 6. All that are the members of Jesus Christ, and saved by him, or for
whom he died as a Redeemer, are (when existent) sinners: but infants are the
members of Christ, and saved by him; he is their Redeemer, and died for them:
go. they are (when existent) sinners: go. they have original sin. The major I
prove from Matthew. 1. 21. [Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his
people from their sins]. If it be the very reason of his denomination, (why he
is called a Savior), because he saves his people from their sins, then he is
a Savior to none but sinners: but the antecedent is true: go. etc. The
antecedent is in the Text most plain. The consequence is undeniable; because
the essence or formal reason denominateth: go. he can be called a Savior to
none other. And to prevent all cavils, note that, 1. it is sin it self, and not
mere suffering, much less undeserved suffering that connoteth not sin as the
cause, that is here mentioned. 2. That it is [their sin], and not other men's
sin, that they are said to be saved from. Nothing go. but violence can evade
this evidence.

Matthew. 9. 12. The whole need not a Physician, but the sick. To be sick is to
be sinful: to be a Physician is to be the Savior: go. those that have no sin
have no need of a Savior.

Ephesians. 5. 23, 25, 26, 27. [Christ is the Head of the Church, and Savior of the
Body]: and how does he save them? [Christ loved the Church, and gave himself
for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the
word; that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing]. So that to be a Savior to the body, is to
sanctify, cleanse, and wash it, that it may be without spot. Those go. that
have no spots or filth to be washed and cleansed from, cannot be of that body,
or have Christ for their Savior.

Rev. 1. 5, 6. The Apostle speaks in the name of the Church, [Vnto him that
has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, -- be glory, etc.]
If infants come to Heaven, they must give this praise to Christ for washing
them from their sins, as well as others.

His work on the Cross was to purge, or make purgation of sin, Heb. 1. 3. He
died for our sins, 1 Cor. 15. 3. He died for us while we were sinners and
enemies, to reconcile us to God, Romans 5. 6, 8, 10. He came to give his life a
ransom for many, Matthew. 20. 28. He gave himself a ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.
6. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being
dead to sin, should live to righteousness, by whose stripes we are bealed, 1
Pet. 24, 25. For Christ also once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust,
that he might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3. 18. Christ our Passover is
sasacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. 7. He appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice
of himself, Heb. 9. 26. He was once offered to bear the sins of many, ver. 28.
By his own blood he entered into the holy place, having obtained eternal
Redemption. He offered himself without spot to God, to purge our consciences,
etc. And for this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means
of death, for the redemption of the transgressions under the first Testament,
they that are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance, Heb. 9.
12, 14, 15. He is the propitiation for the sins of the whole World, 1 John 2.
2. If one died for all, then were all dead, 2 Cor. 5. 14. that is, in sin, and
for sin. Joh. 1. 29; Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
World. A multitude of such passages of Scripture tell us, that Christ's death
was for sinners only; and go. that he died for none but sinners: for what need
had the innocent of a satisfaction to Justice, and of a Sacrifice, and Ransom,
and Redemption? No one text of Scripture can be produced, in which Christ is
said to die for any that had no sin, or to be the Redeemer or Savior of any
such. And go. to say that he died for infants, to procure them supernatural
Grace, and Heaven, and not to save them from their sin, is vain. Scripture
knows no such design of Christ's death. And the very privation of that
rectitude which they call supernatural grace, is sin; as is manifested: nor can
a rational creature be shut out of Heaven, but penally for his sins; it being a
very grievous punishment.

And for the minor, (that Christ died for infants, and is their Savior, etc.)
it is proved: 1. In that he is often said to die for all the World. 2. In that
there is no other name under Heaven given by which we can be saved. 3. In that
he has taken infants into his Church and Covenant, before and since his
incarnation: and took them in his arms and blessed them, and said his Kingdom
was of such. 4. In that he would have gathered the Jewish infants with their
Parents into his Church, Matthew. 23. 37. 5. Else they are not Christians, (no
not imperfect ones), nor to be baptized. Many more proofs I have given in the
foresaid Treatise of Infant Baptism. And few I think deny the minor.

Arg. 7. All that ought to be baptized with the Christian Baptism, are sinners.
But some infants ought to be baptized with the Christian Baptism: go. they are
sinners.

The minor I shall suppose to be proved in the foresaid Treatise. The major I
have proved at large in my Disput. of Right to Sacraments: especially page 79,
80. where it is proved that Christ has commanded or instituted no other Baptism
but what is [for remission of sin:] (to p. 88.) The sign it self (the washing
by water, and burying under it, and rising from under) shows that this is
essential in the signification: what else but sin are we to be washed from?

Read over all the texts of Scripture that speak of Baptism, as instituted by
Christ; and when you have found that no one of them intimates such a thing as
baptizing them that are no sinners, washing them that are not unclean, then
tell us why we should believe that there is such a thing. Nay it imports a
false dissimulation with God; when we will assert infants to be washed by the
blood of Christ, when we believe that they have no sin, and need no such
washing.

Arg. 8. If infants have no sin, they must either never come to Judgment, or be
justified by the Law, or their mere innocence, without remission by a Redeemer:
but the consequent is false: go. so is the antecedent. The consequence is
undeniable, in that no justice can condemn the innocent: the Law will justify
them that have no sin; for its commination has nothing against them: such go.
need not pardon by a Redeemer.

The falsehood of both parts of the consequent, is proved easily. 1. Many
Scriptures show that all men shall be judged, Heb. 9. 27. all that die. Romans
14. 12. Joh. 5. 28, 29. all that are in the graves; with many such places. 2.
If infants be not judged, they would neither be justified nor condemned: but
that is not true, go. etc.

2. And that all infants (nor any) are not justified by the Law, or their own
Innocence, is plain in the Apostle's arguings, Romans 3. 4, and 5. throughout:
and in the Epist. to Galat. Romans 3. 20. by the deeds of the Law there shall no
flesh be justified in his sight. Romans 4. proves that even to Abraham and his
seed justification was by remission of sin through faith in Christ, and not by
the Law, or their own innocence. And if it was so with Abraham's seed, it is so
still with our seed.

Arg. 9. Romans 3. 23. 9, 10, etc. All have sinned, and come short of the Glory
of God, being justified freely by his Grace, through the redemption that is in
Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, etc. go. infants
have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God, and must be justified by this
propitiation for sin. Ver. 9. We have before proved that Jews and Gentiles are
all under sin. Ver. 19. That every mouth may be stopped, and all the World may
become guilty before God. If men will groundlesly say that all these universals
are to be limited to the adult, they do but say they will believe what they
list, and words shall signify what they will.

Obj. The Text speaks of actors in sin.

Answ. True, because it speaks of all the World, among whom the adult (actors)
were the principal part.

Obj. The word [All] is to be taken limitedly in many other Texts.

Answ. 1. What of that? shall we go. deny its properest signification, without
a proved necessity? and shall words be taken improperly by us at our pleasure,
because they are so sometimes where we may prove it? 2. Will you allow this
plea to them, that use it against the texts that speak for [Christ's dying for
all]: when yet they have as fair pretense? 3. The scope of the Apostle, and the
often repeated universals, plainly show that it is the guilt and condemnation on
one side, and the justification on the other side, of all simply, that are
condemned or justified, even of all the World, that he speaks of. And he lays
the strength of his Argument upon the universality: for if any might have
pleaded not-guilty before God, and justified by the Law, or their Innocence, it
had spoiled the Apostle's argument. So many plain Scriptures are not to be
forced.

Arg. 10. If infants (without a Redeemer) should have been all shut out of
Heaven, and denied everlasting happiness, then are they guilty of original sin.
But the Antecedent is true: go. so is the Consequent. The minor is granted by
those that do oppose us. If it were not, it is easily proved, 1. From all those
Scriptures that appropriate salvation to the Church, and to the members of
Christ, and to such as have it by his purchase and procurement, who has the
keys of the Kingdom. 2. From those Scriptures that tell us that if any have not
the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, Romans 8. 9. and that without
holiness none shall see God, Heb. 12. 14. and that except a man be regenerate,
and new Born, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; with many the like.
3. From the incapacity of an unholy soul to see and love God, and so to be
happy; it being a contradiction. And God has given us no ground to believe
that he will sanctify all infants after death: and that without any
satisfaction for their sin by the death of Christ.

The consequence of the major proposition is proved thus: Infants having souls
made capable of immortality, either shall live immortally, or not: If not, that
privation of everlasting life is an evil so great, that any rational man would
choose a perpetual tolerable punishment to escape it: and God would not thus
use so many subjects of his Kingdom, to whom he has undertaken to be a King,
and judge them righteously, and all without any measure of sin in them. And I
find not yet that the adversaries assert this: If they do, they make infants to
be but mere bruits; (of which anon). If they live an immortal life, (and rise
with others), then either in Heaven, or out of Heaven, in happiness, or not: If
not in happiness, (which is before proved, and by them granted), then it must
be in misery: 1. Because the very privation of that happiness is half hell and
more. 2. Because there is no middle state to a living rational creature: they
will have feeling and knowledge; and go. they shall feel good or evil to them:
and they cannot but know that they are deprived of Heaven and Happiness; which
knowledge must cause a positive grief. And thus God does afflict them by the
greatest privation, and some positive pain: which Reason, or Scripture, or his
relation of a righteous King and Judge, will not suffer us to think that he
does without any sin of theirs. For shall not the Judge of all the World do
righteously? Will he destroy the righteous with the wicked? far be it from him,
Genesis 18. 23, 24, 25. Had all the infants of the old World, of Sodom, of Amalek,
of Midian, been wholly free from participating in sin, they had not been
destroyed by a righteous Judge.

Arg. 11. If infants are under God's displeasure, or deprived of his acceptance
and complacency, then are they guilty of original sin: but the antecedent is
true: go. so is the consequent. If they were in the favor of God, they would
be saved; (for all the subjects of his Kingdom have the blessings and rewards
of loyal subjects, that are in favor with him): but without Christ and pardon
through his blood, they would not be saved: go etc. If they were not under his
displeasure, he would not deny them his sanctifying grace, and heavenly
inheritance, which they are capable of, and which is the portion of his
faithful ones. But these he does deny to some, and would deny to more, or all,
if it were not for their pardon and reconciliation through Christ. Nor would he
torment them with pain, (as he does many in this life), and after kill them,
(and then shut them out of Heaven), if he were well pleased with them.

The consequence is proved, in that nothing but sin can make God displeased
with a rational creature. Only moral evil can deprive them of his favor. Were
original corruption but malum physicum, such a natural evil as blindness,
lameness, sickness, madness, etc. God would not withdraw his favor for it. Man
hates a serpent or a toad that have no sin, because their natures are contrary
to ours: but no mere physical evil is evil to God, or contrary to his nature,
and go. none such is hated by him A toad is no more contrary or odious to God
than a lark: go. for such evil, infants could not fall under his displeasure.
He loves the sick, the lame, the leprous, as well as the most sound.

Arg. 12. Infants have a nature derived from their Parents, who were corrupt
and guilty: go. they cannot be incorrupt and innocent. The antecedent is
undeniable. The reason of the consequence is, because the cause can produce no
effect that is better than it self. What the effect receives, is from its
cause: and the cause cannot give that which it has not: go. Adam could not
convey to Cain or Abel by generation a nature that was innocent and holy, when
he had none but a guilty sinful nature himself.

As when Adam had sinned, each part of his body did bear its part in the guilt;
and if a leg or an arm had been cut off from him, that cutting off would not
make it become innocent; but at the resurrection it shall bear its share of
penalty, so the embrio, and the seed, blood, and spirits that caused it, were
as real parts of the Parents once, as a leg or arm; and when they were parts,
they could not be innocent: (otherwise you may as well say that the hand or
foot was innocent): and go. they could not merely by birth become innocent. It
is not the separation of the infant from the mother, that can put away the
guilt that once it had. If any say that a leg or arm themselves have no sin or
guilt, but all is in the will; they must then make the body to be no part of
the man, and must deny its pain, and its resurrection to everlasting pain or
joy. It Is granted that the will is the first and chief seat of moral good or
evil: but from thence the whole man does participate thereof: and go. it is the
man that is condemned or justified, punished or rewarded, and not the will only.

Obj. But the soul was no part of the Parent, though the body were: no nor the
body neither, for it is in a continual flux, and we have not the same body at
seven years old, which we received from our Parents.

Answ. 1. This argument (as to the body) is it by which our novel Infidels do
think to reason us out of the belief and hopes of a resurrection of these same
numerical bodies: and by the same reason you may as effectually prove, that the
body that commits murder or adultery this year, and dies seven years after,
shall not be condemned or punished for it; because it is not the same body that
committed the sin: but this ingenious folly will save none from punishment, nor
prove them guiltless of original sin. So much is permanent, as does essentially
constitute and identify the body.

And for the soul, 1. It is certain that it is essential to the man, and
certain that man begets a man; and go. certain that man begets the soul. And
though it be not by partition of the Parents soul, yet is it a true generation:
and go. the man begotten can be no better than he that begat.

Obj. If you say that the soul is ex traduce you will make it material, and so
mortal, and a compound of two communicated souls conjoined, viz. the Fathers
and the Mothers, etc.

Answ. If by materia, be meant substantia, quae potentia corpus est, or
substantia incompleta in potentia ad omnes formas, which is Aristotle's materia
prima; or if any element, or any body be hereby meant, so we deny that the soul
is material, or that it is hence inferred to be such. But if material be
extended as far as substantial, or so far as to comprehend spirits
(improperly), then it is granted on both sides, that the soul is material. But
supposing it taken in the usual sense, I answer, that God can cause spiritual
substances to propagate their kind: and go. such propagation proves neither
their materiality or mortality; no more than the creation of the first animals
proved their immortality: nor is it any inconvenience to grant, that two souls
do join in the communicative generation of a third, as long as it is not by
partition, or deperdition of any of their substance; no more than that two
candles conjoined should light a third. But the large handling of this would
require more time and words than we shall now spare. I refer the Reader
therefore to those that have handled this subject on purpose; and particularly
to Micraelius in his Ethnophronius. It is not a Traduction e potentia materiae
that we maintain. The materiale seminis is but as the oil to the flame, to
which the soul is conjunct. The semen contains quid immateriale; the soul is
in it, not only in potentia, but in actu, as it is in the leg or arm of a man.
If you object that then the soul is divided, and part of it dies quum semen
ejicitur and moritur: I answer; Not so; no more than it is divided when a man
is beheaded, or dies when a leg or arm dies that is cut off.

In brief, we must not argue ab ignotiore; nor deny a plain and certain truth,
(that man begets man), because we are uncertain of the manner of the
propagation. As men do in the controversy about Grace and Free Will, so do they
in this: they divide what are to be conjoined, for fear of giving too much to
the other side. As one denies special ascertaining Grace, and another denies
Free Will, when that Grace works by this Free Will; so some deny God's part
in the causing of the soul, and some deny man's part, because they are
unskilful in discerning the concourse. God does as much in it, as if man did
nothing: and is as fully the cause as if it were by a mere creation, and man
were no cause: and yet he causes it by man, even in the way of natural
procreation, which by a stablished Law he appointed in the beginning; and then
gave man a living soul that might propagate living souls. And more than so, it
is the soul that is the principal in procreating and being procreated: and that
spark of immortal life that is in semine, does by due cherishing of the further
causes, fabricate its own body: and the soul (as Scaliger says, ex Themistio),
sui domicilii non inquilina tantum est, sed and architecta (under God). And we
are most certain that our knowledge of the way or manner of God's influx into,
and concourse with second causes, is so much above our reach, that we are unfit
from presumptions about such a mystery, to argue against a revealed truth. Nay,
when we have conjectured at the manner, it is our wisest course to confess we
know it not. But as the wind blows where it lists, and we hear the sound of
it, but know not whence it comes, or whither it goes, so is it in the
outgoings of the spirit of God for the new birth, and in like manner of his
causation of the natural birth. But of these things we are certain; 1. That the
Parents beget the child: man begets man; by virtue of the nature, first given
them, with the law or blessing annexed, Increase and multiply; and God's
continued influence. 2. That man's soul is not debilitated in its vegetative
and sensitive operations, by being rational: 3. That go. man begets not less
than bruits. He that says the soul, as vegetative and sensitive, is not
begotten, makes man to beget less than bruits. 4. Yea he makes him to beget
nothing: for the body or mere matter is not begotten, but with the soul, nor
would the semen inanimatum come to be an embrio. 5. We are sure that semen in
corpore animatur anima illius cujus est corpus. 6. The conceit of two or three
souls, (which is the last refuge), and that the rational only is created, is at
large confuted by many; and it feigneth man not to procreate his kind, when
bruits do theirs; nor to beget children indeed, but something else that is
irrational. And yet even this way, (supposing God to have at the creation by a
decree, annexed his creating act of the rational soul, to man's procreating of
the sensitive), the propagation of original sin might be defended.

Obj. But by this doctrine still God is made the cause of the sin: for you say
he is the total cause of the soul, even as much as if man were no cause.

Answ. God causes it two ways: 1. At the first creation of man, he put a
virtue into the souls of our first Parents to propagate their like, on
supposition of his requisite universal influx, to bring that cause or virtue
into act. 2. As an universal cause he effectually procures second causes to do
their part, and draws forth their virtue, and communicates on his part all
that belongs to the universal cause to communicate. Now if God be the Author
of Original sin, it must be by one of these two acts, viz. by Creation, or by
his universal Causation and influence: but it is by neither of these. Not by
creation, giving the generative specifying virtue to man: for he made man
upright, and commanded him to continue so, and so it was an upright nature that
he should have propagated, if he himself had not depraved it by sin. Not by his
universal concourse or causality; for that causes only the soul as such, and
not as defective or corrupted: as the Sun causes the life of a toad as well as
of a lion, and of a stinking weed as well as of a flower of the greatest beauty
and sweetness; but is no cause of the ugly venomous nature of the toad, or of
the stinking nature of the weed, save only by accident; nor is it any fault in
the Sun, that such creatures are generated by it: so though God is the cause of
generation by his universal influx, yet is he not the cause of Original sin:
for the universal cause supposing the specifying virtue in the seed, does work
on all things according to their natures: and though God was and is the
specifying cause by creating the procreating force in man, yea and by his
constant creative emanation, yet he created not the vice, and go. is not the
cause of that.

Obj. But a lame man does not beget a lame child; nor a blind man a blind
child. Why then should a sinner beget a sinner, and corrupted Parents have a
corrupted issue?

Answ. The eye and leg are not the soul, which has the generative power, nor
yet essential parts of the body. But let any of the essentials of the body (as
the brain or heart) be depraved, and it will appear in the issue, (especially
if it be so with both the Parents): much more when the soul is depraved, by
whose power the body it self is formed, and which is most essential to the man,
the pravity must needs be communicated. Lameness and blindness in the Parents
alter not the procreating seed, but consist with its integrity. But none can
communicate that which he has lost, and has not either actually or virtually
himself.

Obj. Righteousness and holiness were not communicable by natural generation if
Adam had not fallen: go. by generation we have no privation of them.

Answ. 1. The antecedent is false: they would have been propagated to posterity
as health and beauty to the body, as I proved in the beginning. 2. If
generation as such had not conveyed them, yet if God had affixed, by a standing
law, his supernatural gifts to natural procreation, it would have proved
(against the consequent) that we are sinfully defective in being without them.

Obj. Learning and wisdom are not now derived to posterity.

Answ. Nor any thing that is acquired, and not natural.

Obj. Godliness is not now conveyed by nature: go. it should not have been so
then.

Answ. I deny the consequence: 1. Because that holiness that was natural then,
is supernatural now. You may propagate eyesight to your children because it is
natural: but you can neither restore your own, nor theirs, when it is put out,
without a supernatural power. 2. Because though Adam was our natural head and
root, and so had power to hold or lose the grace which he had received for
himself and us, yet when it came to the work of our restoration, he being
utterly insufficient to recover himself or us, the work is put into another
hand, and Jesus Christ the second Adam is now our Root and Head; and as he
purchased all, so all our mercies are at his disposal, and he gives them out
as he sees meet: and go. as he gave Adam pardon and holiness for himself, so
will he give to all his members for themselves; himself being still the
treasury of his Church, and keeping the keys of life in his own hands. 3.
Sanctification is imperfect in this life, and go. leaving some corruption, no
wonder if that be propagated by the best. 4. But yet as Adam should have
conveyed an innocent holy nature to his children if he had not lost it; even a
legal righteousness, such as he had himself: so now (though generation do it
not, yet) Christ in his Gospel Covenant has made over a Gospel Righteousness
to the infants of the sanctified, (who devote themselves and their children
unto God in the Baptismal Covenant): so that as posterity is unhappy through
their first Parents sin, so children may recover happiness from Christ by means
of their Parents faith and holiness, and dedicating them to God in Christ.

Obj. Foolish Parents beget wise children: go. wicked Parents may beget godly
children.

Answ. 1. I grant that God may graciously sanctify the seed of the ungodly:
but that is not by their procreation. 2. I deny the consequence; because that
foolishness comes from the distemper of the organs, and the bodies ineptitude
to serve the soul, and no alteration may be made by it upon the seed of
generation. But when the soul is depraved by sin, there is no virtue left in
nature to rectify that by generation, and hinder the propagation of the
pravity. 3. And still as to guilt, all these objections say nothing. No man can
convey the innocence which he had not.

Obj. Adam when he was pardoned had no guilt: go. he could not convey what he
had not.

Answ. 1. There is a threefold guilt: 1. Reatus facti: 2. Reatus culpae: 3.
Reatus ad poenam. To be guilty of the fact, is to be truly one that did commit
it, or participated therein. To be guilty of the fault, is to be truly culpable
by reason of that fact, it being really a fault. These two God takes not away
by pardon; for it is impossible that which is done should be undone, or that
which was a fault should be no fault. The third, which is the obligation to
punishment, is it that is done away by pardon. Now suppose this perfectly done
away to Adam, or any godly man, yet this pardon is but for himself, and he
propagateth to his children the two former, (reatum facti and culpae), which
were never done away; and then the third (obligation to punishment) will follow
immediately per nudam resultantiam, as long as they have themselves no pardon.

2. Christ is the Quickening Spirit, though Adam was a Living Soul; and Christ
is now the Fountain of Grace, and gives it out in the measure, and on the terms
that he sees meet: And as God past sentence on mankind, before he granted his
pardon to Adam, and promised the Messiah; so his pardon was no full remitting
of that sentence, but such a personal remission to Adam, as should consist with
much punishment (in his imperfection in grace, and his toil, and labor, and
death, etc.) and with the guilt of his posterity, till each man received from
Christ the Mediator his own remission. And so as he gave in the promise a
pardon to Adam, he has on the same condition given it to all. Adam had not
power to cure himself when he had poisoned his nature: but Christ being become
the common Physician, has prepared a remedy for him and us; and if we take it
as Adam did, we shall be healed: And the infants are included in the Covenant
with their Parents. So that notwithstanding all these objections, the 12th.
Argument stands good.

Arg. 13. If natural corruption be in infants viciously disposing them to evil,
and against good, then original sin is in them. But such corruption is in them:
go. etc. The minor is proved by the common experience of the World. All infants
show their inclination to sin as soon as they can act it: yea so strong and
obstinate does it prove, that frequently it resists all the endeavors of the
most prudent, diligent, godly Parents that would root it up; and of Masters and
Teachers that apply both Doctrine and Discipline against it. And never is it
conquered but by special grace; and never is it so restrained in any that live
to the use of reason, as not to break out into many actual sins. And if all men
in all ages in all the World do sin, and frequently sin, it shows that there is
some corrupt inclination in the nature of man to sin; for the effect reveals
the cause: (yea it is so great corruption as to lead into some kind of moral
necessity of sinning, or moral impossibility of not sinning; or else some one
in the World would have escaped it: which none did but Christ; and the Papists
except but the Virgin Mary.)

Obj. Adam sinned, that yet had no corruption.

Answ. The fall of one or two may come from wilful carelessness, or
inconsiderateness, where there is no corrupt inclination antecedent: but so
cannot the fall of all the World; especially their so frequent falls, and
ordinary obstinacy in sin. If now and then a man only should die, we might
impute it to some accident; but when all mankind dies, we are convinced that
mortality (even a disposedness to death in some sort necessitating it) is
become natural to him: so here.

Obj. Infants have the use of sense as soon as they are born, and are long
coming to the use of reason, and reason is long weak when sense is strong, and
this by reason of infancy as such, and go. in all this time the prevalency of
sense can be no sin: and so long a prevalency must needs breed a habit: and
this is it which you take for original corruption.

Answ. 1. If sin had not made the appetite inordinate, infants might have lived
till they had overgrown their infancy without transgressing: an ordinate
appetite would have carried them to no inordinate acts. And they would not have
been so liable to many of those evils that now provoke their passion: and to
cry when they are hurt, would be no sin. And so as they had grown up, their
temptations would have been but proportionable to their reason; and go. they
might well have overcome them. As children have not the reason of grown men, so
neither have they their temptations. They have not worldly riches, or honors,
or dignities to care for; they are not tempted to the sins of lust. And as now
the love of their Parents keeps them, even in childhood, from transgressing
the commands of their Parents, and makes them desirous to please them, so
would the love of God have made them desirous to please him, and keep his
commands. 2. We see sin now break out in children, before custom can engage
them to such a habit, and against that custom which Parents engage them in
against it, and with greater obstinacy than that mere custom could so soon
produce. So much for the minor.

The consequence of the major is proved, 1. From the purity of God's nature and
of his Law, and from the nature of this corruption. This corruption is a
disconformity to the holy nature, will and law of God, and that in his
subjects: go. it is sin. The inclinations contrary to his holy nature and
image, in a rational creature, must needs be abhorred of God, because they are
such. And the fleshly mind, the body of death, is contrary to the Law. 2. These
same corruptions which are born with us, remain in the unsanctified (and partly
in others) till they come to age, and then they are sin, (even the same degree
that was born with us: for it is not only the degree that custom after
superaddeth that is sin). Certainly that absence of good, and backwardness to
it, and proneness to evil, is sin in the adult: go. it was sin before. For it
was the same thing, and in a true subject, capable of vice and virtue. 3. The
only Argument against it is vain; viz. from the involuntariness, as shall be
showed.

Arg. 14. Adam and Eve had moral good before any actual volition: go. infants
are capable of moral good before any actual volition: and consequently actual
volition, or willing, is not of necessity to the morality of a habit or
inclination; and go. they are capable of moral evil.

The antecedent is proved by the concession of all, that Adam had (whether
naturally or supernaturally) the image of God, and virtue or holiness ut
principium, before he acted it: and so had original righteousness (by creation
or gift), which was bonum morale, and made him capable of the divine
complacency and acceptance. The parity of reason proves the consequences. Or
if there be any disparity, it makes against the adversary; infants being
virtually pre-existent in their Parents.

Arg. 15. The doctrine that numbreth infants with bruits, in point of morality
and felicity, is false: but such is that doctrine which denies original sin:
go. etc.

The major is proved, 1. In that they have immortal souls, and virtually
rational. 2. They are under many promises and threats that are mentioned in the
Scripture. 3. They are disciples of Christ, and members of his Church.

The minor is plain: 1. In that they make infants incapable of any moral evil
eo nomine because they have no actual volition, or choice. 2. And thereby they
conclude them incapable of moral good. 3. And thereby they conclude them
incapable of judgment. 4. And of any rewards. 5. And of any punishments. 6. And
they say they are under no law, or obligation. 7. And go. they can be no
subjects of Christ's Kingdom, or members of his Church. Only, God may do with
them what he will: and so he may with bruits.

Arg. 16. The infants of the unbelieving Gentiles were sinners, and children of
wrath: go. infants are capable of sin, and some (at least) are sinners, etc.

The antecedent is proved from Gal. 2. 15. [We Jews by nature, (or birth) and
not sinners of the Gentiles], i. e. by nature. 1 Cor. 7. 14. [Else were your
children unclean, but now are they holy]. The Anabaptists make this to speak
but of legitimation. The Papists by [being unclean] think nothing is meant but
being not baptizable; and to be holy, they think is but to be baptizable, and
and that a posteriore, because it is presumed that such infants will be
religiously educated: but Christ has instituted no Baptism but what is for
remission of sin: and he does not actually remit sin to some more than to
others, upon a presumption of the Church that they will hereafter be educated
as Christians. There is some holiness mentioned by the Apostle, which is the
reason why those infants more than others are to be admitted to Baptism, which
supposes and signifies it: and that cannot be only a thing future and
uncertain. Divines commonly call it (among Protestants) a federal holiness; and
that this supposes infants capable of moral good and evil, I have showed on
this Text in my Treatise of Infants Baptism.

Ephesians. 2. 3. [And were by nature the children of wrath, even as others].
Forasmuch as (...) signifies nature, birth, or natural disposition, properly,
and signifies custom only by a rare and improper acception; go. it is not here
to be interpreted by [custom], without such cogent evidence, as none has yet
given us. Those that attempt a collecting of testimonies for this improper use
sometimes, do give us many that make against them. There is no necessity that
will warrant our reception of such a tropical and unusual sense.

Job. 11. 12. [For vain man would be wise; though man be born as a wild asses
colt], that is, of a rude, sottish, unruly disposition.

Ezekiel. 16. 2, 3, 4. [Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations, and
say, Thus says the Lord God unto Jerusalem, Thy Birth and thy Nativity is of
the Land of Canaan, thy Father was an Amorite, and thy Mother an Hittite; and
as for thy Nativity, in the day thou wast born thy navel was not cut, neither
wast thou washed, etc.] This allegory shows that part of Jerusalem' s
abomination was natural from the birth: and nothing but sin is abomination
before God.

Job 25. [How then can man be justified with God? or how can he be clean that
is born of a woman?] 15. 14. [What is man that he should be clean, and he that
is born of a woman that he should be righteous?] The illustration that is
fetched from the natural weakness and impurity of the Heavens, the Moon, the
Stars, does not contradict the exposition of the former words, as of moral
impurity; for the impurity is according to the subject: and natural impurity is
not unrighteousness.

Arg. 17. From the necessity of regeneration. Joh. 3. 3, 5, 6. Except a man be
born again he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: -- That which is born of
the flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of the spirit, is spirit.

If there be a necessity of a new birth to make us spiritual, (the first birth
bringing forth but flesh), before we can enter into the Kingdom of God, then by
the first birth we are born in sin. But the antecedent is certain: go. so is
the consequent.

The minor is plain in the Text, 1. That flesh begets not spirit, but flesh: 2.
That regeneration is therefore of absolute necessity. At present, I will
suppose that by flesh here is not meant sin, (that the adversary may not think
I beg any thing of him). The consequence of the major has this double proof,
1. Because flesh without spirit in a rational creature is sinful, or morally
corrupt: for being deprived of the spirit, it is deprived of moral good. 2.
Because nothing but sin can keep a rational creature, and subject of God, out
of Heaven: for to be kept out of Heaven, is one half (at least) of the damned's
misery: and to live and know that loss, (as immortal souls must do), will
produce also positive punishment.

Arg. 18. That doctrine is untrue which makes God the Author of sin; but so
does the denial of Original sin: go. it is untrue.

The major will be granted. The minor I prove. The doctrine which feigneth that
innocent nature is under such a moral impossibility of not sinning, as that no
one person in all the World, that has the use of reason, shall escape it, does
feign God to be the Author of sin. But so does their doctrine that deny
original sin: go. it feigneth God to be the Author of sin. Or, The doctrine
which feigneth that innocent nature does sin for want of necessary grace to
escape it, does make God the Author of sin. But so does the denial of original
sin: go. etc.

For the proof of the major of both Arguments, consider, 1. That the
adversaries suppose nature in infants to be innocent; 2. That it is granted by
them, that de facto all men that have the use of reason are sinners, except
Jesus Christ: (the Papists except also the Virgin Mary). If they denied this,
it is easily proved, 1. By the common experience of the World, (as to the
generality). 2. By plain Scripture. 1 John 1. 8. 10. If we say that we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. -- If we say that we
have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us. Jam. 3. 2. For
in many things we offend all. Eccl. 7. 20. For there is not a just man on
earth, that does good, and sins not. And that there is a moral impossibility
to escape sin, appears, 1. By the universality of the event: that which no
man in all the World in any age attaineth to, notwithstanding all the helps
vouchsafed, is morally impossible. 2. And the Scripture assertion proves it,
in that it allows us to conclude it of all that we know not, and of those
that are yet unborn. And that the World sins for want of necessary grace (to
innocent nature, as the adversaries think) is plain: for necessary grace has
some sufficiency to its ends: and go. it it is called sufficient grace by the
adversaries commonly: But that which never attaineth its end in any one person
in the World, in their own judgment is not sufficient. It is their common (and
last) argument against our doctrine of special effectual grace given to all the
elect, as distinct from that sufficient grace which (say the Dominicans) is
given to others; that the grace is not sufficient that never proves effectual
in any. We may much more confidently say so here, when we speak of the whole
World, that the grace is not sufficient that never is, was, or will be
effectual in any. If it suffice to make the event naturally possible, yet not
to remove the moral impossibility. 3. And that God is the Author of the Law
that forbids sin, and of innocent nature, is granted, and past doubt. The
certainty of this universal event cannot come from a contingent cause as such.

The will is naturally free that chooses, but it is not morally free; or else
the World would not choose evil. So that it is certain that if there be no
original sin, the cause of this universal event (that all men sin) must be
resolved to be somewhat in nature, or something in providence, of which God is
the cause. If God have so framed pure nature, and so order the affairs of the
World, that no man on earth shall eventually escape the sin, which he so much
prohibiteth and abhors, it must needs follow that he is the moral reputative
cause at least. And yet it is one of the pretenses against the doctrine of
original sin, that it makes God the Author of it in infants, when it is they
that make him the Author of it in all.

Seeing therefore that sin has so overspread the World, that all men sin in
all Countries, in all Ages, (except Christ), this must proceed either from man's
natural principles, and so be chargeable upon God his Maker, or it is the fruit
of original sin, and to be charged on our first Parents, and our selves.

Arg. 19. If infants have in their corrupted natures a virtual enmity to God
and Holiness, then have they original sin: but such an enmity they have, (I
mean in disposition, seed, or habit): go. they have original sin.

The antecedent or minor I prove, 1. From the common experience of the World,
that manifest such an enmity as soon as they come to the use of reason, and
that maintain it so obstinately, till renewing grace do overcome it.

How early do they show an aversness to the work and ends for which they were
created? How little do the precepts of Parents, or Teachers, and all the means
of grace themselves, to conquer it in the most? And where it is most conquered,
(even in the godly), it is most confessed, because there is a troublesome
remnant of it still: so that there is no man in the World that has not more or
less of it in him; the wicked being under the power of it, and the godly under
the trouble of these remainders.

2. From Genesis 3. 15. Joh. 3. 5, 6. Romans 8. 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Romans 7. 21, 23,
24, 25, compared. In Joh. 3. 6. we find, that flesh begets but flesh, [That
which is born of the flesh; is flesh], and that go. a new birth by the spirit
is necessary to make us spiritual, (of which before). In Romans 8. we find, that
it was through the flesh that the Law was weak, and that God sending his son in
the likeness of sinful flesh, (not as sinful, but as flesh), and for sin
condemned sin in the flesh: Where it is undeniable that by [flesh] is not meant
sin it self; for then it had not been called sinful, nor the subject of sin,
nor Christ said to have taken the likeness of it: and go. the word [flesh] here
is taken in no worse a sense than in Joh. 3. 6. We find here also that all
flesh is universally called sinful, which Christ took the likeness of. And
Christ took the likeness of infants, and that first, only growing up to the
likeness of the adult: infants go. have sinful flesh. And ver. 5, 6. This flesh
as the principle that prevails in some, is opposed to the spirit which
prevails in others, and their fruits opposed: the one sort mind fleshly
things, the other spiritual things; and death belongs to one, and life and
peace to the other. And ver. 7. [The carnal mind is enmity against God; for it
is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be]. And ver. 8. They that
are in the flesh cannot please God; that is, they that have not the spirit to
subdue and mortify the flesh, as it is explained ver. 9. And [if any man have
not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his]. So that flesh without spirit
(which is now man's natural estate) is a principle of enmity and rebellion, and
proves men none of Christ's, and in a state of death. And many Expositors judge
that in Genesis 3. 15. such (being none of Christ's till they have the spirit) are
annumerated to the serpents seed, that has the enmity against the spiritual
seed: which so shows it self when they come to age, that as Cain by Abel, and
Ishmael by Isaac, so still, [He that is born after the flesh, persecuteth him
that is born after the spirit], (if not restrained), Gal. 4. 29. And Romans 7.
18. [I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing], that is,
in Paul, so far as he was without the spirit.

And as this innate universal enmity is thus proved, so it is proved to be sin;
1. By the Law of nature, which tells us that an habitual enmity of the rational
creature against God and Holiness, is sin, if any thing be sin. It is an
inclination or disposition contrary to the primitive nature and moral image of
God in man, and contrary to what our relation to God imports; and as it is
commonly said of actual hatred of God, it may as truly, if not much more
evidently be said of this dispositive virtual enmity, that it is an evil that
cannot become good, and so naturally sin, that it can be no other. 2. It Is
proved to be sin by the express assertion of the Text. Romans 8. 3. 10. it is
sinful flesh, and the subject of sin, till the spirit come. Ver. 9. it proves
them none of Christ' s. Romans 7. 14. 17. 20. 24, 25. it is called [in-dwelling
sin], and [a Law of sin], and [to be carnal], is [to be sold under sin]. 3.
From the effects, which nothing can produce but sin. They cannot be subject to
the Law of God: They please not God: To be carnally minded is death, etc. Romans
8. So 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural (merely animal man now in his corrupt estate)
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him:
nor can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. And it can be no
better than sin that makes spiritual things seem foolishness.

All the other Texts of Scripture commonly urged for Original sin, I purposely
pass over, because in Commentaries and Controversies they are so frequently
handled.

Arg. 20. My last Argument is from the universal consent of the Church of God,
if not of most of the Philosophers also. In so great a point, it is not safe to
go against the consent of the universal Church, that has so much in Scripture
to encourage and warrant it: But the deniers of Original sin do go against the
consent of the universal Church, as is proved, 1. From the known confessions of
all the Churches that own Original sin. 2. In that general Councils have
asserted it; 3. And have condemned those as Heretics that denied it. And so
did diverse received Provincial Councils. I shall now recite only the words of
the Council. 2. Melevitan. Arausican. and the Popish Council of Trent.

The first, Can. 2. says, Item placuit ut quicunque parvulos recentes ab
uteris matrum baptizandos negat, aut dicit in remissionem quidem peccatorum eos
baptizari, sed nihil ex Adam trahere Originalis peccati quod regenerationis
lavacro expietur, unde sit consequens ut in eis forma baptismatis in
remissionem peceatorum non vera sed falsa intelligatur, Anathema sit: Quoniam
non aliter intelligendum est quod ait Apostolus [Per unum hominem peccatum
intravit in mundum, and per peccatum mors, and ita in omnes homines
pertransiit, in quo omnes peccaverunt] nisi quemadmodum Ecclesia Catholica
ubique diffusa semper intellexit: Propter hanc enim regulam fidei, etiam
parvuli qui nihil peccatorum in semetipsis adhuc committere potuerunt, ideo in
peccatorum remissionem veraciter baptizantur, ut in eis regeneratione mundetur,
quod generatione traxerunt. Augustine was one in this General Council.

So Arausican. 2. Can. 1. and 2. Siquis soli Adae praevaricationem suam, non
and ejus propagini asserit nocuisse, aut certe mortem tantum corporis, quae
poena peccati est, non autem and peccatum, quod mors est animae, per unum
hominem in omne genus humanum transiisse testatur, injustitiam Deo dabit,
contradicens Apostolo dicenti, Per unum hominem peccatum intravit in mundum,
and per peccatum mors in omnes homines pertransiit, in quo omnes peccaverunt.
(Ita and Council. Diospol. and alia.)

I shall add the Council of Trent, because the adversaries should be ashamed to
be less Oxthodox than Papists, and that they may see the continuance of the
Tradition, (which the Council. Melevit. plead against Pelagius). They use the
words of the former Councils. Sess. 5. Can. 2. and 4. Siquis soli Adae
praevaricationem suam, non aliis etiam and ejus propagini asserit nocuisse;
acceptam a Deo sanctitatem and justitiam quam perdidit, non nobis sed sibi soli
perdidisse; inquinatoque illo per inobedientiae peccatum, mortem and poenas
corporis tantum, in omne genus humanum, and secundum communem legem
transfudisse, non autem and Peccatum, cui pro poena debebatur utraque mors,
corporis, viz. and animae, Anathema sit: cum contradicat Apostolo dicenti, Per
unum hominem, etc.

Can. 4. Siquis parvulos recentes ab uteris matrum baptizandos negat, etiamsi
fuerint a baptizatis parentibus orti, aut dicit in remissionem quidem
peccatorum eos baptizari, sed nihil ex Adam trahere Originalis peccati, quod
regenerationis lavacro necesse sit expiari ad vitam aeternam consequendam, unde
sit consequens ut in eis forma baptismatis in remissionem peccatorum non vera
sed falsa intelligatur, Anathema sit: Quoniam non aliter intelligendum quod ait
Apostolus, Per unum hominem, etc. nisi qu^madmodum Ecclesia Catholica ubique
diffusa semper intelle^^it; (and so on as above, Conc. Mel.) Hanc fidei and
sanctorum patrum normam imitand^, haec sancta synodus fatetur and declarat, in
baptismate per Jesu Christi gratiam quam confert and continet, non modo remitti
reatum originalis peccati, sed totum id auferri quod veram and propriam
rationem peccati habet. (These last words Binnius leaves out, but they are in
him and others repeated again in Can. 5. so that they are their own. Crabb also
leaves them out; and both of them leave out some other words, which Caranza
puts in: but the difference reaches not to any thing material to our
controversy.) So that it is apparent, that even the Church of Rome do
Anathematize those that hold not infants to have Original sin, truly so called,
before Baptism. Their assertion of the abolition of all that is truly sin by
baptism, is more than they found in the Council. Melevit. or any of the ancient
ones. If to be Anathematized by the Council of Trent be nothing, yet with those
men that take general Councils to be the supreme power in the Church on earth,
and separate from others for not obeying them in some Ceremonies, or
indifferent things, methinks the Curses of the ancient Councils, and that on
the account of differences in points of Faith, should seem considerable.

The consent of the Reformed Churches is so well known, that I need not recite
their words. And though the English Articles mention only our pravity, and say
nothing of Adam's sin imputed, or made ours, (whether by forgetfulness, or by
moderation not imposing that which some deny), yet they deny it not; and
elsewhere the Church of England seems to own it.

Obj. 1. That which is not voluntary is not sin: Original corruption or guilt
is not voluntary: go. it is not sin.

Answ. I deny the minor: I before answered that there is a threefold
voluntariness: 1. Actual; 2. Reputative or moral, by participation; 3.
Habitual. Original sin is voluntary in both the last senses. It was the act of
his will that was virtually and reputa^ively ours: and the corruption is the
habit of our wills, and the privation of good habits; and that which is
habitual, is more voluntary than that which is but some single Act.

Obj. 2. That which never was in our power to prevent, is not sin: But, etc.
go. etc.

Answ. It was in our power, as we were in Adam: It was in his power, from whom
by the established Law or order of providence, we were to derive our nature.

That habits are good or evil as well as acts, I hope few will deny. And
whereas it is objected that only such habits as are the effects or consequents
of our acts, are sinful: I further answer: 1. If it be so, it is eo nomine,
because they are the consequents of our acts, that they are sinful, or else for
some other formal reason. Not because such, or as such: for it is most certain
that many effects of sin upon our selves, are but misery, and not properly sin.
Sin may make a man sick, or lame, or blind, or mad, and yet these be no sins,
but the effects of sins. Sin may kill us, and yet death be no sin. There must
be therefore some other formal reason, which can be nothing but the
disconformity to the rule. 2. Adam (as was said before) had original
righteousness, which was imputable to him as a moral good, before his actions:
go. it is not necessary to the morality or imputability of a principle, that it
be the consequent of our acts. 3. Jesus Christ had moral good before his humane
action: go. the same will follow. 4. Infants that are sanctified have moral
good that is not the consequent of their acts: go. etc. 5. The dedication by
believing Parents, and entering the child into the Covenant of God, is taken to
all the ends thereof, as if it were the infants act. 6. Among men, the will of
the Parents is in many cases reputatively the will of the child, and children
receive good, or are deprived of it (and oft-times penally), for the Parents
acts.

Obj. 3. No righteous Judges do punish the children for the Parents sin.

Answ. 1. It is not for the Parents only imputed, but their own contracted,
that God does punish them. And he takes that cognizance of the heart that man
does not. 2. And he is more holy and just than man. 3. And yet all
Commonwealths are directed by the light of nature, to punish infants for their
Parents sins, as naturally participant. The Laws do threaten the posterity of
many offenders, for the Parents sins; and Judges sentence them accordingly. As
that Traitors, or some other most odious offenders, shall be deprived of their
honors and estates, and their children after them for ever. It cannot be said
here that this is but an affliction to the posterity, and not a penalty; or
that it is a mere consequent of the Parents sin, and not the effect: for it is
expressed in the Law, and Judgment; and is malum natural propter malum civil
vel morale; and it is on a subject: And it is a privation of the good that he
should else have possessed; and many positive evils of mind and body (care,
sorrow, want, labor, etc.) follow thereupon.

Obj. 4. But God has told us, that the soul that sins shall die; and the
child shall not die for the Parents sins.

Answ. 1. go. it follows that children that do die, have sin of their own. 2.
The text plainly speaks of those children, that see the evil of their Parents
sins, and do not after them, but renounce them, and live in righteousness
themselves: which is nothing to the present case.

Obj. 5. It seems to make God the Author of sin, when he will cause us to be
born of sinful Parents, and infuse a soul into sinful flesh, when we cannot
help it.

Answ. 1. I have proved that it is the denial of original sin, that makes God
the Author of sin, resolving it into his workmanship, or denial of sufficient
or necessary grace, so that no man in the World avoideth sin. 2. But the true
doctrine of original sin, does manifest that it is not of God, as I have
showed. God as Creator settled the nature of his creatures, and the course of
propagating them, before man sinned: and he was no ways bound to change the
course of nature, when man had corrupted it, to prevent our being born sinners.
Though we know not fully the manner of God's concourse in our generation, and
how he causes souls; yet we are sure it is according to the first established
course of nature, appointed in the creation, as much as the generation of any
other creature is: and that is enough.

God was not the cause of Adam's transgression; and his Law of propagation went
before it: and his concourse with the Parents makes him no more the cause,
than the Sun is of the poison of a toad.

Obj. 6. But it seems cruelty to damn infants for that which they could not
help.

Answ. The deniers of Original sin do much more impute cruelty to God, as I
shall prove. For, 1. They confess as much of the misery and sufferings of
infants, as we assert. 2. And they maintain that God inflicts all this without
the least desert of theirs. For the first, they confess that infants die: and
they confess that God is not obliged to revive them; and that without Christ
they should have no part in glory. If God may annihilate them, or deny them an
immortal life, they cannot deny but he may cause their souls to live, and their
bodies to revive, if he please: and if so, that he may inflict as much positive
pain as shall be proportioned to the evil of annihilation. And it is a great
deal of suffering that man would choose to prevent annihilation. They confess
that God may make them to be toads, (when such creatures are what they are
without sin): and so continue them for ever. And who would not endure much
misery as a man, rather than be a toad or serpent? They confess that infants
have immortal souls, (at least capable of immortality), and that God is no ways
bound to annihilate them, and that he may shut them out of happiness; which is
half damnation, and that in equality with the worst, (it being the same Heaven
that all men lose): and if they are rational creatures, they must needs have
the torment of positive grief in the despairing apprehension of their loss. And
for our parts, we presume not to be so far acquainted with the secret judgments
of the Lord, as to determine whether infants shall have a greater degree of
misery in their damnation, than all this which the adversaries grant. So that
we differ not about the degree of suffering.

2. And then for the cause of it, there is the difference. We say that God
inflicteth not all this but for their own desert by original sin: And our
Adversaries say, that he does it without the least fault or desert of theirs.
And then I would know whether there be any reason why God does all this against
infants, but because he will do it? If man had never sinned, he might have done
it according to them. If it be said, that he punishes the Parents in the
children: I answer, 1. What punishment to Parents is the everlasting loss or
suffering of the children? 2. Or what punishment is the present death of
children, to harlots and unnatural persons, that desire to be rid of them? 3.
And how can he cause the subjects of his Kingdom to suffer so much without
their own desert? 4. And if their natural interest make them not in some
measure partakers of their Parents sin, what reason, why they any more than
other creatures, should be chosen to the suffering?

And here I would propound this question: What if God had left it in the
beginning to Adam's free will, whether he would beget a man, or a toad, or a
serpent? Would you have thought this a cruelty, or injustice? Why might not God
leave such a thing to his free will, as well as his own salvation or damnation?
And if he might leave it to a serpent necessarily to beget a serpent, why might
he not leave it to the will of man to do it freely? And if man had chosen such
a generation, could his offspring (if capable) have charged God with cruelty?
And if not, (as nothing surer) why might not God leave it to the will of man to
remain righteous, and beget a righteous seed; or to fall, and beget such as
himself?

Obj. 7. But the pains of hell consist in the torments of conscience: and the
conscience of an infant will not torment him for that which he could not help.

Answ. 1. It is past our reach here to understand fully the nature of hell
torments. 2. The loss of Heaven is the greatest part of the misery. 3. The
sense of that loss will be no small positive misery. 4. And all this (which the
adversaries grant) will be confessed due for original pravity, and because they
are the seed of sinners.

Obj. 8. No Law forbids us to be the seed of Adam, or to draw corruption
from our Parents.

Answ. The Law forbad Adam, in whom we were, to sin; and it requires
perfection of acts and habits, and condemns sinful habits as well as sinful
acts: and go. we are violaters of that Law.

Obj. 9. If Original sin were derived from Adam to us, it would have been in
the humane nature of Christ; at least Adam's act would have been imputed to
him, as being really the son of man.

Answ. The relation and corruption go together; and both of them belong to them
that derived their natures only from Adam, according to the way of natural
generation. But Christ was conceived by the Holy Ghost, who by sanctifying the
substance of the Virgin, of which he had his humane nature, and by the
miraculous way of procreation, prevented the derivation of guilt or sin.

Obj. 10. Christ says, except we become as little children we shall not enter
into Heaven.

Answ. He speaks not of their innocence, but of their beginning the World, and
their lowliness: except we be little in our eyes, and begin the World anew by
conversion, we cannot enter into his Kingdom. But this denies not, but that
infants may have corruption that unfits them for his Kingdom, as you confess.

Obj. 11. 1 Cor. 7. 14. The children of believers are holy.

Answ. 1. But not by nature, but by grace, and the faithful's interest in the
covenant and dedication of them to Christ in Baptism. 2. They had no need of
this hallowing, if they had not naturally some corruption. And, 3. The children
of unbelievers are still unclean. 4. And the children of the faithful are not
perfectly holy: for then they should be better than the Parents.

Obj. 12. By the same reason you may say that we are guilty of our immediate
Parents sins: for we were in them more immediately than in Adam.

Answ. We have the same natural interest in our nearest Parents sin, and some
participation; which we must lament, and not excuse. But of that I have spoken
by it self.

The chief objections here omitted, I answered before, (from Adam's, or our
nearer Parents being themselves forgiven, and so having no guilt to derive to
us; and their being sanctified; and from the creation of the soul, etc.) and
go. shall not again repeat the answers to them. It better beseems us to confess
our sin and misery, and value the remedy, than to tell Christ that we will not
so much as pray for the pardon of Original sin, nor be beholden to him to
forgive it, nor to his spirit to cure it: which yet is really the thoughts of
them that think they have no such thing.

Among others, read Philip Mornay Lord du Plessis, in his Verity of Christian
Religion, in the Chapters of Original sin. The vanity of Dr. Taylor's
opposition may be easily seen, by what is said; his begging the question about
the supernaturality of holiness to Adam; his frequent mistakes, and
self-contradiction.

Whether Posterity be guilty of Death, by reason of the Actual sins of their
immediate Parents?
AS little as is said by Divines on this Question, it is no overcurious, or
needless unprofitable subject; but very weighty, and needful to be understood
by all Christians, that can reach to the understanding of it. For as it is
useful for the opening of the cause and nature of Original guilt, so, if it
should prove true that we are guilty by the sins of our immediate Parents, it
would be necessary that we know it, for our due humiliation, and that we may in
penitent confessions and deprecations prevail with God for the pardon thereof:
As it is thought a dangerous thing to deny original sin, because they that so
do, will not be humbled under it, and sensible of their misery by it, nor of
the necessity of God's mercy, or Christ's blood for the pardon of it, nor will
apply themselves to God by Christ in Faith, Confession, and Prayer for pardon,
and consequently are in danger of missing of pardon: so in the present case,
the same reasons will prove it as well dangerous to deny our guilt of our
Parents sins, if indeed we are so guilty. Which that we may enquire into, after
a very brief explication of the terms of the Question, I shall lay down a few
necessary distinctions, and then assert what I judge to be the truth in certain
Propositions, and prove such of them as most require proof.

1. By [immediate Parents], we mean those that personally beget: By
[Posterity], we mean their children so begotten. By Reason of [Actual sin], we
mean, by the Merit of those sins which our Parents themselves committed; or by
a resultancy from such sin compared with the rule. By guilt, we mean obligation
to punishment, or duness of punishment. By death, we mean the destruction, or
final misery of the creature; either death temporal, or eternal.

We must here distinguish, 1. Between the seminal, causal, potential, and
virtual being which we have in our Parents, and the personal existence that we
have in our selves. 2. Between the guilt which immediately resulteth from
actual sin, and the guilt which rises but mediately from it, viz. by the means
of some intervening corruption of our own. 3. Between the sins of Parents while
we are seminally in them, and their sins after our birth: either, 1. in our
infancy, or 2. in our riper age. 4. Between guilt of fault, and guilt of
punishment. 5. Between the aggravation of voluntariness actual, and of
voluntariness habitual, or dispositive. 6. Between plenary proper guilt, and
guilt so called by analogy of attribution, and guilt so called equivocally. 7.
Between punishment univocally, analogically, or equivocally so called. 8.
Between obligation to the pain of loss, and to the pain of sense. 9. And
between the mere sense of that loss, and the sensible accusations of conscience
for actual sin. 10. Between the curable obligation of the Law of Nature, or
Works, and the peremptory and remediless obligation of the Law of Grace.

Though these distinctions reach further than to the terms of the Question, yet
are they all such as will be of necessary use in our determination.

Prop. 1. God does not impute to us the sins either of our first or nearest
Parents, further than our true interest in such sins does give sufficient
ground for such imputation.

As Dr. Twiss, among others, has often and well proved.

Prop. 2. God does not esteem us to have personally committed the sins which
our first or nearest progenitors did actually commit. For his judgment is true;
and therefore he judges of things as they are; and therefore he judges us not
to have done that personally, which we did not do.

Prop. 3. God does not by any Law oblige us to punishment, as the personal
committers of such sins, which any progenitors of ours did commit, and not we:
and therefore we are not guilty of punishment on that account. He never made
such a covenant with Adam, or any since, as some imagine, wherein he declares
that he will judge the Posterity guilty of the Parents sin further than their
true desert or interest in it, merely because God will so judge, or because he
will impute the sins of one to another, without his desert: that were to make
him the causer of such men's sins, or rather to mistake, and call that their sin
which indeed is not so.

Prop. 4. It seems to me that in the same kind as we are guilty of Adam's
actual sin, we are also guilty of the sins of our nearest Parents; allowing for
some accidental differences, and also our guilt having a remedy at hand, which
his had not that he knew of, we being under a pardoning covenant. Because this
proposition is not agreeable to the commonest opinion, I shall speak to the
proof of it, and of some that are near to it, anon toward the end.

Prop. 5. If it should prove true, which some of the Reformed Divines maintain,
that original sin does consist only in the real qualitative corruption of our
nature, and not directly in any imputation of Adam' s actual sin to us; and
that there is no such direct imputation of his sin to us, but that it is only
the cause of our proper Original sin, and not our sin formally: then must it
needs follow that the like must be said for the negative, of the sins of our
immediate Parents: for they can be no more our sins, than Adam's was. If this
opinion therefore stand good, then our controversy is at an end; and we are not
guilty either of Adam's sin, or of our next Parents, nor of death for them. I
will not presume to make my self judge between the Learned Divines that
disagree upon this point: Camero and his followers go this way, against the
imputation of Adam's sin to us: of which see the sum of their Arguments in Jos.
Placaeus his Disputat. de statu hominis lapsi ante Gratiam in lib. 1. Thesium
Salmuriens. page 206, 207. And Chamier is not only of the same mind, but
confuteth the contrary among the Popish errors, as you may see in Tom. 3. lib.
1. cap. 7. against Pighius sect. 20, 21. but specially throughout chap. 8.
contra Salmeronem. So also Peter Martyr on Romans 5. But yet the far greater
number of our Writers go the other way, and so do the Papists too.

Prop. 6. It seems not to be a guilt so plenary and perfect, which we lie under
for any Parents sin, (if such a thing be proved), as that is which a man is
under for his own personal sin. The difference will appear, if we consider that
it is not a punishment in so full and perfect a sense, which we are obliged to:
for the suffering is but the matter of the punishment; its form lies in the
relation of that suffering to the fault: if the malum natural be not propter
malum morale, it is not punishment: and the punishment is his in the fullest
sense, who suffers for his own sin: now the sin of Adam, or any Parent, is
not so fully our own as that is which we personally commit; seeing as we were
but seminally, causally, and potentially in our Parents, and not by existence
personally; so it is not so much to be esteemed the son of a sinner, as to be
esteemed the actual sinner himself. So that it seems our guilt of, and
punishment for the actual sin of any Parent, is so called by analogy of
attribution as they speak, (as Accidens is called Ens), being a more imperfect
kind of guilt and punishment.

Prop. 7. It is past doubt that God may and does punish Parents in their
children: In which case the sufferings of the children are materially (though
not as the next matter) the punishment of the Parent; but the next matter is
the Parents own suffering (real or reputative) in the suffering of his
children: but this God does not without respect to some concurrent guilt in the
child, unless as he will repair his hurt with a greater good.

Prop. 8. When the sufferings of a child are but the mere consequents of the
Parents sin or punishment, then are they no punishment themselves, unless
equivocally so called: but when they are intended by the Rector for the
demonstration of justice for the Parents fault, then it has the nature of
punishment, though the child were imagined innocent. For example; If a Traitor
be sentenced to death, and his estate forfeited to the Prince, his Heirs will
be deprived of all their hopes, though the Judge never thought of them in his
sentence, because the Parent cannot convey to his posterity what he has lost
himself. And here the suffering of the Heirs is not formally a punishment, but
the mere consequent of a punishment. But if the Rector do ordain that the Heirs
of a Traitor shall be desinherited, and intend this as part of the penalty, to
deter others from Treason, then it is not a mere consequent, but a real
punishment, though the Heir be personally innocent.

Prop. 9. It seems to me that we are so far guilty both of Adam's sin, and of
our nearer Parents, committed whilst we were seminally in them, as that God
may, not only without injustice, but also in positive execution of vindictive
justice, punish us with temporal death for such guilt, though it be but a more
imperfect kind of guilt and punishment.

Prop. 10. If this interest in our Parents sins deserve a temporal death, then
also an everlasting death. For when the creature has lost his life by the
stroke of justice, God is not bound to restore it.

Prop. 11. It hence follows that God may in justice deprive us of everlasting
glory for such guilt; which is one part of Hell, viz. the poena damni: for the
dead enjoy not glory.

Prop. 12. Hence also it follows that God may justly, for such guilt, leave
man under some penalty of sense too, as well as of loss: 1. Because he may, if
he please, continue natural life to man, when he depriveth him of glory; (for
he that may justly take away both, may take away one only): and then man being
rational, must needs have a sense of the greatness of his loss. 2. And there is
no man of reason, but would rather choose a tolerable degree of pain for ever,
(as a less evil) than to be annihilated. And he that may inflict the greater,
may inflict the lesser.

Prop. 13. Those positive torments of conscience which follow the review of
wilful actual sin, and which men must suffer for such in Hell, cannot be the
punishment of our guilt either of Adam's or our nearest Parents actual sin.
Because conscience has no such matter to work upon; it cannot charge us with
choosing that evil by our own wills; for so far this guilt was involuntary.

Prop. 14. God is the Rector of the Universe, of Commonwealths, Churches, and
Families, as well as of individual persons; and therefore he may punish the
World as such, and punish a Commonwealth as such for their sins, or a sinful
Church, or a sinful Family: And so some individual persons, not as such, but as
parts of the society, may justly suffer the loss of those benefits, which as
members of that society they did possess, though they committed not the sins
for which the punishment is inflicted: In which case the nature of punishment
is divided between the society, and that individual sufferer. It is the
Societies fundamentaliter, because they are the sinners; it is the sufferers
Terminative, because he bears it: and true punishment it is; for it is
[suffering for sin], though not for his personal sin. And thus a Child, a
Subject, a Churchmember may suffer for the sins of the Heads or Body of the
Society. Nor can it well be said that this is but on occasion of their sin, and
not for it, and so that it is but equivocally punishment, and not truly so: for
it is an evil of suffering for the evil of sin, and inflicted for demonstration
of justice on the whole, and so on each part. Yea, and it seems that positive
punishments, as well as losses, may be inflicted on this account.

Prop. 15. Yet as God is Rector of each particular person as well as of
societies, so he deals justly with every person, and therefore in punishing
societies, he still observes his established Laws concerning individuals: and
therefore he punishes no person beyond his due: For, 1. it is supposed that a
man who by consent is a member of any Society, does consent to bear or venture
on the common inconveniences and infelicity of that Society, so that he may be
partaker of the felicity and benefits of it: and where nature makes a man a
member of a society, it supplies the place of our personal consent. For in it
self it is a necessary good to us to be in society with others, seeing no man
can live happily by himself; and it is supposed in nature, that no man will
dissent from his own necessary good. It is therefore by their own consent
fundamentally, that such persons, though innocent in themselves, are made
liable to punishment; and therefore in all wars, when the innocent do suffer
with the guilty, in the besieging of a City, the punishing of a Country, it is
no injustice.

Obj. But that is because men are not able to discern between the righteous and
the guilty, or to difference in the execution, as God can do.

Answ. It Is true that God can do this, and man cannot: but withal God does not
all that he can do. He rules the World by means in an established order, and
it is he that has given men authority to rule under him: and therefore
whatsoever punishment they righteously execute, it is God that righteously does
it by them. So that as men do us no wrong in such cases, so neither does God.
3. But yet God has determined in his Laws, that none shall bear the punishment
of eternal damnation, for the sins of a society, but for his own sin: yea, he
has resolved that all shall tend to the everlasting felicity of the innocent.
4. It cannot be accounted any wrong to such, when God will repair their hurt or
loss with far greater advantages, which he might have denied them. 5. But yet
for all this, it is certain that de facto God does not punish any man who is
not guilty by personal sins; for there is none such on earth to punish: but
though God does so sweetly, and in perfect order carry on the work of
Government, that none shall have cause to complain of injustice, and does keep
an harmonious consent between his more general and his particular punishing
justice, so punishing societies, that he will make good all his promises to
each individual: yet, 1. It seems to me that in one and the same penalty
materially considered, God may punish us both as individual persons for our own
sin, and as members of a Society for the sins of the Society, which are no
otherwise ours, than by being such members of a sinful body, and so being
liable to the justice which that Body is liable to. 2. And it seems to me, that
if we were supposed to be personally innocent, yet God might in justice punish
us with such a society, so far as may stand with his Covenant to individuals:
and that that Covenant does not restrain him from inflicting the least penalty
on us for any besides our own sins which we have personally committed: Though
still even the guilt of that common sin, is participative personally ours, as
we communicate in it by being members of the society: as the hand is guilty of
the sin of the tongue, because it is a member of the body that is guilty.

Obj. There is no sin, and so no punishment, where there is no willingness.

Answ. Here is a willingness fundamentally, in that in hope of the good of the
society, and benefit from it, we consent to share with them, and speed as they,
though we consent not to the sin: so that the sin is reputatively ours, so far
as that we should be obliged to punishment by it, though not in it self, nor so
as that we should be accounted the actual offenders. Even as our sins became
Christ's by his voluntary sponsion, so far as to bear the penalty, but not so
far as to be accounted the committer of them: so that his sufferings were truly
punishments, because for sin, though not for his own; yet not punishments in so
full and strict a sense as ours that suffer for our own sins; but by analogy of
attribution, or ob inaequalem generis attributionem: and such, as it seems to
me, are those punishments which innocent persons suffer merely for the sins of
the Societies that they are members of.

Prop. 16. It is not a mere reputative interest, (as the last described), but a
natural interest which we have in the guilt of Adam's actual sin, and so in the
guilt of the actual sins of our nearer Parents, as to mere desert: For our
nature was in him: our persons, though not existent, were seminally in him; we
come not from Adam as our Creator, that makes us of nothing, nor as our
Fabricator, that makes us of an extrinsick pre-existent matter; but as our
Progenitor, who deriveth a being to us by communication, out of himself; and
therefore can give us no better than he had himself, either qualitatively or
relatively; and therefore being a son of death, he could not beget sons of
life: being guilty, he could not beget persons that are innocent; nor bring a
clean thing from himself, who was unclean.

Prop. 17. This natural interest in the guilt of Progenitors, is only from
those sins which they committed while we were in their loins, or seminally in
them, and not from any that they committed after we were born: but the
reputative guilt which we have from the sins of societies (whereof we are
naturally or electively members) may befall us as much (and rather) from the
sins which they commit when we are at age, and have the fullest use of reason;
therefore all men should be careful what society they voluntarily join
themselves to, or abide in, and should diligently endeavor the reformation of
such societies: and when they are falling into ruin past hope of recovery,
should foresee the fall, and save themselves.

Prop. 18. It is both these sorts of guilt which adhere to us in our infancy
from our Parents sins. 1. The guilt which follows our natural interest, as we
are seminally in them, adhereth to us all, as soon as we have our being. 2. The
other is varied according to the several societies that we are members of. 1.
As we are members of the great Commonwealth of the World, whereof God is the
Sovereign, so we are guilty by reason of the sin which mankind in our first
Parents committed in the beginning. For God dealt with Adam in his first Laws,
not only as an individual person, but also as whole mankind, he and his wife
being then the whole World. And so as we are first guilty of death, because of
our natural interest in Adam's sin, as being his Progeny, so next we are also
guilty by reason of this civil or reputative interest, as being members of the
sinful World, or of sinful mankind: which later yet supposes the former as its
ground, and does not arise from any Covenant or Will of God to impute that to
us which we were never guilty of, by any natural interest of our own. Not that
we were personally guilty before we were personally existent; but that we were
then seminally guilty as we had a seminal being in the nature and person of our
Progenitors; and when our persons from that seed do first exist, they are
guilty persons, as soon as persons. And therefore when man had first sinned,
God, that had given him a Law, as being all mankind, and the root of a
Posterity in course of nature to spring from him, did also in the same relation
call him to judgment, and sentence him for his sin; and therefore passed such a
sentence which we see by experience is executed on all mankind; and as the
individuals multiply from the first condemned root, so does the guilt and the
sentenced punishment adhere to each individual. (And in the same relation was
the promise of a Redeemer made to him.) As it was not Adam only, but all
mankind that is meant by God's sentence, [Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall
return, etc.] yet only Adam as then personally existent and condemned, and all
others as seminally in him, and the sentence makes its first seizure on their
persons when their persons shall first exist, and not before; Even so is it by
the guilt, as it is by the sentence: It was only Adam's person that was at
first guilty; but not only as a particular private person, but as mankind, and
as the root of all that should succeed; and therefore we were seminally guilty
in him, and are personally guilty from him, when we first personally exist. 2.
And as we are thus guilty as members of sinful mankind, so also as members of
sinful Families; and in that respect may for the sins of our nearest Parents,
lie under Family punishments. 3. So are we also as members of wicked
Commonwealths, and particular subordinate Societies in those Commonwealths:
And therefore it is so common for God to punish men for common abominations,
and provoking enormities, which yet themselves did not commit.

4. The like may be said of heretical, impure, and scandalous Churches, whose
members become liable to Church-punishments, as those aforesaid to
Common-wealth-punishments.

Prop. 19. It is one thing to be so far guilty, or to deserve punishment, as
that God may in the execution of vindictive justice, lay it on us as our due,
(unless remedied): and it is another thing to be so far guilty, as that God must
punish us, or else be unjust, or not attain the ends of right Government, by
ordinary means. It is the first guilt only which I say arises from the sins of
our Parents to us: the second I neither affirm nor deny, as not intending now
to meddle with that Controversy.

Prop. 20. Though according to the strict rigor of the Law of nature or works,
considered alone, God might, for the sin of Adam, or our nearer Parents,
adjudge us to everlasting death, as our due, because of our forementioned
participation therein: yet has he provided such a remedy in the Gospel, that
no man shall everlastingly perish for any such sin, who is made partaker of
that remedy. And therefore though the Gospel finds men under such a guilt by
nature, yet does it not bind it on them, but free them from it, if they be in
Christ: therefore when God tells men that if they repent and believe, it is
not their Fathers sins that shall damn them, yet bids them take heed lest they
perish by their own, this does not deny that we deserve death for Adam's, or
our other Parents sins; but only that if we repent, and be our selves
evangelically righteous, the deserved evil shall not befall us. The remedy
supposes, and not denies the malady.

Prop. 21. A further difference may yet appear between the guilt of Adam's
first sin, and our guilt of his following sins, or the sins of our nearer
Parents; if we distinguish between the Fundamentum and the Terminus of guilt,
and then observe, that the Terminus is but one and the same, but the Foundation
is diverse. The punishment which we are guilty of, or liable to, by Adam's sin,
is the privation of our whole felicity. The new guilt of our nearer Parents
sin, or Adam's further sins, yea, or our own actual sin, can bring no new
punishment on us according to the covenant of Works, (though according to the
covenant of Grace, which gives new mercies, whose privation we are capable of,
we may have new punishments, which the first sin did not bring us under). As to
the pain of loss it is clear; because when we have forfeited all, we can
forfeit no more: but by the first sin we forfeited all. But this is not because
the sin in its own nature has not the same demerit as the first: but because
man is capable of no greater privation than he has incurred already; nor of
any greater torment, if the first sin deserved as much torment, as man's nature
was capable of. So that terminative here is no new super-added punishment,
according to the first Law. But yet none may hence conclude that here is no new
guilt; because it is another fundamentaliter and formaliter. For diverse
relations may have the same Terminus. We do by following sins incur a new and
further obligation to the same penalty; which would be to a greater penalty,
were we capable of it naturally. When a Felon is guilty of death on one crime,
yet twenty bills may be brought in against him, which may charge him with a
manifold guilt, though but of one death. As a man may have a manifold right to
one good thing which he possesses, and a right super-added to his first right,
(as God has the right of Redemption to us, super-added to the right of
Creation); so may a sinner have super-added, and manifold obligations to the
same punishment. Yet here we see some difference between our first guilt of
Adam's sin, and all super-added guilt; that the first having deprived us of all
our felicity, none that follows can deprive us of any more, (except of the
mercies new given us by the Gospel, which the mere sins of Parents shall
deprive no man of, that disowneth them).

Prop. 22. Though it be but an imperfect analogical guilt, which the act of
Adam's, or other Parents sin does directly and immediately leave upon us; yet
the corruption or pravity of our own nature, inherent in each person, which by
Adam's sin was introduced, does bring on us a further guilt. And so mediately
the said actual sin does bring it. Which occasioneth so many Protestant Divines
to place original sin (as ours) in this pravity alone.

Prop. 23. Though this natural depravedness may seem to infer a lesser guilt,
because it is not voluntary, as our actual sins are: Yet, 1. we being seminally
in him that voluntarily caused it; and, 2. it being the habitual pravity of the
will it self, and so far voluntary; and, 3. therefore containing virtually all
future actual voluntary sins; 4. and being more contrary to God's holy nature
and will, than one single actual sin would be; it has therefore many
aggravations instead of that one, which it seems to have less of: And so must
needs bring a true and proper obligation to punishment, (till Christ dissolve
it), as well as actual sins.

Prop. 24. It seems to me that the sins of nearer Parents may do much to the
corrupting of our natures, as well as the sin of Adam; and to increase the
pravity that from his only sin, would have been upon them. Proved, 1. There is
the same reason why the sins of immediate Parents should deprave the nature of
Posterity, as there is that Adam's sin should do it.

Some Divines say that God took away his image from Adam: some that he took
away his spirit, and so the loss of his image followed: some that Adam's sin
did it self destroy, or blot out that image. As to the first; I say, 1. It is
not sound; because it makes God the most proper immediate, (if not the only
true) efficient cause of sin, and of the sinning sin, which is the worst of
sins: Also, because there is no word of God that says any such thing. 2. If it
were true, the sin of Cain deserved the same, as well as the sin of Adam.

As to the second opinion, I say, 1. It is yet undetermined (de nomine) among
Divines, whether it be not the Redeemer only that gives the spirit, and
whether it can properly be said that God gave his spirit to Adam in innocence?
though I am for the affirmative. 2. But suppose that there be some conserving
aid which God did withdraw, by what name soever it be called: yet thaat
withdrawing was in order of nature consequential to man's sinning, and not
before it: and that sin it self did deprave the soul. 3. The sin of Cain
deserves the like desertion as well as the sin of Adam: but man's nature is
not now capable of it in the same sort as then it was, because then we were
innocent, and had the perfect image of God upon us, and were capable of losing
it: but now we have lost it already, our Parents sins can but remove us further
from God, and hinder our recovery.

The third opinion seems most warrantable, that Adam put away, or blotted out
God's image, and so depraved his own soul: (for which see Capel of Tempt, and
These. Salmuriens. Vol. 1. disp. de statu hominis lapsi ante gratiam; sect. 19,
20, 21.) But there is the same reason why Cain's sin should deprive his
posterity of God's image, save only that they had not the same to lose: for the
destructive nature of the sin is the same, and so is the merit. And though they
have not that perfect image of God now to lose, yet they have some remnants of
moral virtue, assisted by the light and law of nature; and the nature of man is
capable of being made worse than yet it is: And there is the same reason why
Cain's sin may make it worse, as there is why Adam's may make it bad.

Man's fall was a change of his end: He first took God for his ultimate end,
and chief good: He was seduced to take him for one that envied his felicity,
and for a liar, and to seek his felicity in the creature, against the command
of God. The ultimate end of man's actions being thus changed, all moral good is
so far perverted; for all means and subordinate ends depend on it. And so the
stream of man's actions are turned into a wrong channel; the sensitive appetite
is hereupon become the master-principle in the soul, as ruling the rest. For,
as Placaeus says, ubi sup. Cujus facultatis finis proximus est hominis
ultimus, ea caeteris omnibus facultatibus, tanquam architectonica, imperat:
that faculty whose nearest end is man's ultimate end, does rule all the other
faculties, as the master of the work. And thus man being turned finally to
sensibles from God, his nature is depraved, and God's image defaced. Yet is not
the soul removed to the utmost distance from God; for then he should be as bad
as the Devils, and all men should be equally evil; and the sensitive appetite
would so uncontrouledly reign, that man would be worse than bruitified, his
reason serving only to purvey for the flesh, so that the light and law of
nature would not restrain him, nor any thoughts of a God, and a life
everlasting, once stop him in his sin. Now it is apparent that there is the
same natural (and meritorious) force in Cain's sin to turn his nature further
from God, as was in Adam's to turn it so far away: Or if man were at the worst,
yet his following sins have the same power to fix him in that misery, as his
first had to bring him into it. For they also are a wilful turning from God to
the creature, as well as the first.

Arg. 2. It is past all doubt that the sinners own personal nature is made
worse by his own actual sin: experience proves it too fully: Scripture says,
that they that have been accustomed to do evil, can no more learn to do well,
than a Blackmoor can change his skin, or a Leopard his spots. And there is no
reason that I know of that can be given, why a more corrupt Parent should not
beget a child more corrupt, and deliver him the sinful improvement of his
pravity, as well as that all sinful depraved Parents should beget depraved
children: And though this controversy be mixed with the great difficulties
about the propagation of the soul, and the matter of its corruption, yet which
way soever those be determined, it makes not against the thing that I assert.
If the soul be ex traduce, and so corrupted, then the case is most easy. If man
beget the sensitive soul corrupted, and God do then promove that to the
excellency of being a rational soul, (as some think the material species of the
phantasy is raised by the active intellect to be the intelligible immaterial
species); still there is the same reason why the more corrupt Parent should
propagate a soul more corrupt, as that all should propagate a corrupt one. If
the soul be depraved either by a taint from the body, or by a willing
accommodation of it self to the body, through the force of the natural desire
of union, (de quo vide Placaeum ubi supra,) as water to the shape of the vessel
that it is put into: still the reason holds the same for the degree of
corruption, as for the thing it self. That God by way of penalty should create
the soul sinful immediately, seems plainly to make him the Author of sin: But
if it were so, yet there is the same reason of demerit, to provoke him to
create the soul of Cain's son yet more sinful, as there is in Adam's to provoke
him to create it sinful at all.

Arg. 3. Besides, experience assures us, that all children bring not an equal
degree of pravity into the World, if we may judge by their first exercise of
reason, or use of passions. But if there were no difference made since, it
should seem that all should be corrupted alike, (further than God cures any,
and so makes a difference.) We see also that many of the children of the most
vicious people are more vicious than the ordinary sort of men are. We see also
that some men's bodies being distempered by their vices, they propagate those
bodily distempers to their posterity; which we evidently perceive do make a
great alteration on the soul: from whence we see some persons very sottish and
silly, yea some idiots, and some extreme talkative, some extreme passionate,
some lustful, some malicious, some gluttonous, some drunkards, and this above
the corrupt inclination which appears in the ordinary sort of men; and
plainly sed by the temper of the body.

Obj. 1. If our corruption were increased by the sins of immediate Parents,
then the World would grow worse and worse, and we should have been Devils long
before this age.

Answ. 1. Most Divines say that the first sin would have done all this, if God
in mercy had not prevented or remedied it. 2. God still resolves to keep the
World in order under his Government; and therefore restrains corruption, and
will not suffer it to grow, as according to its nature it would. 3. This is one
of the common benefits that the World receives by the grace of the Redeemer,
that they grow not as bad as else they would. 4. For the sake of the Church God
will restrain them.

Obj. 2. We see many of the worst men have good children.

Answ. No man's corruptions do put his children into a remediless condition: and
therefore God may sanctify whom and when he pleases. So may he do also by the
Parents themselves, for all their sins; and yet those sins do make them worse.

Obj. 3. Then you may say that Grace is propagated by generation from our
immediate Parents, as well as sin: and yet experience tells us the contrary.

Answ. 1. This makes as much against the propagation of original corruption
from Adam, as from our nearer Parents. If it were of any force, it would be
against both. 2. There is so great a difference between grace and sin, that
quite alters the case. For, 1. Grace is something extrinsecally adventitious,
and now (as to the cause of it, and manner of working it) supernatural: but so
is not sin. 2. Grace is an adventitious perfecting quality: Sin is a defect,
(as it is in the rational faculties). But defects are more easily propagated,
than adventitious qualities: for one requires nothing thereto but a defective
nature; (for nothing can convey to another that which it has not it self:) but
the other requires more than nature to its propagation. No acquired knowledge
or skill in Languages, Sciences, Arts, or Manufactures, are propagated to
posterity by nature: but the ignorance of these is natural. 3. But above all,
it is considerable that original sin, so far as it contains a positive
inclination, seems to be radically in the inordination of the sensitive
appetite, raging against the rule of reason, (though the rational faculty be
corrupted too, and gives up it self to the slavery of the sensitive; yet the
sensitive seems to be the root.) Now it is evident that nature does much in
propagation of the sensitive, (or else man should do less in generation than a
beast). But Grace is radically subjected in the rational faculties, (though by
participation also it reach the sensitive:) and here nature does less in
propagation. We see by experience that a natural gentleness and calmness of the
passions, and such other lower common virtues as are subjected in the sensitive
part, are born with some men; and from the temperament of the body, one man is
more mild, patient, temperate than another: but it is not so with the
intellectual Perfections, nor Christian Graces, Faith, Hope, or Charity.

I shall now proceed to prove so much of the affirmative, as I have here owned
more than is now held, viz. That there arises to children from the sins of
their nearest Parents, such an imperfect guilt, so called by analogy of
attribution, as that God may in vindictive justice inflict on them for the
same, the penalty (so called by the same analogy) both of temporal death, and
of eternal, at least as to the penalty of loss; supposing that it be not
pardoned through Christ.

And this I prove by these following Arguments.

Arg. 1. If we are guilty of Adam's first sin, on that account, because we were
seminally in him, and are propagated from him, then are we guilty of our nearer
Parents sins on the same account. But the antecedent is true: go. so is the
consequent.

Here I suppose it granted that Adam's first sin is imputed to us, and we
guilty of it: for I now deal not with those Divines that deny it, but with
those that maintain it:

For as I said before, if we are not guilty of Adam's sin, then I must give up
my cause, and confess that we are not guilty of the sins of our nearer Parents.
Supposing then the imputation of Adam's sin to us, I must First prove that the
reason of that imputation is, because we are propagated from him, and were
seminally in him. 2. That on the same reason, we have the like guilt of nearer
Parents sins.

1. For the first, I may safely premise this, that as in all relations there
must be a relate, correlate and foundation; and as to the disconformity of a
crooked line from the rule, there must be the crookedness of the line, and the
straightness of the rule; and is the rule will not give you ground to
denominate the line disconform or crooked, unless it be truly so: even so there
must be merit on man's part, consisting in performance, or some participation in
the evil, before the Law (which is the rule) will judge him guilty. The Law is
first the rule of duty, and then the rule of judgment. And it first shows them
to be guilty of the sin (reos culpae) before it show their obligation to
punishment, (reatum poenae.) This being so, it seems clear that the doctrine
(of too many) that lay the chief or only cause of man's guilt and punishment
upon God's covenant, is not sound. They say God made a covenant with Adam that
he should stand or fall for all his posterity: that is, as some expound it,
that his desert of life or death should be imputed theirs: and as others; that
if he sinned, he and his posterity should be guilty of death; and if he did not
sin that first sin of eating the forbidden fruit, both he and his posterity
should be confirmed in their happiness, as the good Angels, and never fall
afterward: And this covenant, say they, makes us guilty of Adam's sin, though
we have not a natural interest to make us guilty; and so God imputes it to us,
not because it was ours before the imputation, but because he is pleased to
make it ours by that imputation, or by his covenant. That it is not the
imputation or covenant that primarily makes us guilty, but determines us
guilty of the fault who are so in our selves, and consequently determines us
guilty of punishment; I prove thus:

1. Else it should be God only or primarily that should make us sinners, and
not we our selves, nor our Parents: But that is most false: go. The consequence
is most apparent. If a man be therefore a sinner, because God by his covenant
or imputation says he is one, and not because he is first made one by himself,
or Parents, then God is the principal, if not only cause of sin.

2. Yea, then God should make a man a sinner by that Law whose essential nature
is to prohibit and hinder sin.

3. Or else thus; God's judgment (by Law or Sentence) is ever according to the
truth of the thing: (He judges or pronounces things to be as they are, and
not as they are not.) But if he should determine or pronounce a man a sinner
that is not, his judgment were not according to truth: but he should make that
which is false become true by judging it true; which is no tolerable conceit.

4. If it were without any antecedent ground in us, that God's covenant does
judge or make us guilty of Adam's sin, (or God impute it to us,) but merely
because he will do it; then on the same reason might God have made or judged
the innocent Angels, or the Lord Jesus Christ guilty of Adam's sin: yea, he
might have imputed it to the Sun, or Moon, or any creature. For if real
innocence secure not us from being made sinners by God, or reputed such, then
it would not secure them: Or if God's will to impute it be enough, without an
antecedent interest to ground that imputation upon, then there is no
difference, as to interest in that sin, between them and us: But that is too
gross a conceit to be defended.

5. There is no such covenant of God with Adam mentioned in Scripture, as lays
the final standing of his posterity upon that first obedience, or disobedience
of his, much less that determines that they shall be judged guilty for his
sake, of more than they are guilty of indeed, by natural interest. The
foundation of the relation is in our selves.

I conclude therefore that it is most certain that there is in man some
sufficient ground or cause why God's Law should denominate or judge him guilty
before it do so. And this cause can be no other than one of these two: either
because we were seminally in Adam, and are his children; or because God making
his covenant as the Rector of all mankind, did make it upon supposition of a
virtual consent contained in the very nature of man, and so supposing that what
we ought to do, we would do, and that if all men had then existed, we ought to
have consented to venture our felicity upon Adam's act, and to run the hazard^
of perishing with him, on condition we might be saved with him if he stand; and
so such a supposed consent is the ground of our guilt. But, though I will not
exclude this last ground, yet certainly it is upon a supposition of the former,
or else it is none at all. For man was not to exist till the fall was past, and
therefore could not be supposed to exist. And if God had decreed to create
every individual person to the end of the World, of nothing, as he did Adam,
without any derivation from him; what virtual consent can be supposed? or on
what ground should it be presupposed that we would all consent to live and die
with him, any more than with the Angels that fell? or any more than the good
Angels might be supposed to consent to such a thing? I conclude therefore that
the first ground of our interest in Adam's sin, or our guilt of it, is our
being his offspring, and then seminally in him; and next, that God might make
one Law for him and all that should come of him, as supposing the equity of
their consent: yet by that Law, he has not (that I know of) involved them in
his first sin any more than in his second or third; nor offered them happiness
merely on condition of his avoiding that first sin, whatsoever they should
afterward do themselves; nor yet promised to make them impeccable, or prevent
all after sin.

2. It being then our natural interest that is the first ground of our guilt of
Adam's actual sin, (so far as we are guilty): and we being as truly the
children of our near Parents, as of him, and seminally in them as well as in
him, it follows that we have the same natural interest in their sins as in his;
and therefore the same guilt, and reason why God should impute them to us:
Unless the change of Laws do make a difference, which if it do, it can be no
more, than by adding the Law of Grace to that of Nature to remedy its
obligation: For the nature of things being still the same, the same Law of
nature still remains: and therefore children must now be naturally guilty of
all Parents sins, as well as then, before that guilt be dissolved by remission.
Though now God will not punish the adult merely for Parents sins imputed to us,
yet he might do it if he would, supposing he had not by the Law of Grace
determined the contrary, if it be proved that he might do it then.

Moreover, as then God might suppose a civil interest in Adam's sin, (as we
were parts-future of the same World of mankind,) on presupposition of our
natural interest, (as his offspring;) so now (though our Parents be not the
root of mankind as Adam was; and that is the main difference, yet) seeing our
nearest Parents may be the root of Families, or other Societies, whereof God is
also the Rector, he may suppose another sort of civil interest or guilt of
their sins upon us. As he imputed Adam's sin to us as he was Rector of all
mankind, so may he our nearer Parents as he is Ruler of a Family, or of some
more remote, as Ruler of a Commonwealth.

Obj. But that Law which made us guilty of Adam's sin, is abrogated, and
instead of it is made the Law of Grace. God does not now say to any, In the day
thou sinnest thou shall die.

Answ. I know that commination stands not alone, and unremedied; and I yield
that the promissory part is ceased: but still every sin does leave upon us a
guilt of death, till Christ take it off; or else what need could we have of the
pardon of it?

Obj. But that Law was particular and positive, [in the day thou eatest thou
shall die]: go. it is ceased.

Answ. The particular prohibition of that act of eating is ceased, cessante
objecto: But that particular was grounded on, and presupposed a general, and
that which you call positive (how fitly, I now enquire not) was first natural,
as to the duness of penalty for each particular sin. The Law of nature first
says [death is the due wages of sin]. or [every sin deserves death]: and this
Law does still remain. So that though, as to the event, we have not that reason
to expect eternal death now, for Parents sins, (nor for every sinful act of our
own,) as before the promise of Christ we might have had; yet that is not
because the Law is abrogated, which is the very standing Law of nature, nor
because now each sin deserves not such death: but because we have now a remedy
at hand to put away the guilt. I am sure, this is the commonest judgment of
those Divines that are most against Arminianism; for they maintain that all the
unbelievers are still under the Law of works it self, as to the cursing and
punishing power.

Arg. 2. If we receive the guilt of one sin from our immediate Parents, then
may we as well receive the guilt of more: But we do receive the guilt of one
from them: go.

The antecedent is plain: For we receive from them the guilt of Adam's sin. It
is theirs before it can be ours. Adam delivered it not immediately to us. As we
received our nature and persons from our nearest Parents, so did we therewith
our guilt of that sin.

The consequence is proved, in that there is the same reason of both. Why did
not our Parents propagate us free from the guilt of Adam's sin? Because they
were not free from it themselves naturally; and therefore cannot give us a
better nature than they have themselves.

And so on the same reason it must follow, that being themselves guilty of
other sins, they cannot convey to us a nature not guilty of them. If one be
therefore ours because it was first theirs, and our nature from them, the other
must be so too.

Obj. The Law makes the difference: for God has not made us liable to Justice
for our nearer Parents sins, as he did for the first.

Answ. This is already answered. The Law indeed makes a difference as to the
event and execution, and actual remaining obligation: but not as to the desert.
The Law declares and shows men to be as they are, and does not judge unequally
of men that are equal, or of equal actions. The same Law, though remedied, is
still so far in force.

Obj. Our Parents, if faithful, are pardoned and justified, and therefore
cannot convey to us the guilt of any sin, because they have it not themselves.

Answ. It must be carefully understood, that pardon takes not away, 1. either
the reatum culpae, so as that person should hereafter be judged not to have
done what he did, or not to have sinned in so doing: 2. nor yet the natural
merit of punishment, as if that sin, and the person for it, did cease to
deserve death; but only it remitteth the punishment deserved, and takes away
the legal effectual obligation to punishment, or that duness of punishment
which must bring it upon us. So that Parents may nevertheless convey to their
children that natural desert which was not removed from themselves. 2. And then
remission being a free act of God, extends no further than he pleases: and
therefore (unless the covenant to the faithful and their seed, do pardon all
their guilt to their seed as well as themselves) the very effectual obligation
to punishment will follow the natural desert of it, to those children that have
not such a remission. And if this would prove any thing, it would prove us not
guilty of Adam's sin.

Arg. 3. If we are guilty of more of Adam's sins than the first, or than the
eating of the forbidden fruit, then on the same grounds we may be guilty of the
sins of our nearer Parents: But the antecedent is true; go. so is the
consequent.

The antecedent is proved thus. If there were the same causes to make us guilty
of Adam's following sins, as of the first, then th^^e is the same guilt. But
there were the same causes: go.

1. We were seminally in Adam as well when he committed his second sin as his
first. 2. The same Law as to the precept and threatening was in force (as de
futuro) when he committed his second sin, as when he committed the first. 1. It
cannot be doubted but Adam sinned often between the time of his eating the fruit,
and God's making the promise of a Redeemer. For his soul being depraved, and
turned into a wrong course of action, must needs act sinfully. 2. Yea we could
not be guilty of his eating the forbidden fruit, if we are guilty only of his
first sin. For that was not the first. His unbelief of God, and believing the
Serpent, and others more, did go before it. 3. Yea, the sins that Adam
committed after the Promise, do in their nature deserve our sufferings as much
as the first, though that desert had a remedy provided. If any still reduce all
to God's mere will, and say that it was his will in his first actions to deal
with Adam as the root of mankind, but not in his later sins; I must expect,
till they bring some proof of such a will of God, or such a Law; and still say,
that the will and law of God does not make sinners of innocent men, nor make
sinners no sinners any otherwise than by pardoning and sanctifying them* So
that (...) were as much in Adam after the promise as before, and his sin was of
the same demerit naturally; and therefore we are as well guilty of that as of
the first.

And then for the consequent, it is acknowledged by most of those whom we now
oppose, that we are equally related to Adam's later sins, and to those of our
nearer Parents, (I mean, to all that Adam committed before the propagation of
his Progeny.) And there are the same causes, as is before manifested. Though
our nearer Parents were not the root of all mankind as Adam was, yet are they
as much a cause of us and our nature, and of so much of mankind as spring from
their loins, as Adam was. And all the progeny of Cain did spring as truly from
him as from Adam: And all the World since the Flood were as truly in the loins
of Noah as of Adam: and so naturally equally interessed in their sins.

Arg. 4. If our natures may be corrupted more by the sins of our nearer
Parents, then may they be guilty by them as well as by Adam's. But the
antecedent I have before proved: go. The consequence depends on the fameness of
the reasons, that guilt and depravation should concur from our nearer Parents
as well as from our first: And it seems that participation in guilt is
pre-requisite to the depravation of nature; else it might seem some kind of
injury to us, that another should have power to make us so miserable. Sin is
commonly called the punishment of sin.

Arg. 5. If God may without any injustice bring death both temporal and eternal
on the son of a sinner, without intending it as a punishment to the Son for the
Father's sin; then may he also without injustice (nay in justice) inflict the
same death as a penalty for the Father's sin: But the antecedent is true; as I
prove thus. 1. That which all Rulers may do without injustice, that God may do
without injustice. But all Rulers may without injustice deprive the children of
a Traitor, or other offender, of those enjoyments which the Father has
forfeited himself, and which were to have been conveyed from the Father to the
child, if the Father had not forfeited them. If a Traitor forfeit his Lands,
and Honors, his Son is justly deprived of them, though the Prince intend it
not as a punishment to the Son. Because the Father cannot convey to his Son
that which he has not himself; as having lost it on his forfeiture: and the
Son has no right to it when the Fathers right is gone. So if a wicked man do
forfeit his right to all blessings in this life, or that to come, he cannot
convey a right to his Son which he had not himself. And what other way should
that Son have such a right, unless God should give it him; which he is or was
free to do or not. It Is true that God by a new covenant has given this
everlasting life to believers: but that is not to all; nor does that deny them
to be guilty of their Parents sin before, nor yet that it deserves death still
as to its nature, and might bring it, were it not pardoned.

2. God has no obligation on him according to the Law of works, to give
health, peace, or any blessing in this life, much less eternal glory to the son
of a sinner.

2. And for the consequence, 1. It is evident from what is said, that God
cannot be charged with hard or cruel dealing, in regard of any wrong that we
should suffer, if he punish us (thus by deprivation) for our Parents sins: for
if it be no cruelty to do the same thing upon the mere occasion of their sins,
(which is unquestionable,) then it is no cruelty to do it in respect to their
sin, as the deserving cause. 2. And for the point of justice, as it is already
proved to be non injustum, so it may be proved to be justum, thus. Where there
is a real participation in the sin, there it is just that there should be a
participation in the punishment, because of that sin. But we did really
participate in the sin, as of Adam, so of our nearer Parents: go. For the
minor: they that were seminally in them, (though not by personal existence) did
really participate with them in their sin. But we were seminally in them: go.
This will be further confirmed in that which follows.

Arg. 6. If we should have been guilty of the sin of our nearest Parents,
though Adam had never sinned, then are we guilty of them now: But the
antecedent is true: go.

Here I suppose that Adam had not sinned, and our nearest Parents had. If any
say this is not to be supposed. I answer; Though it may not be affirmed to have
so been, yet we may in dispute suppose it had been. Nor have I yet seen it
proved that God made any such promise to Adam, as to confirm all his posterity,
on condition that he did not commit that, or any sin. If Adam had begot a
posterity no better than himself was in his first created perfection, and under
the same Law, then they would have been peceable and mutable as he was, and
liable to the same penalty upon their sin as he was. But Adam would have begot
a posterity no better than himself, for ought we can find by Scripture, which
no where promises him a better, that is, an immutable or indesectible
posterity: and they would have been under the same Law; for it was suited to
their perfect nature: go.

From what is said, the antecedent is evident. For if we should have been as
much in our nearest Parents as we were in Adam, and they have been under the
same: Law* then their sin would have brought on us the same guilt and
punishment. For example, if Cain had been the first sinner, and Seth had been
innocent; the posterity of Cain would have been all guilty and corrupted, as
Adam's posterity now is. For the same causes would have produced the same
effects.

The consequence is clear, in that Adam's sinning first can be no cause why we
should not be guilty of the following sins of our nearer Parents, which
otherwise we should have been guilty of.

Arg. 7. None can be naturally the propagators of a nature better than their
own, (or a person better than themselves.) But if Parents who are manifoldly
guilty of death did propagate a nature not guilty, then should they propagate a
nature (or person) better than their own: go.

Here I must explain my meaning, by distinguishing of evil positive (if such
be) and privative: Between evils adhering to our nature or essence, and those
that adhere but to some integral part: Between a total privation and a partial:
Between a privation real or physical, and relative. And so I conclude that, 1.
I speak not here of positive evil, as such, (if such there be,) but of
privative. 2. I speak not of every evil that adhereth only to some part, and
not to nature it self. For I know a lame man may beget a Son not lame, and a
sick man may beget a sound child. 3. Nor do I speak of such a partial privation
which may consist with the prevalency of the contrary; and which nature may
supply, or overcome. 4. Nor yet of a privation of some physical good, (though
that be another part of our unhappiness,) but of a relation or right. 5. Nor of
a privation accidentally accrewing to the person, and limited to himself alone
by the will (...) another; but of one that is without any such limitation,
naturally, or by necessary resultancy fallen upon him.

Furthermore it must be observed; 1. that the guilt that we now speak of is no
natural being, but a relative, and that not proper and complete, but, as we may
call it, a privative relation, participating of the nature of a proper relation
but little more than a natural privation does of natural being. A right to life
is a true relation, which by sin we are deprived of: yet because there is not
only the non debitum habendi, but the debitum non habendi, I will not deny but
even in this privation there is a kind of relatio rationis. 2. Observe that we
are not now speaking of the duness of positive torments; for I say nothing of
that in this point of guilt of progenitors sins. 3. Note that many learned
Philosophers and Divines affirm that all evil is a privation of good formally;
(see Barlow's Exercit. de Natura Mali.) And if that hold, then it seems that
our Parents sins do bring upon us a guilt of all evil of punishment: for when
they have forfeited all good, they can convey no right of any to us. 4. Note
also, that right to blessedness more or less, does not adhere to the nature of
man as man; (for then those in Hell should have it:) but it is a separable
thing, depending on the will of God: And therefore our Parents may convey our
nature, without any right to such blessings. 5. When I say that it is
naturally, and by necessary resultancy, that a sinner is thus guilty, I do not
exclude God's free will as the antecedent cause in making Nature it self, and
the Law: but the indifferency, or non-necessity of the effect when the causes
are once in nature thus laid. Gnd might have chosen to have made man such as he
is, that is, man: and having so made him, whether he might have chosen to make
him that Law which we call the Law of nature, I will not now dispute; (though I
think not: because that Law of nature is nothing but the very nature of man
himself, considered as related to God, and withal the nature of the whole
creation; which all per modum signi do show man the will of God concerning what
shall be due from man, and to man.) But this is clear, that God having freely
made man in that relation, and under that Law as he did, his breach of that Law
does then by a natural necessity bring him under guilt: for if the subjectum,
fundamentum and terminus be put in being, the relation cannot be avoided; for
that were a contradiction.

Having given this explication, I suppose little more need to be said for the
proof of the premises. For the major, it seems now clear, that a person who
has lost his right totally to life, or any blessing, cannot convey to another
person, of whom he is the root, a nature that has right to that life or
blessing. For nemo dat quod non habet. 2. And this seems plainly to be no mere
negation of right, (in the derived nature,) but a privation. Because if our
progenitors had none of them sinned, we should have been born with that right
which now we want; and so we had seminally and virtually a right our selves:
which being lost, it is a privation to us, and not a mere negation; and so a
punishment, and not a mere affliction: Yet as the right of our Parents
themselves, (as Adam) who were personally existent, was a more full and proper
right than ours who were but seminally in them; so our privation is not in so
plenary and proper a sense called a privation, nor a punishment, as theirs is,
or as our own is for our actual sins: And so our guilt is not so full and
proper a guilt; but analogically so called, as Accidens is called Ens. And this
seems to me to be the true difference between our guilt of our Parents sins,
and of our own: and our punishment for theirs, (original from Adam, or others,)
and of our own actual sin. And perhaps Zuinglius meant thus, when he denied
Original sin to be properly called sin. So far as such a seminal right or
possibility which the seed has through the Parent, does differ from the
Parents own right; so far there is a difference in the formal nature of penalty
and guilt, upon the loss of that right. It is doubtless some more loss that the
Son of a Traitor has, by his Fathers forfeiture of his Lands, than a stranger
may be said to have by that forfeiture, who never was in a possibility of
enjoying them. It is therefore no mere negation, but a privation, and
consequently participateth of the nature of penalty, and the obligation thereto
of the nature of guilt. And thus in the major proposition of this Argument I
place the very reason of original guilt, from Adam, or any Parents.

The minor is plain: If Adam should convey to Abel a nature that has right to
life, or that is not deprived of the right it was in possibility of, or
seminally had, then he should propagate a better nature than his own, and give
that which he had not to give. And so if our nearest Parents, who are by a
manifold obligation deprived of that right, should convey to us a nature that
is deprived of it but by a single obligation, they also should propagate a
better nature than their own. But that cannot be. God by his Grace may make us
better than our Parents: but they by natural procreation cannot.

Arg. 8. Where punishment may justly follow, there guilt did go before: But
punishment of children for their Parents sin committed while they were in their
loins, may justly follow: go. there guilt did go before.

The major is proved, in that all punishment is for some fault, whereof the
person punished was some way guilty. Obj. It suffices that another were guilty
of it: Answ. One man's sin deserves not another man's punishment, further than
that other does some way participate in the guilt. Only we must distinguish
between guilt by personal commission or omission, and guilt by moral and
reputative, or by natural participation: Only Adam or other Parents were guilty
by personal commission or omission, as to those particular sins: but we are
guilty by natural participation, in that we derive all our nature and personal
being from persons so guilty: And we are guilty by reputative participation, of
the sins of mankind, (in Adam,) and of the Societies that we are members of,
(quoad nudum meritum, still,) in that we are justly reputed to consent to
partake of the benefits or penalties of such Societies, when we voluntarily
become and continue members of them.

Obj. Christ himself was justly punished, and yet was not guilty of our sin.

Answ. He was not guilty by commission, or by natural participation: but he had
an analogical guilt by reputative participation; that is, by his own voluntary
sponsion, putting himself quoad poenam in the room of finners: but mark the
limitation; it was but quoad poenam, that he undertook this task, viz. that
though he were not properly guilty, yet he consented to suffer as if he were
guilty, for the sakes of them that were. So that his own consent was a just
cause of the derivation of the penalty to his own person which did not commit
the sin; and so that analogical guilt was instead of proper guilt. It may well
he said that Christ was guilty ad poenam, as obliged to punishment, in that his
own consent was sufficient to induce an obligation to punishment.

Obj. May not God's pleasure bring on us a reputative guilt of Adam's sin, and
not of our nearer Parents? seeing he has absolute power over us, and therefore
his will may serve instead of our consent, as the will of a Parent may be
instead of the infants will.

Answ. God brings not guilt on any by efficiency, or making them such as
deserve punishment: but by imputation and adjudication. Otherwise God should be
the cause of sin, as sin: for so to make guilty, is to make a man really a
sinner. Our Parents may will sin, and so may do it for us, because we are
seminally in them: but God cannot will sin. Our Parents by willing it, do first
become sinners themselves, and then convey the guilt to us: but so cannot God.
It being therefore but by reputation and adjudication that he judges men so
guilty of sin, it is apparent that his judgment must have some ground in the
nature of the thing; and the man must be guilty before God judge him so: for
his judgment is according to truth. And therefore it must needs be that there
must be some reason in our selves why Adam's sin should be judged ours, or why
we should be judged liable to punishment for it: and that must be, because we
derive our natures from him: And then there is the same reason for our guilt of
nearer Parents sin, save only that God has since more freed us from the danger
of that suffering, which by such sins we might have undergone, (as he pardons
to us Adam's imputed sin also.)

The minor of the Argument will be anon cleared in the following Arguments.

Obj. It is indeed a punishment that is due to children for their Parents sins:
but it is only to the Parents that it is formally punishment; and to themselves
it is but materially so, and so but affliction, because the sin, and so the
guilt, was only the Parents, though the child be the subject of the suffering.

Answ. 1. If this were granted, it would still hold good, that God may justly
lay that suffering which is materially punishment, upon children, for the sins
of immediate Parents. 2. If this were so, then it will equally follow that we
may not be formally but materially punished for Adam's sin, seeing the reason
is manifested to be the same. 3. I have showed that there must be some reason
on the part of the sufferer, why he should suffer for another man's sin: Now
with us in the present case, it is evident that the reason is, because we are
their seed, and have our natures from them: go. this is a less-perfect, or
analogical guilt.

Obj. God does inflict sufferings on the beasts for man's sin, without any cause
on their part: go. he may do so by infants.

Answ. 1. God is not the Rector of Beasts in a moral proper sense; but only in
a natural improper sense, as a Pilot rules a Ship, or an Herdsman Cattle: And
therefore he has made no Law for them, nor has engaged his fidelity to them
concerning the conditions of their happiness or misery, as he has done to man:
And therefore bruits are not capable of sin or punishment, though they be of
suffering. So that childrens case and theirs do differ. 2. Yet when the bruits
suffer for man's sin, it is because of their relation to man: And therefore
children must suffer because of their relation, which is natural, and so near
that it makes them truly capable of guilt. So that according to the subject,
the same suffering receives a various form and denomination, and so does the
obligation. In the personal committers of the sin, there is guilt and
punishment due to them, in the primary, fullest, and most proper sense: on the
children that were then in their loins, it is guilt and punishment, more
imperfectly, as by analogy of attribution: in the bruits, when sacrificed, or
destroyed for their Masters sin, it is but equivocally guilt and punishment.

I shall proceed to some Texts of Scripture.

Arg. 9. Deuteronomy. 28. 18. Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body. Children are
cursed for the sins of immediate Parents: go. punished.

Obj. It is only to the Parents that it is a punishment.

Answ. True in the primary sense: but as the children participate of their
nature, so also of the nature of guilt and punishment. It is a threatening of
natural evil to a rational creature, because of a moral evil, which he has
some participation of: go, it is by participation a true punishment.

Obj. You may as well say that the bruits and inanimates are punished, for they
are here cursed too.

Answ. This was answered even now. The same evil threatened against a bruit, is
no punishment, which threatened against a reasonable creature, is a punishment,
because of, their different capacities.

Obj. The meaning of the Text is but this: Thou shall be denied the desired
fruit of tby body; i. e. your women shall be barren.

Answ. That may be part of the meaning: but as that is not the full proper
sense of the words, so is there no reason from the Text for limiting it to that
only; and many other Texts of Scripture tell us that it is, to be extended
further.

Obj. This was the voice of the Law of Works, which God does not now govern the
World by.

Answ. 1. This is a Law which was in force since Adam, and the Promise: and
therefore not then abrogated. 2. It is as much as I plead for, that according
to the law of nature, punishment is our due for our nearer Parents sins or else
it had not been put in this curse by Moses: But that Christ has provided a
remedy in the Gospel, for that and original sin as from Adam, and our actual
sin it self, I thankfully acknowledge. I say not therefore that eventually any
shall perish for the imputed act of his Parents sin, to whom it is pardoned by
the Grace of Christ.

Arg. 10. Exodus 20. 5. It is expressed in the moral Law it self, [For I the
Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the
children to the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me;] so Deuteronomy. 5.
9. and so God proclaims his name to Moses, Exodus 34. 7. Here then is a
threatening determining punishment to be due to the children for their nearer
Parents sin: for God will visit; that is, in justice punish it on them. The
objections before answered, I pass by.

Obj. This is only against those children that do themselves tread in their
Fathers steps.

Answ. True, as to the adult. But it is the Parents sins that are visited on
them. Those children are especially threatened, because it is they that lie
under such guilt ununremedied: But it is thence plain that it was the case of
all, till they receive the remedy: for the child's actual sin does not then
begin to make him guilty of his Parents sin, but only shows him to lie under
that guilt.

Obj. Yes; it is by consenting to our Parents sin when we come to age, that we
become guilty of them.

Answ. That Is not the first guilt: and that consenting brings not on us the
same formal numerical sin or guilt that was on our Parents; (for one accident
cannot pass from one subject to another, nor remain in two subjects:) but it
brings only a guilt of the like sort; so that ours is but the guilt of
consenting to their sin: But the Text here says expressly, that it is the sins
of the Fathers that are visited on the children.

Obj. It is meant of children in an ethical sense, that is, not natural, but
the heirs of their vices.

Answ. It is plain in the Text that it is to natural children, and therefore
the third and fourth Generation are mentioned: (though it is true, that it is
not all those children that lie under that guilt, but only those that inherit
their vices.) Otherwise the threatening should be equally to any other man's
natural children, that imitate your sin: But that is against the plain Text:
Though it be true, that any other man's children that imitate your sin, are
liable to punishment for such imitation: yet not for your sin.

Arg. 11. Ephesians. 2. 3. 11, 12. [Were by nature the children of wrath, even as
others. -- Remember that ye being in time past Gentiles in the flesh, -- that
at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of Promise, having no hope, and
without God in the World.] The first words are commonly understood of a state
of wrath derived from Parents by natural Generation. If that be not the
meaning, then I confess it makes nothing to prove either the imputation of
Adam's sin, or other Parents; nor native corruption neither: But if that be the
sense, as is commonly judged, then is there no intimation for a restriction of
it to Adam's sin, as the only cause of our desert of that wrath; nay, the later
verses, and the whole scope of the place gives it as a special reason; that
[they were Gentiles in the flesh]. So that it seems to me some state of wrath
which Israel was not under, that is here meant; or at least, some what more to
them as the seed of the Gentiles, than was common to Israel. It appears also
from the following verses, that when Christ took away the enmity, so that the
Gentiles were no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-Citizens of the
Saints, and of the household of God, and no more without God, Covenant, Hope,
etc. that Christ did deliver the Gentiles from a special punishment (and
consequently guilt) which lay on them and their seed, more than on the Jews.

So Gal. 2. 15. [We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles]
which intimates plainly that the Gentiles were by nature in a worse state than
the Jews: and therefore had by nature some more guilt than they.

Obj. That is not because the Gentiles were by nature guilty of any more than
Adam's sin, but because the Jews were by nature freed from that guilt; which
made the difference.

Answ. I confess that may be much, taking the word [nature] but as the cause of
the persons to whom the benefit is given, and not as the cause of the gift, or
thing given. But yet that seems not all which is meant, when we are called
[sinners of the Gentiles, and strangers and foreigners, etc.] For these show
some further transgression of our Parents that bound the sin of Adam falier on
us, and increased our guilt beyond that of the Jews, I mean, increased it
fundamentaliter quoad ^iusam meritoriam, though not terminative quoad poenam
demeritam. And indeed, it was not all the Jews that were freed from the guilt
of Adam's sin; but only those of them that were within the special Covenant of
Grace.

Arg. 12. Matthew. 23. 31, 35, 36. [Wherefore ye be witnesses to your selves that
ye are the children of them which killed the Prophets: Fill ye up then the
measure of your Fathers. Ye serpents! ye generation of vipers! how shall ye
escape the damnation of hell? -- That upon you may come all the rightous blood
shed on the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zaccharias
son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the Temple and the Altar: Verily I say
unto you; all these things shall come upon this Generation.]

Here, 1. that which they are brought in to witness against themselves, is
something that may justly subject them to punishment: But that which they must
so witness is, [that they are the children of them that killed the Prophets,]
(and not of Adam only:) go. etc. 2. From hence Christ concludes, 1. [Fill up
the measure of your Fathers, etc.] q. d. 1. Having the same corrupt natures
with your Parents, no wonder if ye do the same deeds. 2. It is just with God to
forsake you for their sakes, and permit you to follow the nature that you have
from them. 2. He calls them a generation of vipers and serpents, not only
because of their first Father, but because of the murderers of the Prophets. 3.
He says, that the righteous blood shed by their Fathers shall come on them: so
that it appears that it is not only their own imitation of their Parents
blood shed that comes on them, but even that very blood that was shed by their
Parents before they were born. 4. He gives the reason from their natural
participation, [whom ye slew:] and [ye are the children of them that killed,
etc.] q. d. In as much as your Parents did it, and you have your nature from
them, it is just that all this be imputed to you, and that you suffer as the
doers of it your selves; which yet you might have remedied by leaving their
sinful ways: but being your selves imitaters of them, you shall bear both the
sins which they and which your selves have committed.

Arg. 13. Psalm. 109. 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. [Let his children be
continually vagabonds, and beg: and let them seek their bread also out of their
desolate places. -- Neither let there be any to favor his fatherless children:
let his posterity be cut off, and in the generation following let their name be
blotted out. Let the iniquity of bis Fathers be remembered with the Lord, and
let not the sin of his Mother be blotted out. Let them be before the Lord
continually, that he may cut off the memory of them from the earth.] Here seems
to be as plain evidence, that we may be justly punished for the sins of our
nearer Parents, as any is in Scripture to prove the imputation of Adam's sin.
1. David desires a curse upon this sinners posterity, even before they are
born, or before he knows what they will prove. 2. And this is not because of
Adam's sin, though that also lay upon them; but, as he expresses it, ver. 16.
[because he remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted the po^ and needy man,
etc.] 3. Yea, he desires that God would remember the iniquity of his Father,
and not blot out the sin of his Mother: which cannot be meant of any punishment
that David would have God inflict on that Father or Mother. He is not of a
spirit so cruel and contrary to the Gospel, as to desire that God would not
forgive them that are dead long ago, and either in joy or misery; when he knew
not whether they died penitently, or impenitently. If any say that he did know
by the spirit of prophecy, or special vision, that they did die impenitently,
and are in hell: 1. I desire them that affirm it, to prove it. 2. If so, what
need he desire that God would not forgive them, or blot out their sin, which he
knew was now beyond possibility. 3. But the next words in the Text show that he
speaks only of the sin of the dead Ancestors, as it lies on the posterity, and
not on themselves: For as it was not the dead, but the living, that David
prays against, so he next says, Let them be before the Lord continually,
that he may cut off the memory of them from the earth.] So that it is a penalty
on him that then was living, and upon his posterity, that David prays for, even
that his Parents sin may be remembered against him, and his sin remembered
against his children; and not that any of them may be remembered against the
dead, who, for ought he knew, might some of them be pardoned in Heaven.

Obj. This might be an unlawful Prayer.

Answ. Then would it not be recorded among the sacred forms which were dictated
by the Holy Ghost, without one word of check or reprehension.

Obj. It is but temporal judgments that David desires for the Parents sin.

Answ. 1. It Is known that the judgments and blessings of God are mostly
expressed in the old Testament, as consisting in things temporal; because it
was not yet the fullness of time for Grace, and the great fruits and
concomitants of it to be revealed to the full. Life and immortality are brought
to light (in a greater measure) in the Gospel. 2. I have proved in the
beginning, that If God may inflict temporal death on children for Parents sin,
then also may he inflict eternal, as to the penalty of loss, and so much of the
pain of sense as the apprehension of that loss must needs infer. He that
depriveth man of life, depriveth him of all the comforts of it: and he that may
do so, may leave him his life without those comforts, if he please.

Arg. 14. [Psal. 137. 9. Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little
ones against the stones.] Here Babylon's children are to be dashed against the
stones, not only for Adam's, but their nearer Parents sins: As is plain, in
that those are given as the reason, in the Psalm.

Arg. 15. Job. 21. 19. [God lays up his iniquity for his children,] that is,
a punishment for his very iniquity. So Job 27. 14. If his children be
multiplied, it is for the sword; and his offspring shall not be satisfied with
bread: Those that remain of him shall be buried in death. So Job. 17. 5. Even
the eyes of his children shall fail. So Job 5. 4.

Arg. 16. The infants were to be part of the fasting, mourning, repenting,
sanctified Assembly, Joel. 2. 15, 16. which was not to lament Adam's sin only,
but their later sins: go. the infants had some sort of participation in the
guilt and danger of punishment.

Arg. 17. Nahum. 3. 10. [Her young children also were dashed in pieces at the
top of all the streets.] This mentioned as God's punishment for Parents sins.
The like is often in the Lament.

So Hos. 13. 16. Samaria shall become desolate, for she has rebelled against
her God; they shall fall by the sword, their infants shall be dashed in pieces,
and their women with child shall be ripped up.

Arg. 18. Jer. 29. 32. [Thus says the Lord; I will punish Shemaiah the
Nehelamite and his seed, because he has taught rebellion against the Lord.]
Mark here, it is called [punishing his seed.]

So of Jehoiakim, Jer. 36. 31. I will punish him and his seed, etc. So Jer. 22.
28, 30.

Arg. 19. Isa. 14. 20. [The seed of evil doers shall never be renowned.] Isa.
1. 4. [A people laden with iniquity; a seed of evil doers.] Psalm. 21. 10.
[Their fruit shall thou destroy from the earth, and their seed from among the
children of men.] Psalm. 37. 28. [The seed of the wicked shall be cut off.] So
Psalm. 106. 27. And it is often made a reproach, and a note of men liable to
contempt; as Isa. 57. 3. [Ye sons of the Sorceress, the seed of the Adulterer
and the Whore: so often. Mal. 2. 15. may have somewhat to this sense; [And
wherefore one? that he might seek a godly seed:] whereof one reason may be,
when they contract no guilt of Parents Adultery.

I might here also draw an argument not contemptible from the interest of the
seed of the faithful in the benefits of free Grace: But because I have been so
long, I will add but one more, and in that sum up many more Scriptures.

Arg. 20. From all the examples of God's actual execution of Justice on
children for the sins of nearer Parents. 1. For that of Cain's I mentioned it
before, out of Matthew. 23. And the Text shows that his seed suffered for his
sake, and not only for Adam's, when there was such a difference made between
Seth's and his, that his seed are called, the children of men; and so far
excommunicated, that the sons of God were not to join with them in Marriage. 2.
The infants of the whole World were drowned in the flood, not only because of
Adam's sin, but because their Fathers were grown so wicked. And it seems by
Peter; 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. that they are part of the spirits in Prison. When in
the mean time, Noah's whole Family (even wicked Cham) are saved for his sake.
3. When Sodom is burnt, all the infants perish. And it seems by Jude 7. that
they suffer the vengeance of eternal fire; and the reason is, because they gave
themselves over to fornication, and strange flesh. Ibid. 4. God destroyed all
the first born of Egypt for the Princes and Parents sin. 5. Moses commands to
kill every male of the Midianites among the little ones, even after they had
given them quarter, and brought them home, Numb. 31. 17. 6. So did they, and
more, to the subjects of Sihon, Deuteronomy. 2. 34. They utterly destroyed the men and
the women, and the little ones of every City and left none to remain. 7. So did
they by Og the King of Bashan, and his subjects, Deuteronomy. 3. 6. besides the rest
of the inhabitants, whom they drove out. 8. The like God denounces against
themselves for their rebellion, Deuteronomy, 32. 25. 9. The like is executed on
Achan's Family, Judge. 7. 24, 25. which indeed goes beyond the case in hand. 10.
God commands Saul to slay both man, woman, infants, and suckling of (...)
Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15. 3. 11. God kills the child begotten by David in
Adultery, for his sin. 12. He threatens out of his own loins to raise up evil
against David for that sin, and other evils. 13. He brings a curse on Eli's
house after him, for his and his sons sins. 14. He says, for Solomon's sin, he
will afflict the seed of David, 1 Kin. 11. 39. and so rendeth from him the ten
tribes. 15. He cutteth off, and brings evil on Ahab's posterity for his sake,
1 Kin. 21. 21. 15. He rejected all the seed of Israel, and afflicted them, and
delivered them into the hand of the enemy for their Parents sin, 2 Kings 17.
20. 16. Manasseh's sin God would not pardon to his posterity, when he was dead,
and pardoned himself, 2 Kin. 24. 3, 4. 17. Ezekiel. 9. 6. He gives the like
command, [Slay utterly old and young, both maids and little children.] 18. The
children of Babylon, Shemaiah and others are mentioned before. 19. I will
mention but two more, which shall be very remarkable. The first is, 2 Samuel 21.
where the plague of famine is inflicted for Readiness sin, and healed by the
sacrificing of seven of his posterity. 20. The last is the sad example of the
Jews, for killing Christ; who, being acquainted, it seems, with this doctrine
that I maintain, did say to Pilate, His blood be on us, and on our children:
and so it has been, and is to this day, to the terror of all the Churches, who
therein may behold the severity of the Lord.

So much cursorily for the proof of the Assertion.

In the next place we must answer some more of the chief objections, besides
what are already answered on the by. And first I will answer those that make
equally against the imputation of Adam's or our nearer Parents sin: And because
learned and judicious Placaeus has said more to the matter (in These.
Salmuriens. Vol. 1. de statu hom. lapsi ante Great. page 206, 207. These. 12, 13,
14, etc.) than any that I know of, I shall consider of his reasons; as they are
brought against the imputation of Adam's actual sin, to his posterity; and
consequently make against our participation in the guilt of our nearer Parents
actual sins.

1. He says it is not agreeable to that of Ezekiel. The Son shall not bear the
iniquity of the Father: for we should bear the iniquity of Adam.

Answ. 1. This speaks of a Son that disowneth his Fathers iniquity, and hates
it, and goes not in the same way; as is plain, Ezekiel. 18. 5, 6. 14, to 17. and
of no other: such shall not die for Parents sins. 2. But this is no proof that
he never deserved death for them; but only that through gracious indulgence, it
shall not be inflicted. So that this is a passage of Grace, and not of pure
Justice according to the mere law of works.

Obj. God speaks it to prove his Righteousness, and not his Grace: ver. 29.

Answ. It is his ordinate Righteousness according to the promise of Grace,
which he must fulfill, and not according to the mere law of works or nature,
which he vindicateth: It is his just and equal dealings with men compared one
to another, supposing that they stand all upon terms of Grace. 3. And this is
yet more plain, in that the very same promise, on the same ground, is made to
them that repent, and turn from their evil ways: ver. 21, 22. Certainly the
promise of pardon of sin is a promise of Grace, and not an effect of the pure
law of nature or works. So that the reason here why that Son, who himself does
that which is lawful and right, shall not die for the Fathers sin, is the same
as why a repenting sinner shall not die for his sin, ver. 21, 22. which can be
no other than pardoning Grace; which is so far from proving that there was no
precedent guilt, that it undoubtedly proves that there was: for where there is
no guilt, there can be no pardon.

This answer shall serve also to those that confess the imputation of Adam's
sin, and yet from hence argue against the imputation of other Parents sins. To
which I shall add, as to them, that this Text is no more against one than the
other: go. if it be not against the former, it is not against the later. Let
them show any intimated difference.

2. Says Placaeus, It agrees not with right reason. For, 1. If Adam's sin be
imputed, then his obedience ought to be imputed, if he had continued innocent.

Answ. The word imputation, as ambiguous, I purposely avoid, unless where I may
explain it: but not the sense before explained. I grant that to be true, which
he supposes absurd: But I say withal, that yet Adam's imputed righteousness
alone would have saved none that had had the least personal unrighteousness of
his own. Because bonum est ex causis integris, we should have been innocent as
we came into the World; but yet the next sin of our own would have spoiled that
innocence. 2. Further, I showed before that there is not the same reason for
conveying accidental benefits to nature, as for conveying a nature deprived of
them. In case of privation, the Parents cannot convey what they have not: But
though they had it, yet it follows not that they should convey it, if it were
a supervenient accident separable from nature: as for example, any right to a
reward that Adam might be supposed to attain by his obedience: this might be
proper to himself.

3. He adds, [at least, all the sins which Adam committed while we were in
his loins, must be imputed to us.]

Answ. I grant it, and say that so they are: yet with the forementioned
difference, that the first sin depriving us of all title to all God's benefits,
the second could deprive us of no more; and so could add no more guilt
terminative, but only fundamentaliter.

4. He adds, [so should all the sins of our intermediate Parents, seeing when
they committed them, we were as much in them as in Adam.]

Answ. I grant all, with the last mentioned difference: Let those that go on
other grounds answer the Objector as well as they can.

5. He adds, [yea the death of Adam should be so imputed to us: for if he
sinned as the Head of mankind, why should he not also be punished in the same
respect? If we were not bound to obey that prohibition, but in his person,
surely neither to be punished: for the commination belongs no otherwise to us
than the prohibition.]

Answ. But withal consider, that though God might have satisfied his justice
with destroying Adam, and so putting an end to humane race; yet, 1. He was no
way bound to do this: He that a little before bid man increase and multiply,
might let him enjoy his forfeited life: that was no injustice. 2. Yea, when God
had so lately made so glorious a structure for the demonstration and
communication of his goodness, etc. it may seem in wisdom much fitter for him
to let the sinning creature live, while he provideth, propounds, and applies
a remedy, than presently to destroy the works that he had made, though man
deserved it. 3. I pray you mark then the grounds that I go on: I say not that
we personally were then guilty in Adam; but that we draw a guilt with our
natures from Adam. God having in just and merciful wisdom resolved that we
shall survive, and so humane nature be propagated, it can be no other but a
guilty nature that is so propagated, which God is not bound to hinder; but
rather in wisdom not to hinder it, if that might be called an obligation.

6. It is further objected, [Moreover, how did we sin in Adam actually, who
were never actually in him?]

Answ. 1. I say not that we then sinned in Adam properly; no more than that we
did exist in Adam. For, as I know that existere est esse extra causas, so I
know that the act of sin, and the relation of guilt, are accidents that must
have an existent subject, if they exist: and therefore we cannot be sinners,
and guilty before we are. But I say, that when we first are, we have a nature
received from a guilty progenitor, and therefore a guilty nature, because he
cannot convey to us the right to felicity which he lost. 2. We were seminally
in Adam, and so sinned in him: though I know, as to personal actual existence,
this is but terminus diminuens, yet is it more than merely potential.

7. It Is objected, [How could that act be voluntary as to us, which was long
past before that we had any will?]

Answ. As we did not personally exist in Adam, so did we not will that act in
Adam: But yet when we received a will from Adam, it was quaedam natura, and
guilty of what his will was guilty, though not by the guilt of actual
commission, yet of derivation and participation: And thus it is reputatively
voluntary.

8. It Is next replied to some of the common reasons on our part; [There was
indeed humane nature in Adam; but singular, and divided from this of ours. And
if the first act of sin were an act of nature, why not also the first act of
generation? yet no man will say that in Adam we did beget Cain or Seth.]

Answ. 1. This makes nothing against me, who say not that we then sinned in
Adam properly: but that we received a guilty nature from Adam; which then began
to be a sinful or guilty nature or person, when it began to be a nature or
person; and before that was but a guilty seed. 2. Faults and punishments being
quid moral vel civil, a political thing, may be moraliter and reputative
transferred: and therefore as a man may suffer as a membe^ (...) a sinful
Society, though personally innocent, so might we as branches of mankind. But
generation being quid natural, there is no such ground for such an imputation,
or reputative translation of it. So that the case is not alike.

9. It follows; [And if Adam did deserve to himself a punishment equal to that
his sin* that is, as great as God had threatened, shall we think that Justice
will require other punishments from innumerable other men for that same sin?]

Answ. Adam did deserve a punishment as great as his personal nature was
capable of, and also the same to all that should come from his loins. If God
had destroyed him before he had any posterity, it would indeed have prevented
the propagation of guilt, by preventing the being of a capable subject; but yet
there would have been in Adam's sin a desert of such a propagated guilt, or a
reason for it, on supposition that there were a nature from him propagated. I
deny therefore the Antecedent, on supposition that God would let the course of
humane generation go on, according to the newly established Law of nature: It
was not only to his own person that Adam deserved this punishment. Or thus I
may deny the Consequence: Though Adam deserved punishment only to his person,
yet it being to his whole person, and our persons being then seminally in his,
and so after existing from his, it follows, that what he deserved to his
person, is propagated to those to whom that person propagates a being; seeing
it is of himself, and out of himself, that we proceed, and not by a mere
efficient causality, as in creation, or fabrication, but he affords us our
matter.

10. It Is further objected, [Either that sin had but one adequate guilt, which
was to be divided among all Adam's posterity; or as many guilts as men: If the
first, then it is but a little of that sin that is imputed, or of the
punishment that is due to each of us singularly. If the later; then one sin
should not have one guilt, nor one adequate punishment, but innumerable.]

Answ. The fundamentum is sin; and that is one: so the guilt is one
fundamentaliter and subjective primario; but more than one fundamentaliter and
subjective per derivationem: on supposition, that according to the course of
nature the one first guilty subject procreate more; for thereby sin is
propagated with, and in nature. If the Law of this Land do ordain, that a
Traitor and his posterity be all disinherited and banished; you may here put
your dilematical question, and as you answer it, so would we. If the Law of God
deprive rebellious man of all his felicity, and leave him his natural being, he
will beget a posterity therefore deprived of it, because they are his
posterity; Call this one guilt or two, as you please: I call it one
fundamentally, and one subjectively while there was but one subject; and many
consequently by propagation, when that one subject is as it were multiplied
into many. So that this is but about words, and not things.

11. It Is further argued; [Lastly, if we are therefore guilty of Adam's
disobedience, because we are his Sons; so that neither the miraculous
generation in respect of both Parents, (such as was Isaack's and John
Baptist's,) nor yet a divine creation of the soul without the operation of man,
can exempt any man from it: what then shall we say of our Lord? For his
miraculous Conception by the Holy Ghost did not hinder him from being truly the
Son of Adam, arising from the fruit of David's loins.]

Answ. I confess this objection has often seemed more difficult to me than all
the rest: but I see no reason that it should overthrow all our grounds. For it
stands on the supposition of many uncertainties; especially about the way of
humane generation, and the natural interest of male and female comparatively
therein, etc. But passing by all these, (because the very naming of
difficulties I find offends many,) I stand on the common answer, though the
part or interest of Mary in Christ's Conception was so much as might prove him
man of man, and give him the name of the Son of Man, of David, of Adam; yet
that was but secundum quid, or in the smaller part: for the interest of the
Holy Ghost in that Conception was the predominant interest: and therefore he is
said in our Creed simply, [to be conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the
Virgin Mary;] and he is principally and more fully to be called the Son of God,
than of Man, even according to his humanity, how much soever of his material
substance might be of the Virgin. This being so, he could not stand guilty of
Adam's, or any Parents sin, because in the predominant sense, he was not one of
their offspring, but the Son of God, conceived by the Holy Ghost. 2. And if
the Holy Ghost's Conception do free Christ from the actual corruption of his
nature, as your self confess; why not as well from the foresaid guilt or
imputation, supposing that such there is? For why else should not natural
pravity adhere to the substance which he received from the Virgin? To imagine
that Mary was born without original sin, is but to make the difficulty greater;
(how she was free that was not conceived as Christ, by the Holy Ghost?) or to
run it I know not how far. It were more plausible to say, that she was
perfectly sanctified by the Holy Ghost before Christ's Conception; and
therefore could convey no guilt to him: but what proof this would have, let
them tell that know.

12. After these reasons, the judicious Author concluds thus; [These things I
thought good briefly to dispute, following the authority of most grave Divines,
(who have disallowed this imputation either tacitly by their silence, as
Calvin. Instit. Tilen. These. etc. or else openly, and in express words, as Pet.
Martyr in Romans 5. Chamier Panstrat.) First, that we may not take that for God's
word which is not his word. 2. That we ascribe not that to God which becomes
him not. And that we may free the Christian Religion from such unnecessary
difficulties. And lastly, that we may the stronglier prove original sin as it
is described, Art 10. and 11. of the confession of our Churches.]

Answ. 1. We stick not on men's names; though we have more Divines against you.
2. Whether it be God's word, let our foregoing proof manifest. 3. Which if we
have proved, then should not humane reason say, it becomes him not: especially
when the same reason confesses the like to become all Princes and
Commonwealths. 4. I think I have done more to free the Christian Religion from
difficulties, by asserting such an imputation of all Parents sins, as
aforesaid, than you have done by denying all. 5. And I think that we may far
more rationally maintain original corruption, and the justness of punishment
for original sin, if we maintain the said guilt, than if we deny it, as you do.
So much to this excellent Writer.

Having answered their Objections, let me add this in the conclusion.

Arg. If we cannot be guilty of inherent original sin, without the derived
guilt of Adam's actual sin; then we do derive a guilt of Adam's actual sin. But
the Antecedent is true: therefore so is the Consequent.

That we are guilty of inherent original sin, is by them confessed. But this
cannot be without a cause, or foundation. And the foundation or cause must be
ours, or else the guilt cannot be ours. Now this foundation is either merely
the inherent pravity it self, or somewhat Antecedent. Not merely the inherent
pravity it self:

For, 1. It would prove against no Law: for no Law forbad us to be born as we
(...) Laws are not made to prohibit that which (...) not, to be what it cannot
choose but be. The Law against Adultery prohibiteth the Parents to commit it,
but not the child^^^ be born in it. There might (...) be a Law to prohibit a
child in the womb to come forth, as to prohibit the ^eed to become a man, and
such a man. Laws (...) made to the intelligent (...). Yet I deny not, but
original (...) is contrary to the Law of God (...): but that is only
consequentially, (...) which it could not be, if we had not the guilt of the
voluntary act, which is primarily against the Law.

2. The esse of our inherent (...) on p^^^^ations, is in order of nature before
the (...) or culpability. But we could not have had so much as the esse without
an antecedent guilt. Which I prove thus: Either the being of our original
dispositions is only a sin, or also a punishment. If it be only a sin, without
any antecedent sin or guilt of ours, then either God or Man is the Author of
it. Not God; for he is not the author of sin: and if he were, it would excuse
of the guilt If man, either our selves, or our Parents. Not our selves; for we
made not our selves. If our Parents; then either their acts are imputable to
us, or else that would make it never the more ours. So that our corruption
would be misery, at non peccatum; no more sin than the venom of a toad is sin.

But it is certain that the very being of our natural qualities and privations,
is a punishment. For God would not inflict so great an evil on us as that is,
which shall subject us to eternal death, for nothing. And this is commonly
confessed. Well then, the esse corruptionis is in order before the culpability
of it. That esse is truly poena, a punishment; though not as caused by God,
(for God causes it not,) yet as permitted by God, and as the consequent of his
just desertion. And omnis poena est peccati poena: punishment is essentially
related to a fault deserving it. This fault was merely our Parents, or by
participation and derivation ours. If merely theirs, then our corruption is
merely their punishment. For God will not punish one for another fault, when
there is no ground of imputation of it to themselves. But it is certainly our
punishment; or else it could not make us inherently sinful, and so damnable
therefore as the penalty is ours, some antecedent fault must be ours: which can
be nothing but a derived guilt of Parents sins.

Chamiers Reasons also I shall briefly dissolve; I mean those passages against
Salmeron and Pigbius, Paustrat. Vol. 3. l. 1. c. 7, 8. in which his strength
lies.

C. 8. sect. 9. Dico nullum peccatum unum numero posse esse commune omnibus
hominibus, -- Actiones sunt suppositorum, -- Itaque nego peccatum illud Adami
esse peccatum originale.

Resp. 1. In the instant of committing it we were not persons distinct from
Adam, and so had not a distinct sin; but we were seminally in him, having our
essence after from his essence: and so far as we were in him, we were guilty of
that act in him. And when we become persons from him, we become guilty persons
of that act: that is, not reputed to have done it as distinct persons, but
justly reputed odious and punishable, as being then seminally in him, and as
having our essence from him; and therefore such as his essence was, as to the
guilt: so that now we have numerically as many original sins as we are.
persons, that is, individual guilty natures and persons, from that one sin,
(besides qualitative pravity.) The same he has often, sect. 11, 12, etc.

Sect. 17. He says, Resp. Constitui nos peccatores formaliter vel causaliter
-- And he says that formally it is that which in nobis ipsis inest tanquam
qualitas peccatrix, -- ut albus paries per albedinem, -- But by Adam's act only
causaliter.

Answ. 1. Why is causaliter distinguished from formaliter? as if forma non
esset causa. 2. If by causaliter he mean efficienter only, he should tell us
what sort of efficient it is. 3. If there be such a thing as actual sin, how
does that act make us sinners? Is it formaliter? Then we are sinners but in the
instant of act: for our own acts are presently gone, and nothing, as well as
Adam's. If it be causaliter, then Adam's act is confessed to make us sinners,
as our own acts do when they are past. 4. The plain truth is, (whether learned
Chamier saw it or not) both acts and habits make us sinners in the same kind of
cause, (and so may Adam's,) viz. as the fundamentum relationis; and the reatus
culpae is that relation, or the formalis ratio peccati, (though the reatus
poenae be but a consequent.) And therefore Pet. Martyr on Romans 5. does ill to
deny that reatus is sin it self, (cont. Pighium.) Now men call the fundamentum
relationis in these morals, by the name both of causa meritoria efficiens, and
materialis. Meritorious acts or qualities are called causa efficiens quoad
ipsam relationem inde resultantem: and causa materialis constitutiva, as the
whole essence of sin is made up of them, (as meritorious matter,) and of the
relation together. If we will be Logical, we must be accurate, or we cheat men
by words.

Reader, in conclusion, lament with me the common partiality of the best
Disputers. How little did this opinion dishonor great Chamier, Pet. Martyr,
etc. And why? Because it was against Pighius and Salmeron that they wrote it:
opposition to whom I think verily drew them also to it. But when Placaeus said
the like, or less, with what a heap of authority does Rivet (well) overwhelm
him? For then it was not the Papists that were concerned in the dispute.

I shall next speak to those objections which are made only against the
participation of guilt of the sins of nearer Parents, by those that confess our
guilt of Adam's sin. Supposing that of Ezekiel. 18. and consequently, Deuteronomy. 24.
16. answered before. And they are these following:

Obj. 1. If we are thus guilty of our nearest Parents sins, then have we two
sorts of original sin: when as we have hitherto acknowledged but one.

Answ. It is but one subjective in each person, and but one terminative; that
is, it is but one and the same punishment that one and the same person is
obliged to: but it is manifold fundamentaliter, as arising from the desert of
many sins. But, 2. if you take the word [Original,] not as signifying all that
adhereth to us ab origin, but as signifying only that sin which was the
original or first inlet of all our misery; then as there can be but one first,
so is there but one original sin, even Adam's. 3. As our natures are further
polluted by some nearer Parents sin, so may they be further guilty by them. I
think I proved before, that the children of some ungodly Parents have an
additional pravity in their natures, at least as to the inclination to she
creature the terminus ad quem of their apostasy, more than the generality of
mankind have as merely from Adam's first sin.

Obj. 2. If we are guilty of the sins of our nearer Parents, then this
Generation should be many hundred fold more guilty than the first was; and so
the last man or age should be the most sinful.

Answ. So they are fundamentaliter, but not terminative: They have forfeited
but the same felicity which one sin may forfeit; for there is no more to lose:
But it is on a manifold desert or ground that they have forfeited that one
felicity: and so incurred that one penalty. 2. But this I say but on
supposition that the Parents are none of them pardoned. For if the Parents be
pardoned themselves, it is the judgment of very learned and judicious Divines,
that by the same Covenant all their infants are pardoned with them, as soon as
they have their being: And also that pardoned Parents cannot convey that guilt
to their children which they have not on themselves. And consequently, that by
the remedy, an interruption is made in the process of guilt. 3. But then it is
still confessed, that the reatus simplex, as some call it, that is, the mere
natural merit antecedent to the persons obligation (which some call reatus
redundens in personam) is not taken off by pardon from the Parent, and
therefore not from posterity.

But a great difficulty here arises in the way: How then can the guilt of
Adam's sin be conveyed to any of us, seeing it was pardoned to Noah, from whom
all the World proceeds; and how could Noah convey the guilt which he had not?

Answ. This objection was before answered in part. Remember still that the mere
merit of punishment, simply considered, is not taken away by pardon: nor the
mere reatus facti vel culpe. It remains true to all eternity, that such a man
did commit such a sin, and that that sin deserved death: (but not that he is
obliged to death for it.) Remember also that this is communicated to posterity
with their nature: And that it is a voluntary act of God that remitteth the
deserved punishment, and pardons the sin; and therefore it can extend no
further than he please. As also that this mere merit does produce a proper
guilt on every soul that has it, which makes it capable of pardon; though to
infants that are pardoned, the guilt and the pardon are in the same moment of
time, yet in order of nature the guilt goes first.

These things premised, I further answer, that there are two opinions of
Divines about pardon of infants. Some think-that only the elect are pardoned;
and some (as Davenant, Ward, Amyraldus, etc.) think that all the infants of
Believers (or that are baptized rightly) are pardoned. According to the
principles of the former it must be said, that when God pardoned Noah (or any
godly Parent) and his elect seed, that pardon remains firm for ever: but a
pardon it is to the seed as well as to the Parent, and therefore supposes
guilt, which is by a necessary resultancy from the natural desert, till Grace
destroy it. But as for that seed (as Cham. e. g.) which was not elect, God
pardoned Noah's original sin but limitedly, intending that it should not extend
to the non-elect seed, but that they should have a guilt on their souls from
that natural merit, as if God had never pardoned the progenitors. For the
desert and imputability adhereth to nature, but the remission will go no
further than free Grace extends it. According to the principles of the later
it must be said, that God pardoned to Noah (and every godly Parent) the sin of
Adam, and all other, and to his infants while infants; but with this
limitation, that if they themselves at years of discretion believed not, they
should not continue pardoned, but perish, either by the return of the sin
before so pardoned, as some think; or only for the super-added sin, as others
think. In a word, every Parent begets a Son of Adam, and of himself a
sinner, and thereby begets a nature that has in it self compared with God's
Law, the fundamentum reatus, and this he does never the less for being pardoned
himself. Unless his posterity be pardoned with himself, they will remain
guilty: for the relaxation of the commination being but to his own person,
makes only a change on himself. The disease is natural, and the cure is
accidental; and therefore though he be cured, yet will he convey the disease to
posterity.

To explain this by the like. Suppose that by a standing Law of the Land, all
the posterity of any Traitor are to be disinherited, dishonored and banished.
It pleases the Sovereign not to destroy this Law, but to dispense with it as
he shall see special reasons. Whereupon he pardons some one of a traytorous
line, with this limitation; either that this pardon shall be but to his own
person only, or at most but to his seed (immediate) till they forfeit the
benefit by ungrateful rejection. In this case, all his posterity would be
nevertheless born guilty of the foresaid punishment: only that guilt would be
taken off according to the terms in the Law, and no further. For the Law is
still in force, and universal; and the children are naturally the posterity of
a Traitor, (whether in one degree or many;) and the pardon is but a singular
and supra-legal act, and limited as is expressed; and is purposed for the
removal of a guilt from the particular persons, and not for the preventing it
in any one of them; or if the pardon be universal-conditional, all is one.

What I have said about Adam's sin, will (more easily) answer the like
objection, as to nearer Parents sins.

Obj. 3. If we are so guilty of our Parents sins, then Christ's satisfaction,
and God's pardon of sin is imperfect: for he pardons them upon Christ's
satisfaction to every believing Parent: and if after this they must be punished
again on their posterity, then were they not perfectly pardoned at the first.

Answ. The perfection of pardon, and Christ's satisfaction, must be discerned
by considering them in their own kind, and in their perfect sufficiency to
those ends whereto God intends them, and not according to mistaking conceits
of men. Pardon is not simply and absolutely perfect in this life: Manosseh's
sins must be punished when he is dead, on his posterity. But it has no
Imimperfection dishonorable to God, or to Christ's satisfaction. 2. It is not
the same numerical guilt that is pardoned to the Father, and not pardoned to
the Son, or remains on him. From one sin there arises one single guilt to
the first sinner, and that multiplyeth upon the multiplication of persons from
his loins: and every person has a several guilt, though from the same root. 3.
Note also that this objection makes as much against our guilt of Adam's sin, as
of our nearer Parents, and more: for they may say, that sin has been pardoned
to many of our progenitors, between Adam and us. But it holds not against
either.

Obj. 4. God would not drown Noah with the World; nor destroy Lot with Sodom:
and Abraham says, Let it be far from the Judge of all the earth to destroy the
righteous with the wicked.

Answ. 1. God was not then dealing with the World, or with Sodom, for such sins
as Noah or Lot were guilty of. So that, though he might have found sin in them
deserving his wrath, yet when he comes to execute an extraordinary judgment for
an extraordinary sin, he will not deal with those, as with such extraordinary,
or great, or impenitent sinners, who were not such. 2. It is justice
Evangelical therefore, or on terms of Grace, and not pure legal Justice, which
Abraham appeals to for the rescue of Lot. It Is true, it is a personal
righteousness of Lot, which he pleads with God for his deliverance from
judgment, even with the Judge of all the earth; as a necessary work of his
justice: (which those may note that will have no righteousness inherent in our
selves pleaded with God, much less with Justice, for freedom from his wrath:)
But it is but a righteousness consisting in a freedom from that impenitency and
wickedness which God came to revenge; and not in perfect obedience. This
therefore shows not* what God might do in strict justice; but what he will do
in that justice which is tempered with (and prevailed over as it were) by
mercy. 3. The infants of the old World and Sodom perished with them.

Obj. 5. Parents sins are not voluntary as to us: go. not ours.

Answ. This is answered before. They are the sin of our wills, and so
voluntary: and we come out of them that voluntarily committed them.

We must not look on Parents and children as on two distinct persons that have
no derivation from, or dependence on each other: but consider that our very
being is from them.

And that God does actually punish and destroy children for their Parents sins,
is proved already by a multitude of Texts. And who dare say that he does it
unjustly, because we are not consenters? To prove that God does it, is enough
to prove it just, because he can do nothing unjustly.

As for the great question, whether any be damned for Original, or Parents sin,
I answer; Whatever the degree of penalty is, none can be freed from it but by
pardoning Grace through Christ: and therefore none but those that are the
children of the pardoning promise.

I shall conclude all with these following Corollaries, containing some Use of
what has been said and proved by us in this dispute.

Cor. 1. This Doctrine of our liableness to punishment for our nearer Parents
sins, does much clear up the reason of our original sin, (as from Adam,) and
consequently much confirm us in the belief of it, and enable us to answer most
of the cavils against it. And I must confess for my part, that I am not able to
maintain our guilt of Adam's sin, without this.

Cor. 2. It hence appears that it is a duty of all Christians to bewail, and
beg pardon of their Parents and Ancestors sins, as to the punishment which
themselves are liable to for them. They are not only to confess that they are
the children of Adam, but also the seed of Idolaters, superstitious, ignorant,
prophant, unbelieving Ancestors; that their Father was an Amorite, and their
Mother an Hittite, Ezekiel. 16. 3, 4. and that he whose eyes are on all the sons
of men, to give every one according to his ways and doings, does recompense
the iniquity of the Fathers into the bosom of their children after them. Jer.
32. 18, 19. 2 Kin. 22. 13. Great is the wrath of the Lord which is kind^^d
against us, because our Fathers have not hearkened to the words of this Book, to
do according to all that is written. So. 2 Chronicles. 29. 6. 9. 2 Chronicles. 34. 21.
See a full example, Nehem. 9. from 16 to the end: especially ver. 32, 33, 34,
35, 36, 37. Psalm. 106. 6, 7. We have sinned with our Fathers: our Fathers
understood not thy wonders in Egypt; they remembered not the multitude of thy
mercies, but provoked, etc. see to the end. Jer. 14. 20, 21. We acknowledge, O
Lord, our wickednest, and the iniquity of our Fathers; for we have sinned
against thee* Do not abhor us for thy name sake, etc. Jer. 3. 25. We lie down
in our shame, and our confusion covers us: for we have sinned against the
Lord our God, we and our Father, from our youth even to this day. Lament. 5. 7.
Our Fathers have sinned, and are not; and we have born their iniquities. Dan.
9. 16. I beseech thee let thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy City
Jerusalem, thy holy Mountain; because for our sins, and for the iniquities of
our Fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach to all that are
about us. See the whole prayer.

Nehem. 9. 2. They stood and confessed their sins, and the iniquities of their
Fathers.

Isa. 14. 20, 21. The seed of evil doers shall never be renowned: Prepare
slaughter for his children for the iniquity of their Fathers.

Isa. 65. 6, 7. Behold it is written before me, I will not keep silence, but
will recompense, even recompense into their bosoms; your iniquities, and the
iniquities of your Fathers together, (says the Lord,) etc. Jer. 16. 10, 11.
They shall say to thee, Wherefore has the Lord pronounced all this great evil
against us? or what is our iniquity? or what is our sin? Then shall thou say
unto them, Because your Fathers have forsaken me, says the Lord, and have
walked after other Gods, and have served them, and have worshipped them, etc.

So, Jer. 44. 10, 11, 21, 22. The Lord could no longer bear, but the Land was
made a curse, because he remembered the sins of their Fathers.

I fear lest many of us, yea most, have been guilty of not bewailing and
praying for the pardon of our forefathers sins, and desire godly men to
consider more of it for the time to come.

Cor. 3. From hence it appears, that it is a sad thing to be born of evil
Parents; and a blessing to be born of those that fear God: and accordingly to
be acknowledged.

Cor. 4. Also it follows, that if God show mercy to the children of wicked
Parents, it is a double blessing, and the freeness of such Grace is accordingly
to be magnified.

Cor. 5. Though blessings be not merited, as curses be, yet seeing the natural
interest of children in their Parents, and Parents in children is so great, you
may hence discern, that even to reason it is very probable that God should deal
better with the children of true Believers than with others: and that they
should have special benefit by their Parents Faith considering that God is as
prone to mercy as to severity.

Cor. 6. May we not hence see some ground to justify God's severity against
those infidel parts of the World, whose Ancestors have refused the Gospel, and
the Lord Jesus? And are not those infidels guilty of their forefathers sin, in
the sense beforementioned? If Christ died for them, and offered them himself,
his grace and benefits, and they reject him, it is a just punishment to
posterity, if for this sin of their Fathers, he leave their Country in
darkness, and seek out a people that shall give him better welcome. And if he
do not so by us, who have so abused him, it is not because in justness be may
not, but because in mercy he will not: and the greater and freer is that mercy.
If he promulgate his Laws to the Fathers, and they reject them, he may take
that as a sufficient promulgation for the obligation of posterity, and may
judge them for rejecting that Law or Gospel: and if they say We never heard it;
it suffices to tell them, It was sent among you; and your Fathers would have
none of it, but expelled it out of their Country; and refused to have him that
redeemed them reign over them.

Aquinas handling this Question, 1. 2. Q. 81. art. 2. Vtrum etiam alis pecata
primi parentis, vel proximorum parentum traducantur in posteros? denies it;
but then he seems not to speak at all of the matter of mere guilt or
imputation, but only of the traduction of inherent pravity: And therefore it is
nothing to the matter that we have specially here to deal with; and, 2. even in
that his reasons seem not of weight. The sum is, that only Adam's first sin
did corrupt nature in specie, and others are but personal: The ground of this
his assertion is that opinion wherein the Papists differ from our Divines; viz.
that Grace was supernatural to Adam; and original sin being nothing but the
privation of that Grace or Rectitude, and the first sin making a total
privation of that to humane nature, there is nothing left for after sins to do
of that kind: This seems his full sense, though he speak it not out in so many
words. But to this I say, 1. This (as is said) does not at all deny that we
deserve punishment for our Fathers sins, but only that we are not capable of
this punishment in specie: and so the main thing is granted which we seek.

2. His sentence about the supernaturality of Grace to Adam (which yet he
affirms to be concreated with him) is not proved* The Scotists do resist him
in it, as well as the Protestants. Read an excellent Dispute of it in Rada's
first Controversy, showing how far it is or is not supernatural.

3. His ground, viz. that [naturals could not be lost] is unproved: There be
certain natural perfections of the mind which are so far under the power of
exercised reason and free will, that they may be depraved or much destroyed by
the abuse of these.

4. The word of God, and the experience of the World does fully prove that
wicked men grow worse and worse, and are prone to apostatize and depart yet
further from God; and that the very light of nature may be extinguished in
part, and some men by custom in sinning make themselves much worse than they
were by nature: go. it is certain that men are not so bad by Adam's first sin,
but their nature is capable of being made worse: And they are not at the very
worst till they come to Hell: And in this life we see great variety in degrees
of wickedness among wicked men.

Particularly as to his answers to the three Arguments. To the first, (drawn
from Scripture examples of punishing children for the Fathers sin) he says it
is only corporally, because the child is as it were a part of the Father quoad
corpus. Answ. 1. Corporal punishment proves that we deserve punishment, else
God would not inflict it: for he will be no more unjust in the lesser than in
the greater. 2. He that deserves corporal punishment for sin, deserves more. 3.
The whole man, soul and body is as much from our nearer Parents as from Adam.

To the second reason, (which is drawn from Parents traducing Adam's sin to us,
and therefore much more their own,) he confesses it would hold were their own
sin traducible, which he says, it is not; but the reason is before disproved.

The third reason is, that if we therefore contract sin from Adam because we
were in him, then may we do it from our other Parents because we are in them,
seeing the Scripture shows we are capable of growing worse. To this he only
says, that the first sin corrupts nature, the second only the person. But
this is a bare denial, and no answer to the force of the reason. And unless he
distinguish of common nature, and the persons nature, what sense has it? For
to corrupt the person qualitatively, is so to corrupt his nature.

What Bellarmine says, Lib. 4. Cap. 18. de Amiss. Great. and statu pecc. being
of less weight than this of Aquinas, needs no other reply.

That we should have been corrupted by Original sin, if Cain and Seth had
sinned, and not Adam, see Aquin. de Malo q. 5. a. 4. ad ult. (of which says
Bellarmine groundlesly, fortasse locus corrumpitur.)

FINIS.

