A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL Of that Faithful Minister of Christ Mr. John
Corbet. With his True and Exemplary CHARACTER.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns at the
lower End of Cheapside.

A Funeral Sermon.
2 Cor. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. It is not expedient for me doubtless to
glory: I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.

I knew a man in Christ above fourteen year ago (whether in the body I cannot
tell, or whether out of the body, I cannot tell, God knows) such an one
caught up to the third heaven.

And I knew such a man (whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell:
God knows)

How that he was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it
is not lawful for a man to utter.

Of such an one will I glory; yet of my self will I not glory, but in mine
infirmities.

For though I would desire to glory, I shall not be a fool; for I will say the
truth: but now I forbear, left any man should think of me above that which he
sees me to be, or that he hears of me.

And lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of the
revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan
to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure.

For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.

And he said, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect
in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that
the power of Christ may rest upon me.


IT is but lately that we were here lamenting the loss of this City and the
Church of God, in the removal of an excellent Saint; we are now come on the
like occasion. It is a year of Jubilee for holy souls, and a harvest for heaven,
The ripest are gathered, and the green and sour fruit is yet left on earth:
But Oh what a heavy judgment is it, to the needy world, which wants such
lights, as God is taking in. But we are not the Choosers! Its well if we be
obedient Learners, and can follow such to life in the Holy path.

The Text read to you has so much matter of Instruction that will excuse me if
I scarce name the most. It is part of Paul's Vindication against the accusers of
his Person and Ministry, which were some Erroneous Judaizing Teachers. He
confesses that glorying is an unexpedient thing, and sounds like folly; but
yet in case of necessary defense, it may be modestly and sincerely done:
Especially the opening of those Divine Revelations and gifts which makes for
the strength of the Faith of others. The Explication shall be taken in as we go.

Observe. 1. It is no new thing for the wisest and holiest of Christ's Ministers
to be accused even by the Teachers of Christianity.

For 1. There are many Erroneous Teachers, that are confident they are in the
right, and oppose the Teachers of Truth as if they were the erring men.

2. And there are Worldly, Proud, Malignant Hypocrites, who bring their
unsanctified Hearts into the sacred Office, and manage it as men do common
Trades, but with greater enmity and strife.

3. And there are abundance of ignorant or halfwise injudicious men, who have
self conceitedness enough to be peremptory and confident, but neither knowledge
nor humility enough to perceive their own weakness and mistakes.

Use. 1. Therefore let it not become a scandal to you if you hear some Teachers
accusing and vilifying others.

2. And think not that a Minister is erroneous or faulty, merely because
others, though of great name, do accuse him, or so represent him. It has still
been so, and while Satan is Satan, and man is Corrupt man, and there is so much
darkness and so much Worldly Temptations, and Cross Interests, it will be so:
And Preachers will be made the common and dangerous hinderers of Preachers; And
where they have Power will silence them, and disgrace their work.

Observe. 2. Glorying or boasting is in it self an inexpedient thing. It savours
of Pride, and Selfishness, and Folly, when it is not necessary and just. And
therefore all Christians should be backward to it.

Observe. 3. Yet that which is so inexpedient, may on just occaons become good,
and a duty.

That is, 1. When it is made needful to Gods honor, and the vindication and
success of our Ministry and the Truth. And,

2. When these are our true ends. And,

3. When we speak nothing but the Truth.

Use. III. O that men knew how great a sin it is, by their confident Errors and
rash Accusations, to put Christ's Ministers upon such a defense; much more to
seek their silence and destruction.

2. And here you see that inconveniences will not excuse us from necessary
duties; nor prove that all is unlawful which has such. What is it in this
confused and imperfect World that has not its inconveniences? In Government,
both Monarchy, Aristocracy and Democracy, absolute and limited, have their many
inconveniences. In Churches, the power of People and Pastors, equality and
subordination, riches and poverty, severity and lenity; to use Discipline or
neglect it, have their inconveniences. In Worship, imposed words of free, and
all humane forms and modes have their inconveniences. In Houses, a married
life and a single, to have Children and to have none, to have servants or none,
to have much business or little, to be high or low, rich and poor, to rule
greatly or severely, have all their inconveniences. In our conversations to be
yielding or not, to converse with few or many, with high or low, to speak or to
be silent, have all their inconveniences.

And yet there are men that on one side can silence Christ's faithful Ministers
by hundreds or thousands and persecute the true Members of Christ, and cast out
true discipline, and corrupt the Churches, and justify all this by urging some
inconveniences. And there are others that can unchurch most Churches in the
World, and separate from their Worship, and think the charge of inconveniences
will justify all. And so we should have no Government, no Ministry, no
Worship, no Families, Wives or Children, or Servants, no Books, no Trades, no
Food, no Physic, if all mere inconveniences forbid them.

By this our instance Solomon may be understood, what it is to be Wise and
Righteous overmuch, some are so Wise and Righteous (materially not formally)
that they can find faults in all persons, all duties, all speeches, all
actions, and on pretense of doing all better, would hinder us from doing what
we can, and undo all as if it were for amending, not but that inconveniences
may make actions sinful. But the great part of Christian prudence lies in
holding the balance, and trying wisely whether the good or hurt, the benefit
or inconvenience do weigh down; We shall never Preach or Pray, nor converse
with mankind without some inconveniency.

Observe. 4. Divine Revelations acquainting the soul with Heaven, are matters
most worthy of lawful, humble, modest Glorying.

It was Paul's Heavenly Visions which he gloryed in as his advancement, when he
had mentioned his many persecutions and sufferings in the way.

These tend to that perfection and felicity of souls: In these men have to do
with the glorious Jehovah, the Angelical Chore, the heavenly Society, our
glorified Head, our highest Hopes, and matter of the greatest everlasting joys.
O if God would but give you and me this Heavenly sight, and let us but once see
what Paul saw, what little things would Crowns and Lordships seem to us when we
look down from such an height? What trifling should we think most of the busles
of this world? what toys and dreams, their wealthy honor and sinful Delights.
I should then say, Now I see what it is that we seek and hope and suffer for,
what it is to enjoy God and our Redeemer: And therefore now I know, what it is
to be a Beleiver, a Saint, a man indeed. O what a help to mortification would
such a sight of Paradise be? How easily should we after resist temptations,
deny the Flesh, contemn the world, and hate our sins. O how it would overcome
all these distrustful trembling fears of death, and make us long, and grown and
cry, to be with Christ? What life would it put into all holy duty? How easily
should we bear our short afflictions? How would it mellow our sour contentious
minds toward one another, and teach us better whom to love and live in Peace
with, than pride and VVorldliness or Faction will teach us.

Fellow Christians, Though you and I may not expect such Raptures, and Ecstasies
as Paul's; yet we have the Gospel of Jesus, a Divine Revelation of this same
heavenly glory; not to be set light by, because we see it not our selves, It is
by the Son of God that saw it, and now is there preparing it for us; it is by a
sealed certain word. And the heavenly beams are sent down from him upon our
hearts, to show it us and lead us up. We are capable of a lively belief of the
full assurance of hope, of the pledges, earnest, and first fruits; and of
rejoicing with unspeakable glorying joy. We are capable in our manner, and are
sure of traffic for heaven, and with heaven, of sending up our treasures, and
there conversing in spirit as in the City which is our home, and hearing by
Faith the joyful harmony of the heavenly Songs and Praises of Jehovah. Here we
are capable of such a powerful touch with the Loadstone of Divine Love, or to
have our Spirits so refined and sublimated, as shall make it as natural to them
to make upward toward Christ, and long for full and perfect union. O had we
lived as Beleivers should have lived, how much more of heavenly mindedness, and
delight might we have attained than we have done? O thank God for the Gospel
revelation, and beg grace to bring it in power on your hearts; And then, let
worldlings take their earthly portion; We can spare them all that hinders
not the gathering and edification of the Church, and the heavenly interest of
souls.

Observe. 5. There is a third Heaven and Heavenly Paradise, where are the
concerns and hopes of holy souls.

Paul was thither taken up; had he no interest there, no hopes, no friends, no
business there; Why then should he have been rapt up thither? How many Heavens
there be, and why it is here called the third, I will not interrupt your more
necessary thoughts, by conjecturing enquiries: Most say the Air is called the
first, the Starry Heaven the second, and the place of the glorified Spirits,
the third; but these are vain conjectures. No man knows how many there be,
the Globes or Stars are at vast distance from each other, some great
Philosophers have been tempted to think that World is infinite as an adequate
effect of infinite Power, because God has no unactive power; All this is
profane rashness. The Heavens which are our inheritance are the place where
perfect Glorious Spirits shall live in blessed Society with Christ and one
another; joyfully beholding the Glory of God, and feeling the delights of
mutual Love; And yet there are different degrees of Glory from the different
degrees of the Capacity of Spirits: Whether also from any difference in the
place and communicating Causes, we shall shortly better know. There are more
sorts of Spirits thatn we can now know. Though I know not how to receive
Aquinas's Doctrine that no two Angels are of the same Species; the diversity as
well as the incomprehensible Glory and Numbers, are unknown to us. Those that
God employeth under Christ as his Pursuivants, Messengers, and Servants for his
Church, are called Angels: Whether there be orders over orders quite above
Angels, and how Angels differ from the perfected Spirits of the Just, we know
not.

As it is designed for Saints, its Glory consists,

1. In the Glory of the Place.

2. In the perfecting and glorifying the Natures and Persons that enjoy it.

3. In the Glory of the Heavenly Society, Christ, Angels and Saints.

4. In the Glory of their high and excellent work, to Love and Magnify God for
ever.

5. In the Communication of the Joyful Love, and Light and Life of God, upon
these glorified Spirits. O what does every one of these words signify! Is not
this a Paradise indeed, that is a place of purest greatest pleasure?

Use. 1. And are we not taught by such a glass as this, how Great and how Good
a God we serve? O look up to the Heavens, and see what he is by that which he
has made. Yea, its said Psalm. 113. 6. that he humbles himself to behold the
things in Heaven; as well as upon earth. O sinners! what a God do you despise,
neglect, and forget! and what a Heaven do you fell for fleshly lust, and to
feed a Corruptible Body for the Grave! O Christians, what a God have we to
serve and fear! and how Zealously and purely should we serve him! What a God
have we to trust and hope in, and how great a sin is it to distrust him! What a
Heaven have we to seek and hope for, and how cheerfully and constantly should
we do it. Alas, our cold Hearts, and slothful Lives, and worldly Cares, and
sinking Spirits, beseem not such a God and Heaven. Were we designed but to
inhabit the Sun, or some resplendent Star, how high is it above this Earth?
Shall we creep only on Earth and feed on dust, and defile our Souls as if we
were preparing them by Sin for Hell, when we have a third heaven, and Paradise
to look up to, and seek and hope for?

Does Satan say, what is that to thee, that is so far above thee. It is to us;
it is the place where the Glory of God is which we seek; where our glorified
Head is. The place of holy Spirits, whither also Henoch and Elias were
Translated: where Abraham, Isaac and Jacob live; whither Christ's Spirit went at
Death, and where he received the believing Thief; where Lazarus is in Abraham's
bosom; which Stephen foresaw, and to which he was received. It is the place
which we are set on Earth to seek; dearly purchased; surely promised; to which
Gods Spirit is now preparing us: and of which it is our pledge and seal. Were
it not for such an end and hope, how vain were Man, and what a dream this
World. Take Heaven from us, and take our Lives, our Joys, yea, more than many
such lives as these: O that we could be more deeply sensible for what we are
Christians, and for what we hope! what holy, patient, joyful Christians should
we then be. But it is not a wavering Belief, a divided heart, and a few cold
strange and staggering thoughts of Heaven, that will do this, as we desire it.

Observe. 6. Souls are not so closely tied to the body, but now they may be rapt
up into Paradise, or the third Heavens.

When Paul could not tell whether it was in the body or out of it, it shows
some how the Soul was there, and that its possible it might be out of the body.

Obj. If it were in the body, the body must go with it: If out of the body it
must leave the body dead.

Ans. It might be in the body and not take up the body: If man were born blind,
the Iucid Spirits, and visive faculty would act only within: But as soon as a
Miracle opened his eyes, he would see as far as the Sun and Stars. And the Sun
sends down its beams even to this Earth. Should God open this dark Lanthorn of
the Body, we little know how far a Soul may see without any separation from the
body: Did not Stephen's Soul in the body see Christ in Glory?

And if it went out of the Body, it follows not that it must be separated
from the body and leave it dead. When London was on fire, how high did the
flame go above the fuel, and yet it was not separated from the fuel: A Soul can
stay in the body, and yet not be confined to it as a Chicken in the Shell; but
may see, and mount above it to the Heavens.

Use. Therefore think not of Souls as you do of Bodies, which are Circumscribed
in their proper places. We know not what formal thoughts to have of the
dimensions or locality of Spirits: Somewhat such eminenter they have, (for they
have individuation and numeral quantity, and some passivity) but not formaliter
as gross bodies have: While the Soul is in the Body, it works on it, and is a
Substance distinct from it, and such a form as has also its own form; even its
formal Power or Virtue, of Vital Activity, Sensitive and Intellective
Perception, and Sensitive and Rational Appetite. It is Active Life it self, as
the Principle: It perceives it self, and loves it self, it understands what
other Spirits are, by it self; It remembereth innumerable things past: It
rises up to some knowledge of God. It can seek, love, and obey him, and all
this though not out of the body yet above any efficiency of bodily Organs. O
what a sad part of Man's Fall is it, to lose so much as the World has done, of
the knowledge of our selves. And to begin to know our selves, our souls, and
how Man differs from a Beast, is the first part of recovering knowledge,
leading up toward the knowledge of God, which is the highest.

O then, Sirs, do not only own the heavenly dignity of Souls, but use your
Souls accordingly. Are they good for no better* than to serve the Body in Lust
and Appetite, and keep it in motion and some Pleasure, or at least from
stinking a while in the World, Sinners, hear and consider, If you wilfully
Condemn your own Souls to Beastiality, God will Condemn them to perpetual
Misery. Yea, you do it your selves, and pass from bruitishness to the Devilish
Nature and Woeful State.

Observe. 7. The things of the Heavenly Paradise are to Mortal Men unutterable.

That is,

1. Such as cannot be uttered. And,

2. Such as must not be uttered. It is not lawful to Paul that saw them.

Not that nothing of it may or must be uttered: Christ has brought Life and
Immortality to Light: They are great things and glorious which are by him
revealed. Enough well believed and used to overcome the Temptation of this
Flesh and World, and to raise us to a holy Life, and joyful Hope, and
comfortable Sufferings and Death. Christ best knows the just measure of
Revelation meet for Earth. Candles must serve for narrow and dark Rooms, and
are more worth than all the Gold on Earth: The Sun by day must not come too
near us lest it burn us up, but send us its beams at the distance that we can
bear them. And all Souls are not here meet for the same measures; Much less for
that sight which the glorified enjoy. The pure in heart do see God, Mat. 5. and
even here more than impure Souls.

1. There is no humane Language that has words fit to reveal that part of the
heavenly things which God has shut up from us as his secrets. Man's words are
only fitted to Man's Use and to Man's Concerns, and not to Angels and the secrets
of Heaven: We speak not a Word of God himself, which signifies formally what
God is, but only analogically or by similitude, and yet not in vain. Paul saw,
and holy Souls see, that which no humane Language can properly express.

2. And if it could, yet mortals could not understand it: No more than a
Language which they never heard.

3. And Paul had it revealed in a manner suited to his own use, and not in a
manner meet for Communication.

2. And it was unlawful also to utter it. For God saw not all that meet for the
dark world of undisposed sinners, which was allowed to one eminent Saint.

2. Nor would he have so much more revealed by a Minister than the son of God
from heaven; had himself before revealed.

3. And the revelation is to be suited to the fruition. Full knowledge is fit
only for those that must fully enjoy it.

Use. Therefore remember with what measures of heavenly knowledge, we must be
here content, so much as Christ has revealed and is suitable to a distant life
of Faith. I have known some that have run into greater calamities than I will
mention, by an expectation of visible Communion with Angels; and others by rash
conceits of Visions, Dreams and Prophetical Revelations: But the common Error
of Christians is, to content themselves with a feeble Faith (or at least get no
better) and then think it should be made up by somewhat like to sight or
corporal sense, and to be unsatisfied because they know no more than by
beleiving they can reach to: As if beleiving were but an uncertain
apprehension, (with which we are unsatified) and we are not content to live on
that which God has revealed, but we would fain know more, before we are ready
for it; whereas we must explicitly believe all that is explicitly revealed, and
implicitly believe and trust God for the rest.

We are here used to live by sight and sense, and the soul is strange to such
apprehensions as are quite above sense and without it. And fain we would have
God bring down the unseen things to these sensations and perceptions: And we
would fain have distinct and formal knowledge, of that which God has but
generally revealed. It is somewhat excusable for a soul to desire this, as it
is the state of perfection to which we do aspire. But it is not well that we
remember not more that sight and full fruition, are reserved together for the
life to come; and that we live no more thankfully and joyfully on so much as we
may in the body by beleiving know.

Quest. What may we conjecture those things are which Paul had seen and must
not utter?

Why should we enquire, when they must not be uttered? We may mention a
possibility to rebuke our bold unquiet thoughts.

Our souls would fain have not only Analogical, but formal conceptions of the
essence, substance, glory, immensity, eternity of God. Hope for much in heaven
(but never for an adequate comprehension) But this is the very highest of all
those things which are not to be uttered, and therefore not to be here attained.

Our souls would fain be perfect extensively and intensively in Philosophy, and
know Heaven and Earth, the Spheres, or Orbs, or Vortices; the magnitudes,
number, distances, motions, and the nature of all the Stars, and the
Compagination of the whole frame of Being. But this is unutterable, and not
here to be known.

Our souls would fain know more of the Angelical nature; what such Spirits are,
whether absolutely immaterial as mere acts and virtues; or substances which are
pure matter, and what their number and differences are, and how vast and many
and distant their habitations, and what are their offices on Earth or
elsewhere; and how much they know of us and our affairs, and in what
subordination Men, Churches and Kingdoms stand to them, and they to one
another, and how they are individuated, and how far one: But all these are
unutterable, and locked up from us.

Our souls would fain know whether there was any World before this Earth, and
the Creation of the six days; and whether there was any spiritual Being, which
was an eternal effect by emanation from an eternal Cause, as Light from the
Sun: And whether the Sun, and Stars are intellectual or sensitive, and exceed
man in form as well as in matter, and what the noble nature of fire is. But
these things are unutterable and so not knowable to us.

Our souls would fain have more sensible perceptions of themselves, as to their
substance, and their separate state? Whether they are substances utterly
immaterial, how they are generated? How they subsist, and act out of the body?
And how they do enjoy? How they are indivuate, and yet how far one? How far one
or not one with Christ, and one another? Whether they are divisible in
substance as continued quantities, as well as in number as quantitates
discretae: What place and limits do confine them (being not infinite)? How far
they have still sensation? And how they see, Praise and enjoy God? And how they
converse with one another? And how far they know the things on Earth? And how
their state before the Resurrection differs from what it will be after? And how
far the soul will be instrumental in the raising of the Body: But all these are
unutterable things.

We would fain know more of the decrees of God, and how all his acts are
Eternal, and yet produce their effects in time? How they are many, and yet but
one, producing diverse and contrary effects. Many such things inquisitive nature
would fain know which are unutterable.

But this must satisfy us.

1. That sinful souls, and dark, in a dark body, and a dark World, are not fit
for so great a Light, nor capable of it; It will put out our eyes to gaze so
nearly on the Sun.

2. That Christ has revealed so much of the greatness and certainty of the
heavenly glory, as he sees meet and suitable to Gods holy ends and us.

3. That the Church has so much clearer a revelation than the Heathen and
Infidel World, as should make us thankful for our Light.

4. That if we believe the revelation of the Gospel soundly, we may live a holy
joyful life, and die in the Peace and Triumph of our hopes.

5. That it is not by sight, but by Faith that we must here live, in our
Wilderness expectant state.

6. That the more we cleave to God, and live by Faith above the Flesh and World
whilst we are in it, the clearer and sweeter our apprehensions of heaven will
be.

7. That God must be trusted implicitly about that which is yet unknown to us,
as well as explicitly for what we know. And,

8. That what we know not now, we shall know hereafter and the day is near. Let
these things quiet our souls in health and sickness, though we are yet in
darkness as to the unutterable things.

9. And always add, that what we know not, Christ knows for us, to whom it
belongs to prepare the place for us, and us for it, and to receive us. Had we
but a Friend in heaven whom we could trust, we could partly, take up with their
knowledge. Our head is there, and the Eyes that we must trust to are in our
Head.

But how was Paul in danger of being exalted above measure, by the abundance of
Revelations?

Answer, 1. It might have been above the measure meet for man in Flesh, and so
unsuitable to his present state.

2. It might have been unto sinful Pride, as the Angels fell from God, and as
Adam fell, desiring to be as a God in knowledge.

Observe. 8. Even Heavenly Revelations may be made the matter and occasion of
unmeet and sinful Exaltation.

For, 1. It is the nature of sin to turn all our objects into it self to feed
it. Not as they are without us in esse reali, but within us in esse cognito,
the idea's in our minds. Austin says indeed, that Grace is that quo memo male
utitur, but he must mean it. 1. As in it self. 2. And efficiently, Grace never
does evil. But objectively in the Idea or remembrance of it, it may be abused
to pride.

2. And the greatest and most excellent objects as ours, give Pride the
greatest advantage. Heavenly Revelations are far more excellent than Gold, and
Dominion and VVorldly Pomp. Children are proud of fine Cloths, and Worldly
fools of Vainglory; but Saints may be more tempted to be proud of Wisdom,
Holiness and things above the reach of others.

3. And Satan knows how to fetch. Temptations from the Highest, Best, and
Holiest things: And his Malice being as much against them as against us, he
will be here most malignantly industrious.

Use We see then that Pride is such a sin, as the holiest Saint is not fully
secured from, no not when he has been hearing unutterable words, and seeing
the Heavenly Paradise it self: No not if he came down from the third Heavens,
(and bring his unperfect Nature with him) Though he came newly from Converse
with Angels; Much more when he comes from the most fervent Prayers, or holiest
Meditations, or most heavenly and successful studies, and from hearing the most
Seraphick Preacher, or Preaching as such an one himself: He is not out of
danger, when he newly comes from the most Self-denying acts of Mortification,
or the greatest Victory against Temptation, or the greatest Suffering for
Christ. What a sad description do Cyprian and Epiphanius make of the
miscarriages of some Confessors that had offered to die for Christ.

Let none therefore abuse the Grace of Christ, and the Doctrine of
perseverance, by thinking that it sets him above all danger or fears of
falling, unless he can say that he is better than Paul was, and has seen and
heard more than he did in Paradise, or than Peter did with Christ, and Moses
and Elias on the Holy Mount. O that this Age did not loudly tell us, how much
the real or supposed knowledge of Divine things, may be abused to sinful
Exaltations! By one side, even by most famed Teachers, to contempt of others,
and Lording it over the Heritage of God, and wracking and rending his Church by
their needless, yea wicked comvulsive imposing devises. And by other side, by
hurtful unwarrantable Censures and Separations, and speaking evil of the things
which they know not. Have you heard and seen more of heaven than others? Be
then more Holy, Loving, Merciful and Peaceable, and liker those in Heaven than
others: Read over and over Jam. 3. show out of a good Conversation your works
with meekness of wisdom: For the wisdom from above neither befriendeth Enmity
to Piety or Peace, but is first pure, then peaceable, etc.

But how is Paul kept from being exalted above measure? God gave him a thorn in
the flesh. Note,

Observe. 9. God sees our danger when we see not our own, and saves us from
that which we saw not, or had not else prevented. Thanks to him, and not to us.

But how does God do it? By a Thorn in the Flesh.

Observe. 10. It is better that the flesh smart, than the Soul be overmuch
exalted.

No pain or suffering of the Flesh is so bad as Pride, nor has so bad effects.

Use. Why then do so little fear Exaltation. How greedily do some Religious
People desire it? How impatient of any thing that crosses it and humbles
them: How little do they lament it and confess it. Is Pride so rare or so small
a sin? even among Preachers and zealous men.

And why do we so much fear every Thorn in the Flesh: Every Sickness, Pain, or
Cross, as if Pride could be prevented or killed at too dear a rate? And why do
we quarrel with God for our sufferings as if our Disease were not so bad as his
Remedy. Who ever heard you in health cry out of your Pride, as in Sickness you
do of your Pain. It Is a happy Thorn which lets out this corrupt and pestilent
blood.

But what was this Thorn in the Flesh of Paul.

Answ. The Greek word signifies a sharp stake, Pale, nail, stub, or Thorn, or
any such sharp thing that runs into the flesh, as it falls out with barefoot
Travelers among such Thorns and Stubs.

Its strange how many Expositors came to take up that injurious conceit that it
was fleshly lust; which has not the least color in the Text.

1. Lust would be rather likened to a Fire or Itch, than to a Thorn.

2. It would be called an alluring rather than a buffeting.

3. Paul had a Life of Labor and Suffering, which would keep down flesly Lust.

4. This Thorn is given him, as sent from God to save him from sin; But where
is God said to give men lust to save them from Pride.

5. This Thorn was the buffeting of a Messenger of Satan. But it is not like,
that Satan could so excite Lust in Paul.

6. Paul prays thrice that it might be taken from him: It is not like that
Satan could so follow him with Lustful motions, and that Paul would not have
mentioned fasting and other means of Cure.

7. God does not yet say that he will yet take it from him, but under his
weakness manifest his sustaining Grace: which sounds not like an answer of a
Prayer against Lust.

8. Paul is vindicating his Ministry against Accufers, by mentioning his
Infirmities, that is, his bodily Sufferings and his Revelations; and is the
telling them of his Lust a meet means for this?

9. It is called his weakness; which is his usual Title for his Sufferings; but
you may see Romans 7. that he calls Lust by more odious names.

I doubt not but it was some bodily Suffering which was this Thorn, but whether
by Persecutors or by a Disease is the chief doubt: Many think that it was by
Persecution.

1. Because it was by a Messenger of Satan.

2. Because wicked men are in Scripture likened to Thorns.

I more incline to think it was a fit of some violent pain in the flesh, and
most likely the stone (or some such thing) which indeed is a Tormenting Thorn
in the flesh. For

1. We read of his frequent Persecutions, but never that he so named them, or
that he so much prayed against them, but rejoiced, as Christ bids such, with
exceeding joy: Mat. 5. 11, 12. And when he and all the Apostles so much exhort
Believers to rejoice in such Sufferings for Christ, is it like he would here
tell men how he prayed against it?

And as to the Reasons for the contrary sense,

1. Wicked men are called Thorns as hurtful, and so are other hurting things.
Christ had a Crown of Thorns on his head, Joh. 19. 5. and Paul must feel one in
his Flesh. Job 41. 2. Prove. 26. 9. and 22. 5. Hos. 2. 6. and 9. 6. Any thing
hurtful is likened to Thorns.

2. And Satan is in Scripture usually mentioned as Gods Executioner, even in
trying his Children. It was into his hands that Job was put: Hurting work is
fittest for an evil and destroying Angel. He would sift the Apostles as wheat,
by outward affrighting as well as inward Tempting. However suffering it was.

Observe. 10. A Thorn in the Flesh is one of Gods means to keep the best from
being overmuch exalted.

You have heard that the best may need it;

1. And the Flesh has so much hand in our sin, that it is fit to bear its part
of suffering.

2. And it is the most ignoble part, and therefore its suffering has less of
hurt, and less to signify Gods displeasure. Soul sufferings are the sore
sufferings. And it is the Soul that is the chief Agent in our Duties, and
therefore where it is spared we are least disabled for Gods work, and our
Communion with him.

3. And the nearness of Body and Soul is such, that God can use the Body to
keep the Soul in a humble, and a safe Condition.

Use. Mistake not the Nature and meaning of the Flesh's sufferings. Grudge not
at God, if he exercise thus his greatest Saints: VVonder not if the best men
have sharp persecutions, pinching wants, and painful sickness, a long and sharp
tormenting stone, or other such like Thorn in the Flesh.

1. It is but the Flesh, in our British part; common to Beasts: If Flesh must
die and rot, why may it not first feel the Thorn.

2. We grudged not at that health and youth and ease and pleasure of it, which
was the danger and temptation to the Soul, why then should we grudge at the
pain which tends to our Cure.

3. If you feel not the need of suffering, you know not your selves: Did you
know your Pride, and overmuch Love of Flesh and Ease, you would say that Pain
is a Physic which you need, were it but to help on your willingness to die.

4. Pain here depriveth us of none of our true Felicity; it hinders not Gods
love to us; it keeps us not from Heaven: Lazarus was in a fairer way than
Dives. It takes nothing from us, but what we Covenanted to forsake for Christ.

5. Do we not find that we are better when we suffer than when we are high?
Were Religious People better when Victories and Successes did lift them up than
they have been in their sufferings. Did they live then more humbly, peaceably
and heavenly?

6. The Thorn will soon be taken out; Flesh will not endure long and therefore
this pain will not be long; a few more painful Nights and Days, and the Porter
which we fear, will break open our Prison Doors, and end these weary grievous
sufferings.

Use. 2. And think not the Thorn is a mark that such are worse than others.
Paul was not worse; and shall we Censure such as he.

Use. 3 But let us all know the use of suffering, what cure has this Medicine
wrought? Blessed be our wise and gracious Physician, we find it a powerful
though unpleasant Remedy. It keeps Lazarus from the sins of Dives; from
living a worldly sensual Life; and loving the prosperity of the flesh instead
of heavenly true felicity: It keeps us from a beastly living to our appetites
and lust; which would divert and deprave the spiritual appetite: It keeps us
from being deluded by worldly flatteries, and looking for a portion in this
Life, and laying up a Treasure on Earth, and from growing senseless and
impenitent in Sin. It awakeneth the Soul to serious expectations of Eternity,
and keeps us as within the sight or hearing of another World, and tells us to
the quick that we must make ready to Die, and to be judged, and that we have
much more to do with God than with man, and for Heaven than Earth; It takes
down Pride, and all excessive respects to humane approbation, and keeping us
still in the sight of the Grave, does tell us what man's body is, Mors solae
fatetur, Quantula sunt hominum Corpuscula, Juv. What faithful Soul that has
been bred up in the School of afflictions does not by experience say that it
was good for him? How Dull, how Proud, how worldly might we else have been, and
trifled away our lives in sloth and vanity.

And it is not for nothing that our Thorns (or Nails) in the Flesh are kin to
the Nails that pierced our Savior on the Cross, and that we tread in his
steps, and as Cross-bearers are thus far conformable to his sufferings.

Be patient than under the Pain, and careful to improve it, and thankful for
the Profit. And let not the Soul too much condole the flesh, as if it had not
at hand a better Habitation and Interest. It is but this Vile body, Phil. 3.
19. lent us for a little time, as our Clothes till Night, or as our Horse in a
Journey; when we have done with them, be content of Gods separation; and till
then let us not take our Corrector for our Enemy. I groan too much, Lord, I
complain too much, I fear too much: but my Soul does acknowledge the Justice
and Love and Wisdom of thy dealings, and looks that this Thorn should bring
forth sweet and happy fruit, and that all the Nails of my Cross being
sanctified by the blood of my Crucified Redeemer should tend to make me
partaker of thy Holiness.

But who put this Thorn into Paul's Flesh? It was one of Satan's Messengers.

Observe. 11. The sufferings of the holiest persons in the flesh, may be the
buffettings of a Messenger of Satan.

No wonder! He that has got somewhat of his own in us all, defiling us with
sin, if he also may answerably be permitted to afflict us: He possessed many in
Christ's time, and it was Devils that made them dumb, and deaf, and mad; whom
Christ at once delivered from Devils and Diseases. He is called the Accuser and
destroyer, and he that had the power of Death. Heb. 2. 14. whom Christ by Death
and Resurrection Conquered. Christ calls his healing the Palsy man, the
forgiving of his sin; and James says, upon Prayer and Anointing, the sick
should be healed, and his sins forgiven. And for the Cause of sin, many
Christians were sick and weak, and many fallen asleep. I cannot say that Good
Angels may not hurt men, and execute Gods Judgments; but Scripture makes evil
ones his ordinary Executioners.

Use. Therefore it is no proof that a man is not a Child of God, though the
Devil have permission to Torment his Flesh, Rev. 2. 10. The Devil shall cast
some of you into Prison.

Please God, and Satan has no Power; and Christ will take take out the Thorn
ere long, which Satan is permitted to put in.

But how does Paul endure the Thorn? He prays that is might depart from him.

Observe. 12. The best men are sensible of the suffering of the Flesh, and may
pray God to take it from them.

Grace does not make the Flesh insensible; Nor separate the Soul from it,
though it set us above it; nor make us despise it, though it show us a higher
Interest and better Habitation, and teach us to bear the Cross, and resign the
Body to the Will of God. A Godly man may groan under his Pain, and take it as a
fruit of sin, and an act of the Chastizing Justice of an offended Father, and
pray against it as hurtful, though not as a Remedy. They that ignorantly
dispute that because Christ has suffered all our Punishment, therefore there
is no Penal hurt in Pain or Death, confute themselves if they complain under
it, or pray against it, or desire such Prayers from the Church or any. Yea, one
use of the Thorn is to awaken and quicken us to Prayer: Like Jonas's Storm.

Use. Go then to God in all affliction, but not with carnal discouraged hearts.
He makes you thus feel the need of his Mercy, that you may with the Prodigal
think of home and cry for Mercy, and abuse it no more. Christ did not blame the
blind and lame for crying out, Jesus, thou Son of David have mercy on us. Nor
the Canaanite Woman for begging for the Crumbs; is any afflicted let him pray,
and send for the Elders Prayers. The Thorn in the Flesh will make us feel; and
feeling will teach us to repent and pray, and prayer is the means of hope for
the deliverance of Body and Soul. Grace makes us not stupid, yet there are
some that think a man behaveth not himself like a Believer if he cry and pray
that the Thorn may depart! What think they of David, in Psalm. 6. and 17. and
88. And many more? What think they of Christ that prayed, that if possible the
Cup might pass by him. He did it to show that even innocent nature is averse
to suffering, and death through Grace makes us submit to the Will of God; (we
continue men when we are Beleivers, we must mourn with them that mourn, and yet
not love others better than our selves; nor feel their Thorns more sensibly
than our own. We must neither despise chastenings, nor faint.

But how does Paul pray? Does he make any great matter of of his thorns, He
besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart.

Observe. 13. Even earnest and often Prayer is suitable to sharp Afflictions.

There is a kind of Devils, and so of Satan's thorns, which go not out but by
fasting and prayer, no not by Christ's own Apostles. The sense and means must be
suited to the malady. God can do it upon one prayer, or upon none, but we are
not so easily fited to receive it.

And Paul in this also is conformed to Christ, who in his Agony prayed thrice
against his Cup, though with submission

Use. 1. You see here that the Apostles gift of healing, was not to be used at
their own will, nor for their own flesh that it might not suffer; but for the
confirmation of the Faith, when it pleased the Holy Spirit. Troplainus and
Epaphroditus might be sick, and Timothy need a little Wine with his Water,
though Paul had the gift of healing.

Use. 2. O let our pains drive us all to God, who has not some? Sicknesses are
all abroad, what house, how few persons have not some; and yet is there a
Prayerless house, or person? If Faith have not taught you to pray as
Christians, methinks feeling should teach you to pray as men? I say not that
prayer must shut out Food and Physic, but Food and Physic will not do, if
prayer prevail not with the Lord of all.

Use. 3. And think not thrice or continued praying to be too much, or that
importunity is in vain, Luke 18. 1. Christ spoke a Parable to this end, that
men ought always to pray and not wax faint. Whether God deliver us or not,
prayer is not lost, it is a good posture for God to find us in, we may get
better if we get not what we ask. Obey and Pray, and Trust God.

But what answer does the Lord give to Paul's thrice praying. He said, My grace
is sufficient for thee, and my strength is manifested in weakness.

1. It was not a promise that the thorn should depart.

2. It seems to be rather a denial at the present, and that Paul must not be
yet cured of his thorn; for it is called a weakness that must continue for the
manifesting of Gods strength: and what was the sufficiency of grace and
strength for, but to endure and improve the thorn?

3. But this promised grace and strength is better than that which was desired.

Obs. 14. Even often and earnest prayer of the greatest Saint, for deliverance
from bodily pains, may not be granted in the kind, or thing desired.

For, 1. we are not Lords, but beggars, and must leave the issue to the donor.
And God has higher ends to accomplish, than our ease or deliverance. It Is meet
that he should first fit all his actions to his own will and glory, and next to
the good of many, and to his public works in the World; and then to look at
our interest next.

2. And we are utterly unmeet judges of matter, manner, time or measure what
God should give us for the body, and how much, and how, and when. When should
we be sick, or pained, or persecuted, or dye, if all our prayers must be
absolutely granted. We know not how much better God is preparing us for by
pain, and bringing us to by dismal death. He will not keep us from grace and
glory because our flesh is loath to suffer, and to die.

3. And in this Paul also was conformed to Christ: He was heard in the thing
that he feared, when in his agony he prayed with strong cries: but it was not
by the removing of the bitter cup, but by divine strength and acceptance: And
so it is with Paul; sufficient grace and strength to bear, is the thing
promised.

Use. 1. We see then that they are mistaken that think Christ's promise of
giving believers whatever they ask, will prove him a breaker of his promise, if
the strongest believer receive not all that he asks for the body. Was not
Paul a strong believer? All that God has promised, and we are fit to receive,
God will be sure to give.

2. Let not unbelief get advantage by Gods not granting such prayers for the
body. Say not, Why then is it my duty to pray? 1. You know not beforehand but
God may give it. Possibility bids you beg. 2. Why did Christ pray against his
Cup? 3. You lose not prayer: you draw nearer God: you exercise repentance and
desire: you signify your dependence: you are prepared for much greater gifts.

Obs. 15. When God will not take the thorn out of our flesh, and deliver us
when we pray, from bodily sufferings, he will be sure to do better for prepared
persons, even to give them his sufficient grace, and manifest his strength in
their pain and weakness.

It is not for want of Love or Power that he lets us tumble on our beds in
pain, or lie under slanderers or persecutors rage. He that with a word could
make the World, with a word can save us from all this. But if we suffer not,
how shall suffering-graces be exercised, faith, patience, self-denial, and
hope? Is not grace better than ease or life? How shall we get the benefit of
suffering, if we feel it not? How shall grace and divine strength be manifested
to our selves and others?

Quest. What is it that Grace is sufficient for?

Ans. 1. Not to set us up above the frailties of humanity and mortality; nor to
raise us to the joy that souls in heaven have. 2. Not to every one alike, but
in our several measures: some fear pain and death more than others: some have
greater patience and joy, and long to depart and be with Christ.

But to all the faithful it shall suffice, 1. To keep them from revolting from
Christ, and repenting of their choice and hope. 2. To save them from charging
God foolishly, as if he did them wrong. 3. It shall keep them from damning
despair. When Satan sifteth them, Christ's intercession shall keep their faith
from failing: Grace shall humble them, and save them from sin, and the flesh
and world: they shall cast soul and body upon Christ, and trust him in hope in
their several degrees. And those that have been more believing, heavenly and
fruitful than the rest, are likest to have the greatest peace and comfort,
especially in their greatest need.

Quest. And how is Gods strength manifested in our weakness?

Ans. 1. It is manifested to our selves, by keeping us from sin, and sinking
into despair, and enabling us to bear, and trust, and wait, and usually in the
peace or joy of hope: We know we are insufficient for this our selves: When
flesh and heart, as natural, fail us, God is the strength of our hearts, and
our portion for ever, Psalm. 73. 26. We do not think often before that ever we can
bear and overcome, as grace enableth us.

2. And it is manifest often to others, who shall see that power of grace in the
sufferings of believers, which they did not see in their prosperity.

Use. 1. Let not then our own weakness and insufficiency too, much distress us
with fears of suffering and death; yea, when we feel the thorn, let us not
forget our help and strength. By Grace here is meant, the living and merciful
help of God, especially giving us the inward strength by which we may not only
bear, but improve the sufferings of the flesh. This body was not made to be
here incorruptible or immortal; we were born in sin, and therefore born to pain
and death. We have lived in sin, and no wonder if we live in sorrow: but the
sufferings of our Redeemer have sanctified our sufferings. The Cross is not now
such a cursed thing, as guilt had made it. He took our suffering flesh and
blood, that he might destroy by death, the devil that had the power of death,
and deliver us who by the fear of death, were all our lifetime subject to
bondage, Heb. 2. 14. Our pain prepares us for endless pleasures, and our
sorrows for our Masters joy. When we have suffered with him, we shall reign
with him: He lives, and we shall live by him: He is risen, and we shall rise
by him: He is in Glory, and we must be with him.

In the mean time his Grace is sufficient for us, not only in health and ease,
but in all our pain and sickness: He is not so unskilful or unkind, as to give
such physic to his own, which shall do them more harm than good. Though it be
grievous at the present, it brings forth the quieting-fruit of righteousness:
but we must first be exercised therein. Let us not then be his impatient
patients: Grace can support us and overcome. Men are not sufficient: Our wit,
our power, our worthiness are not sufficient: but God's grace is sufficient: If
ease and life had been better than Grace and Glory, we might have had them: But
God gives us better than flesh would choose. Though the body be weak, the head
weak, the memory weak, the stomach weak, and all weak, yet God is strong, and
his strength will support us, and bring us safe to our journeys end. Lazarus
lay among dogs in weakness at the rich man's doors, but the Angels conveyed him
in strength to Abraham's bosom. We must lie, and languish, and groan in
weakness, but Omnipotence is engaged for us: We must die in weakness, but we
shall be raised in power, by him who will change these vile bodies, and make
them like to his glorious body, by the power by which he can subdue all things
to himself, Phil. 3. 20, 21. Let us therefore lift up the hands that hang down,
and the feeble knees, Heb. 12. 12. Looking to Jesus the Author and finisher of
our says, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross.

And let us beg more for divine grace and strength, than for the departing of
the thorn. Grace is better than ease and health. If the soul be our nobler part
than the body, the health of it is more desirable. Bodily ease is common to
bruits and wicked men: strength of Grace is proper to Saints: Ease and health
in this life are short; but Holiness will be everlasting. Health fits us for
fleshly pleasure, but Holiness for Communion with God. O pray not carnally, for
the flesh more than for the spirit, for earth more than for heaven. Pray, that
while the outward man is perishing, the inward man may be renewed day by day;
and that our light afflictions, which are but for a moment, may work for us an
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, while we look not at the temporal things
which are seen, but at the eternal things, which are unseen to us, 2 Cor. 4.
16, 17, 18. Why should we grudg at any sufferings, which are for the glory of
Gods grace and strength: As Christ said of Lazarus, This sickness is not unto
death (that is, the end of it is not to end his life, though he dye) but that
the glory of God may be revealed. So pain and death are not Gods ends, but the
manifesting of his grace and strength.

But, alas, it is not only the flesh that is weak, but Grace it self, (as it is
in us, though not as it is in God and of God); nor is it flesh only that has
the thorn, but the heart or conscience also has its part. The spirit of a man
(if sound and well) will sustain (his bodily) infirmities: But a wounded spirit
who can bear? If faith were not weak, if hope, and love, and desire were not
weak, the weakness of the body might well be born. If sin and guilt were no
wound or thorn in the soul and conscience, we could be more indifferent as to
the flesh, and almost as quietly bear our own pain and death, as our
neighbors. Though it is hard to say is Tertullian Nihil crus sentit in nervo,
cum animus est in coelo; yet our content and joy would overcome the evil of our
suffering. But, alas, when soul and body must be both at once lamented, this,
this, is hardly born! Lord! seeing it is thy sufficient Grace, and not my
bodily ease which I must trust to, and my weakness must manifest thy strength:
O let not Grace also be in me insufficient and weak! O let not Faith be weak,
nor Hope, nor Love, nor Heavenly desires and foretasts be weak! Nor Patience
and Obedience weak! Head is weak, and heart is weak; but if Faith also be weak,
what shall support us: At least let it be unfeigned and effectual, and attain
its end, and never fail. Flesh is failing, and health (as to its proper
strength) is failing. But be thou my God, the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever. And what ever thorn the flesh must feel, yet let me finish my
course with joy. Amen.

I have run over many things in a Text so suitable, that I could not well spare
any of them. Those that well knew our Deceased friend, will say that except
Paul's extraordinary rapture, and Apostolical privileges, in Paul's case I have
been describing his.

I come not to gratify the interest of any of his Relations, to speak to you
according to custom of a stranger whom I knew not; but for the honor of Gods
grace, and our own edification, to tell you what I knew by my most faithful and
familiar friend. It is almost forty years since I heard him preach in the City
of Gloucester; there was his entrance, and there he lived (under a Papist
Bishop of the Protestant Church, Godfry Goodman, as his last Testament in Print
professed) there he abode during the Civil Wars, and wrote the History of what
happened there. He was after removed to the City of Chichester, and from thence
to Bramshot in Hamshire, and silenced with the rest, he was cast out, where he
continued till 1662. He lived peaceably in London without gathering any
Assembly for public Preaching. Dwelling in Totteridg with Alderman Web, his
great love drew him there, to remove to me, with whom a while he took up his
habitation. In all the time that he was with me, I remember not that ever we
differed once in any point of Doctrine, Worship, or Government Ecclesiastical
or Civil, or that ever we had one displeasing word.

The Kings Licenses encouraged his old flock at Chicestor to invite him
thither, though they had the help of another Nonconformist before, with whom he
joined with love and concord. God many years afflicted him with the disease
that was his death; while the pain was tolerable to nature, he endured it, and
ceased not Preaching till a fortnight before he was carried up to London to
have been cut. But before that could be done, in about a fortnight more he
died. This is the short History of his course.

But I will next give you his true Character, and then tell you how like his
case was to Paul's here in my Text, and then tell you to what use I do all this.

I. He was a man so blameless in all his Conversation, that I may say as I did
here lately of another (Alderman Ashurst) that I never heard one person accuse
or blame him, except for Nonconformity, and that difference from others in
these divided times, which his Book expresses. Of which more anon.

II. Were it not that I have said we never differed, and so made my self an
incompetent Judge, I should have said that I thought him a man of great
clearness and soundness in Religion, much by the advantage of the calmness and
considerateness of his mind.

III. He was of so great moderation and love of peace, that he hated all that
was against it, and would have done any thing for concord in the Church, except
sinning against God, and hazarding Salvation. In the matter of the five
Articles, or Arminianism, he went the reconciling way, and I have seen a
Compendium of his thoughts in a Manuscript, which is but the same with what I
have delivered in my Cath. Theol. but better fitted to Readers that must have
much in a few words.

He constantly at Totteridg joined in all the Worship with the Public
Assembly, and had no sinful separating Principles. He was for Catholic Union,
and Communion of Saints, and for going no further from any Churches or
Christians than they force us, or then they go from Christ. He then Preached
only to such Neighbors as came into the house between the times of the Public
Worship. He was for loving and doing good to all, and living peaceably with all
as far as was in his power. Something in Episcopacy, Presbytery, and
Independency, he liked, and some things he dislikt in all; but with all sorts
lived in love and peace, that did seek the furtherance of men's Salvation. Many
parts of Conformity he could have yielded to, but not to all, nothing less than
all would satisfy.

IV. In all he was true to his Conscience, and warpt not for a parties interest
or faction. If all the Nonconformists in England had refused, he would have
conformed alone, if the terms had been reduced to what he thought lawful. And
he studied that with great impartiality.

V. He managed his Ministry with faithfulness and prudence: He took it for
heinous Sacriledg to alienate himself from the Sacred office to which he was
devoted, though men forbad it him. But he thought not the same circumstances of
Ministration necessary to all times and places: He was not for open preaching
to great numbers, when it was like by accident to do more hurt than good: Nor
yet for forbearing it, when it was like to do more good than hurt. He spared
not his flesh, but held on from year to year under his great pain of the Stone
in the bladder, till within a month before he dyed. Much less would the
prohibition of any restrain him, to whom God gave no such forbidding-power.

VI. He served God with self-denial, not with any selfish or worldly designs:
He never looked after preferment or riches, or any great matters in the world:
He had daily bread, and was therewith content.

VII. He suffered his part in our common lot 1662. Aug. 22. (ejected and
silenced with about 2000 more) with as little murmurring as any man that I
knew: I never heard him dishonor the King, nor speak much against those by
whom he suffered, or rip up their faults, unless a rare and necessary
self-defence be called an accusing them. I never heard him so much as complain
how much Church maintenance he was deprived of, nor of the difficulties of his
low dejected case.

VIII. He was great hater of that base pride and envy, which possesses too
many of the sacred office, who grudg if others be preferred before them; and if
the people go from them to others for their greater edification, and think
themselves wronged if they be not followed and applauded, either above, or
equal with more worthy men: He was very careful to preserve the reputation of
his brethren, and rejoiced in the success of their labors, as well as of his
own, and a most careful avoider of all divisions, contentions, or offenses. And
he was very free in acknowledging by whom he profited, and preferring others
before himself.

IX. He was very much in the study of his own heart, by strict examination, as
his Cabinet-papers, which may come to light, make known, as I had also occasion
otherwise to know.

X. By this examination he was confidently assured of his own sincerity in the
true love of God, and of holiness for it self, and suchlike evidences which he
wrote down, renewing his examination as occasion required: And though he had
known what it was to be tempted to doubt of the life to come, he was fully
settled against all such doubts and temptations.

XI. But though he had a settled assurance both of the truth of the Gospel, and
the life to come, and of his own satisfaction and sincerity: yet so lively were
his apprehensions of the greatness of his approaching change, and the weight of
an everlasting state, and what it is to enter upon another world, that he was
not without such fears, as in our frail condition here, poor mortals that are
near death are liable to. And indeed fear signifies a belief of the word of
God, and the life to come, much more than dull insensibility: But he signified
his belief both by fear and hope, and strong assurance.

XII. He had the comfort of sensible growth in grace. He easily perceived a
notable increase of his faith, and holiness, and heavenliness, and humility,
and contempt of worldly vanity, especially of late years, and under his
affliction, as the fruit of Gods correcting-rod.

I have truly given you the description of the man, according to my familiar
knowledge. I shall yet review the similitude of his case with this of Paul
described in my Text.

I. Paul was accused by envious, contentious Teachers: And so was he; Though I
never heard any one person else speak evil of him; as is said, They that
upbraided not Paul with his former persecution, nor had any crime to charge him
with, yet accused his Ministry: As they said of Daniel, We shall find no fault
against him, except it be concerning the law of his God. His Preaching and
Writings, though all for peace, were the matter of his accusations: The Bishop
blamed him for Preaching, even when the King had licensed him: And a nameless
Writer published a bloody Invective against his Pacificatory-book, called The
Interest of England, as if it had been written to raise a War. The enemies of
Peace were his enemies.

II. He took boasting to be inexpedient, as Paul did: And when he was silenced
as unworthy to be suffered in the Ministry, he once offered a modest defense to
the Bishop, and wrote a short and peaceable account of his judgment about the
sin of Schism, in his own Vindication.

III. He had (though not the Ecstasy of Paul, yet) great knowledge of things
Divine and Heavenly to have been the matter of his glory.

IV. The heavenly Paradise was the place of his hopes, where he daily studied
to lay up his treasure, which had his chiefest thoughts and care.

V. He found by experience that an immortal soul is not so tied to this body of
flesh, but that it can get above it, and all its interest and pleasure, and
live on the hopes of unseen glory.

VI. As he knew the incapacity of mortals, to have formal and adequate
conceptions of the state of the heavenly Paradise and separated souls; so he
submitted to Gods-concealing Will, and lived on the measure of
Gospel-revelation.

VII. He knew the danger of being exalted above measure, by occasion of holy
Knowledge; and how apt man is to be so puffed up.

VIII. God himself saved him from that danger, by his humbling wholesome
sharper remedy.

IX. A Thorn in the flesh was Gods remedy to keep him in a serious humble
frame: Three great Stones were found in his bladder, and one small one in a
corrupted Kidney: And how painful a thorn these were for many years, it is
easy to conjecture.

X. Satan was permitted to try him as Job, not only by the pain of his flesh,
but also by reproaches, as aforesaid, and by casting him out of his Ministry,
as unworthy to preach the Gospel of Christ, unless he would say, swear, and do
all that was by men imposed, and the rest of those afflictions which are
contained in such an ejected, impoverished, calumniated state, are described in
the late and former experience of may such.

XI. Though I never heard him pray against poverty or reproach, yet for the
liberty of his Ministry he did, that he might preach that Gospel of Salvation.
And pain forced him to have recourse to God for deliverance from the thorn in
his flesh. And if Christ and Paul prayed thrice with earnestness, no wonder if
continued pain made him continue his suit to God.

XII. As Christ was heard in the thing which he feared, and yet must drink that
cup: and Paul instead of the departing of the one, was promised sufficient
grace, and the manifesting of Gods strength in his pain and weakness; so it
pleased not God to take away the Thorn from our dear Brothers flesh, but he did
better for him, and gave him his supporting help, and an increase of grace, and
showed his own strength in all his weakness; and also hastened his final
deliverance, beyond expectation.

And now he is past all, at rest with Christ, and all the blessed: We see not
them, but they see God, and God feeth us, and is preparing us for the same
felicity: And if it be by the same means, and we must bear the Cross, and feel
the Thorn, it will be wholesome and short, and good is the will and work of
God. Lord, let me not account ease, honor or life dear to me, that I may
finish my course with joy, and the Ministry received of the Lord, and come in
season and peace to thee.

And is not this Providence of God, and this example of our deceased friend of
use to us? Yes, no doubt of manifold use.

I. It is of great use to all the Land, to good and bad, to observe Gods
threatening in the removal of his servants: O how many excellent Christians and
faithful Ministers of Christ, have been taken hence within a few months: The
same week we hear of four or five more besides our brother, and some of them
the most excellent useful men. And is it not time, 1. To repent of our neglect
of such helps as God is now removing? 2 And to be presently awakened to use
them better before the rest be taken away? Alas, poor Souls, what a case are
you in, if you dye, or the word be taken from you, before you are regenerated
and prepared for a better life! It is not so much their loss and hurt as yours,
which Satan endeavors in silencing so many hundred such: And it is your
heavy punishment more than theirs, which God inflicteth by their death. O
speedily repent, before that death have stopped the mouths which called you to
repentance. And it should awaken the best to prepare for death, and for public
suffering: It seems there is some great evil to come when God thus takes away
the best. Yea, if it should be a forerunner of a better state, yet all save two
of the old stock that dishonored God in the Wilderness must fall, and it was
by bloody Wars (a dreadful means) that Joshua and the new generation were to
possess the Land of promise.

II. It is of use to us unworthy Ministers of Christ who yet survive. 1. It
calls loudly to us to work while it is day, for our night is near when we
cannot work: Death will shortly silence us all more effectually, than men have
done. Do Gods work prudently, do it patiently, peaceably, and in as much
concord and true obedience as you can: But be sure you do it, whoever forbid
it, or be against it, as long as God or your selves have not rendered you
incapable. Whatever silencers say against it, Necessity is upon you: God calls
for it: Souls call for it: The charge is dreadful, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. your Vows
call for it: Satan's malice, and the number of Soul-betrayers and murderers must
provoke you: our time is short: Souls are precious: Christ the chief shepherd
dearly purchased them, and will judge you according to your works: It will not
justify your neglect to say, Men forbad me: Sufferings were prepared for me:
Bishops and famous Divines wrote learned Books to prove that preaching was to
me a sin, and that I was bound to forbear it when forbidden. 2. And it tells
us that we as well as others must prepare for the sharpest trials from God. No
thorn in the flesh so sharp and painful, which we may not feel. No death so
violent or sudden but we may undergo. Love and hatred are not known by outward
events, prosperity or adversity. A great difference Solomon acknowledges
between the good and the bad, the righteous and wicked, him that sacrifices
(or worshippeth God) and him that does not; him that swears (perjuriously or
profanely), and him that seareth (such) an Oath: some are loved of God, and
some are hated: And this difference is manifest in such disposals, even of
prosperity and adversity, as tend to their greater holiness and happiness,
which shall manifest the difference fully and for ever. But outward events
manifest it not in themselves: All such things come alike to all: yea, the
Cross is more laid on the godly, than the wicked. O therefore away with the two
Disciples desires of Church-preferment and worldly dignity, and prepare to
drink of Christ's Cup, and be baptized with his baptism, Eccles. 9. 1, 2, 3.
Matthew. 20. 22, 23. Learn daily how to bear slanders and persecutions from men,
even from Christian Teachers; and how to lie in fleshly pains night and day,
and how to die: and all this in faith, and peace, and joy, at least in the
quiet hope of everlasting joy.

III. And without any disgracing or provoking design, but merely in conscience
and compassion to the Souls of the people, and of our Reverend Brethren
themselves; I do humbly entreat the Right Reverend and Reverend Imposing
Clergy, to lay by a while, if possible, all unrighteous prejudice and
partiality, and worldly interests and respects, and consider that they also
must die, and as they will stand to it at last, to resolve these Questions:

I. Whether those Terms of Church-Concord and Peace be wisely and justly made,
which are too narrow to receive such men as this (for faith, knowledge,
peaceableness, blamelesness, holiness, etc.) into the Ministry, Communion of
their Church, or to endure themout of a Jayl? Whether wise and good men could
find no better? And whether Christ ever directed the Church to exclude such, or
did not plainly require the contrary? And whether the Apostles ever excluded
such, or made such Rules?

II. Whether they think in their hearts that it were better all the good were
undone, which has been done by Nonconformists these 18 years to the
Ministerial furthering of knowledge, repentance, holiness and salvation, than
that such should have preached the Gospel when forbidden?

III. Whether it will be peace to your consciences at the Judgment of Christ,
that any of you have furthered the silencing of such, and their other
sufferings?

IV. Whether they that have written and preached against their Preaching, or
for their silencing, and the execution of the Laws against them, or persuaded
them to give over their work themselves, and reproached and accused them for
doing it, be not engaged in this frightful Cause?

V. Is it not gross partiality, if you will cherish men of ignorance,
vitiousness, or far less worth, while such as these are thought intolerable,
merely because the former are more obedient to you, than fear of sinning will
suffer these to be.

VI. Was that Church therein guided by the Spirit of Christ, which made the
Canon which ipso facto excommunicateth such?

VII. If you had known as many of the (about) 2000 silenced, and as well as I
have done, how much of the grace of God shined in them, Is it possible that any
man that has the true fear and love of God, and sense of everlasting things,
could ever by any pretenses of Church Government or Order, or upon any byas of
interest, have consented to their silencing and sufferings?

Some will think that in partiality I over-magnifie men, because they were of
my own mind and party: I have (besides some pious Women) written the
Characters, and published the praises of diverse; of Mr. Rich. Vines, Mr. John
Janeway, Mr. Joseph Allen, Mr. Henry Stubbs, Mr. Wadsworth, and now Mr. John
Corbet, and lately one Layman, Alderman Ashurst; and he that has now received
them, whom such as you cast out or villified, knows that I have in knowledge
of them, and love to Christ, whose grace shined in them, spoken simply the
truth from my heart; and it is in a time and place where it is fully known, and
fears no confutation. And the History shall live to the shame of
Church-dividing tearing principles, and all thorny hurtful dispositions, and to
the encouragement of the faithful, and the imitation of those that in time to
come, shall by says, patience, and well-doing, seek for immortality and
eternal life, by serving our Redeemer, and pleasing God.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. Line 26. for great, read gentle. Page 4. l. 1. for our, r. one. l. 34.
for grown, r. groan. p. 5. l. 11. for are sure, r. measure. l. 37. after that,
r. the.

HIS Writings published are,

1. His History of Col. Massy's Military-Actions at and near Gloucester.

2. The Interest of England, 1st and 2d Part.

3. A Discourse of the Religion of England, asserting, That Reformed
Christianity, settled in its due Latitude, is the Stability and Advancement of
this Kingdom: In two Parts.

4. The Kingdom of God among Men: With a Discourse of Schism: and an Account of
himself about Conformity.

5. His secret Self-employment is now to be Printed. Containing, 1. Memorials
for his own Practice. 2. His Evidences upon Self-examination. 3. His Thoughts
in his last painful Afflictions.

What else may hereafter see the light, we yet know not.

Besides his Labor in Compiling Mr. Rushworth's first Volume of Historical
Collections.


