THE Scripture Gospel defended, AND Christ, Grace and Free Justification
Vindicated Against the Libertines,

Who use the names of CHRIST, FREE GRACE and JUSTIFICATION, to subvert the
Gospel, and Christianity, and that Christ, Grace and Justification, which they
in zealous Ignorance think they plead for, to the injury of Christ, the danger
of Souls, and the scandalizing of the weak, the insulting of Adversaries, and
the Dividing of the Churches.

Yet charitably differencing the wordy Errors of unskilful Opiniaters, from
their Practical Piety: And the mistaken Notions of some Excellent Divines, from
the gross Libertine Antinomian Errors.

In Two Books.

The first, A Breviate of Fifty Controversies about Justification; written
about thirteen years past, and cast by till now, after many provocations, by
Press, Pulpit and Backbiting.

The second upon the sudden reviving of Antinomianism, which seemed almost
extinct near Thirty four years: And the re-printing of Dr. Crisp's Sermons with
Additions; with twelve Reverend Names prefixed for a decoy, when some of them
abhor the Error of the Book, and know not what was in it, but yielded by
surprise only to declare that they believed him that told them that the
Additions were a true Copy.

By RICHARD BAXTER, an Offender of the Offenders of the Church, by Defending
the Truth and Duty which they fight against.

Lux oculos vexat, ubi noctua luminis osor,
Putrida suspecti vexabunt ulcera tactus.
LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the
lower end of Cheapside. 1690.

HEB. 11.5, 6. Without Faith it is impossible to please God: He that comes to
God must believe that He is, and that He is the Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. Luke 19.17. Well, thou good Servant. Because thou have
been faithful in a very little; have thou Authority over ten Cities* So Mat.
25.21.

Mat. 25.34, 40, 46. Inherit the Kindgom prepared for you from the Foundation
of the World: For I was hungry and ye gave me Meat -- In as much as ye have
done it to one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it to me -- And
these shall go into Everlasting Punishment, and the Righteous into Life
Eternal. Genesis 22.16, 17, 18. By my self have I sworn, says the Lord, because
thou have done this thing, and have not withheld thy Son -- etc. John 16.27.
The Father himself loves you, because you have loved me, and have believed
that I came out from God. 1 John 3.12, 13. Whatsoever we ask we receive of him,
because we keep his Commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his
sight, and this is his Commandment that we believe on the Name of his Son Jesus
Christ and Love one another. Rev. 3.4. They shall walk with me in white, for
they are worthy. Rev. 3.10. Because thou have kept the Word of my Patience, I
will keep thee, etc. Mar. 7.29. For this saying go thy way, the Devil is gone
out, etc. Mat. 5.20. Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes, and Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Mat. 12.36, 37. Every idle Word that Men shall speak, they shall give account
thereof in the day of Judgment. For by thy Words thou shall be Justified, and
by thy Words thou shall be Condemned. Jam. 2.24. You see then that by Works a
man is Justified, and not by Faith only. So v. 13. to the end. Romans 8.29, 30.
Whom he foreknew, them he predestined to be conformed to the Image of his
Son, that he might be the first born among many Brethren: And whom he did
predestinate, them he also called: And whom he called them he also justified,
and whom he justified them be also glorified. Luke 18.13, 14. I tell you, This
man went down -- Justified rather than the other. Prove. 17.15. He that
Justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the Just, even they both are
abomination to the Lord. Of Faith imputed to Righteousness, and our being
Justified by Faith, See Romans 3.30, 26. Romans 4.11, 22, 23, 24. He that
considers the different sense of (...) and (...), (the first usually
signifying the Practical or Preceptive matter that is Righteousness, the second
Active efficient Justification, and the third the State of the Just,
Qualitative or Relative, or ipsam Justitiam, will the better expound the Word
Justification as it is in our Translations.

Romans 4.24* 25. For us also to whom it shall be imputed (not is before we
believe,) if (a Conditional) we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord
from the dead: Who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
Justification: ( Not only obeyed and suffered for our Justification, but was
raised for it.) (...), efficiently to make us just relatively and
qualitatively, and so to justify us, and consequently to judge us just. Exodus
23.7. I will not justify the wicked. Obj. Romans 4 5. He justifies the ungodly,
Answ. Yes: By making him Just by Pardon, Adoption and Godliness: As he heals
the sick, and raises the dead, in sensu diviso.

Acts 2.38. Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord
Jesus, for the remission of sins, 13.38. By him all that believe are Justified
from all things from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses, See
Titus 3.6, 7. 1 Cor. 6.8, 9, 10, 11. Romans 2.13, 14. 1 Peter 1.16, 17. 2 Co^*
9.6.

Rev. 20.12, 13. And the dead were judged out of those things which were
written in the Books according to their works, etc. (Which is often said in
Scripture.) John 5.22.29. The Father judges no man, but has committed all
Judgment to the Son, and has given him authority to Execute Judgment. -- They
that have Done Good to the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil
to the Resurrection of damnation. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have fought a good fight. --
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but to all that
love his appearing. See Heb. 6.10. 1 Cor. 15.58. Col. 3.24. Heb. 11.26. 2.
These. 1.5, 6, 7. Mat. 5.12.

Mat. 6.2.4.6. and 5.12. and 10.41.42. and 10.29. 1 Cor. 9.17. Romans 2.5.10.
Mat. 7.4.

1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. So Romans 10.10.13.

Mat. 6.14, 15. If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
forgive you: But if ye forgive not men. -- Neither will. 1 John 3.17. Let no
man deceive you: He that does Righteousness is Righteous. Isa. 1.16, 17, 18.
Cease to do evil etc. Come now If your sins be red as crimson. Isa. 55.6, 7.
Seek the Lord while he may be found, etc. Let the wicked forsake his way, etc.
Let him return to the Lord and he will have mercy on him, etc. Acts 10.35. In
every nation he that fears God and works Righteousness is accepted of him.
Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they ^ay have right
to the Tree of Life, and may enter in by the Gate into the City. John 3.18. He
that believes not is condemned already, because, etc. Romans 8.9. If any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his. See also, verse
4.5.7.14.

2 Cor. 13.15. Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates. Col. 1.27.
Christ in you the hope of glory. See Ephesians. 2. What the Elect are before
Conversion.

1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither fornicators -- And such were some of
you: But ye are washed, ye are Sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. 1 These. 6.10. God is not
unrighteous to forget your work and labor of Love. Phil. 2.13. Work out your
Salvation with fear and trembling: For it is God that works, etc. Rev. 2, and
3. Read the promises to him that overcomes. Mat. 6.19, 20. Lay up for your
selves a treasure in heaven. Luke 16.9. Make you friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, that when you fa^l they may receive you into the everl^sting
habitations. Genesis 4.7. If thou do well shall thou not be accepted? But if
thou, etc. Luke 13.3.5. Except ye repent ye shall all perish. Mat. 18.3. Except
ye be converted and become as little Children, ye shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Heb. 5.9. He is become the Author of Eternal Salvation to
all them that obey him. Luke 19.27. These mine Enemies that would not I should
reign over them. Heb. 10.33. Cast not away your confidence which has great
recompense of reward, 39. We are not of them that draw back to perdition, but
of them that believe to the saving of the Soul. Mat. 18.32, 35. O thou wicked
Servant, I forgave thee all that d^bt, because, etc. so shall my heavenly
Father do also to you if you from your hearts forgive not every one his brother
their trespasses.
The Answer to all this by the Adversaries.
I. By the Infidels, [The Scripture is not the Word of God.] II. By the
Mahometans in special: [The followers of Christ altered it.] III. By Papists,
Scripture is to us but what the Church declares of it; 1. The reading of it,
and rejecting supplemental Tradition by the Vulgar* causes heresies. IV. By
the Quaker, It is the light within us that is our Rule. V. The Enthusiasts, or
Fanatics, We must try Scripture by the Spirit, and not the Spirit by the
Scripture: (the Apostles Spirit by ours, and not our low measure by theirs*)
VI. The seekers. The Scripture must first be recovered by a true Ministry. VII.
The Cabbalist and Familist; It is not to be understood Literally, but
Mystically. VIII. The Antinomian Libertine: The written word, or at least all
that prescribes duty and has conditional promises, is but a Covenant of
works. The Covenant of Grace is only the Spirits Effectual work: I will, and
you shall.
A Breviate of the Doctrine of Justification, Dilivered in many Books, By
RICHARD BAXTER: In many Propositions, And the Solution of 50 Controversies
about it.

Written, 1. To end such Controversies. 2. To confute Rash Censurers and
Errors. 3. To inform the Ignorant. 4. To procure Correction from wiser men, if
I mistake.


Occasioned by some men's Accusation of me to others, that will not vouchsafe
their Instruction to my self.

And by the Erroneous and dangerous Writings and Preachings of some
well-meaning men, such as Mr. Troughton, etc. who at once mistake and misreport
God's Word and ours, and fight in the dark against Christian Faith and Love.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the
lower end of Cheapside. 1690.

The Preface long ago written.
Reader,
IT was the Army and Sectarian Antinomians (more fitly called Libertines) who
first called me in the year 1645. and 1646. to study better than I had done the
Doctrine of the Covenants and Laws of God, of Redemption and Justification: I
fetched my first resolving thoughts from no Book but the Bible, specially Mat.
5, and 6, and 25. Grotius de Satisfactione next gave me more light. While I was
considering many men's friendly Animadversions on my Ap^orisms, and answering
some (that more differed from each other than from me) it increased light,
especially the Animadversions of Mr. George Lawson. My Writings against the
Antinomians had success beyond my expec^ations, though some good men of the
Party called Independent, having more heat than light, deceived by the notions
of some that had spoken injudiciously before them, cast out suspicions and
contradictions in a jealousy that I encroached on the honor of Free Grace: I
mean such men as prefaced the Book called The Marrow of Modern Divinity, which
on pretense of Moderation is Antinomian or Libertine, and very injudicious and
unsound: And others Books (such as Paul Hobsons, Mr. Saltmarshes, Bunyan on the
Covenants, etc.) which ignorantly subverted the Gospel of Christ, came out on
the same business, and revealed men's mistakes on pretense of revealing the
Mystery of Free Grace.

John Goodwin was then, and before, publishing his Judgment of Justification,
and Mr. Walker, and Mr. Roborough wrote against him, with great disparity of
light and strength. But because J.G. turned to the Arminians, prejudice cried
down his Doctrine of Justification, (and it was not all to be approved.) Mr.
Gataker published many things to the like purpose, and among the rest, the
Narrative of Mr. Wottons Case, referred to many London Divines, and decided by
them; Of my suspension of my Aphorisms, and of my Contests with Mr. Craudon,
Mr. Eyres, Mr. Warner, and afterward with Dr. Tully, I need not here make
particular mention. The most that I converst with seemed of my Judgment: The
rest (beside the Animadverters on my Aphorisms) who freeliest spoke of me
beh^^d my back, would none of them speak to me. Vavasor Powel, and Mr. Ed.
Bagshaw, were two of the chief. Many worthy men published the same Doctrine
which I ass^rted; especially Mr. Gibbons of Blackfryars (in his Sermon in the
Morning Lectures at St. Gi^^s) Mr. Benjamin Woodbridge, Mr. Hotchk^^* Mr.
Thomas Warren, Mr. Graile, and Mr. Je^^op, labored to prove that Dr. Twisse
meant the same, who seems to speak for Eternal Immanent Justification: And Mr.
Truman, and Lud. Le Blankes Theses at last came out (after the The^es
Salmurienses, and the Breme Divines, Lud. Crocius Conrad. Bergius, and the
Berlin, Johan. Bergius) as clear as any.

But the practice of some (who wanted the humility and ^ili^ence which were
necessary to learn the Truths which they knew not) was just the same with that
of the Prelates in Councils for a thousand years, even to put it to the Vote of
m^n of their own mind, or to lean on the names of some of their Predecessors
who were men of note, and especially to cry down those that heard them not.

And lately came out a Book of one Mr. Troughtons of the same temper with the
rest. He allarmeth the Nation, as if the Enemy were at the Gates. He is a man
that has been blind from his Infancy or early Childhood, and I suppose never
read a Book, but has had some one to read to him, and he undertaketh to tell
the sense of Protestant Writers, and Fathers, and the words and sense of Mr.
Hotchkis and me, and such others, whom be fiercely assaulteth as his and the
Churches Adversaries: And the good man heapeth up untr^^^s in matter of fact in
false reciting his Adversaries words and sense. Besides his Libertine false
Doctrine, (as that the Covenant or Promise of Justification has no Conditions,
no not Faith, and such like,) and abuses the Authors whom he cites. I thought
once to have bestowed two or three days work in answering him, but I desisted,
partly because he was one of those that had written at the rate of some former
Adversaries, who had so formed their Assaults, that they had left me little to
answer but a Mentiris, which is so unpleasing a task, that they that most
deserve it cannot bear it. And it has been my lot since 1662. in which the
powerful Ringleader Morley began, to have so many such Books written against
me, and such reports divulged of me, as if the Devil had been studying to
prove, Romans 3.4. that every man is a Liar, to be true in a sense beyond the
meaning, and to bring all History at least of Disputers into discredit, and to
make it become a valid consequence [ It is said and written by a domineering,
or an ambitious, or an erroneous, or angry Adversary; Ergo it is false.] And
also I was loath to say that against the man that his Book required: For I hear
he is a very honest man, and not only blind, but a sufferer for Nonconformity
with the rest; and when he was a Child, his Grandfather, Grandmother, and
other kindred in Coventry were my hearers and loving friends, and godly people:
His Father and Mother my very near Neighbors, and weekly, and almost daily
company, have asked my Counsel, what they should do with a blind Boy that was
much inclined to Learning, and I encouraged them to further him, not foreseeing
his snares. 3. And I perceive that judicious Readers have no need of an
Antidote against so weak a Poison. He that gave me the Animadversions answered
in the end, told me, He had scarce patience to read him. And as to those that
are so weak as to need an answer to such a Book, it is like they are too weak to
understand one; or will think him in the right that has the last word, and
that may be he that lives longest. The great fault of the good man is that
which is too predominant in all Cases in corrupted Nature, even an unhumbled
understanding, which does not sufficiently suspect it self, much less is
acquainted with its own Ignorance, but when it most mistaketh, does most
confidently rage. Who would think that such a man could be ignorant how unfit
he was who never saw their Books, to undertake such account as he gives of
Fathers, Protestant Writers, or us his chosen Adversaries? When his Reader has
read to him some parcels of our Writings, how knows he what he omitteth* or
what explications he never read? And how incapable must his memory needs be of
retaining and laying all together out of so many Volumes, and making a charge,
and passing a Judgment thereupon, unless his memory be greater far than Bishop
Hall says Dr. John Reynolds reading and memory was [next to a Miracle,] which
his gross falsifications show that it is not.

And 4. I found so many ready to write on the same Subject for my sense, that I
the more thought it needless to my self. Sir Charles Wolsley has lately done
it very judiciously. I have lately perused diverse Manuscripts that are such
prepared for the Press: One of Mr. William Mannings, another of Mr. Clerk Son
to Mr. Samuel Clerk (and Dr. Twisse has a Latin Disputation to the same
sense,) and some more (all Nonconformists.)

But yet I still hear some London Brethren use to cast out their suspicions,
aspersions and censures behind my back, and some in their Conferences when they
meet: Whereupon I drew up this Paper of Explicatory Propositions and
Controversies, only to let them truly know my sense, and long after gave it
that honest Dr. Annesley, at whose house sometimes some meet of different
Judgments in such things, desiring him but to get it read to them, and to
procure me their Animadversions on what they did any of them dis^ike; instead
of their unprofitable Obloquy when I cannot hear them; for this I should take
for a great brotherly kindness: But it is now near a twelve month that I have
waited in hope of it, but cannot procure a word to this day; which makes me
think it needful to publish that which I intended but for their private view.
Yet one that to me prof^ssed dissent, seemed to take it well that I entreated
his Reasons, and promised to give them me, but never did. Nor has any one yet
answered, 1. My Confession; 2. My Disputations of Justification; 3. My Apology
(to many;) 4. My small Tract of Saving Faith to Bishop Barlow; 5. My Treatise
of Justifying Righteousness to Dr. Tully.

This week an honest judicious moderate Friend (that is more a Consenter than a
Dissenter, as far as I can judge, sent me the Notes which I answer in the
latter end, as partly his own, and partly others; which (not as opposing them,
but as tending to elucidate the whole Cause) I here adjoyn, though all or most
here said, is said elsewhere before, which I mention, lest you think that I
took all for his own Opinion which he cited out of Dr. Owen, who himself
reformed much of his former Judgment about Doctrine and Government before he
died. The Lord heal his Church by Light, Love and Humility, which is torn by
Ignorance, Uncharitableness and Pride. Amen.

The Prologue.
. 1. THE Doctrine of the Justification of sinful man, by Christ as our
Redeemer, Savior and Judge, is of so great moment, that it should be Skilfully
taught to all that are Catechized. And yet by the Unskilfulness of Teachers, is
become a football of Strife and Contention, and of Wrathful Censures, and
Reproach, among those who are most zealous for the safe and honorable
preservation of it, and really differ more in the Terms and Methods which they
think must preserve it, than in the inward practical sense of the matter itself.

. 2. Two things constitute this itch or leprosy rather of strife, which
experience makes us fear is uncurable: And these two are one. Ignorance:
Ignorance of the case: And Ignorance of our Ignorance. But what Ignorance is
it? I am grieved to know and speak it. It is Ignorance of words or the art of
speaking; of Grammar and Logic. O what a plague did Nimrod bring on the World,
and what a Babel has it been by the confusion of language to this day! How
vain has peaceable Dr. Wilkins attempt of an Universal Character proved? My
good old highly valued Friend, Mr. John Eliots long ago wrote to me, that to
make the Hebrew the Universal Language, and to set up a Godly Magistracy in the
world were the two things yet to be done for Universal Concord and Reformation:
Alas, good man? Abi in cellam* etc. If you can get the Earth to drink up the
flood of Persecution cast out against you in New England, it is well. Little
did I think when I was a Schoolboy Learning my Grammar, that I should live to
find that the Christian World is all in confusion* Divisi^n, Wrath, Schism,
War, and Blood, and much, if not mostly for want of Skill in words or Grammar!

But indeed were there one Universal Language it would not be enough to heal
us. For we are mostly so dull of nature, and so slothful in our Studies, and so
apt to speak as our parents or first Masters or ^ompany teach us, that we are
utterly disagreed and unreconcileable about the sense of our ommon words in our
Mother Tongue. So that if English were the only Language of the World, we
should still be disagreed: I have been a great comtemner of vain ostentation in
Critical or Verbal Skill: But I see that rightly used about things necessary,
it must be a principal help to end most of our Controversies.

. 3. Though supernatural Revelation far exceeds the mere light of Nature, and
the teachings of the Creation* yet the difficulty of learning and speaking many
Languages, without which we cannot Preach abroad in the World, and the
Universal Wars about words that take up and corrupt mankind, do make me read
the 19 Psalm. with great regard, and not think so hardly as I have been tempted
to do, of Gods dealing with the heathen and generality of mankind, while the
Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy works,
while day unto day utters Knowledge and while Sun Moon, and Stars, do Preach
God with so loud a voice, and their sound goes through all the World and there
is no Nation or Tongue where their sound is not heard: And it is not a Syllable
or Letter, an Accent or an Emphasis, that does obscure their sense. And they
all tell the World that God is, and that he is the rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. And that the invisible things of God are seen by the
things that are made, and in him we live and move and have our being, and that
in every Nation, he that fears God and works righteousness is accepted of
him. It is most legible in the book of Nature, and Providence, that God uses
all the World upon terms of mercy, and not according to the utmost desert of
sin; and that this mercy should lead them to repentance, and that God is
infinitely good, and therefore to be Loved above all: And that he that truly so
loves God, shall not lie in Hell and be separated from him.

4. Were it only Plow-men and other of the unlearned Vulgar that thus contended
about words not understood, they had some excuse: But it is those that have
from their Childhood been bred up to learn the art of speaking by their
Parents, and School masters, Books, and Universities. And when they have been
thus tutored thirty or forty years, and exercised in Pulpits to the talking
art, and gloried in it; they are after all this the incendiaries of the world,
for want of understanding what to say.

Yea were it only men that understand not Hebrew, Greek, Latin or any Language
save one, and were Skilful in that one, we might have some hope of ending this
blind War. But it is kept up by our unskilfulness in the English tongue, as
well as of the Greek and Hebrew. Men have not brains and diligence to exclude
Equivocals, or to distinguish of their sense; or to state the sense of their
terms before they dispute. Nor to understand each others meaning, but fight in
confusion in the dark like the Physicians that let the Patient die, because
they could not agree whether he should take succinum, Carabes, Electrum or
Amber.

5 Whither need we to go for an instance of this unhappiness, but to our
controversies about Justification? How many Books, Sermons, Disputings, and
Backbiting Revilings, are employed about words neither explained nor
understood! Rash folly and confident rage beseem not holy things, that should
be managed by Reverence and Discretion.

1. Justification is loudly talked of, by men that know not, or never tell you
what the word signifies, or what the thing is: They never tell you whether
they mean making Righteous Eff^ciently, or making Righteous Constitutively, or
making Righteous Instrumentally, or only Virtually, absolutely or
conditionally; or only a Dispositive Reception of it as a gift; or Esteeming
one Righteous or Justifying by Apology, by Witness, by Evidence, or by Decisive
Sentence of the Judge, or executively using one as Righteous; Or many of these
Conjunct, and which. Or if they name one sense, they give us quite another when
they are put to define it. Mr. Bradshaws little Book is too big for their
brains; because the distinctions are so many when others by distinction and
clear explication make the Controversies intelligible, (as is excellently done
by many) they understand them not, or despise distinction, and still mouth out
the ambiguous word Justification, as if they would end Controversies as a Bell
Ringeth by Sound and Noise: When Paul says, 1 Cor. 14.7, 8. That even things
without life must give a distinction in the Sounds as Harp and Trumpet, or else
who can know what is Piped or Harped, or can prepare himself to the Battle? So
we unless we utter words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is
spoken? But we speak into the air, v. 9. But confusion and ambiguity are not
instructive, but deceitful to the simple.

2. So they talk much of Imputation, and neither know nor tell you what
Imputation is: But take it mostly to be that which even Dr. Crispe calls a
charging God with falsehood; as if it were his Reputing, Reckoning, Esteeming or
Supposing us to be what indeed we are not* or to have done or suffered what we
did not, or to have what we have not: Whereas Paul means nothing (and (...)
signifies nothing but a true accounting us to be what we are, and to have done
what we did, and to have what we indeed have. And to impute righteousness to
us, signifies but truly to Repute, Account or Judge us Righteous. Those that
are here most inclined to mistake, should the rather take Mr. Bradshaw to be
impartial, because he was for Independent Church Government (tho sharp against
Separation.) And in the Preface to his English Edition of his little Book of
Justification, he has in a few lines said enough to end all this Controversy,
by a true explaining in what sense Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us, and
how not.

3. And do they tell us with any agreement what Righteousness of Christ they
call Imputed? Some say only the Passive, some also the Active; Some also the
habitual, and some also the Divine. Much less agree they to what Effects it is
imputed, and how far.

4. Also the name of Faith is used without a due and true explication of their
meaning. One by Faith means not Faith, but Christ's Righteousness. Another
calls it an Instrument, and yet denies it to be the (...) credere that is, the
Act of Faith indeed, as if any thing else was that instrument. Another says it
is but one Physical act, and not like contracting, a Moral complication of many
Physical Acts: One says it is but one Act, and all other Acts of Faith he that
looks to be Justified by denies the Doctrine of Grace or true Justification,
and so leave men to despair because they can never tell which that single is,
and how to escape the damning Doctrine of Justification by works. One says it
is the Understandings assent: Another that it is the Wills recumbency, or
trust: One says it is only Faith in Christ that Justifies, and not in God the
Father or the Holy Ghost: One says it is only Faith in Christ's Priestly
Office, and not in Christ as Prophet or King; some say it is not Faith in his
whole Priestly Office, either his Intercession or Heavenly Priesthood, but only
in his Sacrifice and Obedience. Another that it is only the trusting on his
Imputed Righteousness: Another that it is none of all these, but only the
belief that we are already Justified by Christ. One says we are Justified only
at once by the first numerical Act of Faith, and never by any after Act:
Another that an Act of the same Species continues our Justification. And this
confusion is from the vain fantasy of men, that will divide and mince and yet
will not sufficiently distinguish: and know not that by Faith is meant our
becoming Christians and continuing such.

5. So they talk loud against Works in the Case of Justification, and know not
what either Paul or James or Christ means by works. But they dream that Works
and Acts are of the same signification; As if every humane Act were that which
Paul means by works, contrary to his express explication: And so to be
Justified by Faith must be to be Justified by Works. One says, we will grant
Justification by Faith, if you take it aright, to be a going wholly out of our
selves and denying all our own righteousness, and going to Christ and his
Righteousness alone. But is their chosen Metaphor [of Going out, and Going to]
an Act or no Act? If an Act, than it is works, if they may be believed. If no
Act, then their meaning is, we confess that you are Justified by Believing, if
you do not believe: You are Justified by Faith, if Faith be nothing; and by
coming to Christ if you come not to him, or it be nothing. Such is the sense of
these Confounders and Corrupters.

But these and many such mistakes are to be opened in their proper place.

That which I here intend is (not a confutation of this or that writer, but) to
give them a breviate of my own Judgment, who will not read what I have largely
written in many books long ago* pretending that the length of the books is
their reason; and yet have not so much conscience as to suspend their censures,
no nor their backbiting, false accusations of that which they have not leisure
to understand or read; They judge hard cases which they never digested by any
answerable Study; and Scruple not Judging and Slandering persons unheard.

Corrupting the Gospel, and so excellent a Subject as the Doctrine of Grace,
and of the Office and Merits and Judgment of Christ, and so of Christianity it
self, is a matter that conscience should more tenderly fear, than wearing a
Surplice, or kneeling at the Sacrament, or communicating with a Church that
uses the Common Prayers. To think those unworthy of their Communion that use
such Ceremonies or forms of prayer, and at the same time to profane so high a
part of the name of God, as is his Grace in Christ, and his Justifying,
Governing and Saving works, and this ( quoad verba) by corrupting it even in
Essentials, and then to defame as erroneous those that are not as Ignorant and
Erroneous as themselves, and to foment malice and error and Sects by such
lying defamations: This is a Nonconformity which I earnestly desire that no man
that loves Christ, or Free grace, or the Church or his own Soul; may ever take
for his duty or his honor, or rashly as a sequacious admirer of any mistaken
leader be ever guilty of: What is straining at a Gnat and swallowing a Camel,
if this be not? And of how ill a constitution is such a blind and partial
conscience?

I shall here study brevity, and first explain the Doctrine of Grace, and
Righteousness and Justification, in some self-evident Propositions And next
briefly resolve about fifty doubts or Controversies hereabout.

THE CONTENTS.
1. THe nature of Justification explained. Controv. I. Whether it be an
Immanent Act in God, and from Eternity. Cont. II. Whether the Covenant of Grace
be made only with Christ; or with us also. Cont. III Whether the Covenant of
Grace have any condition required of us. Cont. IV Whether our performance of
the Condition efficiently justify us. Cont. V. Whether we are justified by
Christ's righteousness imputed to us: And whether the Scripture say we are.
Cont. VI. In what sense is Christ's Righteousness imputed to us. Cont. VII What
Righteousness of Christ is it that is ours and imputed to us; the Passive, the
Active, the Habitual, or the Divine, or all. Cont. VIII. Whether Christ's
Righteousness be the Efficient, Material, or Formal cause of our Righteousness,
or Justification? Cont. IX. Whether the Union between Christ and believers be
not so near as makes them the same Subject, and so the Accident of Christ's
righteousness, to be ours in itself. Cont. 10. Are we not so righteous by an
Union with Christ as we are sinners by our Union with Adam. Cont. XI. Is not
Christ's Righteousness ours, as our sins were his by imputation? Cont. 12. Does
Christ's Righteousness cause our Sanctification, in the same sort of Causality
as it causes our Justification? Cont XIII. Is it faith itself that is said to
be imputed to us for Righteousness, or only Christ's, or Christ's Righteousness.
Cont. XIV. Whether Grace be Grace and free if it have any condition. Cont. XV.
Whether Repentance be any condition of Pardon and Justification, and to affirm
it, do not equal it with Faith. Cont. XVI. Whether faith justify us as a
meritorious cause or as a dispositive cause of receiving Justification, or as a
mere condition, or an Instrumental cause. Cont. XVII Is Justifying faith an act
of the understanding or of the Will? Cont. XVIII. Of the distinction of sides
qu^^ and fid^s qua Justi^ica^, what it means. Cont. XIX. Whether we are
Justified by the Law of Innocence saying, obey perfectly, and live. Cont. XX*
Whether by works, Paul means acts in genere, or what sort of Acts. Cont. XXI.
Are any works of man meritorious? Cont. XXII. Is obedience a part of Justifying
Faith? Cont. XXIII. Is any more necessary to the keeping or not losing our
Justification, than to its beginning? Cont. XXIV. Is Pardon and Justification
perfect the first moment? Cont. XXV. Is nol^e punire, or non punire, (not
punishing) true pardon? Cont. XXVI. Is future sin pardoned before? Cont. XXVII.
Is any one punished for pardoned sin? Cont. XXVIII. Is punishing one that
Christ died for, unjust punishing one sin twice. Cont. XXIX. Are regenerate
believers, under any guilt of any but corrective punishment, or should ask
pardon of any other? Cont. XXX. What is it to be judged according to our works?
Cont. XXXI. What Law is it that Paul calls the Law of works which cannot
justify? Cont. XXXII. How and why it is so called. Cont. XXXIII. What is Paul's
drift in his disputes about Justification. Cont. XXXIV. What is the drift of
James. Cont. XXXV. M^st a believer any way plead his Faith, Repentance or
Holiness to his Justification, or trust to them? Cont. XXXVI. Has
Justification and Salvation the same conditions? Do those works save us that do
not justify us? Cont. XXXVII. Have we any Justification against false
accusations (of Infidelity, etc.) Cont. XXXVIII. Does faith justify as a
righteousness? or any personal righteousness in subordination to Christ's?
Abundant Scripture proof of the affirmative. Cont. XXXIX. Is Gods accepting
Christ's righteousness for us, the imputing of it? Cont. XL. Whether Christ's
sufferings merit Eternal life for us, seeing the Law said, Do this and live,
and not suffer and live. Cont. XLI. Whether Christ being the end of the law for
righteousness, prove that Adams first law justifies us as fulfilled by Christ.
Cont. XLII. Whether the sufferings of Christ merit our freedom from nothing but
what he suffered in our stead. Cont. XLIII. And so whether Christ's sufferings
merit not our freedom from habits and acts of sin, which Christ had not. Cont.
XLIV. And so whether his sufferings redeem us from Spiritual death, seeing we
suffered it, and not be. Cont.* XLV. Is this the reason of our deliverance from
the curse of the law, because we suffered the equivalent of everlasting Hell
Fire in Christ. Cont. XLVI. Is it true that Christ's active obedience only
meriteth Heaven for us, and therefore that only meriteth Sanctification? Cont.
XLVII. Is it true that Repentance can be no condition of Justification because
it follows it. Qu. XLVIII. How can faith and repentance give a right to the
righteousness of Christ, which must first give us that faith and repentance?
Qu. XLIX* Is it true that we must be practical Antinomians unless we hold that
only Christ's Active righteousness merited grace and glory for us. Qu. L. Is
this proved by* Romans 7.4. The Conclusion.
A Breviate of the Doctrine of Justification.
Pr. 1. WE must first agree, what Righteousness is. Righteousness is formally a
Relation: And therefore must have the definition of a Relation: I need not tell
Scholars what that is.

2. The subject of this Relation, is, first men's actions and habits, and their
Titles and Rights, and then their Persons as the subject of these.

3. Righteousness is a Relation to the Rule or Law: And is an Agreeableness
thereto: If it be Gods Law, it is Righteousness before God. If but man's, it is
but humane Righteousness.

4. As a Law has two parts; the precept and the retribution of reward and
punishment* so there are two sorts of unrighteousness and righteousness: As to
the precept, Obedience is Righteousness, and Sin is Unrighteousness. As to the
Retribution. Right to Impunity and to the promised Reward is the Persons
Righteousness, and so contrary.

5. Righteousness materially is either, 1. Particular, in some one cause, or
few causes, 2. Or Universal and perfect in all causes.

6. Righteousness particular is either in some small matter that we are not
made happy by. 2. Or in some great cause which our happiness depends on.

7. The first Law required personal perfect constant obedience on pain of
death; and so justifies none without it.

8. Adam was the Father of all mankind, from whom they spring, but he did not
so represent the Persons of all that were to spring of him, as if his obedience
without their own would have justified any of them at age. If Adam had not
sinned, Cain should have been condemned if he sinned; and so others.

9. The first Law being broken, man was made incapable of either part of
Justification by it; either as one that sinned not, or as one that was not by
it to be condemned. And so it was no more to him a Promise or Covenant of Life;
the Condition being now become impossible, and so no condition; and the
threatening becoming as a Sentence.

10. This Law neither gave, mentioned or owned any Surety, Substitute, or
Mediator.

11. But the blessed Lawgiver our Creator would not so lose his Creature, but
the eternal word presently interposing, undertook man's Redemption, and God gave
man a new Law of Life, or a Covenant of Grace* promising him a Mediator in the
fullness of time, and giving him freely for his sake both pardon of his sin,
and right to Life, on the Terms of Grace therein prescribed: and commanding him
future obedience, especially in the reception of his Grace, and use of the
means of Grace appointed him.

12. This Law of Grace was made to Adam the lapsed head of all mankind, and so
to all mankind in him: And it was renewed to Noah in the same capacity: so that
all fallen mankind was put under this Law of Grace in that first Edition of it,
made to Adam, and Noah. And were neither left lawless, nor utterly desperate as
under the mere damning violated Law, which now no more offered Life to any, the
condition being become of natural impossibility: God is not to be supposed to
say now to sinners, If you be not Sinners you shall li^^; when it is known that
they are.

13. Abraham, being eminently righteous, according to this Law of Grace, and
Believing a special promise of God, and not withholding his only Son in his
obedience to his command, God made with him moreover a Covenant of peculiarity,
superadded to the common Law of Grace. In which he chooses out his Seed as a
peculiar Holy Nation, from whom the Me^^iah should come, in whom all the
Nations of the Earth should be blessed. This promise was renewed to Isaac (and
Jac^b) Genesis 26.4, 5. Because that Abraham obeyed my Voice and kept my Charge,
my Commandments, my Statutes, and my Laws.

14. This Covenant of Peculiarity with Abraham, nulled not the common Law of
Grace made to mankind, nor was it ever nulled or abro^ate, but perfected after:
Though men make themselves incapable of the benefits.

15. God uses none of fallen mankind according to the severity of the first
Law, but giv^th to all men undeserved forfeited Mercy, and binds them to use
some means for their recovery; to repent in hope, and to receive and thankfully
use the measures of mercy which he vouch^^^eth them. And all men shall be
judged according to that edition of the Law of Grace which they were under, and
the receiving and using the Grace or Mercy which was given or offered them.

16. When the peculiar Seed was formed into a Nation, God gave them by Moses a
peculiar Law, which exempli^ied the Holiness of the first Law, but had the
Promises and Grace of the second, with the peculiar additions; and plainlier
pointed out the Messiah to come but by a way of operous Ceremonies, and severe
Discipline, suitable to their rude minority.

17. In the fullness of time. Christ was conceived by the Holy Ghost, in a
Virgin* and being God and Man, a^ made by the Will of the Deity was made a
Subject under a Law peculiar to himself, according to his peculiar works; and
this Law given to our Mediator had three parts. 1. That he should perfe^tly
obey the Law of Innocence so far as it was fitted to his case, and overcome the
Tempter. 2. That he should perfectly keep the Law of Mose^, so far as it agreed
to him. 3. That he should perfectly do all that was proper to the Redeemer, in
being a Sacrifice for sin, clearing and publi^hing the New Covenant; sealing it
by Miracles, rising again, instituting his Word, Sacraments and Ministry,
ascending, giving the Spirit, interceding in Heaven, etc. his promised reward
being the success of his undertaking, the saving of his Church and his Glory,
in the glorifying of God the Father: This is the peculiar Law to the Mediator.

18. That which is called The Covenant between the Father and the Son* is this
Covenant made to and with Christ In^arnate, and the fore-dec^^eing thereof,
with the Prophecies of it. If there be more, it is past our reach.

19. Christ perfectly fulfilled all that he undertook, and this as the second
Adam; not a Natural Root, but a Voluntary Sponsor: Not our Substitute or
Servant sent by us, but chosen by the Father, and sent by him to do all his
Will for Man's Redemption.

20. As he took the common Nature of Man, so the sins of all, and not only of
the Elect were the causes of his sufferings, and said upon him, and the fruits
of his sufferings and merits were some common, and some peculiar to the Elect.

21. He being not as Adam, our natural Parent, was not merely by natural
generation to convey his benefits to the Redeemed; but by such means as he
should choose, and Man consent to, even by a holy Covenant or Contract, being
also his Doctrine, and his Law in several respects; which Covenant having great
and precious Promises, is Gods Instrument of Donation and Condonation, and our
title to all the blessings promised; by which God does give us right to Pardon
and Salvation: This Law of Grace is the Rule of our duty, and the Rule by which
we shall be judged.

22. This Law or Covenant gives a Conditional Pardon to all in the tenor of
it, with Adoption and Right to Life Eternal: But actual Pardon and Right
accrueth to none, till the Condition be performed, which is to be Believers, or
their Infant seed dedicated to God by Covenant Consent.

23. This Condition is not that we our selves make God amends or satisfaction,
or give him any thing that has any merit in Commutative Justice, or do any
kind of work which shall make the reward to be of debt, and not of grace: But
it is [ the Belief of, and Consent to the Covenant of Grace, and the Believing
Acceptance of the gifts and grace of the Covenant, according to their nature,
and (...) their proper use; and is the same thing which is to be professed in
Baptism, which is the solemnizing of this mutual Covenant, and in which God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, do give themselves to us, for grace and glory, and
we give up our selves by consent to him, believingly accepting his grace, and
penitently renouncing the lusts of the flesh, the world and the Devil; and so
are sacramentally invested in a state of Justification, Adoption and Spiritual
Life.

24. The profession of this Faith and Consent in Baptism, makes men visible
Christians and Church*members; and true heart consent in Faith makes men
Living and Justified Members.

25. This belief and consent, or performance of the Condition, is not the
Efficient Cause of our Pardon or Justification, but is the necessary (...)
position or qualification of the Receiver, in the very nature of the Act
suitable and needful, and by Divine Institution and Promise made the Condition
and acceptable.

26. Though we are not capable Receivers of Justification, till we thus
penitently and believingly consent, yet when we do so, it is the merit of
Christ's Righteousness by which we are justified: For the Covenant of God is but
his Instrument by which he gives us Christ (to be our Head) and Life in and
with him, and so gives us Justification as procu^^d by his Merits.

27. Justification is a word of many senses: sometimes it signifies [ making
us righteous] sometimes, the Law or Covenants virtu^l judging us righteo^s, it
being the Rule of Judgment: sometimes Gods esteeming us righteous in his own
mind: sometimes for a Justifying by ^vidence or Witness: sometimes by ^polo^y
of an Advocate: sometimes by the Sentence of the Judge: and sometime for the
Execution of that Sentence. But the notable special sorts are three, Making
just, ^udging just, and Using as just: And they that will dispute of
Justification, and not tell in what sense they take the word, do but abuse
their time and talk.

28. No man is judged righteous by God, that is not first made righteous.

29. He that is made righteous, is justifiable in Judgment, and virtually
justified (in Law.)

30. No sinner is made righteous as to the Preceptive part of the Law of
Innocence; it being a contradiction to have been a sinner and no sinner.

31. Pardon of sin does not make the fact done to be undone, or not done, nor
the sin to be no sin, nor not to have deserved punishment: But it remitteth the
punishment and the fault, so far as it infers punishment, because of the
merit and satisfaction of the Mediator; and delivers the sinner from that
which he was bound to suffer by the violated Law.

32. To make a man righteous before God that has sinned, all these things must
concur: 1. He must have a Mediator that must answer the Ends of the Law that
condemns him, and so meriteth his Justification. 2. This Savior must make
him a Pardoning and Justifying Covenant, to convey the right of the purchased
benefits to him. 3. He himself (by grace) must per^orm the Conditions of that
Covenant; accepting the free gift believingly according to its nature and use.
4. Upon this the Covenant (by virtue of the foresaid Merit of the Mediator)
must effectually justify him.

33. Though we have no Righteousness of our own, that is so denominated by the
Law of Innocence, yet have we a Righteousness to plead for our Justification
from its Sentence, which by our Mediator was performed to it, by which the
Lawgiver has received satisfaction; and we must have the personal subordinate
^ighteousness required by the Covenant of Grace.

34. All that are made righteous, are esteemed and judged righteous, and used
as righteous.

35. Pardon of Sin, and Right to Life, are not that Righteousness which
answers the Precept of the Law: But they are that Righteousness which
justifies us against the Accusation, [ that we are not to be saved, but to be
damn^d*]

35. Christ's Perfe^^ Ob^di^nce to the Law of Innocence, exempteth u^ from the
necessity of perfect obedience to it* and from all duty of obeying it as the
condition of life: But he did not Repent and Believe in obedience to his own
Law of Grace, to exempt us from the necessity of Repenting and Believing, which
we must do our selves by his grace, or perish.

36. To make a man righteou^ implies, that he was before unrighteous: But to
judge him righteous, supposes him to be righteous; yet either accused of
unrighteousness, or accusable; Justification here supposing either actual or
virtual Accusation.

37. The Law is the Virtual Accuser, but that speaks nothing but truth; (
viz. that we sinned and deserved damnation.) Satan is the Actual Accuser, and
the Father of Lies.

38. We shall not be justified by denying the true Accusation of the Law, but
by denying the false Accusation of Satan: That we are sinners must be granted;
and that our sin deserved Hell: But (that we have no part in Christ, that we
are unpardoned, unreconciled sinners, that we are unbelievers, impenitent,
unregenerate, unholy, or hypocrites, must be denied, or we perish: As also that
hereupon we ought to be damned, and not to be glorified.

39. By this it is very plain how far a man must be justified in Judgment by
his own personal Righteousness; and also how to understand, Matthew. 25* and all
the descriptions of the last Judgment, and the Reasons there assigned of the
Sentence; and what it is to be Justified or Condemned by our words, and to be
judged according to our works, or what we have done in obedience or
disobedience to the Law of grace; and what is meant in James by being justified
by works, and not by faith alone. For though Christ's righteousness is to be
then honored, it is not his part, but ours, that is by him to be Examined and
Judged. And it is the Law of Grace by which we must be judged, which prescribed
us the Conditions of Pardon and Salvation. The performance of which must
therefore be the cause of the day to be Examined and Judged.

4. To justify a man's Right to Salvation is to justify the man when his right
is the thing tried: Therefore the causes of our Right to Salvation are
necessary causes of our Justification. All this is plain, and I think, not by a
Christian to be denied: And is not here enough to be the matter of our
Christian peace and concord in this one point of Justification. But we are not
so happy; It is a greater number of Controversies that the teachers of
Christians have raised about it, than many hours will serve to handle. I will
name some that are too many, and yet far from all, and give you my sense of
them plainly and briefly, that you may truly understand the matter and me.

Cont. 1. Passing by all the old quarrels, about Christ's Person, by the
Arrians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Monothelites, Phantasiastae, and abundance
more, about Justification it self, the first that I shall mention is that which
a few great and worthy men have unhappily raised, Whether Justification be not
an Immanent act in God, and so eternal: This they assert, and I deny: There is
nothing in God but God; Nothing therefore that has beginning and end, but all
is Eternal. But Relations and Extrinsick denominations, and also Effects may
begin and end. The world was not from Eternity: God did not make it from
Eternity, nor was the creator of it from Eternity, in proper speech. And yet no
Act as it is in God had beginning or end; for it is God himself. But Gods
Essential will or word is not called creating till it actually create. So is it
in Justification: Nothing is new in God, besides Relation and Denomination; but
much is new by and from God. Justification is a transient act of God. It is the
act of his Covenant and his Judgment and Execution. Therefore he that says
Elect Infidels are Justified from Eternity, Contradicts Gods word, that says
we are justified by faith, and till then are under Condemnation.

Cont. 2. Whether the Covenant of Grace, be made only with Christ, or with us
also? The first is put into a Catechism where I am sorryer to find it, than in
Maccovius, Cluto, Cocceius and Cloppenburgius. The Covenant made with Christ is
not the same that is made between Christ and us, and which we celebrate in
Baptism. It is not only Christ that is baptized, but all his members; And
baptism is the mutual Covenant. We are the receivers of the Relation to God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and we are the Promisers (the word Restipulation is
too presumptuous.) If we are not Covenanters, we can be no Covenant breakers,
nor have right to the benefits of such a Covenant: It is the same thing that in
several respects is called a Law and a Covenant. And if we are not under
Christ's Law we are Lawless, or not his Subjects. Deny Christ's Law and Covenant
to us, and you will subvert all Christianity and deny the rule of Judgment and
Justification.

Cont. 3. Whether the Covenant of grace have any condition required of us.

Ans. Here we first show our weakness in contending about the word [ Condition]
while we agree not of the sense, though till men made a difference on this ill
occasion, there were few words that men were more agreed in (of such a
Subject.) And the word we must use, has no other name that I remember which
our Grammar has taught us to call such Conjunctions by as [ If] is* but [
Conditional] nor any other name that Law and Civil use has taught us to call
the thing defined by but [ CONDITION] without circumlocution, uncouthness or
obscurity. The common definition of Lawyers is that it is, [ Lex addita negotio
qua^ donec praestetur eventum suspendit: It is in our case the Mode of the Law
or Promise requiring a Duty or Moral Act or qualification, on the presence or
absence, performance or nonperformance whereof the Law or Donation annexeth or
suspendeth the event. This is a Condition as it is in the* Law or Covenant, or
Promise, being but its Modus: But as it is in the person and performance, it is
a Moral Act or qualification, required by the Law, or Promise, to which it
annexeth, and till it be performed suspendeth the event. Natural or merely
contingent conditions that are not moral, belong not to our enquiry. (As if it
be a fair day to morrow. If such a ship come safe home! If I live so long, etc.)

Some define a condition here to be any Moral medium of obtaining a benefit ex
pacto: But 1. A Law has its conditions, and so has a Donation or promise,
when there is no proper mutual pactum or Covenant. 2. There are other Moral
media ex pacto besides conditions (as are all simple duties.) 3. But these
definers cannot congruously deny the Gospel Covenant of grace to have
conditions of our ^ustification and Salvation: For none but an Infidel can
congruously deny that Faith and Repentance are conditions of our Justification
and Salvation, if every Moral medium be a condition which is ex ^acto. Is
faith, and is repentance no means? And are they not required of us? and do we
not profess them at present and promise them for the future?

Sometimes the same thing is a moral cause and a Condition of the Event. And
sometimes it is a mere Condition and but sine qu^ non, and no proper cause;
usually in Moral Conditions there is something in the Nature of the matter for
the sake of which the Donor or Lawgiver makes it necessary; which is its
aptitude as a means to some of his ends.

If Faith had no more fitness to be the condition of Justification than
Unbelief or hating God, and if Godliness or Holiness had no more fitness to be
the Condition of our Salvation than wickedness, they would not have been
deputed to this place, Office and Honor.

Faith is no Condition of Gods making the promise (He abso^utely made some
Conditional promises, and others only on conditions performed by Christ.) But
it is the condition of our right to or possession of the thing promised; or of
the event.

Either the deniers of conditions deny all or but some. If all then they deny
that Christ performed any conditions. If but some, they deny either the name
only, or the thing also. If the name only. 1. Is it worth their Zeal and
Contention? 2. Are they not singular; and singularity in the use of words
tends to causless quarrels. 3. Why do they not commend to us some better name
for the same thing? Grammar and common use has taught us this. Dr. Twisse has
found another, often and often saying that [ Faith is a dispositive cause of
Justification.] I dislike not his notion, save that, 1. It is too general there
being more dispositive causes besides Conditions. 2. That it is not Political
enough as the Subject requires (or Civil.) 3. That it is in two words when one
is better; and 4. That the very terms [ Cause] is liable to mistake. For faith
is no efficient cause of Justification, principal nor instrumental: We must not
ascribe so much to it. Nor is it a final cause, nor the formal cause. But it is
as the Dr. speaks Dispositio Subjecti recipientis: Not a natural, but Moral
disposition; Yet made such by Gods institution, because the very nature of the
act contains a fitness to its receptive Office; even as it is the believing
acceptance of such a free and wonderful gift to such special ends and uses.

2. But if it be not the Name only but the thing defined that is denied the
Gospel is denied, and that which is of necessity to Salvation is denied. To
deny faith to be necessary to Pardon, Justification and Salvation as a moral
means congruous in its nature and instituted of God, is Infidelity or open
profaneness; Nor can those be meet Preachers of the Gospel that deny it and
oppose it.

Two ways Scripture shows that Justification and Salvation are given
conditionally. 1. By the plain Conditional Phrase, and 2. By the conditional
description, in the mode of the promise: To instance in a few Texts among a
multitude, Mar. 16.16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, and he
that believes not shall be damned.

Romans 4.25. To whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up
Jesus our Lord from the dead.

Romans 10.9, 10. For if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus and
shall believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved. For with the heart man believes to righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto Salvation.

Joh. 1.12. To as many as received him to them gave he power to become the Sons
of God, even to them that believe in his name.

Joh. 3.19.18, 16. Joh 6. throughout.

Mat. 6.14.15. If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
forgive you. But if ye forgive not, etc.

Luke 13.3, 5. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish.

Acts 10.35. In every nation he that fears God and works righteousness is
accepted of him.

Acts 8.37. If thou believe with all thy heart thou may, ( i. e. Be
baptized for the remission of sins.)

But I have recited so many Texts of this sort in my Confession and other
books, that I will here forbear unnecessary recitals. Mat. 5. alone may
suffice, and all the Texts that say, Faith his imputed for or to righteousness*
and that we are justified by it.

Furthermore; 1. If the Baptismal Covenant have no condition, then none is to
be prerequired in the person to be baptized, nor his promise of any demanded.
But the consequent is false: Else the baptism instituted by Christ and ever
practiced in the Church is false.

And here you see what a Baptism these men would make: If they practice it
according to this principle; and how they would overthrow our Christianity, and
baptize Infidels.

The major is evident because, where no condition is required of God or
imposed, there none should be required or imposed by the Minister. And if so in
Baptism, why not also in Absolution and the Lords Supper.

2. If the Promise of Pardon and Justification be Absolute without any
condition, then either to All men, or but to some. If to All, then all are
justified. If but to some, to whom? If you say to the Elect; no man knows
them, while they are unbelievers: and so neither the Person nor the Minister
can apply that Promise to any singular man: If you say, To Believers, you grant
Faith to be a necessary, moral antecedent: And if so, whence can you imagine it
to be such, but Aptitudinally^ in the Nature of the Act ( receiving Christ,
which some call it is Instrumentality) and Actually by Gods Institution in the
Tenor of his Word: Now this is 1. In the Tenor or Mode of the Precept, and that
makes it a Duty. 2. In the Tenor or Mode of the Promise, and that makes it
it is Condition: In what other respect do they (exclusively) feign it necessary?

Obj. As an Antecedent? Ans. That speaks but the Order: But what Antecedent
is it?

Obj. As a sign? Ans. Of what? and why Is it as a sign of Election? But
Holiness, the Love of God, and man, etc. are signs of Election, and yet not
prerequisite to baptism and pardon. And whence is it that this sign of Election
is prerequisite, but that Gods precept made it a duty, and the promise a
condition? Grant it a sign, the question is still of the reason of this signs
necessity to Justification. 3. If Signification be the thing necessary, it must
be either to God, to the Sinner, or to the Baptizer. Not to God, that needs no
notice by signs: and so it would follow that before God Elect Infidels are
justified, which is false, as is often proved: And to the Minister it is not
certainly known: Nor may he baptize any merely as Elect, if he could know it
(by revelation) before Faith. Nor might such a person claim it. Nor do
believers usually at the very first know their Election. It Is pity that any
catechized person should be so ignorant as to deny so plain a Truth as it is
that the Promise makes Faith antecedently necessary to Justification under the
form of an apt condition; when no used phrase can speak the thing to us so
intelligibly and truly as this does.

Obj* It is prerequisite as an Instrument? Ans. Of this I shall speak by it
self anon. By an Instrument I hope when considered they will not mean any
proper efficient Instrument of Justification (Though in exciting, the acts of
Sanctification in us it may be called our Instrument and Gods by us:) But
justifying is wholly and only Gods Act, and the Covenant as an Act of oblivion,
and Grace is his Instrument^ giving us our Right to impunity and Life, (in
which our Constitutive, Justification does consist) But they mean a
Metaphorical Receiving Instrument, and to ^eceive Christ is but the very
essence of Faith, which they call the To credere, and so to be justified by
Faith as it receive^h Christ, and as a receiving Instrument, and as it is the
To credere in specie, are all one. And all this is true, if you ask but for
what Natural aptitude God made Faith the Condition of Justification: And it is
more aptly called by the foresaid Dr. Causa dispositiva; and yet more aptly
dispositio receptiva moralis, necessary and successful, aptitudinally in its
Nature, and Actually by the tenor of Gods Promise or Donation, making it a
Condition: that is, saying [ He that believes shall be justified and saved,
and he that does not shall be damned.] if God had not given Christ and Life by
a Promise of this Tenor, [ If thou believe thou shall have Christ and Life,]
it is aptitude would have had no use. If the King by an Act of Oblivion say [
All Rebels and Malefactors that thankfully come and take out their pardon, and
lay down arms shall live, and the rest shall be unpardonable.] Here, 1. The Act
of Oblivion is the pardoning Instrument, and the receivers Title and
fundamentum juris 2. The Reception is made a Condition by the Act being the
modus donandi seu condonandi. 3. Next this Condition is performed. 4. And next
the effect follows from it is proper efficient causes, e. g. suppose, 1. The
Kings Clemency. 2. His Sons Intercession. 3. The Act of Oblivions
Instrumentality. 4. The Offenders performing the Condition, which does but make
him a capable Receiver of the Effect. 5. And lastly, the Ministers instrumental
applicatory sealing, delivering and investiture. This is all plain, to men that
by prejudice fight not against the light.

And that the Promises of Salvation, or Glory (and perseverance) have their
Conditions, I will not for shame and tediousness stand to prove to such as you.

Obj. But he that performs a Condition may boast and ascribe somewhat to
himself.

Ans. 1. I find many that thus argue the pronest of most Christians to boast
of, or to defend their honor and the honor of their party against any that
would vilify them; and ^o ascribe something to them, even to be the best sort
of men. 2. God boasts of his Servants, and ascribes much to them, viz. to
have his Image, the divine nature, to be the Salt and Lights of the Earth, his
Jewels, the Apple of his Eye, etc. He bids them turn themselves, save
themselves and work out their Salvation, and keep themselves in his Love and
continue in his Love, etc. 3. If saying that they believe and repent, and give
up themselves to God in Christ be culpable boasting, then all that have been
baptized on such a required profession, have thereby sinned, and all the
Christian baptism has been sin. 4. No man is a Christian* justified, or can be
saved that cannot so boast (that he is not an Infidel, but a Penitent
Believer.) 5. Is it a matter of boasting that God commands when he commands
us to repent and believe the Gospel? If he freely pardon condemned Sinners for
the sake of Christ's Sacrifice, Righteousness and Intercession, on Condition,
that they do not finally refuse the gift, but believingly accept it according
to it is Nature, and all this by his Grace; is this matter of boasting? May a
pardoned Traitor boast of his Merit to the King, if the Condition of his pardon
be, that he shall not refuse it, and spit in the Kings face, or continue a
rebel?

Obj. Where all is of Grace, and Faith it self given and promised by the
Covenant, there the Covenant is not Conditional.

Ans. 1. As to the giving of Faith, it well stands with Gods method both to
Command it as a duty, and to make it a Condition of his Promise, and to give
his Word and Spirit to cause us to perform it. It is a fiction that these may
not consist, and he subverteth the Gospel that says they do not consist. 2. As
to the Promise, God indeed has promised to Christ, to give him a seed, and to
draw them to him, etc. But the Covenant made with particular men, and sealed
and solemnized in baptism does not promise Faith and Repentance, which are
first given, but prerequire them as the necessary qualification of the adult.
And this is the Covenant that we speak of. 3. It is a Condition of Pardon,
Justification and Acceptance, that we enquire of. Therefore it is the Promise
of these that we must mean: Now I ask whether the Promise of Pardon and
Justification be a Promise of Faith, or whether it be not a Promise to pardon
and justify Believers only and their Seed, and so prerequireth Faith.

Obj. But you call the many parts of one Covenant by the name of many
Covenants. Ans. I hope we shall not be called in matters of Catechism to
Metaphysical or Logical quibbles de Vnitate and Individuatione. Which is too
hard for men's wits about things natural or moral. That is one in some respect
which is many in others. There is some sort of Unity of all the Universe, even
of all Creatures: And so there is of all Gods Laws and Covenants: either the
Objectiors speak de nomine or de re: If but of the Name [ One,] they shall call
it One if that will please them, and let them only distinguish the Parts of
that One: If they ^ill say that the Covenant made by the Father with the
Mediator, and the Law made for him, are one and the same with the Covenant made
by the Fat^^^ and Son and Holy Spirit with us, and that our Baptismal Covenant
is no Covenant, but only a part of the Covenant of which that with Christ
aforesaid is another part, I will not use their phrase, but let me understand
them that it is only the Name of [ One or Two] that they contend about, and we
will fit our words accordingly: I think on several accounts they are to be
called Diverse Covenants: If they dislike it, let us enquire whether the various
Precepts of one Covenant make not various duties to Christ and to us; and
whether the various Promises of it have not various Conditions, some to be
performed by Christ and some by us. Our present Question is, Whether that part
of the Covenant which promises and gives Pardon of sin, Justification*
Adoption, and right to Glory; have any Condition, as the Modus of the gift? We
will rather follow them in unmeet terms than leave them thence a pretense to
confound names and things, and hide their error by the confusion.

All Divines, ancient and modern, reformed and and unreformed, that I know of,
agreed with us in the conditionality of the said Promise, and by the form of
Baptism showed the Churches consent till Maccovius in Holland, and Dr. Crispe
and other Antinomians in England began to subvert the Gospel on pretense of
magnifying the freeness of Grace; and yet they durst never attempt to alter the
Form of Baptism; as this Opinion will require.

Contr. 4. By what has been said, the fourth Controversy is already resolved;
viz. Whether our performance of the Condition of Justification does efficiently
justify us? Some say, because we say that Christ does not justify us till we
perform the condition by believing, that therefore we make our own Faith or
performance to justify proximately, and Christ but remotely, and so to do more
than Christ to our Justification.

Ans. 1. As to the phrase, Scripture says, that we are justified by Faith,
that word not signifying an e^^^ciency, but a receptive qualifying condition;
but it never says, that Faith does jus^ifie us, much less that we by it
justify our selves: Our performance or Faith is no efficient cause; but as to
two parts of our Justification it has a twofold Office: 1. As to our
Justification by the Merits of Christ's Righteousness against this charge [ that
damnation is due to us for sin] our Faith is the Condition of our Pardon and
Justification; that is, the moral qualification which God has made necessary
to make us capable receivers of it: As laying down Arms, and taking his Pardon
thankfully, may make a Rebel capable of Pardon (but does not pardon him) if the
pardoning Act say [ This shall be the Condition:] And by his Pardon he is
justifiable against the charge of being liable to death.

2. But as to the subordinate part of Justification, against the fal^e charge
that we are no believers, nor repent, and so have no part in Christ; here our
own Faith is the very Matter of Righteousness by which we must be in tantum so
far^ justified: As truth and innocence is against every false accusation: And
to say that because Christ's Merits justify us not before and without our Faith
and performance of the Condition, therefore our Act justifies us more than
Christ, or efficiently at all, is a thing unworthy of an answer, being below
the thoughts of an intelligent Disputer. How much the capacity or incapacity of
the Receiver does as to all the various changes in the world, both physical and
moral, when yet efficiently it does nothing, is not wholly unknown to any sober
thinking man. As the same sunshine makes a Weed stink, and a Rose sweet; so
the same Act of Oblivion, or conditional Justifying Law or Covenant, does
justify the capable, and not the incapable, though no man's Faith does effect
any part of his own Justification. Mr. Troughton, and such others denying Faith
to be the Condition of our Justification by the Promise, has drawn me to speak
the largelier of this.

Contr. 5. Whether we are justified by Christ's Righteousness imputed to us: and
whether the Scripture say so.

Ans. The Scripture often says, that Faith is imputed to us for Righteousness;
and that is, Faith in Christ: And it says, that Righteousness is imputed, or
reckoned to us, that is, we are reckoned or reputed righteous, Romans 4.11, 22.6.
And that sin is not imputed, that is not charged on us to punishment, or
damnation, Romans 5.13. and 4.8. Psalm. 32. v. 2. 2 Cor. 5.10. The words of
Imputing Christ's Righteousness to us, I find not in Gods Word, and therefore
think them not necessary to the Churches peace or safety. But as for the sense
of those words* no doubt but it may be good, and the Papists themselves own
them in the same sense as many Protestant Divines profess to use them, as I
have proved.

Contr. 6. In what sense is Christ's Righteousness imputed to us?

Answ. It is accounted of God the valuable consideration, satisfaction and
merit (attaining Gods ends) for which we are (when we consent to the Covenant
of Grace,) forgiven and justified against the condemning Sentence of the Law of
Innocence, and reconciled and accepted of God to Grace and Glory.

Q. But did not Christ represent our persons in his Righteousness, so that it
is imputed to us as ours, as if we our selves had been and done what he was and
did as righteous?

Ans. This being the very heart of all the Controversy, should be decided only
by Scripture, and nothing added or diminished. That Christ is the second Adam,
and called (...) a Sponsor, Surety or Interposer, and a Mediator between God
and Man, that suffered for us, the just for the unjust, a price, and a
sacrifice, is all found in scripture. Wise and peaceable men here will be as
fearful of humane Inventions and Additions as in Discipline or Ceremonies at
least. But because all are not such, we must speak to men as they are. There
are several sorts of Sureties or Sponsors.

Few represent the very person, at least not all: If men will needs impose on
us their own word of Representation, for peace sake we accept it, in a sound
sense. In a limited sense it is true that Christ represented us; that is, he
suffered in our stead, that we might not suffer: He obeyed, and was perfectly
righteous as Mediator in our Natures, and so far in our stead, as that such
perfect Righteousness should not in our selves be necessary to our
Justification. But he did not absolutely represent us; he was not our Delegate:
Our persons did not in a Law-sense do in and by Christ what he did, or possess
the habits which he possessed, or suffered what he suffered: Nor does God
account us so to have done, for that were to mistake. I have rendered a
multitude of reasons to prove this in my Treatise of Justifying Righteousness:
The contradiction is enough that we are accounted never to have sinned, because
Christ never sinned; and yet we are accounted to have suffered or satisfied for
sin, because Christ did so; or at least that we need a pardon by his blood, and
must ask for pardon, and must suffer correcting punishments, and long be
without necessary grace and glory, when yet we are accounted never to have
sinned, but from birth to death to have fulfilled all Gods Law in Christ. I
have fully proved that this Doctrine subverteth the sum of all the Gospel and
Religion, to which I refer you.

Contr. 7. What Righteousness of Christ is it that is ours, and imputed to us;
the Passive, the Active, the Habitual, or the Divine, or all?

Answ. Divines are here fallen into four Opinions.

I. Many of our most famous Divines say, that it is only Christ's sufferings
that are imputed to us as our Righteousness to Justification; being Justitia
Merit^, the rest being Justitia Personae, to qualify Christ to merit for us.
Thus Paraeus, Scultetus, Wendeline, Beckman, Vrsine, Piscator, Olevian, Camero
with his followers, and many more: These are far from thinking that we
fulfilled all the Law in Christ, or are righteous because he fulfilled it.

II. The second sort think that the Active and Passive Righteousness are
imputed to us as our Righteousness.

III. The third sort are for the Passive, Active and Habitual imputed.

IV. The fourth think so also of the Divine, (which is the Deity it self; for
there is nothing in God but God) Andrew Osiander is for our Justification by
the Divine Essence, but I think rather by Communication than Imputation. Thus
has our weakness distracted and disgraced us. But Mr. Bradshaw truly noted,
that if the sense of Imputation were well agreed of, the rest might well be
reconciled; viz. that no Righteousness of Christ is imputed to us in the strict
sense of Representation, as if we our selves were legally accounted to have
been done or suffered, what Christ did, was and ^uffered. But in the just sense
of Imputation all is imputed to us, that is, Christ's Habitual, Active and
Passive Righteousness, fulfilling his own part of the Covenant, advanced in
dignity by the Union of the Divine nature and perfection was the true
meritorious cause of our Justification, and not any one of these alone.

Cont. 8. Whether Christ's righteousness be the efficient, material or formal
cause of our Righteousness and Justification.

Ans. Its pity that poor people must be thus tempted with Controversies of
Logic. But what remedy? Christ's righteousness as materially and formally his,
merited our Justification: But for the accidental relation of righteousness in
Christ, to be the accidental relation of righteousness to every believer, is
impossible unless the Subject be the same: If Christ be the believing sinner,
and as many persons as there be such, or all these be the same person with
Christ, then his individual righteousness is formally theirs, else not. For as
noxa caput sequitur, so no accident is the same numerically in various
Subjects. They that deny this wanted but the same advantages to have believed
Transubstantiation, and renounce the common principles.

But that Christ's righteousness is the meritorious cause of ours, is past
doubt. And therefore they that affirm and they that deny it to be the material
cause (which is the common Doctrine of Protestant disputers) do but differ
about a name. For if Adam had merited his own glorification had not his works
been both the meritorious cause, and the material? that is, the matter of that
meritorious righteousness: And why may we not say so of Christ? It is therefore
the material because it is the meritorious, that is, the meriting matter. For
righteousness being a Relation has strictly no matter, but a Subject. And
Christ's Acts and habits were the first Subject of that righteousness of his
person whose merit justifies us: But the believer is the Subject of his own
personal righteousness thus merited by Christ. It Is pity that holy things
should be brought down to such Logical trifling; but more pity that Church
teachers that will do so, should abuse them by their ignorance in their own
way. The matter of the righteousness which meriteth our Justification from the
Laws damnation of us, is Christ's own righteousness; (unless by the matter you
mean the Subject person.) But the matter of our subordinate righteousness is in
and of our selves, of which anon.

Cont. 9. Whether the Union between Christ and believers be not so near, as
makes them the same Subject, and so the accident of Christ's righteousness to
be ours?

Ans. So some think, but this tremendous mystery must not be rashly and
profanely handled. In a Union Specific of humanity, all mankind is one with
Christ that is, of one Species of humane nature: And so that which is
predicated of one as such, is predicated of the other.

In a Political Union Christ as the head, and the Church as the body make one
Society as parts constituting the whole. And so whatever is predicated of a
part merely as a part, is predicable of both: But that which is predicated of
the whole as a whole is properly predicable of neither alone: And that which is
predicated of the Head as a head, is not predicable of the body, nor that of
the head, which is proper to the body, nor that of one member which is proper
to another. But some things by way of Communication may be predicated of the
whole, for the sake of a part. So the Church is called sinful and imperfect for
our sake, though Christ be not so: And it is eminently holy and glorious,
because Christ is so; that is, secundum quid.

But no Union will make us righteous and personally happy by another
righteousness and happiness, unless it were a personal Union, (natural or Legal
at least as to Relative rights.) The question then is whether every believer be
one person with Christ? And if so, whether one natural person, or one Legal (as
a lawful vicarius is.) They that hold the first plead that the same Spirit that
is in Christ, is the same divine nature, and makes us one natural person. But
where does the Scripture say so? The Sun is not one Individual with every Plant
that it quickens, nor every plant with it. A nettle or rose is not the Sun,
nor is it the illuminater of the World* that makes day, etc. But they have so
much from the Sun as it communicates, and no more. So we are not Christ, nor
the Eternal and Natural Son of God, nor infinite in Wisdom and Goodness, nor
perfectly just and glorified, as Christ is: But we have from Christ so much of
the Spirit as he communicates; And nothing is ours merely because it is his,
and we one person with him; but because he Communicates it to us: What further
real Union there will be in our glorious perfection we cannot well know till we
are there. But in this imperfection our Union is not such as far as I
understand it, as makes us one natural person with Christ; And surely it does
not make his proper accidents to be our accidents.

And as to that which some call a Legal or Reputative personal Union, it must
be proved before it is asserted. And as I know no word of God that speaks
such a thing, as that Christ and we are imputatively one person; so I know that
they that will assent it of their own heads, presume far in a tender point; and
if they should say that we are simply and ad omnia one person, it were not by
Christian ears to be endured: If they will say that it is but in some respects
and to some certain uses, (as a Servant that pays his Masters creditor by
order in some sense represents him in that one action) they must limit it
carefully and show to what uses we are one person, lest they do they know not
what: And they must show what sort of person they mean? Whether Christ be made
the same person with each believing sinner, and so take our bad denominations;
or each sinner be made the person of Christ; and have his glorious
denominations, or a third sort of person is made of both, and what that is? If
mere personal Unity make us righteous by imputation, because Christ is so,
either it must be as Christ is righteous, in full perfection (reputatively) or
else but according to the measure of our receptivity: The first none will
affirm that understand what they say: And the second brings the effect no
higher than we grant; The foot does not understand as the head does, though it
be a part of the same natural body, and may have its peculiar Ulcers and
Diseases: A crab and a sweet apple may grow on the same Tree: Certainly we have
a person proper to our selves, which has its own defects and evils, and has
no more from Christ than he communicates.

Cont. 10. Are we not righteous by being one with Christ, as we are sinners by
Union with Adam?

Ans. 1. We were but seminally and virtually in Adam, and not personally (as I
have opened in my disput. Of Original sin:) And so we were but virtually in
Christ when he suffered and obeyed, and we were unborn.

2. Nay our derivation from Adam was by nature, but from Christ by his
voluntary Gift and Contract.

3. Had we not sinned in Adam, and yet had sinned our selves we had been
unrighteous: And so it is, though we sinned not in Christ, and yet are sinners
our selves against him.

Our radical righteousness in Adam would have happily disposed us to personal
obedience; as Adam himself was who yet fell: And our radical righteousness in
Christ, is yet a more happy preparative to our necessary duty to him, which is
righteousness also, which he that has not shall be condemned. I know that many
say that if Adam had conquered that temptation, or at least had never sinned,
all his posterity should have been confirmed against all future sin and danger
as the Angels be in Heaven: But I dare not add to the Word of God; and I find
no such thing there, though I hear what others say: And if that were true, the
first Covenant would have ceased upon Adams obedience, as it did upon his
disobedience, and all the World would have been under either no Law, or some
Law to us unknown. The first Adam was a living Soul, indeed, and the second is
a quickening Spirit. And as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made
alive, but every man in his own order. And as we are not raised, nor yet
delivered from all our sin or misery by our Union with Christ as soon as we
believe, so neither from all guilt and unrighteousness; but must daily pray,
forgive us our trespasses, and deliver us from the evil. If our Union presently
made all ours that is Christ's, and that as it is his, yea or as much as we need
it, we were then highly dignified indeed. Marriage gives the Wife her self no
further propriety in the Husbands Estate nor use of it, than he communicates
by the contract: And neither that nor generation itself, give Wife or Child the
Husbands or Fathers learning, innocence or health.

Cont. 11. Is not Christ's righteousness ours, as our sins were his, by
im^utation?

Ans. Yes, As much at least* or more. But take heed of making Christ's Gospel by
your mending it, and of making him no Christ while you would make him more
merciful according to your own conceits. I know it is said once that he was
made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him. But as we are not properly righteousness, much less Gods
righteousness, but are made righteous, and so the instances or demonstrations
of the righteousness of God; so expositors commonly agree that by sin is meant
a Sacrifice for sin. Or by being [ made sin] is meant being used as if he had
been a sinner. Undoubtedly if God imputed or accounted Christ a sinner, and if
he were truly so by any means, practice or translation, he must be by sin
hateful to the most holy God, (even to himself) and would have in him so great
a part of Hell, and Divine desertion, as is not consistent with his personal
perfection, or the hypostatical Union, as far as we can conceive: And if indeed
God imputed to him the sins of all the elect, so as first to make the very sins
themselves to become Christ's own sins by imputation, then Christ suffered for
his own sins, and must be more odious to God than any ordinary sinner; and all
good men that knew it by him must have judged accordingly: For sin, and
especially the sins of so many millions and so great, must needs render him
whose own they are, really sinful, hateful and miserable. Any of which to say
of Christ is blasphemy.

Christ undertook that guilt of our sin which is nothing but the obligation to
punishment, and that such punishment as beseemed him to undergo. There is a
^uilt of Fact, and a guilt of crime, and a guilt of punishment. Christ
undertook the last, but neither of the former as in themselves considered,
unless as by connotation relatively he may be said to be guilty of the sin
merely because he undertook to suffer for it; which is improper speech. Christ
condescended to the admiration of Angels in taking on him our nature, and our
punishment, and suffering for our sins; but his holiness would not suffer him
to undertake our sin it self, or take it to be his own sin. Nay considering the
communication of attributes which Divines assert from the hypostatical Union,
men should tremble to think of laying a ground of calling it The Sin of God, by
the same reason as, Acts 20. it is said, [ The blood of God.] Its a sad case
that partiality can so much prevail, as that they that cry out of some doubtful
words as damnable heresies, do yet think it tolerable language to say, that by
Imputation of the very sin itself to Christ as his sin, he was the greatest
sinner, the greatest Murderer, Liar, Adulterer, etc. in the world. I beseech
you abstain from such words till you find them in the Scripture. Christ never
was reputed of God a sinner, who did so much to show his hatred of it. Nor ever
took our sin unto him, any further than to suffer for it to expiate it: And if
this be the similitude by which we must understand how his Holiness and
Righteousness is made ours, it will make all very plain. It is ours, or imputed
to us, so far as to be reputed the true cause of our Justification, Adoption,
Sanctification and Glory, as our sin was the cause of his suffering and death.

Cont. 12. Does not Christ's righteousness cause our Sanctification in the same
sort of causality as it causes our Justification?

Ans. The effects are diverse, but both from the same meritorious cause. But it
is more unapt to say that it is the material cause of our Sanctification than
that it is the material cause of our righteousness; Though it merit both;
Because our habitual and actual holiness has a nearer material cause in itself
which our pardon and mere adoption have not.

Cont. 13. When it is said that faith is imputed to us for righteousness is it
faith indeed that is meant or Christ's Righteousness believed on?

Ans. A strange and bold question. What occasion has the Holy Ghost given us
to raise such a suspicion, that when it is so often said by him that Faith is
imputed or accounted for righteousness, men should make a doubt whether it be
Faith indeed that he means? If it be not, the context is so far from
relieving our understandings, that it contributeth to our unavoidable deceit or
ignorance. Read over the Texts and put but [ Christ's Righteousness] every where
instead of the word [ Faith;] and see what a scandalous Paraphrase you will
make. The Scripture is not so audaciously to be Corrected: It Is wiser to
believe Gods Word than to contradict it on pretense of expounding it.

Obj. But it is said also that Righteousness is imputed: And that must be
either Christ's Righteousness or our own: But not our own; therefore Christ's.

Ans. We are not now questioning whether Christ's Righteousness be imputed to
us: Though it be not the Phrase of the Scripture, I have showed you that it is
true, in a sound sense, But the question is, Whether Faith be imputed for
righteousness. And what is the meaning of all such Texts? To have righteousness
imputed to us, plainly signifies to be Reckoned, Accounted, Reputed or Judged
righteous. And it is strange that it must not be our own righteousness, that is
imputed or reckoned to us as our own: If it were never so well proved, that the
very Habits and Acts of Christ are by Gift or Union made our own in themselves,
and not only as the causes of their effects, yet still our own they would be,
and the righteousness given by them our own, in order of nature before they are
imputed, accounted or reckoned to us as our own. Some way that righteousness
which is reckoned to constitute us righteous is surely made our own.

Psalm 106.30, 31. Phinehas's executing Judgment, it is said to be accounted to
him for righteousness. And of Abraham's Justification God says, Because thou
have done this, etc. What man that ever read the Bible can doubt, but that
every man that will be saved must have a personal faith, repentance and
holiness, which is called righteousness many hundred times in the Scripture,
besides the righteousness that was or is in Christ? And will not God reckon him
righteous that is righteous? He that does righteousness is righteous? And shall
it not be imputed to him? if God account not a man a believer, can he be
justified and saved? Christ's Righteousness has made Satisfaction for all our
sins, and for our unrighteousness as to the Law that does condemn us: But he
made us not lawless, but put us under a Law of Grace, which says [ He that
believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned.] And must
we not be judged by this Law? and be justified or condemned as we keep or break
it? wonderful is the power of prejudice that any good men that read the
Scripture can doubt whether Christ himself has made us a Law of Grace,
according to which as performers or non-performers we must be justified as
righteous in subordination to Christ's Righteousness or else be condemned, as
neglecters of so great Salvation? Is any thing plainer in all the Gospel?

Obj. But it is the Object, and not the Act; Christ's Righteousness and not our
Faith; the Gold and not the Hand that takes it, that is our Riches and
Righteousness.

Ans. 1. No question but the Faith that we talk of, is Faith in Christ, even
the Believing Receiving of a Savior and his Grace freely given us. And
therefore Christ's Righteousness is ever connoted when we talk of Faith: For
what is the very Specification of the Act but the Object? But it is not the
essence of Christ or his Righteousness, that constituteth Faith; but Christ in
esse co^nito and objectivo, even as it is not the essence of Sin that
constituteth Repentance, but the notion of Sin in esse cognito as an O^ject.
And there is no doubt but Christ is the Souls Riches which Faith receives. But
if the King by Law should restore all the Rebels in Ireland to their Estates,
and give them their Lives, that lay down Arms, and ask Mercy and accept it, if
it come to the Trial whether they are Accepters or Refusers, their Acceptance
must be so far their justifying Righteousness, though their Lives and Estates
be their Treasure, and the Kings Act be their Title to it.

Faith is reckoned or imputed to be that which by the Redeemer himself is
required of the Sinner to make him partaker of Christ and his Benefits,
Reconciliation and Salvation; and it is no other Righteousness.

Christ's Righteousness is not imputed to us instead of our Faith and Repentance
and sincere holiness, which is made by himself the condition of Life. As he
died not for the Sins which we were never guilty of, and are no sins, so his
Righteousness is not instead of that Righteousness which by his Grace we have,
but instead of that which we have not: Not instead of our being penitent
Believers and sanctified before we die, but instead of that perfect innocence
which we want: Not that we are reputed perfect innocent obeyers* because he was
such; but that our want of it shall not hinder our Justification or Adoption,
Grace or Glory. Christ has done all his part, but he has appointed us a
necessary part which must be done by our selves; and though without him we can
do nothing, yet by him we must believe and be new Creatures, and by him that
strengthens us we can do something; and must work out our Salvation, while he
works in us to will and to do.

The purchase then and Donation is by Christ, but the voluntary acceptance is
by us, by the operation of his Grace; which is not to make up any deficiency in
Christ's part, or to be a supplement to his Righteousness, nor to bear any part
of the same office in our Justification; but it is that which subordinately is
required of us as the Condition of Pardon and Life, by his own Law or Covenant
of Grace. And so far it is imputed to us for Righteousness.

Contr. 14. Whether Grace be Grace, or Free, if it have any Condition?

Ans. As free and great as God will have it, but not such as the wicked man
would have it, who would be saved from pain, but not from Sin, or without any
Condition required of him. The Covenant is made conditional, for the use that
the commands are made; to bring man to his Duty, and to convey the Benefit in a
sapiential congruous way; but not as requiring a price for the Benefits: He
that pardons a Traitor on condition that he thankfully accept it, and will
not spit in the Princes face, and rebel again, does pardon freely without a
price. And as our Duty and Act denies not that it is Grace by which we do it;
so the necessity of Grace thereto denies it not to be our Duty or our Act when
we believe. The Covenant gives some Mercies absolutely, but not all. He that
would be from under all Conditions of Gods Promises, would be from under all
Law, and all threatenings: For what kind of Law is that which has no Conditions
of Reward and Punishment.

Obj. But when the Condition it self is promised, it is equal to absolute.

Ans. 1. If that be true, still it is conditional. Why do you not say so then,
not that it has no Conditions, but that it is a conditional Promise equal to
an absolute? 2. But stay a little: Is the condition promised to all that the
conditional promise is made to? even to all that hear the Gospel, or that are
baptized. If you say that the conditional Promise is made to none but the
Elect, you deny the Gospel, which is to be preached to all the World. 3. Will
you cast out Baptism by this Argument? and so visible Christianity? Or will you
new mold it into an absolute Form? Or* will you say that it is no Covenant? If
you suppose not God the Father, Son ^ and Holy Ghost to be there given to us
with pardon and right to Life upon condition of our believing acceptance, and
that we there profess that acceptance which is the Condition, you suppose not
that it is Baptism indeed: And when your little notions shall lead you to deny
Gods Law and Covenant Gospel, Baptism, and so Christianity as visible, they are
scarce fit notions to make you pass for Orthodox, and to be turned against
others as erroneous. 4. But how is it that God promises the Condition it self?
and to whom? I find, Prove. 1. 23. Turn you at my reproof; behold I will pour
out my Spirit to you; I will make known my Words unto you? Is it [ if you do
first turn.] Then there is some degree of turning necessary as a condition to
the promised special gift of the Spirit? Or is it [ that you may turn?] Then
God promises his Spirit and Word to help even those to turn, that yet turn
not; which must suppose some Condition of consent or non-resistance required
which they could perform. I find, that it is all men's duty to pray, and I read;
[ Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, etc.] And so that to ask and
seek saving Faith, is a Duty to him that has but common Faith. And God
commands no man to ask or seek in vain: A mere command to use means implies
that* they are not vain. God then gives (as Dr. Twisse often says as out of
Augustine) the posse credere where yet the act of Faith does not follow: and it
is not a mere Passive, but an Active Power. And where he gives Grace which
causes the Act it self, did God Promise, it before hand to that man any more
than to others? He promises Christ to call all his Elect: But this gives no
right to any individual Person before he is born, or before he believes:
Therefore not to the first Faith. For God to tell men, what he will do with his
Elect is one thing; and to enter into Covenant with a man, and give a right
thereby is another. This Covenant has it is Conditions.

Contr. 15. Here comes in also the Controversy whether Repentance be any
Condition of Pardon, or Justification? And whether to affirm it be not to equal
it with Faith?

Ans. Read these Texts of Scripture and judge, Ezekiel. 14.6. and 18.30. Luke 13
3, 5. Act. 2.38. and 8.22. and 17.30, 31. and 26.18, 20. Mar. 1.4* Lu. 24.47.
Act. 5.31. and 11.18. and 13.24. and 20.21. Luke 15.7. etc.

2. Faith in Christ as it is the remedying Grace ever ^supposeth Faith in God
as God, and Repentance toward God, Act. 20.21. as it is end, and is connoted
when it is not expressed. He that says, [ Take me and trust me as your Physician
and I will cure you] implies, 1. If you desire to be cured. 2 If you will take
my Medicines. To believe in Christ, is to trust that through his Mediation a
penitent returning Sinner shall be pardoned and accepted of God and saved.
Holiness is the Souls health, and Christ believed in is the remedy: Repentance
and Holiness are necessary as the end for themselves, and Faith in the Mediator
is necessary as the use of the Remedy. The Office or Nature of these is not the
same, though both be Conditions. Yet as Repentance is the change of the Mind,
so repenting of unbelief is Faith it self, denominated with respect to the
terminus a quo. Unhappy wits set things as opposite, which God has connexed
and made coordinate.

Contr. 16. Whether Faith justify us as a meritorious Cause, or as a
dispositive Cause of receiving Justification, or as a mere Condition, or as an
Instrumental Cause?

Ans. If these Logical names had never been used, plain Christians would have
understood what is necessary without them.

1. That the Promise makes Faith a Condition, making unbelief a stop to the
benefit, and Faith the removal of that stop, is past all doubt. And the Promise
being the Donative Instrument, and its Condition being its Mode, the interest
of a Condition is most certainly the formal Law-interest that Faith has as to
our Justification.

2. And Dr. T^^ss^'s forementioned name of Causa dispositiva, i, e. recipiendi,
is undoubtedly also ^pt, and signifies both the Nature of the Act, and the
Off^ce (...) as a Condition: For in both respects it is the n^^^ssary
qualification of the Patient or Re^^iver, i. e. naturally and legally
necessary; such as dispositio materiae is said to be in Physics.

3. And as for the notion of an Instrumental Cause of Justification, it is past
doubt that properly taken neither Faith, nor any act of ours is any such* nor
does justify us efficiently at all: But if any be so fond of the invented
notion of an Instrument, as that they will use it, though unaptly, they must
say, 1. That it is not an Efficient, but a Recipient Instrument. Dr. Kendall
calls it like Boys catching the Ball in their Hats, or as a Spoon is in eating:
But it is not an Instrument of Physical Reception, but Moral. To Trust is no
more a Reception, than to Love. The active Acceptance of a Savior given with
his benefits, is a Moral Receiving of him, which disposes us as the Condition
of the Covenant to receive Justification, that is, to be justified. And in this
lax sense, you may call it all these if you please; viz. a Condition, a
Dispositive Cause, and a Receiving Instrument.

4. A Meritorious Cause it is not in a Commutative or strict sense. But if you
will call that meritorious which is pleasing to God as congruous to his free
gift and design of grace, whence some are called Worthy in the Gospel, so the
thing is not to be denied; and so all are reconciled.

Contr. 17. Is justifying Faith an act of the understanding or will?

Ans. Both, and therefore it is no one Physical act only, nor Instrumental in a
strict Physical sense.

Contr. 18. What act of Faith is it that justifies as to the Object? whether
only the belief of the truth of the Promise, or of the whole Gospel also, or
the affiance on Christ's Righteousness, or on his Truth, or on his Intercession,
or taking him wholly for our Savior, Prophet, Priest and King? And whether
Faith in God the Father, and the Holy Ghost, do justify? or all these? And if
but one, which is it? and whether all the rest are the works which Paul
excludes from Justification?

Ans. To say that only one Physical act of Faith is it that we are justified
by, and all the rest are those works, is a perverse corrupting of Christianity,
and not to be heard without detestation. For it will utterly confound all
persons, to find out which that one act is, which they indeed can never do. And
it will contradict the substance of all the Gospel: There is no such thing as
Faith in Christ, which contains not, or includes not Faith in God as God,
both as he is our Creator, and as reconciled by Christ, and as the Giver of
Christ to us, John 3.16. and as the end of all the work of Redemption. Nor is
there any such thing as Faith in Christ which is true and saving, that
includes not, or connoteth not the Knowledge of Christ, and Love, and Desire,
and Thankfulness, and Consent: Nor did ever God tell us of a Faith in Christ's
Imputed Righteousness only that must justify us, which is not also a Faith in
his Person, Doctrine, Law, Promise and Example; and his Intercession in the
Heavens. And to say that only the Act of Recumbency on Christ's Righteousness as
imputed to our Justification, is that act of Faith by which we are justified,
and that Believing in God, his Majesty, Truth, Wisdom, Goodness, and the
believing in Christ as he is the Prophet, Teacher, King of the Church, and the
Resurrection, Life, and Judge of all; and believing in the Holy Ghost, as the
Sanctifier, Comforter, and Witness and Advocate of Christ, and believing and
trusting the Promise of God for Life Eternal, or for any grace except Christ's
Righteousness imputed, that all this Faith in God, in Jesus Christ and the Holy
Spirit, and all our Love to Christ, and desire after him* and prayer for his
grace, and thankfulness for it, etc. are all none of the Faith which
Justification is promised to, but are the Works by which no man is justified,
and that he is fallen from grace, that seeks to be justified by such works,
that is, by true Faith in God as God, and in Christ as Christ: This is a new
Gospel subverting Christ's Gospel, and making Christianity another thing; and
this without any countenance from the Scripture, and contrary to its very scope.

The Faith by which we are justified, is one Moral act containing many Physical
acts, even our fiducial Consent to the Baptismal Covenant, and dedication of
our selves to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, to be our Reconciled God, our
Savior, and our Sanctifier, to give us Pardon, Adoption* Holiness and Glory,
which is our Christianity it self as such.

Contr. 18. But though this be the Faith quae justificat, which justifies us,
is it not only Recumbency on Christ's Imputed Righteousness, qu^ talis, which
has the Office of Instrumentality, and is ^ides qu^ justificans.

Ans. Such quibbling and jingling of a mere sound of words is usual in
ludicrous Disputations of Lads: But it is pity it should pass as the last remedy
against plain truth in so great a matter. First it must be remembered that no
Faith justifies efficiently, and therefore neither quae nor qua justificans is
to signify any such thing, but a mere Moral qualification of the recipient
subject; so that to be justified by Faith, is but to be justified by it as that
which God has promised Justification on as the qualifying Condition: But if it
be not the same thing that is here called Fides quae and qua, but in the first
part they speak of the Habit, and in the second of the Act, had it not been
plainer to say, [ The same Habit of Faith has several Acts, as believing in
God, in Christ's Intercession, Kingdom, etc. but none of these Acts do justify
us, but one only; viz. trusting to the Imputation of his Righteousness?] And so
both the quae and qua is ^denied to all Acts save that one. This is their plain
meaning, which is denied to be truth, and is a human dangerous invention. Yet
it is granted them, that it is not every Act of Faith that is made the Condition
of Justification or Salvation: It is necessary that the formal Object, Gods
Veracit^, be believed to make it true Faith; and that the Gospel or Covenant of
Grace be believed with Consent, as aforesaid, to make it to be the true
Christian Faith, in essence* and it is of necessity that every thing be believed
which we know that God reveals. But it is the Christian Faith that has the
Promise of Justification, and that not any one single Act of it, but* all that
is essential to it, and that which belongs but to its Integrity ad been esse,
when it existeth, is also so far conducible to our Justification, (as Abraham's
believing that Isaac should live and have seed, when he went to sacrifice him)
yet Justification may be without some Acts, as Salvation may without many due
Acts of Obedience, when yet sincerity of Obedience is necessary, and those
Acts, if done, have their place with the rest as means of Salvation; so here*
But Saving Faith is denominated from the essential part: The nature of Faith is
in order of nature antecedent to its Office: The nature of it in genere is to
believe all that God says: The nature of it in specie is to believe in Christ,
and consent to his Covenant: The integrity of it is to believe all that we find
revealed. The Office of it as the Means of Justification, is to be the
condition of the Justifying Covenant or Law. That which some call the
Instrumentality, is the very nature of the Act, the (...) credere in specie:
Believing in Christ is the (...) credere, and that is it that they call an
Instrument of receiving him as such. But the (...) credere even in specie,
Faith in Christ, does not justify qua talis, as that Faith, but as it is that
qualifying Condition which the Promise annexeth Justification to; without which
it would not have done it. Had the Promise been absolute, it had pardoned us
before, and without Faith. The nature of the Act is like the metal of Gold or
Silver, and the tenor of the Justifying Covenant is as the Kings Stamp, that
makes it current Coin. It is Faith in order of nature before it is the
Justifying Condition.

The qua justificans therefore should speak, not a distinct Act from the other
Acts of the Christian Faith as such, but the relation of the same Acts to the
benefit. Omnis fidei actus qui justificat, considerari potest quatenus
justificat.

Contr. 19. Whether we are justified by the Law of Innocence saying, Obey
perfectly and live?

Ans. This is one of the chief points of all our difference: Some say, that
because Christ fulfilled it for us, we are justified by that Law as fulfillers
of it: This is it that Mr. Anthony Wotton has bestowed most of his Learned
Treatise de Reconciliatione to confute. The Law justified Christ, but not us,
for it never said, Thou, or another for thee shall obey.] Nor does it know a
Vicarius obedientiae aut poenae; nor take Christ's Person and ours for the same:
Therefore we are not justified by that Law, but condemned by it: And it cannot
condemn and justify the same man. But we are justified by another Law,
Covenant or Promise by Christ's fulfilling the Law of Innocence, and making over
to us the benefits.

Contr. 20. Whether by Works be meant Acts in general, or ^nly such Acts as are
adverse to Faith in Christ, and make the reward to be of debt, and not of grace?

Ans. The last is the Apostles Exposition of them. Christ says, we are
justified by our words; James, by our works; and all the Scripture that
speaks of Justification, ascribes it to some Acts: It is [ according to our
works:] And Faith is an Act, yea many Acts.

Obj. But it justifies not as an Act, but as an Instrument.

Ans. That is, not as an Act or good Act in genere, but as this Act in specie;
viz. Believing on Christ's Righteousness: But that is the (...) credere; that
is, As this Act: But it is not so, unless you add [ As it is this congruous
Act, or Acts authorized by Gods Covenant to this Office.] So we will grant,
that no Act justifies as an Act, or as a good Act; but as a congruous good Act
appointed thereto.

As is said before, To believe in God, and in Christ as Christ, and in the
Promise of Salvation, and to believe the evil of sin, and the need of a
Savior, and to desire him, and be thankful for him, and pray for pardon, are
not the works that Paul speaks against, but some belong to the Essence, and
some to the Integrity and Accidents of that Faith by which we are justified.
Yet a foolish person may contradict himself, and hold his own Faith, as well as
his Love, or Desire, or Prayer, to be meritorious, as making the reward not of
grace: Such mad contradiction may suppose Faith to be the works which it
denies.

Cont. 21. Are any works of man meritorious?

Ans. Not in point of Commutative Justice, that gives one thing for another to
the commodity of each; as in buying and selling.

2. Nor yet in distributive Governing Justice as making any good due to us by
the Law of Innocence or Works.

3. But as God has freely given us Christ and Life by a Law of Grace, on
condition of suitable acceptance and use so he that performs this condition,
is called worthy, and the contrary unworthy in the Gospel; and did not men
abuse it, they might with all the ancient Chu^ches use the word merit in the
same sense ^s (...). As a good natured Child that humbly and th^nkfully takes
money or meat when his Father gi^eth it him, is said to deserve it of him,
better than he that scorneth it and him. So ^ur merit is but of ^aternal
^overning Justice in the Kingdom of Love, according to Gods Law of Grace in
Christ*

Cont. 12. ^h^ther, o^edience be a part of Faith, or we a^e justifi^d by
obedience.

Ans. 1. To beli^ve in Christ at first is an act of obedience to God, who
commands us so to do: But it is but Subjecti^n to Christ which that act
includes, that is, taking him for our Lord and Savior to be obeyed* which i^
virtually all future obedience as its root, but not actually.

2. Actual obedience to Christ is not faith, but the fruit of faith and part of
our perform^nce of the Covenant which we made with him, and necessary to the
c^ntinuance of our ^ustification and to our Salvation, as all the Scripture
fully shows.

Cont. 23. Whether any (...) b^ ^^cess^ry t^ (...) continuance or not losi^g
our jus^if^catio^, than to (...) b^ginning of it.

Ans. Yes, 1. More acts of the same faith. 2. Praying for pardon. 3 Forgiving
others, as Christ expressly tells us. 4. Sincere Love and Obedience to Christ
unto the end.

Cont. 24. Is Pardon and Justification perfect the first moment?

Ans. No. 1. All the punishment is not yet taken off: We have yet much penal
want of Grace, and the Spirits Operations, and Communion with God. 2. We have
not right to the present removal of all the punishment. 3. Many more sins
hereafter must be pardoned. 4. Much means is yet to be used for final
Justification. 5. That final Justification only is perfect.

Cont. 25* (...) nolle punire or non punire a pardoning of sin? It Is Dr.
T^isses Controversy.

Ans. Yes, In some degree, to a capable person that i^, to a sinner; But not to
one that is no sinner, (...) before one has a being.

Cont. 26. Is future sin pardoned before hand.

Ans. Fu^ure sin is not sin, and therefore not capab^e of pardon, nor the
person for it: But it may be pardoned virtually, though not actually: A general
grant of pardon may be given, which is conditional and virtual, and shall
actually pardon it when it is.

Cont. 27. Is any one punished for sin that is pardoned?

Ans. Not in the same thing and degree that he is pardoned: But every man that
is pardoned in this life* is yet correctively punished in that degree that he
is unpardoned* For pardon is yet imperfect here.

Cont. 28. Is it not unjust to punish him that Christ died for, even one sin
twice?

Ans. No, Unless it were the same person that suffered, or the very same
punishment that was due (and all that was due) were expected again; and unless
it were against our mediators will. But all is contrary in this case. 1. The
Law bound no one to suffer but the offender. 2. Therefore Christ's suffering was
not the same punishment which the Law did threaten, but it was Satisfaction
instead of it; which is the Tantundem, not the idem quod debitum suit, but
redditio aequivalentis alias indebiti, as the Schoolmen call it. For noxa caput
sequitur; the Law threateneth not a surety, but only the sinner, and ubi ali^^
solvit, simul aliud solvitur. 3. And Christ himself never satisfied with any
other intent; and therefore it is according to his will, that they that tread
under foot the blood of the Covenant wherewith they were Sanctified, as an
unholy thing, and do despite to the Spirit of Grace, should suffer the far
sorer punishment, Heb. 10. Yea it is Christ himself that will have it so, and
that does so judge, them, and inflict this punishment for the contempt of grace.

And it is his will that his own members be punished by correction,
notwithstanding his sufferings: As many as he loves he does rebuke and
chasten: And Christ does not wrong himself: The end of his suffering never was
to excuse the redeemed from all suffering, nor to make believers lawless.

Cont. 29. Is a man after his regeneration and Faith, ever obliged to any but
temporal punishments, or need to ask pardon of any other?

Ans. Obliged is a word that needs explication: The very Law of nature yet in
force makes everlasting punishment due to a believers sins, till God forgive
them: But they are forgiven, (and the obligation dissolved) through Christ by
the Covenant of Grace to a true believer as soon as committed (at least if they
be mere sins of infirmity) because of his general repentance and continued
faith: But yet in order of nature the Guilt and dueness of punishment is before
the remission of them. And believers must ask pardon while they live. 1.
Because every sin thus needs it; and asking is part of the expression of that
faith and repentance which is our condition of pardon. 2. They must ask the
continuance of that pardon which they have. 3. And they must ask still for
executive remission; which is, not to punish, poena d^mni vel sensus; Body or
Soul, and so for more of Gods forfeited Grace and Spirit, and the sense of his
Love, and Communion with him.

Cont. 30. What is it to be judged according to our works, or what we have done
in the body?

Ans. To be Judged is the genus: To be Justified or Condemned are the Species.
This opens all the Controversy. It is not according to our works as they are
congruous to the Law of Innocence or works; But as judged by the Law of Grace;
Therefore it is not the same works which Paul excluded from Justification, for
we shall not be judged according to them. 2. And according to them, is as much
as James means, when he says, we are justified by them: It Is all one, that
is, the Law of Christ our Redeemer requires sincere obedience of all that
shall be saved, by his blood and merits from the condemnation of the Law of
Innocence; and accordingly men's right to Christ and Salvation shall be judged
of: Their right to life through Christ's merits and free gift, shall be
justified who were sincerely penitent believing obeyers to the end, and no
others.

Cont. 31. What Law is it that Paul callet^ the law of works, and labor^ously
proves that its works do not justify us.

Ans. It is the Mosaical Jewish Law, as is all along evident; and not the Law
of Innocence, as made to Adam; though consequently a fortiore, it is certain
that we have no works by which that will justify us (either personal or
imputed.) The words [ He that does them shall live in them] do not mean, He
that is no sinner, according to the Law of perfection: For 1. All men were
sinners before, and so this Law should have been only a condemnation in the
form of a promise. 2. And this Law prescribes Sacrifices and Prayers for
pardon of sin; which the first Law of Innocence knew not.

Cont. 32. How and why then is this called a Law of works? Which justify no man?

Ans. Because it imposes strictness in a multitude of laborious Tasks and
Ceremonies and rigorously punishes the breakers of it. 2. The heretical
teachers had falsely separated the Law from the promise of Christ's justifying
righteousness and grace, which was the sense and end of the Law: And Paul
proves that without the Promise and Christ, the Law is but a carcass of
fruitless works without a Soul* and cannot justify. 3. But yet a believing Jew
being justified by faith in the promised seed, was to obey Moses Law sincerely
as his material obedience to God his Redeemer; as we are now to observe the
Sacraments instituted by Christ as part of our sincere obedience, necessary to
Salvation.

Cont. 33. What i^ Paul's drift in all his disputes about ^u^tification?

Ans. 1. Primarily, to prove the necessity of a Saviors Sacrifice,
Righteousness and Intercession to save and justify us, and that the doing of
Moses Law, how excellent soever esteemed by the Jews, would not justify without
him. 2. To prove that the Gentiles may be saved by faith without the Law, as
w^ll as the Jews by ^aith with it: And that it binds not the Gentiles, and is
a^rogate to the Jews, and that the Law of Christ succeeds it. He confuteth
their trusting to the keeping of their Law instead of Christ's Righteousness,
and the promise of Grace and their ob^ruding their Law upon the Gentiles as
necessary to Salvation.

Cont. 34. What is (...) drift of St. James?

Ans. That bare believing the Gospel to be true, will not serve to any man's
Salvation without obeying Chri^ts Commands; Nor will justify any man's Title t^
^alvation, prove him acceptable to God. It i^ the same Justification before God
^and not only in con^cience or before men (that Paul and James speak (...), and
the same instance of Abraham they bring, (...), by Work,] they mean not the
^^me (...)* as is (...) explained.

Cont. 35. Must (...) ever trust at all to his faith, repentance, or holiness,
or p^ead it any way to his justification?

Ans. It must be trusted or pleaded instead of nothing that is Christ's part,
nor for any thing but its own part. B^t a part it has, as is confessed, and
for that part it must be trusted and pleaded; and no man must trust to be saved
without faith repentance and obedience. Heb. 12.14. Mar. 16.16. Luke 13.3, 5. I
conclude all in Dr. Prestons words, Treatise of Faith. p. 44, 45. And of the
Attributes, p. 71. ^ Justifying Faith; (defined) is a Grace or habit infused
into the Soul whereby we are enabled to believe, not only that the Messiah is
offered to us, but also to take and receive him as a Lord and Savior that is,
both to be saved by him and obey him.

No man believes Justification by Christ but his faith is mainly grounded on
this Word of God* In Scripture we find that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
and that he is the Lamb slain for the forgiveness of sins: That he is offered
to every creature: That a man must thirst after him, and then take up his Cross
and follow him: Now come to a believer going out of the World, and ask him,
what hope he has to be saved, he will be ready to say, I know that Christ is
come into the World, and offered up, and I know that I am one of them that have
a part in him: I know that I have fulfilled the conditions, as that I should
not continue willingly in any known sin, that I should love the Lord Jesus, and
desire to serve him above all: I know that I have fulfilled these conditions,
and for all this I have the word for my ground, etc. So far Dr. ^reston.

Cont. 36. Has Justification and Salvation the same conditions, and do works
save us, which do not justify us.

Ans. 1. The works which Paul excludes from Justification he excludes from
saving us, Ephesians. 2.5. 8, 9. Tit. 3.5. so Jam. 2.14, etc. 2. Justification begun
and our right given to Salvation have the same condition. 3. Justification in
the last Judgment, is the justifying of our right to Glory, and has the same
condition with our glorification, Mat. 25. Come ye blessed, etc. But more is
necessary to final Justification and Salvation, than to our first right, as is
before showed.

Cont. 37. Is there any such thing as a Justifying us against Satan's false
accusations: As that a believer is no believer, impenitent, an hypocrite, etc.
Some say the Devil will not be so foolish, knowing that God knows all.

Ans. If Justification relate not to Accusation, Divines have hitherto much
wronged the Church in maintaining it so commonly as they have done. If it do,
1. It is either to a true or a false accusation. Against a true accusation no
man can be justified, but must confess the charge. If it be said that we
sinned, and that this sin deserved death, it must ^e confessed, and we cannot
be justified directly against this charge: For Guilt and Righteousness cann^t
consist as to the same particular cause. But if it be said 1. That we are
unbelievers, impenitent, hypocrites, etc. 2. Or that we have no part in Christ,
3. Or that we are not pardoned, accepted, reconciled and adopted for his
meritorious righteousness and intercession, and were not thus constituted just;
4. And that therefore we have no right to life, but ought to be condemned: All
these are false accusations against which we may and must be justified.

2. And Satan is a Liar and a Murderer and the accuser of the brethren: And his
knowledge hindered not his malice from falsely accusing Job to God himself, nor
from tempting Christ himself to the most odious sin.

3. But it suffices us that Justification relates not only to Actual
Accusation, but to ^^^tual, yea to Possible: And if ^od declare the
Righteousness of his Servants by his ^ight, Sentence or Execution, though none
accuse them, either Satan or Conscience, it sti^l relates to possible
Accusation.

They that deny all this, must needs say that at Judgment (and before as to any
Sentence) there will be no Ju^t^fi^ation at a^l, because no Accusation true or
fa^se: And if no Justification (nor Condemnation) then no Judgment, which is
all contrary to an Arti^le of Faith.

Contr. 38. But though all this prove that we are justified by Faith, y^^ not
as a Right^ousness; so that it is questioned whether any personal Righteousness
consisting in our performance of the Condition of the Covenant, be that which
we are justified by here or at last, in subo^^^nation to Christ's ^ighteousness
[which needs no supplement from us?]

Ans. 1. This Question is either of the Thing, or of the bare Name of
^ighteousness (whether it should so be called.)

1. A^ to the Thing, it is fu^ly proved already, that Faith, Repentance and
Obedience are of flat necessity to our Salvation* and therefore to the
Jus^^^ying of our Claim of Right to that Salvation: And therefore to Justi^^e
the Person as to that Right and Claim (that he is one that truly has such
right:) For the Person is justified by the justifying of his Cause: I suppose
none of this will be denied.

2. And as to the Nam^, 1. The definition will prove it apt: That which is
Righteous, denominateth the subject accordingly. Every Cause in Judgment is
Righteous or Unrighteous: And the Person is Righteous so far as his Cause is
so: If it be said against a Believer, that [ he has no right to Christ, and
(...)] his Right is his Righteousness as against thi^ (...): This Right is no
natural being at ^ll, bu^* Moral Relation, called D^^ness Yet this is hi^
^u^^ifying Righteousness. But the fundamen^^^ of that Right is quid absolutum.

It is an a^surd contradiction to say that a man has any Righteousness that
does not so far constitute (...); as it is to say that a man has Learning W^t,
Honesty, Goodness, which do not so far make him Learned, Wise Honest or Good:
Or the Paper has whiteness that makes it not white.

3. But we ever distinguish between Total Righteousness and Partial, in tantum
or secundum quid: And betw^en that Righteousness in tantum which Salvation is
laid on, and that which is of small concern: And also between Christ's part and
man's. And so we still say, 1. That Christ's part needs no supplement from
ours; nor do we perform the least that belongs to him. 2. But his own Law, Will
and Covenant, has laid a necessary part on us. 3. That by this we are no
further justified than in tantum, as it is a Righteousness of ours; that is,
Faith in it self as such, justifies us only against the false Charge of
Infidelity; Repentance only against the false Charge of Impenitency; Holiness
and Sincerity against the false Charge of unholiness and hypocrisy, etc. But,
as the Condition of the Covenant, they prove our right to Christ and Life: And
so as the Donation in the Gospel is the Titulus (...) fundamentum iuri^; so
Faith and Repentance are the Conditio tituli.

There is a Partial Righteousness which every wicked man may have, which
enti^leth no one to Salvation. The Devil himself may be falsely accused, and be
justifiable against that accusation: But the tenor of Gods Covenant makes this
in question to be a Righteousness on which Salvation lies.

Yet we say that nothing of ours, or in us, is a Righteousness that would do
any thing to our Salvation, without the Righteousness of Christ.

Obj. This is like the Papists, who say, That Christ merited to make our
actions meritorious: So you say, That Christ's Righteousness purchased a
personal Evangelical Righteousness for us, by which we are jus^^^ied.

Ans. Yes: by which we are justified, 1. Against the Charge of Infidelity,
Impenitency, and Insincerity, and final Ungodliness: And 2. By which our title
to Christ and his Righteousness, and purchased benefits must be justified, as
by the Condition of the free gift. And to deny this, is to deny or subvert the
whole Gospel. As to the talk of Popish Merits, I will not be so vain as to
divert on that occasion. He is no true Christian that really denies that
Christ's Righteousness has procured a personal Righteousness in and of us,
consisting in our conformity to the Conditional Mode of the Promise of Christ
and Life. We may differ in words, while we mean the same thing: But as for him
that denies the thing, I know that he can be no better than profane.

Righteousness is denominated as related, 1. To the Precept and Condition of
the Law of Innocence: so the erroneous say, We are so righteous by Christ's
Righteousness imputed: And the orthodox say, We have no such Righteousness.

2. As related to the bare Precept of the Law of Christ since the Fall; which
requiring perfection, (that is, making it a duty) we have no such
Righteousness, and therefore daily ask for pardon.

3. To the Tenor or Mode of the Promising and penal part of the L^w of Christ;
which gives pardon and Life on Condition of penitent believing acceptance and
(...); and continues it on Condition also of sinc^re obedience to Christ our
Redeemer, and God in him: and so we shall be judged, and either justified or
damned, as we have or have not this personal Righteousness: Christ in Judgment
is not to try his own part, but ours: He that is not thus justified shall be
damned.

And as to the Libertine or Antinomian error (that this performing of the
Condition of the Promise is no righteousness, but only Christ's imputed is
Righteousness, because it answers not the perfect Precept, though it answer
the imposed Condition of the Promise, and that it is not to be called
Righteousness, nor we so far as is aforesaid to be justified by it; I appeal to
Scripture and the reason of the thing.

The Words Just, Justice, Righteous and Righteteousness, Justify and
Justification, being viewed in the Concordance, and examined will show you,
that God in Scripture many score or hundred times gives such Names to our
Personal Qualities and Acts: And what is that man that dare deny this constant
language of the Scripture? Does he take Gods Word for his rule; or will he
shame himself by saying that in all these God speaks unfitly, and that he can
mend his Language? See but Genesis 6.9. Prove. 17.15, 26. and 20.7* and 24.16. Isa.
26.7. Ezekiel. 18.5, 9. Mat. 1.19. and 13.49. Luke 2.25. and 20.20. and 23.50.
Act. 10.22. Romans 2.13. Jam. 5.6. 2 Pet. 2.7. Exo. 23.7. Deu. 25.1. Jer. 3.11.
Mat. 12.37. Luke 18.14. 1 Cor. 6.11. Jam. 2.21, 24, 25. Romans 3.26. Ezekiel. 33.13.
etc. Ezekiel. 48.18. Psalm. 35.24. Ephesians. 4.24. 2 Cor. 9.9. Mat. 6.33. and 5.20.
Ezekiel. 3.20. 1 Samuel 26.23. 1 Pet. 3.14. Gal. 3 6. Romans 4 5, 9, 22. Jam. 2.23.
Gal. 3.6. Mat. 5.20 Gen 15.6. Rev. 19.8. 1 John 2.19. and 3.7, 10. 2 Pet. 2.^,
21. and 3.13. 1 ^^t. 2.24. Jam. 3.18. He^ ^ 9 and 7.2. and 11.33. and 12.11. 2 Timothy 2.22 and 4.8 1 Timothy 6.11. Phil. 1.11 Ephesians. 5.9. and 6. 14 1 Cor. 15.34. 2
Cor. 6.7, 14. and 9.10. Romans 6.1^, 16 18, 19, 20 and 8.4, 10. and 10.5, 6, 1^.
and 14.17. Act. 10.35. and 13.10. Luke 1.75. Mat. ^ 6. and 21.32. Zeph. 2.3.
Dan. 12.3. and 4 27. ^zek. 18.20. and 33.12. ^sa. 1.27 and 5.23 and 26.9, 10
and 32.17. and 64.5. and 61.3. Prove. 10 2. and 11.4.5, 6, 18, 19, and 12.28 and
13.6 and 15.9. and 21.21. Psalm. 106.3. D^u. 6.25. Psalm. 11.7. and 15*2. and
23.3. Mat. 10.41 Romans 5.7. 2 Pet. 2.8. Jam. 5.16. 1 Timothy 1.9. Rev. 22.12. 1
Pet. 3.12. and 4.18. Heb. 11.4. 2 Timothy 4.8. Romans 2.5, 6. etc. Luke 1.6. Mar.
2.17. Mat. 25.37, 46. and 13.43. Mal. 3.18. Hab 1.4, 13. Am^s 2.6. Isa. 3.10.
and 57.1. and 60.21. ^ccl. 8.14. Prove. 24.24 and 15.29, 28, 19.6. and 14 32.
and 12.26. Psalm. 146.8. and 1.5, 6. and 5.12. and 32.11. 33.1. and 34.15.17,
19, 21. and 58.11. and 97. 11, 12. Number. 23.10. Genesis 18.23, 24*25, 26, 28. and
7.1. Mat. 6.14, 15. and 18.35. Mar. 11.25, 26. ^^k. 6.37. 1 John 1.9. Mar.
4.12. Act. 26.18. Mar. 1.4. and 16.16. (...). 24.47. Act. 2.38. and 10.43. 2
Cor. 7.10. Heb. 5.9 Romans 10.9, 13. Act. 1^.31. and 11.14, 2, 21. Mat. 10.22.
Prove. 28.18 (...) 2 8. 1 C^r. 15.2. Romans 8.24. Jer. 4.14. 1 ^et. 3.21. Jam. 1
21 and 2.14. and 5.20, Jud. 23. 1 Cor. 1 21. and 7.16. 1 Timothy 4.16. Act. 2.40.
Rev. 22.14. ^sal. 37.40. Genesis 22.16. and 26.5. 1 K^n. 11.34. Luke 19.17. Joh.
16.27. Luke 13.3, ^. Joh. 1.11, 12, and 3.16, 18, 19. 1 Timothy 4.8. Heb. 4.1.
Rev. 20.12, 13. 1 Pet. 1.17. Eccl. 12.14. Romans 14.10. 2 2 Cor. 5.10.

I set light by their Judgment, that set light by all these plain Words of God,
and can distort them to their humane or self-chosen opinions.

I had thought here to have ended, but since the writing of this, Objectors
have raised some new made Controversies.

Qu. 39. Whether the Acceptance of Christ's Righteousness be the Imputation of
it?

Ans. Language is so ambiguous, and some men do so (unskilfully) abuse it to
vain Controversy, as if they had been hired to serve the design of our late
Bruitists, who make Reason and Speech to be our Misery, proving man more
unhappy than the beasts. 1. Either you mean [the Imputation of it to Christ,]
or [ to us.] 2. And that either to fallen man in general, or to this or that
individual Person in particular.

1. To Accept and to Impute are not Words of the same sense. But when Christ
had performed all that he had undertaken, as the Condition of his Mediatorial
Covenant, or the Law of Mediation imposed on him, it was at once both accepted
to the ends of that Covenant and his performance, and also imputed to him, that
is, He was truly reckoned to have fulfilled all Righteousness.

2. Fallen man was then reckoned to be (as to price and merit; Redeemed, God so
far pardoning them, or not imputing their sin to them, as to make them a
general Pardon on Condition of a believing ^ue acceptance, and committing to
his Ministers the Word of Reconciliation, beseeching them in Christ's stead to
be personally and actually reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20.

3. Christ's Righteousness was thus accepted of God as soon as performed: but it
was not then as so performed imputed to any singular Person, to his personal
actual Justification. For it was accepted before we were born, or believed: But
it* was not so imputed to our actual Justification before we were born or
believed.

Righteousness is imputed to us, if we believe, Romans 4.24. And Faith is imputed
to us for Righteousness: And he that believes not is condemned already, and
under the curse, when yet Christ's Righteousness was accepted long before: If
they say that there is a new Acceptance of it for every Sinner just when he
believes, and that it is this that they mean; I answer, that as long as men
take liberty to make new phrases about supernatural mysteries, which are not in
Scripture, and to use these to the forming of new Creeds or Articles of Faith,
they will be so long in acquainting the World with their meaning, that we shall
never come to an end of Controversies, nor to the true understanding of one
another: for few*such men understand themselves; but when they confound the
matter and the readers with their new ambiguous phrases, they cry out against
those that would search out their meaning, as if they did but Cavil with their
Words, and distinction and understanding were the way of Confusion and not
theirs.

We grant that the Justification of every Believer is a new Effect of Christ's
Righteousness: And if they will call this a new Acceptance by God of Christ's
Righteousness, or use any other new made unmeet or gibberish Words, if they
will but expound them as they go, we shall the better bear them.

Qu. 40. Whether it follow that Christ's sufferings (or Passive Obedience) did
not merit Eternal Life at all for us, because it was only Active Obedience
which the Law of Innocence so rewarded [ Do this and live] not [ Suffer and
live?]

Ans. 1. Their foundation-errour animateth the affirmative. They falsely think
that it is that Law of Innocence which justifies us, which does curse and
condemn us, and not justify us at all; but it is the Gospel, or Law of Faith
and Grace that justifies us.

2. The Merit of Christ's Righteousness is to be reckoned principally as
justifying us, according to the tenor of the Law or Covenant made only to him
as Mediator: That Covenant laid on Christ such duty as was made the Condition
of the Promise, and made him a special Promise upon that Condition or Duty: He
performed the latter for the former. The matter of his undertaken Condition or
Duty was threefold. 1. To fulfill the Law of Innocence; 2. And the Law of Moses;
3. And diverse Mediatorial acts proper to himself; (as to satisfy Justice by
his sufferings, conquer Satan and Death, work his Miracles, etc.) To perform
this whole Condition of his Covenant, was to merit of God-Man Justification and
Salvation: The part of this was but part of his Merit materially considered,
justifying himself against any charge from that Law which he fulfilled: But his
Mediatorial Acts, and so his Sufferings were another part, by which he was
justified, and merited Righteousness and Life for us: And therefore the
Objection falsely supposes that it is only Adams Law that justified Christ, and
according to which he merited for us; whereas it was the Mediatorial Covenant
or Law which made his Suffering part of the Condition of the Promise made to
him for himself and us.

His own Glory was merited by death on the Cross, Phil. 2.7, 8 9. Therefore
also ours. By his blood he entered into the Ho^i^st, having obtained eternal
Redemption f^r us. His b^^od not only purges our Conscience^ from dead works,
to serve the living God, but for this cause he is the Mediat^r of the New
Testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgression^
under the first Testament, they which are called might receive the Promise of
Eternal Inheritance, Heb. 12.14, 15. Heb. 10.10, 14. By one offering he has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified. He has (...) us in the body o^
his flesh through death, to present us holy, and unblameable and unreprovable
in hi^ si^ht, Col. 1.22. To ^at Christ's flesh* and drink in blood, is to
beli^ve his Sacrifice, which yet is that which has the Promise of Life.

Indeed the reason of this Objection would deny also Christ's Active Obedience
to merit our Salvation: For by the Law of Innocence Christ merited for none but
himself: For that Law promises Life to none but them that personally obey, and
never mentioned ob^y^ng by another, nor knows any Vicar^um aut ^b^aiertiae aut
poenae. It is only God* Covenant with the Medi^t^r as such, that gave him right
to make us righteous, to pardon and to save us: An^ that Covenant gives it (as
is said on the who^e ^ond^ti^n. It is true, that Life i^ often especial^y
ascribed to Christ's Resurrection an^ Life, and deliverance from guilt to his
Death* But that is not because hi^ Death is no part of the Me^it^rious Cause of
our Life, or Holiness an^ Glory, nor his Life a Meritorious Cause of our Pardon
by fulfilling all Righteousness; but because Guilt was it that was to be
expiated by his Death as a Sacrifice, and so it did but purchase by pleasi^g
God, the gift of our life: But his Resurrection and heavenly Intercession did
more than purchase, even further communicate and perfect our Life. Christ's
Death was in order of Nature first satisfactory for sin, and then meritorious
of Life; and his perfect Active Obedience was first and directly meritorious
both of Pardon and Glory.

I pass by the Controversy which Mr. Gataker most insisteth on, Whether to
deliver from Death, and to give Life, be not all one? And whether according to
the Law of Innocence, he that had no sin or guilt of Commission or Omission,
had not right to the Life there given?

Qu. 41. Whether Christ's being the End of the Law ^or Righteousness, does
signify that he so fulfilled Adams Law in our stead, as that it justifies us
by Fac hoc and vives.

Ans. 1. The affirmers quite mistake Moses and Paul, in thinking that it is the
Law of Innocence, which the words cited by Paul describe; when indeed it was
Moses Law of Works, which had Sacrifices and Promises of Pardon, which the
other had not (of which before.) 2. Christ is there said to be the End of all
the Law as to its shadows, types, and conjunct Promises. The Law was given by
Moses, but Grace and Truth (that is, the things promised and typified) came by
Jesus Christ. The confounding of these Laws confounds many in these
Controversies.

Qu. 42. Whether the sufferings of Christ merit our freedom from nothing but
what he suffered in our ^tead?

Qu. 43. And whether hence it follow that his sufferings merit not our
deliverance from death spiritual and habitual, or actual pravity, because
Christ suffered t^em not?

Ans. To the 42d. The affirmation of the first is a corrupting addition to the
Word of God. 1. He suffered not many temptations, which yet by the merit of his
sufferings we are freed from. 2. He suffered not many relative evils, as bad
Parents, bad Teachers, a bad Wife, and all the attendant crosses in buying and
selling, crosses from bad Tenants, or Landlords, etc. which the merit of his
suffering delivers many from. 3. He suffered not the torment of an accusing
Conscience. 4. Nor Gods hatred or displeasure. 5. Nor the many miseries which
sin in its own nature brings to the Soul (as painful cares, fears,
frustrations, deceits, etc.) 6. Nor corruption in the grave. 7. Nor the final
Sentence [ Go ye cursed into everlasting fire.] 8. Nor the proper Execution of
that Sentence.

Yet he delivers some Believers from all these, and all from some, by the
merits of his sufferings. For it was not the just same punishment that was due
to all Believers that he suffered, but that which was fit to make him a meet
Sacrifice, which was the tantundem vel aequivalens, consideratis considerandis.

Ad 43. The affirmative subverteth our Faith. Christ's Death merited the full
pardon of all pardoned sin: But the pardon of sin is the pardon of the deserved
punishment of sin (and of the sin as related to that punishment.) But certainly
the privation of Gods illuminating, sanctifying Spirit, and its helps and
fruits, is a great part of the punishment of sin, Psalm. 81.11, 12. Romans 1.28. 2
These. 2.10, 12. To be given up to men's own counsels, wills, lusts, vile
affections, to a reprobate mind; to have eyes and see not, hard hearts to
believe lies, etc. Sin is no farther pardoned than this punishment is by
sanctifying grace remitted, and removed.

The Scripture does not ascribe to Christ's Sacrifice, some part only of our
pardon of sin, but the whole, Rev. 1.5. He washed us from our sins in his
blood; and so he is the propitiation for them, 1 John 2.2. and 4.3. He made
purgation of them on the Cross, Heb. 1.3. He died for them, and gave himself
for them, 1 Cor. 15.3. Gal. 1.4. 1 Pet. 3.18. Heb. 10.12. and 9.28. Romans 3.25.
Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood, for
the remission of sins that are past, Acts 22.16. and 13.38, etc. And the poena
damm is part of the punishment to be forgiven: Therefore, Romans 4.7. Blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgiven, etc. But no man is blessed that is unholy,
and separated from God. As we all sinned and came short of the Glory of God,
and spiritual Death is by the objecter confessed to be part of our punishment;
so pardon contains the remission of that punishment.

And it is falsely supposed that Christ's Death is not secondarily meritorious of
more than pardon, even of all that his Active Obedience meriteth; of which
before.

Pardon is, 1. In jure, a Remission of the Obligation to punishment; giving us
Jus impunitatis; and this gives us Right to a^l that grace and blessedness,
which by sin we lost a Right to.

2. Declarative by Sentence, which gives us a Jus judicatum.

3. Executive, which actually freeth us from the poena d^mm and sensus. And so
Sanctification is a part of Executive Pardon, so far as it gives what so: sin
we were penally deprived of. This is all plain and sure.

Qu. 44. Seein^ we our selves bear that p^rt of the Curse which lies in Death
spiritual, does it follow that Christ's Suf^erings were not to free us from it,
when we b^re it, and not he?

Ans. It is not denied that part of the punishment of sin is born by the Elect
themselves, which the former Objecters deny:) And therefore that Pardon is not
absolutely perfect at first: Death and Divine denials of the Spirit and Grace,
are such penalties* And Christ died not (nor obeyed) to save us from that which
we are not to be saved from, but was excepted from Pardon. But the Ob^ecter can
never prove that the Merit of Christ's Sufferings (though he ^uffered not
spiritual death, or privation of Gods Image) does not free us, 1. From so much
of spiritual death or pravity as we are freed from: 2. And from the duration of
it for ever: Or else it merited not one half our pardon. To be washed from our
sins in his blood, can be no less than to be freed from the guilt which is the
obligation to punishment first, and consequently from the punishment it self.

Qu. 45. Is this the reason of our deliverance from the Law, and being dead t^
it, because we suffered everlasting Hell fire equival^ntly in Christ's
sufferings.

Ans. When men once depart from the Scripture, t^ei^ corrupt additions hardly
keep bounds.

1. It Is well that this Objecter implies, that it was not the Ide^^, but the
A^quivalens that Christ suffered, as to our debt.

2. That which made Christ's Sacrifice to be aequival^nt to our endless
damnation, was not that it wa^ as ^^^at a proportion of suffering (poenae
sensus and (...)) ^s all ours together would have been: But because the dignity
and perfection of the person made it an apt means for God that would pardon us,
to accept as a Sacrifice, and so as sit a means to the ends of Government, as
our damnation would have been (and sitter.) This is the aequivalency.

3. We suffered not damnation at all in Christ; nor does God or his Law take or
reckon us to have done so; but only to receive the pardon and other benefits
freely given us, which he in the person of a Mediator, and not in our person
merited.

4. We are dead to the Law, both as a Covenant of Perfection, and as the Law of
Moses to the Jews, because Christ nailed the latter to his Cross, or did
abrogate it as such to the Jews, and to those Gentiles that needed to be
Proselytes; and the former ceased by the Fall and Promise; (But it is the
Jewish Law that Paul speaks of.) And also in our believing acceptance of this
liberation, and of the Law of Christ.

Qu. 46. Is it true that Christ's Active Obedience only meriteth Heaven for us;
and therefore it only m^^it^th the Spirit or Holiness which is but Heaven b^gun?

Ans. Both are false: His Active and Passive Rig^teousness merit Pardon,
Holiness and Glory. And their proof from [Fac hoc and vives] is upon a great
mist^ke, and no proof.

Qu. 47. I^ i^ true, that because Reg^nerati^n is the b^gin^ing of Heaven, and
Christ's Obedience imputed ^^^eth a ri^ht to the whole, therefore it gives a
right to the beg^nning, and therefore Repentance which foll^weth Justification
can be no Condition of it?

Ans. It is a fancy spun by a a mistaken mind, to oppose the plain Word of God.

1. If it would hold, it would exclude Faith as well as Repentance, from being
a Condition or Antecedent to Justification, contrary to the Gospel: For Faith
is as much a grace of the Spirit as Repentance is. And it is not true that
impenitent Infidels are justified, though they may be predestinate to be first
called, and then justified, and then glorified, Romans 8.30.

2. That which goes before Pardon (and that as a Condition) goes before
Justification: But Repentance goes before Pardon, Acts 5.31. Luke 24.47. and
3.3. Acts 2.38. and 3.19. and 8.22. 1 John 1.9. Mark 4.12. But of this I have
given large proof elsewhere.

3. All the grace of the Spirit is a preparation for Heaven: But that eminent
gift of the Spirit, which in Scripture is called the Seal, Earnest, and first
Fruit, is promised upon repenting and believing, and therefore follows them,
and is, 1. The Habit of Divine Love, which is the New Nature, and more than the
first seed of grace: 2. And the Spirit related to us as an in-dwelling,
possessing Agent of Christ to sanctify us to the end. 3. And in those times to
many, the extraordinary gifts of Miracles, Tongues, etc.

1. Faith and Repentance went before Baptism in the Adult, even as a Condition
of it and its benefits, Mark 1.4. Acts 13.34. and 19.4. Matt. 3.11. John 1.26.
Mark 16.16. John 4.1. Acts 2.38, 41 and 8.12, 13, 36, 37, 38. and 9.18. and
22.16. But that gift of the Spirit which is called the Farnes^, Seal, and first
Fruit, was either given in, or after Baptism ordinarily (though to Cornelius
before) but not before Faith and Repentance. It is called therefore, [
Baptizing with the Holy Ghost.] See Mat. 3.11. Acts 1.5, and 2.33.38, and
8.15.17, and 10.2. Romans 5.5. Tit. 3.5.

2. And the Spirit is said to be promised and given to believers, after faith,
and because they were adopted sons: Ephesians. 1.13. Prove. 1.23. Gal. 4.6. and 3.14.
Romans 8.15, 16.30. 2 Cor. 1.22. and 5.5. Therefore our Divines commonly put
Vocation as giving the first acts of Faith and Repentance before
Sanctification, as Romans 8.30. does before Justification and Glorification. And
yet Faith and Repentance are gifts of the Spirit too, and so are many commoner
gifts in unsanctified men: But as the daylight is seen before the Sun rising,
and as Satan is not said to possess all that he tempts; So some gifts of the
Spirit, and some motions and operations of it, go before the proper giving of
the Spirit itself, and his possessing us.

3. It is no absurdity, but the wise order of God, that one gift of the Spirit
shall be antecedent to another, and the reception and exercise of it by us, be
a condition of that other. For God will morally induce us to our duty by
suitable motives. He that denies this subverteth the Gospel.

4. I have elsewhere at large proved the falsehood of this Doctrine, that
Impenitent Infidels are justified by the imputation of Christ's Righteousness.
It is enough that Christ's righteousness is reputed by God to be the meritorious
cause of all our grace even of justification before we are justified.

Qu. 48. How can faith or repentance entitle us to that righteousness of Christ
which must first give us a right to themselves and all Grace?

Ans. 1. Faith and Repentance give us not a Title in strict sense, but the
Covenant or Promise, that is, the Gospel Donation is our Title, and Faith and
Repentance are but Conditions of our Title, which on several accounts make us
morally capable receivers of Right.

2. Christ's Righteousness did merit all grace of God, before it justifies us,
and we are reputed righteous by it. It is a great error to say that we must be
reputed righteous by Christ's Righteousness given and imputed to us to that use,
before we can have any fruits of the merits of his righteousness. Even the
outward call of the Gospel is a fruit of it.

Qu. 49. Is it true that we must be practical Antinomians unless we hold that
only Christ's active righteousness merited grace and glory for us?

Qu. 50. Is this proved by Romans 7.4.

Ans. 1. Some men's words are used to hide the sense, and not to open it. What
is the meaning of Practical Antinomianism? Is it to be the opposers of all Gods
Laws? or only some and which? And does he not mean that the judgment must be
first against them.

How far are we under the Law; and how far not? 1. The Law of Innocence as a
Covenant requiring perfect, personal obedience as the necessary condition of
life, we are not under. It ceased by the first sin, cessante subditi
capacitate: We must not suppose that God says to all sinners: You shall be
saved if you be not sinners. Conditi^n^ prate^^ (...) transit in sententiam.

We are not under the Law of M^^^s as such; even that which was written in
stone is done away, 2 Cor. 3.7, etc.

If this be Antinomianism, I am an Antinomian that ^^ve written so much against
them.

3. We are only under the Law of Christ, into whose hand all power is given:
And that is 1. The Law of reprieved and redeemed nature: 2. All his
supernatural revelation, and so much of Moses Law as he has assumed. If the
objecter think that we are under any other, so do not I, except the subordinate
Laws of men.

2. That Law of Grace which we have, and that freedom from the Law of Works,
are merited both by Christ's Active and Passive righteousness.

Ad. Qu. 50. Romans 7.4. has no such thing, but only that Christ has delivered
men from the bondage of the Law of works which did neither justify nor
sanctify, and has subjected and engrafted us unto himself, that we might by
him be made holy unto God.

[Conclusion.]
THe Reader may now perceive what abundance of great notional errors some men
have corrupted the Doctrine of Justification with, by presumptuous spinning
webs out of their own fancies raising one error out of another, departing from
the Word of God.

I. A radical error is, that the Law of Innocence made to Adam is it that
justifies us, by its ^^c h^c and viv^s, as fulfilling it in Christ.

II. Another is that: is that Covenant of perfection which Paul means by the
Law of Works and the fac hoc, etc. And that the Jews Law was such as made
Innocence its condition of life.

III. That the sense of Adams Law was, [Do this by thy self or another, or else
thou or thy surety shall die.]

IV. That Christ did obey and suffer, merit and satisfy, in so full and strict
a representing and personating every one of the Elect, as that they did and
suffered it in and by Christ, in the sense of the Law of Works, or in Gods
account: and that it was not in the third person of a mediator, to communicate
the Effects freely as he pleased by another Covenant. And so that Gods imputing
righteousness to us, is his accounting us to have done and suffered in Law
sense what Christ did. This is the root of all the rest, subverting the Gospel
itself.

V. And so that God accounts us to be Innocent, and never to have sinned by
Omission or Commission from birth to death, and to have all that is required to
merit Heaven, because we did it in Christ; and also to have suffered in Christ
for our sins, the curse threatened to us, and (as the last objecter says)
eternal damnation equivalently: And so we had sin and no sin: And Christ must
die and we must pray, for the pardon of that sin, which in Gods account or
imputation we never had.

VI. When the Text tells us that, [Faith is imputed to us for Righteousness,]
and that [Righteousness is imputed to believers] that is, [ They are accounted
righteous according to the justifying Covenant of Grace, upon their believing
in Christ, for his meritorious Righteousness and Sacrifice, giving them, by the
new Covenant their gracious relation, to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
with right to further Grace and Glory, they tell us that [by Faith] is not
meant [Faith] but [Christs Righteousness,] and by [Righteousness imputed to
us,] is meant [Gods accounting us to have done all that Righteousness by Christ
which he did for us.]

Many more such humane inventions corrupting our Faith (at least in notion) too
many fight for, as if they were necessary truths of God.

Postscript.
REader, the Author of the following objections is Mr. Stephen Lob: I had
thought not to have named him, till I saw but Yesterday his Books of Free
Grace, which I never before heard of, though it was printed almost ten year
ago: It is so considerable a confutation of Antinomian errors that I commend
it to thy reading.

And being my self in great pain expecting death, and like to write in these
Controversies no more, that I have once more as a Speculator or Watchman blown
the Trumpet to warn men of the danger of the Other Gospel that subverteth the
Gospel of Christ, I have this Peace of Conscience that the blood of the seduced
will not be required at my hands.

And if that M.S. of Mr. Stone of New England which Mr. Lob so praises, may by
him be yet recovered, I entreat his endeavor: In which I cannot doubt but Mr.
Increase Mather will assist him, tho his name be prefixed among the twelve.

And I commend to some honest Bookseller to reprint Mr. Thomas Welds History of
the New England Antinomian Libertinism, it being out of press.

And I hereby entreat Mr. William Manning of Suffolk (if living) to Print the
excellent Treatise of Justification of his which I have long ago read. And Mr.
Samuel Clerk (Author of the Annot.) to Print his sound Treatise (which I long
ago read) on the same Subject.

And though my own Judgment be for the Imputation of Christ's Passive, Active,
and Habitual righteousness, dignified by the Divine as the full and the sole
meritorious cause of all Grace and Glory, as making up the condition of his
Mediatorial Covenant imposed on him by God; Yet I entreat the Learned Reader to
peruse the Writings of those great Divines that are for the Imputation of the
Passive only ( Ursine, Olevan, Paraeus, Scultetus, Wendeline, Beckman, and the
rest, with Camero, Placaeus, and all that party of famous French Divines who
all effectually confute the false sense of Imputation of the Active
Righteousness which Mr. Bradshaw confuteth with many others (as if we had done
it by Christ, and were our selves the Subjects of it, and are justified by that
Law that condemns us.)

Jan. 20. 1690. R.B.


An Answer to some Animadversions of a Friend, tending to the further
explication of some passages which through brevity were not understood.
. 1. SIR, Your notes have so much Judgment and moderation and so little, if any
thing contrary to what I assert, that they require nothing from me, but a
repeated explication of that which you observed not as before explained: But
when it is enough for me to explain my own Words and Doctrine, you put me on
another task to seek after the explication of another man's; which I am not
obliged to on any account, but for your Satisfaction. It is enough for me to
speak true Doctrine in the most intelligible manner that I can without
examining whether other men's expressions be sound or apt.

. 2. I begin with your own Notes: And 1. I hope that few are so ignorant (that
meddle in these matters) as to doubt of what you say, that no one term much
less one Metaphor or similitude can adequately express any of the Mysteries of
Grace, and no one Metaphor must be carried too far; Omne simile est etiam
dissimile: And all set together so far as they are thereto intended must
instruct us.

. 3. I know none but the Socinians that think a Mediator and a Sponsor
inconsistent; or deny Christ to be a Sponsor. And methinks your words for their
consistency, import a greater difference between them than there is. It is part
of Christ's Mediation to be a Sponsor: These terms therefore express no
difference but between the whole and the part.

But what a Sponsor Christ is, is all the doubt which I a little opened, and
you pass by. It is not agreed by expositors what the word (...) means in that
one only place of Scripture where it is used. Very learned expositors think
that as Moses was called Gods Mediator or Sponsor to the people as being his
Spokesman and in his name assuring them that this was Gods Covenant which he
would perform, and returning the peoples answer to God, and praying for them
but not undertaking for them, and personating them; so Christ is here likened
to him, and called the Mediator and Sponsor of the new and better Covenant, not
as he personateth or undertaketh for Covenanting Subjects, but only as he
represents God the Father to man, and is his Sponsor to us.

But as Paul says he is not a Mediator of one, so I see not but (though
chiefly he be Gods Sponsor to man) yet withal he be there called a Sponsor also
as well as a Mediator for man to God: But all the doubt is what a Sponsor for
man he is.

And first we must enquire what Covenant he is a Sponsor of? No doubt but Gods
Covenant with the Mediator as such, is one, and Gods and the Mediators Covenant
with man solemnized in baptism is another: And yet no doubt but these two have
such relation as that in some sort or respect they may be called one. He that
says they are not two is plainly confuted by the constitutive defining parts,
the Diverse Parties, Matter, Terms and Ends.

It was not said to Christ, but by Christ, [Repent and believe in Christ, or be
damned.] Pardon and Salvation are not offered to Christ to be received by Faith
in himself. Yet as the Laws of the Land though several, are One Instrumentum
Regiminis: So we call all the Laws of Nature usually singularly. The Law of
Nature, (and so we say, The Civil Law, the Canon Law, Gods Law, etc.) Now the
question is, what Covenant Christ was the Sponsor of? 1. In his own proper
Covenant he did Spondere and praestare, to suffer for us, and to obey for us,
(in the just sense in due place explained,) to rise and ascend for us, to
intercede for us, to Teach us, Guide us, give out his Spirit, and to Justify
and Sanctify and Glorify his chosen: So that it was part of his Undertaking
and Performance to do all this for us; and this may well be called his becoming
a Sponsor for us, and to be made to us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification
and Redemption.

In our Covenant with Christ, he is the Imposer and Stipulator, and we are to
Promise for our part, to be done by his promised help. But on Gods part, it is
in this that he is the Sponsor, and not in the former, where God the Father is
the Promiser to Christ, and not Christ to himself as a Covenanter: So that it
is in one Covenant that he promises to God for Man, and in another that he
promises for God to Man: And the question is which of these Covenants it is
that the Apostle calls him the Surety of? If you say that the Apostle takes
both here as parts of One, and so means both; I find no proof of this in the
Text: And if it were so, it is all one; for it were then spoken of the whole,
but respectively to what Christ did in the two which are the parts: Indeed it
is (...), and not (...), that is the Covenant mentioned in the Text: and as
Grotius in praesat. ad notas in N.T. has copiously showed, it is a Divine
Disposal, Law, Imposition, or Statute containing the terms of Life, that is
meant by (...): And cap. 7.22. as it is said, yet Je^us was made a surety of a
better Testament. And c. 8.6. He has obtained a more excellent Ministry, by
how much he is the Mediator of a better Covenant [which was stablished on
better Promises.] It is the same thing which our Translators call a Testament
in one Chapter and a Covenant in the other, and it seems that a Surety and a
Mediator here do mean the same thing in Christ: And the whole context shows
that it is Gods Promise or Covenant and Law of Grace made to man that is here
meant, and that Christ's Office and Undertaking and Performance is presupposed.
And so it is the Fathers Sponsor and Mediator to man that is meant here
directly, and man's Sponsor and Mediator toward God by Connotation; but so as
in other Texts, as Cap. 9.15. that part also is directly expressed, and Christ's
death made a part of his Mediation.

4. The Question being not then whether Christ be Mediator, or Sponsor, or the
Second Adam, but what these words signify, that which is to be noted by the
Reader is, 1. What it is hereon that we assert; and whether that be enough. 2.
And what it is that we deny as too much, and false.

5.1. And for the first I explained it here, and more fully in my Treat. of
Ju^tifying Righteousness: And to repeat as often as any one will call for it that
has not leisure to read it already done is tedious. In short [ Christ in the
Common Nature of man made under the Law of Innocence, of Moses and that proper
to the Mediator, did in the undertaken Person of a Mediator, Sponsor for,
interposing Friend and Savior, perfectly fulfill all these, and give up himself
to suffering as a Sacrifice for Man's Sin, that by the Merit and Satisfaction of
him that was God and Man, and Man's undertaking Mediator and Sponsor, doing and
suffering because we had sinned, and deserved suffering, and that for our
sakes, and partly ^n our stead, the ends of God as Governor by the Law of
Innocence, and Mos^s might be obtained to his Glory, without our fulfilling of
those Laws or Suffering the deserved Penalty, and God in consistency with his
Wisdom, Holiness and Justice, might for these Merits and Satisfaction of Christ
give all things into his Hands as the Redeemer, even all Power in Heaven and
Earth, and make him Lord of the Dead and Living, and Head over all things to
the Church, and give him the Keys, and commit all Judgment to him; that by the
will of the Father he might make with fallen redeemed Man a Law and Covenant of
^race, giving them Himself in incomprehensible Union, and with himself his
indwelling sanctifying comforting Spirit of Adoption, with a Covenant Right to
Pardon, ^ustification, Adoption and Glory, if they will penitently accept it,
by a siducial practical belief: And calling Sinners, to this Faith and
Repentance, and effectually drawing his Elect, might by this Covenant give them
as soon as they so believe, an actual right to that impunity, Grace and Glory
which was antecedently given conditionally to all. And might finally perform
all this to them.

In plain and full words, this is that we assert, and the Office which by the
Word Sponsor, Medi^^or and Second Adam we mean.

. 5. I have elsewhere told you that there are many sorts of Sponsors. 1. There
is one that Antecedently makes himself a Party in the Covenant and Bond: As
when my Friend is bound with me in the same bond for a Debt or Duty: If the Law
to Adam had been such as this, took in Christ also into the same bond, and had
meant [ Ore of you shall perfectly obey or suffer;] Then that Law would have
had nothing against Adam at all, because all was fulfi^led by Christ: And it
bound but disjunctively, one or the other. Then Christ's Obedience or Suffering
would not have been sati^factio, which is solutio aequivalentis alias indebiti,
and solutio re^usabtits; but it would have been solutio ejusdem and non
recusabilis according to the bond.

2. There is a subsequent Sponsor that was not before bound, but as a Friend
after interposeth, and offers (not in the Person of the debtor, but yet in
his stead) to pay the debt: and this upon such terms as to the Debtors
deliverance as he thinks best; and so may take him as Debtor to himself, and
put various limits, and Conditions upon his Discharge: And such a Sponsor is
Christ for Man. Many more distinctions of Sureties are here considerable.

3. But some men take a Surety here to be the same Persona civilis, quamvis non
naturalis, wit^ the Offender and Debtor; as if we did Legally* Morally or
Civilly that which Christ did naturally* As indeed an allowed Representative,
Servant or Agent and Attorney is: If I be bound to pay an hundred pound, the
Law and Bond mean^ not that I must needs do it with my own hands* but if I send
my Servant or Friend with the Money, it is Civilly, Legally and Morally done by
me, because he was my lawful Instrument: I di^ it by him.

II. The Doctrine then, which I deny as subverting the Christian Religion is
especially these three errors following.

I. That the true meaning of Adams Law or Covenant was to bind him or his
surety disjunctively; viz. Thou shall obey thy self or another (Christ) for
thee, or else thou shall die, or Christ for thee.] 1. Gods Word says no such
thing. 2. Then Christ had been an Antecedent Sponsor. 3. Yea and a party
equally bound. 4. Then a Savior and Grace had been by that Law: which is
false. 5. Then Adam had been no Sinner; for it was but He or Christ and not He
and Christ that were bound to keep the Law, by this Doctrine. 6. Then no Death
had been due to Adam. 7. Then that Law was not broken at all: for it bound but
disjunctively. 8. Then the Law condemns no man. 9. Then our Death and the
Curse of the Earth were injuries, for we kept the Law by Christ. 10. Then the
Law of Innocence is it by which we are justified (which is false.) 11. Then
there is no place for pardon. 12. Nor for a new Law to give us pardon upon
terms or new Conditions: This is to subvert the Gospel.

Yet this is commonly said by the adversaries, that Adam after his fall was
justified by that same Law, as saying, Do this and Live, because he kept it by
Christ, or Christ in his Name and stead, so that it justifie^h Adam: (which Mr.
Wotton de Reco^^. has at large confuted.) If they say that the same Law or
Covenant commanded Adam to obey perfectly and his surety also in his stead
conjunctly, and condemned both Adam for Sin and his Surety for the same, then
both must suffer as both must obey, and each bears his own part. It is a
fundamental fiction leading on many other errors, to say that the Law of
Innocence as it commanded Adam Obedi^nce, or as it threatened Death to him was
fulfilled by Christ for him* That Law commanded Adam only Personal perfect
perpetual Obedience: It mentioned or meant no ^^carius obed^^^^ae aut poenae:
Dum altus solvit, aliud solvitur. Another obeying or suffering was no
fulfilling of the Law as it commanded Adam: The Law commands each subject
distinctly and personally: Christ fulfilled all the Law as it obliged himself,
and tha^ f^r Adams Redemption who had broken it: But the same Law a^ it ob^^^^d
Adam was broken by Adam, and not kept by him or any for him: It is not that Law
that gave man a Savior, but the Mercy of the Offended Lawgiver. To say the Hoc
fac, and vives, in that Law gives us right to Life, and justifies us as
perfect obeyers, and so no Sinners, is to deny the Gospel.

Many say, indeed that Christ ^atisfied the Law for us: but 1. That proves
that the Obligation of it on us was not fulfilled: For sati^faction is solutio
recusabilis tantidem, loco solutionis e^usdem. 2. But it is an improper speech
to say that [the Law is satisfied] And it means no more but that [the end of
Government by that Law is obtained.] And it is properly satisfaction only to
the Lawgiver, and not to the Law: For the Law in it is sense admits not of
satisfaction, (though it has nothing against it:) It is only the subjects
Obedience that it commands, and his death as satisfaction for sin that it
demands. It is the Lawgiver as he is above his own Law and has power to
pardon, that is satisfied: Though as tropically some say, that Finis Legis est
Lex, so we will not contend with them that tropically say, Christ satisfied the
Law, while they mean but that he satisfied the Lawgiver in obtaining the End of
the Law. But Christ perfectly fulfilled the Law as it obliged himself, upon his
Sponsion. And that Law justified him, but no man else. It is only the New
Covenant that justifies us.

II. The second Error to the same purpose, is, that though Christ and Adam
were two Natural Persons, yet they were One ^erson in a Civil, Legal or
Reputative sense, in Christ's obeying and suffering; and so that what Christ did
and suffered in his own Natural Person, he did and suffered in Adams, and every
Elect man's Civil, Legal, or Reputative Person. This is but the consequent of
the former Error. He may be called our R^pr^^^nter in a limited sense, in
^antum and ad hoc (for there is no hope of holding our opposers to Scriptures
phrase:) But such a strict full personating Representation as is here
described, denies the substance of the Gospel. There are indeed several Cases
in which one in Law or Civil sense does personate another: When the Law
allows one to do the thing by another, that thing is morally done by himself;
e. g. by my Servant, Proxy, Attorney, Agent, in Cases ^o allowed by the Law.
It is I that pay the debt which my Servant, or any Vicarius allowed by Law
pays for me in my name. Christ did not thus pay or suffer in our names as our
Legal Person; but for us and in our stead as a s^t Sponsor in the person of a
Mediator; so that it cannot be said that we did it Legally by him; else all the
forenamed absurdities would follow; and specially that Legall^ we never sinn^d,
and never deserved punish^ent, nor need either Pardon, or the Sacrifice of
Christ for Pardon. It Is certain that Christ never sinned, but obeyed perfectly
from first to last: And if we did this Lega^ly by him, we sinned not in Law
sense, that is, not truly at all. When we show that it is a palpable
contradiction to say, that we were perfectly obedient in and by Christ, from
birth to death, and yet that Christ must suffer for our sins; it is strange to
see how some men satisfy themselves with wriggling, or huddling out a few
insignificant words, unfit to satisfy any other.

And if Christ's Habitual Perfection be also so imputed to us, in a Legal sense,
we were habitually perfect from birth to death. Whence it is that some assert
an equality of such Perfection in all Christians: The consequents I will not
trouble you with reciting; nor stay to enquire whether also his Divine
^ighteousness be ours in such a Law sense, and so Man be deified.

Either Christ was our Legal Person before we were born, or from the time of
our being, or from the time of our believing only. 1. Before we had a Being we
were no sinners, nor bound to obey; and therefore needed not to obey or suffer
by another. 2. When we were born, we were not in Christ, and perhaps not
Believers till old Age: And so the Elect should Legally be just while they are
Infidels, and never sin even in their state of Enmity. 3. If only since
believing we were so personated by Christ, then his Righteousness is not
imputed to us for all the time of our unregeneracy, and then we never sinned in
Law sense after our believing. If they say that in suffering he represented us
as unregenerate, and in his obedience as Believers only, then he suffered not
for our sins after believing, nor obeyed to merit pardon of our sins before. If
they say that so far as we are sinners, we Legally suffered in him, and as
Believers further to merit glor^ we obeyed by him, the contradiction of this is
showed before. If we obeyed so far as to merit glory by the Law of Works, then
we never sinned: And if we suffered in him, for all sins of Omission and
Commission, we merited glory without any other obedience: For the Law requires
nothing but Innocence as necessary to life. He that has no sin, does perfectly
obey. And pardon of all sin of Omission and Commission, is the pardon of all
punishment of Sense and Loss, and so of the loss of promised Life.

Besides that, one that is reputed to have Legally fulfilled the Law, must be
unjustly corrected by the punishment of temporal afflictions or death, or loss
of the Spirit and Grace, and has present right to the reward of that Covenant,
or deliverance from all penal evil at least; so that this Doctrine of strict
Legal personating Representation, overthrows the New Covenant and Law of
Christ, and all his Kingdom of Grace, and all Religion.

III. The third fundamental Error which we deny and oppose, is, that the Union
between Christ and (the Elect, say some, or) Believers (say others) is so near,
as that his very personal Holiness, Righteousness and Sufferings, are in Law
sense truly our Holiness, Righteousness and Sufferings as the accidents of our
persons: As if Christ and Adam, and every Christian, were one and the same
subject of Holiness, Righteousness, Suffering, Merit or Satisfaction. Yet they
dare not say that the Union (like the hypostatical) warranteth such a community
of Properties or Attributes, as that we may be said to be Divinely Righteous,
perfectly Holy, never to have sinned, to have satisfied for our selves, to have
merited our own Salvation, and many such like; as seeing the evil of the
consequents, though not of the premises.

And here sometime they abuse the similitude of a Husband and Wife; whereas
they are distinct persons, and one is not wise, just or guiltless, because the
other is so; nor has the Wife any propriety so much as in extrinsick goods,
but by contract in the proportion granted by the Husband.

Some abuse the similitude of a Head and Members; whereas Natural Head and
Members make one Natural Body; but so do not Christ and Believers: And a
Political Head and Members are distinct persons, and one is not guiltless,
righteous, wise or good, because the other is so. But of this more before, and
elsewhere. Some here abuse the similitude of Christ's being the second Adam,
which you here (though not to this Error) insist upon. And then they feign us,
1. To have bee^ otherwise in Adam than we were; 2. And his sin to be otherwise
imputed to us than it was; And 3. The similitude to extend further than it does.

I. They feign us to have been Personally in Adam, whenas we were but seminally
in him, and personally from him. 2. They feign us to have been in him by a
certain Covenant, more than we were by Natural In-existence: And that his sin
was arbitrarily by God through that Covenant, imputed to us further than we
were guilty of it by any natural In-being or derivation: As if God made all men
sinners by his arbitrary imputation of that to them, which in their natures
they were not really guilty of: And as if our guilt of Adams sin, were just of
the same sort as his; yea, and our guilt and his guilt were individual
accidents of the same individual persons. But this (which Dr. Twisse often
confuteth in most of his Books) I have so largely and lately cleared in my
published Disputations of Original sin, that you shall excuse me for not
reciting it here.

3. The guilt of Adams sin being ours by Natural Derivation, comes to all
alike, entirely (according to the subjects capacity* and necessarily, without
the consent of Parent or Child: Were Adam and all Parents unwilling to
communicate it in generation, it would nevertheless be done: But Christ being
not a Natural, but a contracting voluntary Root and Cause, does communicate the
fruits of his Righteousness only voluntarily by gift of Contract, at the time,
in the ^anner, and measure, and on the terms that he sees meet.

Here it is observable, 1. That both Generation and Regeneration have much
unsearchable: How Souls generate Souls, and how the Spirit of Christ
communicates Grace to Souls, will never here be clearly apprehended, ^ohn 3.8.

2. But it is certain that the Soul of the Parent is not the Soul of the Child,
but some cause of it; and so that they are not one person.

3. We were not persons in Adams person, either the same or distinct.

4. But Adam caused us, not as a man makes a garment, house, etc. but as one
Candle does light another, by some mysterious communication of its essence: so
formae se multiplicant, by the Divine benediction [Increase and multiply,] and
primary causation.

5. Though we were not pers^nally, but virtually and seminally in Adam, yet
when that seed becomes a person, that person is from Adam, and so must
proportionably be guilty: For who can bring a clean thing out of the essence of
an unclean?

6. Adam had the common Nature of all men specifically, and radically, and
causally, though as their nature individually constitute their persons, they
existed not in him (as extra causam.)

7. So Jesus Christ did more assume the common Nature of fallen Man, than the
persons of any, or the Nature as extra causas, constituting the individual
person.

8. Ponum est ex causis integris; malum ex partiali: Any defe^t makes sin, but
good must have entire causes. Adams sin causes Original sin in all, ex
privatione causationis boni: But if Adam had not sinned, every sin of their own
would have made his Children unrighteous.

9. Christ having suffered in the common nature of man so far did it in their
stead, and if you will needs so call it, so far represented fallen mankind, as
that if they will personally receive him by faith, in the New Covenant, they
shall not perish for Adams sin (or their own) (supposing that the parent is the
accepter for the Infant) none perish for Original sin alone, without the
addition of neglected and refused grace and remedy.

10. It is not only the Spiritual offspring that Christ was a second Adam to,
but partly to all mankind: For by a resurrection (though not to glory) all men
are made alive by Christ, Joh. 5.22, 23, 29. 1 Cor. 15. And all have a general
conditional reconciliation and pardon, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. Joh. 3.16. So that
actual Justification resulteth to no man from Christ's mere representation of
him, but from his free donation by the New Covenant.

11. It Is doubtless that all and only the holy seed, or faithful, are justified
actually by Christ's Righteousness: But in what sense it is imputed to them is
all the doubt.

12. It Is also doubtless that Christ suffered in our stead: But in what sense
and how far is all the doubt: Because we deserved it, he voluntarily assumed
it, to demonstrate Gods Justice, Mercy and Wisdom, and deliver us. You say
before that, [ It was strictest Justice that was showed on Christ.] I would not
strive about the word: It was strictest Justice as upon Christ: It was perfect
Justice as to the ends of Government: But it was not strictest Justice as to
us, nor as strictest signifies the strict fulfilling or executing of the
threatening of the Law: For it was not so executed, but the sinner mercifully
pardoned.

. 6. You note that Christ must take our guilt on him or else he could not take
our punishment.

Ans. 1. He took not the Reatum facti, or the Reatum ^ulpae: For, 1. Our guilt
was the accident of one Subject, and that which Christ took of another:
Therefore the accidents were not the same. 2. Else sin however taken in its
reatus culpae would have made him culpable, and formally a sinner, and hateful
to God, and like to Satan: Which he was not.

2. He took upon him the Reatum poena seu obligationem ad ^oenam: But not ours
individually the same; but one of his own instead of ours: Christ's guilt and
ours were diverse accidents of diverse persons. The obligations nor the Subjects
were not the same. Our obligation to punishment was an act of the Law which we
broke: So was not Christ's: That Law never bound him to punishment: But his own
voluntary undertaking and his Fathers imposition. Our guilt was the occasion
and reason of Christ's assumed guilt: As our punishment individually was not it
that he suffered, but his own punishment to prevent ours. He suffered the just
for the unjust, to redeem us to God. God tells us plainly that Christ suffered
for our sins, and was made sin, that is, a Curse or Sacrifice for sin for us,
that we might not suffer. And cannot we receive this plain Gospel, without
spinning so many additional webs of our own? Christ's taking our guilt and
puni^hment is no more, but his voluntary suffering in our stead, that we might
be pardoned, not by that suffering immediately, but by his free donation in the
Law of Grace, in his time and on his terms.

. 7. You note that though we are justified by our own Faith, Repentance, and
Obedience to the Gospel against the false charge of being unbelievers,
impenitent and ungodly; Yet to be free from the curse of the Law, and obtaining
right to life, it is Christ's Righteousness that we must plead*

Ans. Very true thus, 1. It is only Christ's Righteousness that we must plead as
the Satisfying and meriting cause: 2. It is only the free Donation of the New
Covenant which we must plead as our Title or Fundamentum juris, and conveying
cause of right. 3. It is our Faith and Repentance (in various respects) which
we must plead as the conditio tituli praes^i^a which is the necessary moral
receptive disposition of the Subject receiving. These things are all very plain
and sure.

. 8. You seem to doubt whether by the Law of Works* Paul meant not the Law of
Innocence: And first you seem to mistake me as if I had said that he meant only
the Ceremonial Law: I say no such thing. But the whole Law of Moses, considered
merely as a law, and by the Jews ill separated from Faith, and Grace was an
operous Yoke, and of severe penalties to the transgressors; and though it gave
pardon for some faults, it was not merely for the task of sacrificing but for
the great Sacrifice typified: The Law as a Law does only Command, and threaten
and promise life to them that do all things written, but gave not grace to do
it. The Jews left out the true sense of the types and promise which intended
the Messiah, in whom it was that the promissory part of the Law was made; and
thought the very task of duty or works would procure their acceptance and
pardon when they failed. If you are not satisfied with this reason why Paul
calls it the Law of Works, find out a better if you can: But most certainly
that is a great mistake that Moses and Paul describe the Law of Innocence? It Is
tedious to recite the proof.

1. It Is enough that the Law of Innocence as a Covenant was before ceased,
cessante capacitate subditorum: When all men had 2000 years been Originally and
Actually sinners, will you feign God with all that solemnity to make such a Law
as this, [ I know and you must know that no Son of Adam is Innocent: And I make
now a Law that if you ^re, and will continue innocent you shall live: Else you
shall die? This is too gross to be feigned of God.

2. It is enough that when the Law was made they were all under actual mercy
which was the grace of the new pardoned Covenant.

3. Yea that the Covenant of Grace had so long before been made with all fallen
mankind in Adam and Noah, and renewed to Abraham with spe^ial promises: And
does God now repeal or hide it.

4. What need we more proof than so many Laws about Sacrificing and Confessing
for forgiveness? Which the Law of Innocence knew not.

And why else did God deliver the Law as a God of Redeeming mercy, I am the
Lord thy God that brought thee out of Egypt, proclaiming his name, Exodus 34.6,
7. The Lord, the Lord God Merciful and Gracious, forgiving Iniquity,
Transgression and Sin.

6. Peruse all the Contexts in Pau^, and you will be satisfied. See Camero de
triplice faedere (which Dr. Bolton (of Liberty) was so taken with and
magnifieth, and Anthony Burges of the Law, proving Moses Law to belong to a
Covenant of Grace. But I have more fully opened all thi^ in my Methodus
Theologiae. No doubt but Paul's d^sputes have great difficulty; but this much is
very plain.

9. Your next question is about the nature of Faith, whether if it be placed in
the will, and include consent, it be not confounded with Love, whose object is
goodness.

I have answered this often and largely in diverse Books, and therefore must here
be excused from saying any more than this, viz. 1. You must distinguish between
Faith Physically taken, and Faith morally taken. 2. Between its formal act and
its material.

I. Physically some one natural act, constituted by one Object is called Faith:
But morally taken it comprehends diverse Physical Acts, both of the Intellect
and Will: And as it is Justifying and Saving it is so taken: Yea morally it is
sometime in Scripture taken largelier, for our Christian Faith, as God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost the Promise, Grace and Glory are all the
constituting Objects of it in their truth and goodness; and sometime more
narrowly as altogether distinct from Hope and Love; It is taken in the first
sense when it is said to be the condition of Justification and Salvation.

And here what you said of the necessity of conjoyning the many similitudes
which express Christ's Office to us, when but one of them in a Text is named,
the same must be said of Faith in Christ. A Moral act which has many Physical
acts, must be named by some one, the rest being connoted or implied; for it
would be uncomely to name them all in every mention of it.

Note also, that the name is varied according to what is specially noted in the
Object, sometime Truth, sometime Goodness: So Christ says, [ The Father has
loved you, because ye have loved me. And Paul, Grace be to all them that love
the Lord Jesus in sincerity. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be
Anathema Maranatha. And Christ, Luke 14.26. and Mat. 10. He that loves any
better than Christ, cannot be his Disciple. And to be a Disciple, a Christian
and a Believer, are all one in Scripture. But when it is the Goodness of
another Object that is mentioned, the Act is another thing.

I suppose you will confess that no Faith in Christ and the Promise justifies
us, which does not in that same instant include, 1. A belief of the Goodness,
as well as the Truth of both. 2. A willingness to receive Christ and Grace as
good; and a consent to the offer. And if these must concur in the same instant
as necessary Conditions of our Justification or Reception of Christ and Grace,
call them how you will, and say, Consent is an Effect of Faith* or a part of
it, all is one to me: But I will say, that Consent is an Effect of one Act of
Faith strictly taken; viz. Assent; but a part of it taken for Justifying,
Saving Faith.

II. After many and long thoughts of this matter, I think they that will
pretend to exactness, must say, that Trust is the Formal Act of Faith, as
Trustiness or Fidelity is the Formal Object: And that the Material Act is
threefold, Assent, Consent and Practice; and none of these, no not Assent is
the Formal Act. Both (...) and Fides signify Trust; yea and Credere too. And
so Fides, as it signifies Fidelity, and Fides, as it signifies Faith or
Trust, are the Formal Object and Act. I Assent to the Truth of the Gospel,
because I Trust the Veracity or Fidelity of the Author. I Co^^^nt to the
Covenant, because I Trust the Revealer, Offerer and Promiser. I actually give
up my self to Christ, because I Trust him. Mr. Pemble Vindicat. Great. has
accurately opened this.

I have in my Aphorisms, and often said, that a Christian should rather try his
Faith by the Consenting act, than the Trusting act; because many a one cannot
find that they can Trust Christ* that yet find Consent. But I explain this, or
recall it, as not well spoken: For indeed, though it be Consent by which we may
surely know our Interest in the Justifying Covenant (specially when practically
expressed,) yet Ass^ance or Trust is the Formal Act of Faith, and that Consent is
but the Material. For if we Trust not Christ's Fidelity, we can neither Assent,
Consent or Practi^e. But when I spoke as aforesaid, I followed the sense of
most complaining Christians who say, They cannot Trust Christ, meaning by
Trust, that Quieting of the mind, which is but an effect of Trust: Whereas at
that time they take Christ to be Trusty, and a su^^^cient Savior, but are
hindered from the applying and quieting Effect, by Ignorance, or doubting of
their own Trustiness, and not of the Trus^iness of Christ.

If I be tedious in repeating again my old similitudes, you must blame your
self that are the c^use.

Only one Physician can cure the Plague: Some slander him as a deceiver: He
promises to c^re all that will take him for their Physician, and trust him:
Trusting or believing him here in^ludeth materially, Believing his Word,
Consenting to be his Patien^s, and coming to him for Physic.

A Prince in India buyeth the Irish Rebels that had forfeited their lives, of
the King, that they may la^ down Arms, and go with him, and become his
Subjects: He promises to every one of them a Lordship in India, a safe Ship
thither, and pardon here; some call him a Deceiver, and distrust him: He tells
them, if they Trust him, he will perform all this. Here Trust, the Formal Act,
includes as the Material Acts; 1. Assenting to his Word as True; 2. Consenting
to his Off^r and Terms; 3. Practically venturing to lay down Arms, and go with
him in the Ship, and forsake their own Country.

Such is Faith in Christ, when it is made the Condition of Justification and
Life. The Formal and Materi^l Acts together constitute Faith, and not the
Formal, or one of the Material (Assent) alone. (Nor has Bishop Downame well
confuted Mr. Pemble about the Formal Act.) In a word (true and pl^in) Baptism,
our ^hristening, best tells us the Essence of Justi^yin^ Faith: For that is the
Sealing to us the ^u^^^fying Covenant, that it may actually and solemnly
deliver to us our part in Christ, and ri^ht to Pardon and Life, which is given
us on no lower terms, than the Fiducial Assent, Consent and Dedication
professed by us essentially in Baptism.

10. Your next doubt is about the various Objects of Faith in exercise (Gods
Omnipotency, (Truth, etc.) and the various uses of Faith accordingly. This is
the point which Mr. Lawson and I seemed somewhat to differ about: And I have in
my Treatise of Justification said so much of it, that you shall now excuse me
from any more than telling you, that in Sanctification, where one act really
produces one effect on our hearts, and another act another effect, each effect
must be ascribed to its proper act. But you must not think it is so in our
Justification or Adoption, where that which we receive is a RIGHT, Jus
impunitatis and vitae, which is not the Immediate Effect of our Act, no nor any
Effect of it at all, but of Gods Donative Covenant, of which our Faith is but a
Condition, and no Efficient Cause of our Right. And therefore I doubt not still
to say, that we are thus justified as much by a Consenting to Christ's Teaching
and Sanctifying Grace, as by Consenting to be justified by his Righteousness;
or by fiducial taking him for our Teacher, Intercessor and King, as taking him
for a Satisfier and Meriter for us: Indeed it is undivided Taking Christ as
Christ, that is the Justifying Condition, John 1.10, 11, 12. 1 John 5.10, 11,
12.

11. In the end you desire me to answer. What Right^ousness is meant, Romans 5.
By the obedience of one many are made righteous.

Ans. The meaning is, By the Merit of Christ's Active and Passive (yea Habitual)
Righteousness (also) exalted in dignity by his Divine Perfection, all fallen
Mankind is Conditionally pardoned, and has the gift of Life, enacted in the
Law or Covenant of Grace, and all true Believers have by that Covenant actually
given them a Right of Union with Christ, and with him Pardon and Adoption, or
Right to Grace and Glory, and have the Spirit of Holiness as the first fruits.
All this is included in that Righteousness.

12. Lastly, you ask, What Righteousness Faith is imputed to? Whether that
which is by Christ's obedience, and by Faith, be the same? and perfect or
unperfect?

Ans. Here also you may take the blame that I say things long ago so often said.
By Righteous is meant Justifiable in general: And the plain meaning is, Christ
having merited, and freely given Pardon and Life to all sinners that will
fiducially accept his purchased Gift, it is not now keeping the Law of
Innocence or Works, but only the said fiducial Acceptance of Christ and his
free Grace that is required on their part to their Right or Justification. If
by Imputed we meant, Reputing it the MATTER of our total Righteousness, then it
were an unsound sense. But (briefly and plainly)* Faith in Christ is reckoned
to us as the Matter of our imperfect personal subordinate Righteousness, and as
the Instituted Medium of our Reception of our Union with Christ, and our Right
to Pardon and Life for the Merit of his Righteousness. And I think this is
plain and full. For Righteousness to be imputed, is meant no more, but that G^d
accounts the person Righteous: But the imputing Faith to this, is but to
reckon it to be what it is, 1. As the Mat^er of one; 2. As the Medium or
Condition of the other.

13. You here give me an Epitome of Dr. John Owens Book of Justification, which
you judge the best that you have seen, and say it is faithfully collected, to
save me the labor of reading it, to show me how nearly we agree.

Ans. I have perused the Book, but being now absent from it, cannot judge
whether you have rightly epitomized or recited it, and therefore shall speak to
it as yours, and not as his: Thanking you for endeavoring to spare my labor,
but not for calling me to judge of other men's Writings. Only I must say, I am
glad of so much Moderation as is in it; but I ^etter understand many other
Books of Justification; e^pecially Mr. ^ruman, Sir Charles Wols^ey, Mr. Gibb^ns
Sermon, Mr. Wotton, Mr. Gataker* a Manuscript of Dr. Twisses (though I agree
not with him in his exclusion of Christ's Active Righteous^^ss as justifying
us,) Le Bl^nk, Placaeus, yea ^ohn Go^dwin, Mr. Hote^kis, and many others.

14. Y^u take Imputing Righteou^ness to be the foundation of Reputing us
righteous, and not the same thing.

Ans. The Controversy is de re, or de nomine. De re we agree that a man must
be made Righteous before he is Reputed so. De nomine I deny that St. Paul by
imputing does mean making us Righteous. (...) is by all confessed to signify
Accounting, Reckoning or Reputing: Making us Righteous goes before Reckoning
it to us on account. John Goodwin will tell you of many more senses of
Imputation than you recite, and more considerable.

15. II. You suppose an Imputation of Righteousness to us, which was not ours
before that Imputation. Ans. Again de re there is a Donation of such: But de
nomine I deny that this is it that the Scripture calls Imputing.

You make this to contain two Acts, and you Name three, 1. A grant or Donation
of the thing it self to be ours. 2. A will of dealing with us accordingly. 3.
An actual so dealing with us.

Ans. 1. De nomine, I deny that (...) does in Scripture signify the giving of
Righteousness to him that had it not: but the reckoning it on account to him
that by gift first had it. 2. Nor does it primarily signify willing to use,
and using as righteous, but only by consequence infers it.

But 2. De re here is no Explication how Imputing is giving, or how
Righteousness is given us: There is no question but all the Righteousness that
we have is given us by God: But the very heart of the Controversy is, How the
Righteousness of Christ is given us and made ours: In that Righteousness is
found, 1. The Matter. 2. The Form. 1. The matter is, 1. The Habits. 2. The Acts
of Christ in the Divine and Humane Nature: Are these given us, and do we
possess them in themselves? The Acts are past, and so are nothing now: and
nothing is no bodies actual possession. The Acts and Habits were Accidents
which sine interitu cannot pass from Subject to Subject: Diverse Subjects prove
diversity of Accidents. 2. The Form is a Relation, and so an Accident also: And
they must needs be two Accidents, that are Formal Righteousness in Christ and
us, unless we are the same Subject Person. Therefore neither matter nor
Relative form in Christ and Man is the same individual Accident. How then is it
ours! What is there in it besides matter (the subject and fundamentum) and
form? it is plain that, 1. The Benefits are given us, and are our own by that
Gift: All that consist in jure, in right, (as to Christ, to the Love of the
reconciled Father, the Communion of the Spirit, to further Grace, Pardon,
Glory) are all given us instrumentally by the new Covenants donative Act: The
inherent habits, and the Acts are given us by the Holy Ghost. And 2. These
Benefits being given us for the Sacrifice, and Merits of Christ, the price is
said by a Metonymy of the cause for the Effect, to be given us, because it is
given for us: It was God the Father to whom Christ paid the price of our
Redemption, and gave his Active and Passive Righteousness for us: But Morally
and Reputatively it is no unmeet phrase to say that is given to us which is
given for us in our necessity and to purchase us all this.

If the King would ransom all his Subjects that are Slaves to the Turks, and
paid a million for their Freedom, he may well be said to give them a million,
though it be but a Metonymical Speech, seeing he gave it for them: Though it
was the Freedom or Benefits and not the Money which indeed they received: And
so it is here: So God gives us Christ's Righteousness, Merits and Satisfaction;
but not properly the things themselves. If there be any more to be said as
given us, I should have been glad to know what it is: but your Words show it
not.

Were it the very same Individual Righteousness that Christ has, Acts, Habits
and Formal Relation made in themselves our own accidents, it would follow that
we are really perfect in Acts, Habits and Relation, and need neither more
Pardon nor increase of Grace, nor should pray for any, nor use means for any,
nor are we liable to any corrective Penalty, nor to any want of the Spirits
help, but have present right to all that is due to a perfect righteous man;
with much more such, which is all false.

Yet is it truly and fitly said that Christ is our Righteousness, that is, the
purchaser and giver of it; and that he is made of God to us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, on the same account: Yea though
some deny it, his Righteousness may be called the material cause of our
Righteousness, as ours is our Jus ad impunttatem and vitam, because it is the
matter of it is meritorious cause. For if Adam had merited Life himself, his
meritorious Acts and Habits would have been fitly called, the matter of his
Righteousness, that is, of the fundamentum Relationis. Yet this is the
difference: Adams Right or Relation of Just, would have resulted immediately
from his own Acts and Habits c^^pared with the Law; whereas ours resulteth from
Christ's Merits or Righteousness, not immediately as ours in it self, but
mediately as paid for us to God, and the Benefit (of Right and Righteousness)
given us by the Covenant, for the said Merit of our Mediator.

16. Next you say, that this Imputation supposes not the Person to have done
and suffered himself what is imputed to him, and note their mistake that
suppose the Doctrine of Imputation to imply that Christ did commit our Sins,
and we perform his Righteousness.

Ans. This grants much toward Concord: But I hope you understand that the
Question is not whether we did Physically do and suffer what Christ did, even
in our Natural Persons? but whether we did it Morally, Legally, Civilly,
Reputatively, as a Man acts by an Instrument, Attorney, Vicar, or Personating
Representer, ^o that the Law reputeth it his Act. Why did you not note this,
and tell us whether you deny this also, as well as our Physical performance? If
you deny not this our Legal or Moral doing and suffering in and by Christ, you
did not fairly in your Description of the Mind of your opposers, as far as ever
I could understand them. But if you deny this, our agreement seems very
feasible. But then you must go over the Explication of Imputation and Donation
of Christ's own Righteousness again, and better tell us what you mean by them,
than these described words do.

1^ Next you tell us of Imputation, 1. Ex justitia. 2. Ex Voluntaria Sponsione.
3. Ex injuria. 4. Ex gratia.

1. Things imputed ex justitia you say are, 1. For F^deral Relation, as Adams
sin. 2. For Natural Relation, and that only as to some temporal Effects.

Ans. Here we must suppose by your former explication, that by Imputation you
mean not Estimative reckoning or accounting that to a man which he before has,
but, 1. Donation. 2. Usage congruously an^ will so to use one. But Adams sin
was no gi^^ to us, and came not by donation; Nor is Donation, Imputation.

2. What you say of Adams sin being ours by Covenant Relation, as distinct from
Natural Relation, is unsound, and the matter needs fuller explication, which
as aforesaid I have attempted in my Disputation of Original Sin. And as unsound
is it that Natural Relation brings none but Temporal Evil. It cannot be proved,
nor is to be affirmed, that without natural derivation, we derive by mere
Covenant the guilt of Adams sin; no nor that Covenant derivation is before the
natural, nor yet that it goes any further, or that we contract any more guilt
by Covenant, than we do by nature; but the Law of nature it self and Gods
congruous Covenant is that which virtually judges us guilty, when natural
derivation has made us guilty (as Dr. Twisse often as aforesaid.)

Do you mean that guilt resulteth from Gods part of the Covenant, or from
Adams, or from his Posterities? Not from ours, for we exis^ed not, and made no
such Covenant. Not from Adams part (antecedent to Natural Derivation.) For 1.
No man can prove that ever Adam made such a Covenant. 2. Or that God gave him
any such power, (much less Command) to bring sin and death on his Posterity by
his Consent, or Will, or Contract, further than by the Law of Nature they must
derive it from him if he sinned. 3. Not by Gods Covenant act: For, 1. No such
Covenant of God can be shown, that made men sinners further than Natural
Derivation did. 2. Else God should be the Author of sin, even of all men's
Original sin, if his Arbitrary Covenant made them sinners, where nature did not.

Nay more, it is not mere Natural Relation, much less such Covenant Relation
that does it, (for Relation does not so operate of itself) but it is that
Generation which causes Fundamentally at once both the Relation of Sons and
the adherent guilt.

And in my foresaid second Disputation I have proved that Natural derivation
(even from nearer Parents) deserves more than Temporal hurt.

18. II. Your second ex voluntaria Sponsione you exemplify in Onesimus and
Judah to Jacob, Genesis 43.9.

Ans. 1. There is no talk of Imputation in either of the Texts, as to the
receiver: Much less of an Imputation which is Donation. Indeed Paul undertaketh
to pay Onesimus's debt to Philemon; and so bids him set the debt on his
account; that is, take him for the play master; If this be Imputing the debt to
Paul, we are agreed that so (not our reatus culpae, but poenae) our (...) of
punishment was imputed to Christ, that is, he undertook to bear it for us: Paul
gave not the money to Onesimus, but for him (by promise.) He was not an
antecedent surety, but a consequent? He did not promise to pay it in Onesimus
Legal person; Nor is the payment properly imputed to Onesimus as any way done
by him, but only the Effected benefit given him.

And Judah only undertaketh to bring Benjamin again, or else to bear the blame
for ever. No doubt but Christ undertook our ransom, and also to effect our
actual deliverance. If you will call this [ Giving or Imputing his own
Righteousness to us, so as that in se it is made the same accident of every
believer besides giving them the benefits of that which he gave to God for
them, I will not imitate you.

III. That of Bathsheba, 1 Kin. 1.21. takes Imputation as the Scripture does.
For accounting and reckoning them to be sinners, and using them accordingly,
and not as you do for making them such by making another Fact or guilt to
become theirs. All these instances are for what I assert. None of them mention
any such thing as imputing one man's Acts or Habits to another so as to make
them or repute them to be really his.

IV. Your fourth sort of Imputation ex mera gratia you say is the imputing of
that which before that act we had no right to: And you do well to say there is
no other instance of it in Scripture: But you do not well to say without proof
that this is it that is meant, Romans 4. God makes us Righteous by donation
before he imput^th it to us: Imputation there is Reckoning, Accounting, and
Judging a man to be what he is. Abraham had Faith before God imputed Faith to
him for Righteousness: And that Faith was such a Righteousness as God imputed
it to be. To say, it was an imperfect one, is no wonder: A^^aham had none
personally or properly in se but what was imperfect.

The sum of all our Controversy is, what Righteousness believers have? You
before noted that Righteousness as it is a conformity to the ^^eceptive part of
the Law, is one thing, and as it relates to the retributive part, and is our
Jus impunitatis and vitae it is another. The Doctrine which I bend all these
words against is, that we must have, or have, as our own any such righteousness
as is a conformity to the precep^ive part of the Law of innocence, whether done
by us or Christ. Prove that we have any such Righteousness, and I yield all the
cause to them that plead for the Imputation which I deny. If we have such a
Righteousness we have no sin* nor ever had, in the sense of the Law: And have
no need of Christ's Sacrifice, or are capable of pardon or punishment. I dare
plead no Righteousness as mine but [ subordinately as a condition and medium,
my faith ^r performance of the conditions of the Covenant and its gifts, and
principally my right to impunity and life for the sake of the Merits, Sacrifice
and Intercession of Christ, freely given by him in the New Covenant.] It was
Christ's perfect Righteousness which meriteth mine, but I have no perfect
Righteousness of my own, either in me, or done by me, by my self or by my
Instrument or Vicar, nor given to me, saving as metonymically, that is said to
be given to me which was given for me, and the Effects or fruits of it given to
me: Besides my imperfect Faith and sincere devotion to Christ, I know of no
Righteousness that I have, but that which saves me from the Laws Condemnation,
and gives me right to life, which is not perfect obedience to the precept made
mine, but pardon of disobedience, and a freely-given Adoption, merited by
another whose merits were never mine so much as by proper gift or imputation*
though figuratively they may be so called mine. I tire my self and you with
tedious repetitions because I find that without the^ I am not understood*

Therefore your next inference that Paul spea^eth of that which was not ours
before Imputation, is not true, as is proved.

And your second that the imputation of Faith as a work, is not of Grace, is
cloudy, or untrue, or both. If by a work, you mean a work in Commutation
obliging God, or any work which makes the reward to be of debt and not of
Grace, it is true that if faith were such a work it would be an act of Justice
so to judge it. But Faith is no such work; and therefore it would be error so
to judge it. But if by a work you mean but a Moral act, as made by the Law of
Grace the condition of pardon and life, then to Impute, Repute or Judge it to
be what it is so made, is an act of Truth and Justice, but such Truth and
Justice as is Evangelical, and consistent with Grace, and is founded on Grace:
It is Grace, that we have a Savior to purchase and give all: It is grace that
we are not under the Law of Innocence which justifies none but the innocent
and perfect that never sinned: It is Grace that we have a Covenant and Law of
Grace, which makes sincere faith a Mediate or Subordinate Righteousness,
requiring no more at our own hands instead of what the Law of innocence
required: It is of Grace that as this faith is the matter of this subordinate
Evangelical Righteousness, so it is the receptive medium of our right to
Christ, pardon and life which is our full saving righteousness. It being
therefore of Grace that it is made so, and also that we are made believers, it
must be of Grace, though of Truth and gracious Justice, that it is reckoned or
imputed to us, for Righteousness.

By debt opposed to Grace, Paul means not, Debitum, D^^ness, by free gifts
thankfully accepted, but quod debetur ex operis propria dignitate, as a workman
earneth his wages.

. 19. Your Description of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, is either to
be understood as spoken in proper words, or as figurative. If the latter, it is
unintelligible still till explained: If the first, it is that same Doctrine
which I take to subvert all the Gospel; viz. That [God makes an effectual
Grant and Donation of a true, real, perfect Righteousness, even that of Christ
himself, to all that believe, accounting it as theirs.]

God accounts not Christ's Divine Righteousness to be our Righteousness, nor
yet his Humane Habitual Righteousness, nor his Obedience to the Law proper to
the Mediator, nor his Obedience to the Law of Moses (which as such bound not
you or me,) nor his perfect fulfilling the Law of Innocence, nor his
satisfactory Sacrifice for sin, nor his Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession,
etc. But he only accounts these to be the Causes of our Righteousness, and
not our Righ^eousness it self. Though the Meritorious Cause may be called the
Meritorious Matter in a remote sense, as purchasing the free Gift of our Formal
Righteousness.

Though this also is but an unnecessary Logical name, the thing being without
it plainlier opened, Relations having properly no Material Cause, and the
Subject being it that is usually so called; and our Jus being our Formal
Righteousness, and the Covenant Donation the Fundamentum Juris, and Christ's
Meritorious Righteousness being but the cause of that Fundamentum or Titulus,
it can be called the Matter of our Right but in a remote sense, and such a
Matter as is without us, paid for us, but not ours in it self, but the CAUSE of
that Relation which is ours.

The plain inconsistency of a Perfect Conformity to the Law made our own, with
Christ's dying for sin, and our need of pardon, constrained a great part of the
famousest Divines of the last Age, to go too far, in my Judgment, in excluding
Christ's Active, and Habitual Righteousness, to our Justification, and confining
it to the Passive only: Such as Olevian, Vrsine, Piscator, Paraeus, Scultetus,
Wendeline, Beckman, and others in Germany; and Camero, with his most Judicious
and Learned followers in France; and Dr. Twisse (whose M.S. I before mentioned)
Mr. Wotton, Mr. Gataker and others in England: And yet the two last, I think,
go not so far as the rest. But Mr. Bradshaw truly told them, that it is not the
excluding the Active from Imputation that must untie the knot, but the taking
Imputation it self in a sound sense, and forsaking the unsound rigid notion of
it, both as to the Active and Passive Righteousness. Grotius de Satisfactione
has gone the middle way, and if that Book had been more studied, fewer would
have made us a new Gospel in terms, who, I hope, in sense do mean better than
they speak.

. 20. In your explication you further own the subverting sense; viz. That
Christ's perfect Righteousness is made the Righteousness of Believers (forma dat
nomen) and is accordingly judged, esteemed and reputed theirs, being by free
Gift made theirs to all ends and purposes, whereto it would have served, if it
had been their own, without any such Imputation, Donation or Communication, and
God deals with them accordingly.]

Ans. This is plainer dealing than we had before. If this were true, 1. We are
as righteous as Christ. 2. We may deny that ever we were sinners; for had we
done all this our selves, that is, kept the Law perfectly from first to last,
we had never sinned. 3. We had never deserved punishment; 4. Nor needed a
Sacrifice; 5. Or a Pardon; 6. Nor should we, during the time of our
unregeneracy, have been left under spiritual death, or at least, after
believing, be left under remaining sin, and a body of death; 7. Nor have been
penally deprived of any help of the Spirit; 8. Nor of any Communion with God;
9. Nor so long be kept out of Heaven, or the Reward; 10. Nor ever have been
corrected; 11. Nor ever had need of Word, Prayer or Sacraments for the helping
us to renewed Pardon; 12. Nor ever have died and rotted in a grave; 13. Nor
would the Magistrates Execution of Justice on us for our crimes be owned as
Gods Justice. 14. All men wou^d have the same degree of Innocence and Holiness.
15. It would have been a wrong to us, when we had perfectly kept the Law of
Innocence, to suspend our right to Pardon and Salvation upon new Conditions in
a new Covenant. 16. We having perfectly kept the Law of Innocence as to the
death, as soon as we believe, cannot be under another Law of the Redeemer that
has the true uses of a Law. 17. Our own actions besides Christ's) are not
capable of Reward or Punishment. 18. All the Texts of Scripture that mention
inherent or practical personal Righteousness, would contradict our imputed
Righteousness, or make us supererogate, and be more than perfectly righteous.
19. We need not fear that any new crime should diminish our Righteousness which
is perfect, and can neither increase or decrease. 20. Whether we should not be
as righteous on Earth (even under David's or Peter's sin) as in Heaven? and
whether we should be Deified by being divinely righteous, and justified by Gods
Essential Righteousness, as Andr. Osiand^r taught, I leave to be considered, as
you further explain your self.


So much to your Epitome, which if I wrong you by judging it all your own, it
is long of your self that own it as aforesaid in the gross: If the Dr. be
wronged, it is by you, and not by me.

. 21. In the conclusion you do no more peaceably than provedly pronounce us in
a manner agreed, enumerating the particulars in which we consent: But I have
told you wherein we are not agreed in words, nor in sense, if those words be
not mis-used, whatever we are in latent sense.

I still grant that Christ suffered, yea and obeyed, in some sort, in our
stead, though not in our person, Civil, or Legal, so as that we are Legally
reputed the doers of it by or in him: And that his assuming our Nature, and
being the second Adam, a voluntary Sponsor and Mediator, was a necessary reason
of the application of the fruits to us; and that we are as certainly and
happily justified and glorified, as if we had been the doers and satisfiers our
selves (so many as are saved;) But not on the same reasons, nor in the same
method or manner of conveyance: Nor when in judgment we are accused as having
sinned and deserved death, can we deny it, and plead that we were innocent by
another, or by imputation, as we should have been, had we been innocent our
selves: But we must plead pardon, and a free gift of life, through the merits,
satisfaction and intercession of a Savior.

21. And to all before said, I may add, That they who account all the Laws
obligations on each person to be fulfilled by Christ, (and not only
satisfaction given for our not fulfilling them, 1. Must suppose that one person
of Christ to have been Legally as many persons as he died for (or justifies:)
For the Law laid as many distinct obligations on them, as they were persons,
and laid them only on their persons. It said, Thou Adam, Thou Eve, shall
personally obey perfectly, or die: And the Law of Nature, and of Moses said in
sense, Thou Solomon, Thou Manasses, (and so of all others) shall do all things
commanded, and not sin. Now that in all Christ's Obedience he was Legally and
imputatively so many several persons, Adam, Eve, Solomon, Manasseh, and so that
none of these broke Gods Law, I find not in the Scripture. If you say, Adam was
Legally as many persons as are born of him in sin, I deny it: He was the Root
of all his Posterity, and they were in him seminally and virtually, but not
personally, actually, or imputatively: But by one man's disobedience, as their
Root and Cause, many are made sinners: And by one man's obedience, as the Root
and Cause, all Believers are made righteous. It is enough that one Savior and
Mediator in a third person of his own did and suffered that which by its merits
and value (as attaining the Ends of the Law and Government) procured our
deliverance from a necessity of perfect obeying as the Condition of Life, and
from guilt and misery, and is become the Root, Head and Donor of Grace and
Glory.

2. And if (as you say) it be the very thing that is imputed to us as ours, to
all intents, as if we had done it, why have you not told us, whether it be all
that Christ did, or but some? and what? and how from Scripture you prove the
distribution? and whether we have not thus, a Righteousness, which is both too
much, and too little.

I. Too much: For we were not obliged by the Law to be born of a Virgin, by the
Holy Ghost, to fast forty days, to turn Water into Wine, to cast out Devils, to
heal all diseases, and raise the dead, to inaite the Gospel, and send out
Apostles. etc. If you say that so much only of Christ's Obedience is in it self
our own, as we must else have done our selves, I ask the proof of the
limitation.

And II. Is it not then too little, if it must be the Idem, and not the
Aequivalens? For some of us are bound to the Offices of Parents, and some of
Husbands and Wives, some of Servants, some of Magistrates, some of Soldiers,
some to actions proper to the sick, to the old, and other conditions which
Christ was never in: We are bound to mortify our sinful lusts, to pray for
pardon and grace, to receive a pardon offered, to yield to the mortifying
motions of the Spirit, etc. which Christ was not capable of. It was enough that
he undertook all that was fit for him, and necessary by equivalency to
satisfy, and merit a free gift of grace and glory for us, and that he
performed the undertaken conditions and duties of all that Law which was laid
on him; without doing all the same things which were laid on us.

. 22. And one thing more I desire you to note, which Grotius de satisf. has
minded us of, viz. The great difference that there is between the case of a
Rector and a Creditor, and between a Subject and a Debtor, or a Debt of
Obedience or Punishment and a Debt of Money: For the name of Debt occasioneth
some men to run the similitude of a Creditor and Debtor beyond the bounds. The
Law requires not a Debtor pecuniae, 1. To pay the very same individual money
which he borrowed, but the same sum. 2. Nor to pay it by his own hands. But the
Law of God obliges every Subject to every individual act which it commands.
2. And obliges every man to do it all in his own person and not disjunctively
by himself or a Vicar. That Christ is limitedly and only to certain ends and
uses a Vicarius poenae in the person of a Mediator, is not because the Law as
made to Adam required or accepted it, but the Lawgiver as above his Law. The
Law that bound Christ is fulfilled; but the Law that bound Adam and every man
is not fulfilled unless that same man do himself all the same things which it
commanded him.

23. I conclude all with these professions of my opinion of all these
Controversies.

I. I believe that the Libertines (commonly called Antinomians) whose Doctrines
I have in many Books opposed, do use those ill Notions, and Methods which on
pretense of magnifying Christ and free grace, do by plain consequence wrong
Christ and Grace, and Subvert the Gospel, and should rather be thence
denominated, than from their denying the Law. (The Law of Innocence as a
Covenant, and of Moses as Jewish being truly ceased.)

II. I believe that yet most of those that thus err in notions, are not so bad
in their Judgment of the matter it self as their words import; but that want of
Skill in Terms and Method has seduced men of dull wits, slight popular
studies, and undigested thoughts, to speak worse than they think, and had they
more exact distinguishing and expressive Skill, they would show that they mean
mostly as others do.

III. I believe that unskilful contending with the Papists has occasioned all
this, while in the heats of Controversy men bend all their wits to disgrace the
Doctrine of their adversaries, not fearing enough unsafe expressions and
contrary extremes while they seem to serve their present turn: And then
departing from Scripture terms as necessary to set their hearers far enough
from their adversaries, are next carried into a multitude of new made articles
or notions, contrary also to Scripture sense, when they have once thus left the
words.

IV. I believe that most honest, plain, less learned Christians, and the
thoroughly studied and learned Teachers, agree in the true sense of the Doctrine
of Justification which the half studied contenders make to seem more difficult
than it is, and muddy it by their unlearned questions and words. That is, all
plain Christians hold, that [ Christ God and Man is our only Savior who
obeyed, suffered and interceedeth for us, as a Mediator, and is become as
redeemer the Lord of all, even of Nature, Grace and Glory, and has merited,
purchased and made a Covenant and Law of Grace, that whoever believes in him
shall not perish, but have everlasting life; offering his Grace to all, and
effectually giving it to some; And that as our King and Lord Redeemer he
governs us by this Law, and requires Faith and Repentance of all that will
be pardoned, and sincere obedience to the end, of all that will be glorified;
and as he pardons all past sin at our Conversion, so to those that believe
and sincerely obey him, he pardons all their following sins; and as he makes
them righteous by giving them his Spirit to perform the conditions of pardon,
adoption and Salvation, and by forgiving all their sins, and freely giving them
right to life Eternal, for the sake of his Sacrifice and Merits, so he
accordingly virtually justifies them by his Covenant, and so esteems them,
and will so use them, and will so judge them finally by his Sentence hereafter,
and will receive them as so justified and adopted to his Glory.]

This all agree in till wranglers trouble them; and this much is enough.

FINIS.
A Defense of Christ, AND Free Grace: Against the SUBVERTERS, Commonly Called,
Antinomians or Libertines; WHO Ignorantly Blaspheme CHRIST on Pretense of
extolling Him.

IN A DIALOGUE Between An Orthodox Zealot, AND A Reconciling Monitor.

WRITTEN On the occasion of the reviving of those Errors, and the Reprinting
and Reception of Dr. Crispes Writings, and the danger of subverting many
Thousand honest Souls by the Notions of Free Grace, and Justification,
mis-understood and abused by injudicious, unstudyed, prejudiced Preachers.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the lower
End of Cheapside, near Mercers-Chapel, 1690.

TO THE READER. A POSTSCRIPT to the Second Book.
SInce the Writing of all that follows, I have seen the New Edition of Dr.
Crisp's Sermons: There are prefixed to it, twelve Reverend Names, Mr.
Griffiths, Mr. Cockains, Mr. Chancys, Mr. Howes, Mr. Alsops, Mr. Not. Mather,
Mr. Increafe Mather, Mr. Knowles, Mr. Powels, Mr. Turners, Mr. Bures, and Mr.
Gammons. The Preface is Mr. S. Crispes invective against me, unnamed, with the
Citation of some Preachers Words as contrary to mine.

I must desire those Conformists that will write the next friendly debate, and
will charge Heresy on the Non-Conformists, that they will lay the charge on
none, but the guilty; and that they take not all whose Names are prefixed to be
of the judgment of Dr. Crispe (a Conformist): For I am past doubt, that Four or
Five of them are against it. If you ask, why then did they give their Names to
be hanged up like a Sign before the Door of a House of Seduction, it is like
they have something more to say for it than I know of: But their Words show you
that they only testify the Sermons to be the Drs. own. They are men of Peace,
and inclined to gratify others in attesting a truth, and I suppose, intended
not to promote untruth by it.

But I see the corrupting Design is of late, grown so high, that what seemed
these Thirty Four Years suppressed, now threatn^th as a torrent to overthrow
the Gospel, and Christian Faith, and to deny the tru^ Office of Christ as
Mediator and his Grace and Righteousness, by seeming ignorantly to extol them*
And Satan designeth to make us a common scorn to Papists and Malignants, by the
palpable grosnes^ of such men's undeniable Errors. And therefore I dare neither
give them my Name, nor be silent in such a common scandal and danger, while I
can speak and write.

It offends me that I must but briefly name their errors, instead of a large
confutation of them, while the whole Scripture is against them; but I have done
it often largely, which they will not answer. And the Booksellers will Print no
Books that are large and insensible of our danger, think they are but few that
need it.

One error the Preface adds to the hundred* which were it a truth, would
carry the cause for them, and bring me to a recantation, viz. That Christ and
the Elect are one and the same Person. It is not a Relative personality that is
the question; for so Christ himself had many Persons, as one and the same man
may have the Person of a Father, of a Husband, of a Master, of a King, etc. But
it is Physical or Substantial Personality, which Mr. Crispe says, is more than
natural, we being one Spirit, and Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh* And
if this be so, I shall grant that we are as righteous as Christ, and Christ now
in Heaven (and not on the Cross only) is guilty of all our sins, and was indeed
as they call him, the greatest blasphemer, hater of God, adulterer, etc. in the
World.

But 1. If all the Elect be really many distinct Persons, t^en, either Christ
must be also as many dist^nct Persons, or not be the same Person with them a^l,
or any of them. But the Elect are many distinct Persons, and shall be so for
ever: Peter was not Paul or John: They do not the same Acts: They be not guilty
of the same numerical sins: Every man shall answer for all that he has done in
the Body, and not for all that all others of the Elect have done. All the Elect
shall not sit on the twelve Thrones, as Ap^stles: All did not Preach the Gospel
as Paul did, nor Persecute as Paul did: Overthrow distinct i^dividuation here
or in Heaven, and how dismal will be the consequence? And here, will not each
man have right to another House, Wife, Food, Goods, if they are but one Person?

To be one in Spirit, is no more to be one Person, than seeing by the same
Sun-light makes all Lies to be one Eye. For the Spirit is not our personality.

And if you make Christ to be many Millions of Persons, where is his Unity in
himself, or with any.

2. If Christ and the Elect, be all one, and the same Person, then the Elect
are really God himself: For the Person of Christ, is God: These men are unfit
to confute the Schools who have long maintained that the very human nature of
Christ, is not a part of his Person, but an accident of it; because he is but
one Person, which is the second in Trinity from Eternity, and is God (of which
see Derodon de Supposito.) And if we are all one God, then God suffers when we
suffer, and God judges himself when he judges us: May not Men pray to such
then, and Worship them as Gods, and Trust in them as Gods? Is not this Idolatry
worse than Image Worship, or than Anti-christianity?

3. If Christ and the Elect be one and the same Person, then Christ sins
when ever they sin: And Christ suffered for his own sin, even that which he by
them committed: And then he pardons his own sin; (or who pardons him)? But
all this is false.

4. And it would follow, that all the Elect are Mediators to themselves, and
dyed for their own sins, and pardon their own sins, and justify themselves, and
believe in themselves, and save themselves.

5. And are all Christ's threatenings against himself, which are against us?
Does Satan overcome him, when ever he overcomes us? Is his Law made for
himself, that is made for us? Does he command a Father to correct Christ, when
he commands him to correct his Children? Does the Magistrate hang Christ when
he hangs a Malefactor, though Elect, (that sins by surprise.)

6. Where there are diverse Bodies, and diverse Souls, and diverse Understandings,
and diverse Wills, there are diverse Persons: But of all these, in Christ and us
there is a diversity.

I believe that the Union between Christ and the Glorified, will be nearer than
we can well now conceive: But not such as will make us one and the same Person
with Christ. I have read in Phanatick Friars, such as Barbanson, and Benedictus
de Benedictis, and in Gibienf the Oratorian, of our Deification, and being
Goded with God, and that it is the only perfection to know no being but God:
And I have read of such Heathen as Worshipped Demon-Gods, that once were men.
And it is the top of the now prevalent Bruitism, or Sadducism, to believe that
all Souls are but one God, and as Candles that are individuate by the Oily
Matter, when extinct, are all one in the common Air; and that there is nothing
but God and Matter. But I hope few good Christians will so far lose the
knowledge of themselves, as to take themselves to be the same Person with him
that is God: Angels forbad John to Worship them, though he took them not for God.
Do those Churches exercise Discipline upon such as are one Person with Christ?
Do they Excommunicate Christ for sin? No wonder that Dr. Crispe charge David
as speaking untruth, for complaining of his sin, and Gods displeasure; though
John says, He is a Liar that says he has no sin, and all God's Saints have
professed Repentance; but I read not that Christ did ever Repent of sin.

I doubt some will think that I feign Mr. Crispe to say what he does not, his
words are these:

First, He accuses me as saying [ To say our Union with Christ so makes us
Flesh of his Flesh, that we are the same PERSON with Christ; this is so gross,
that I will not bestow time to confute it.] He answers [Nor cannot as long as
that Text is in our Bibles; we are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of
his Bones, Ephesians. 5 -- God says, He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit;
which is more than a Political Member, or a Natural Member either.] I believe
that it is more than Political, but not such as makes us one Person with
Christ. Andrew Osiander, is condemned by Protestants for feigning that the
Essence of God is our Righteousness. Nestorius was condemned by General
Councils, as supposed to feign Christ to have two Persons: What would these
Councils have judged of them that feign him to have Million of Persons, or
Millions, to be all one Person with him?

As to Mr. Crispes Epistle, it calls more for Pity, than Confutation: He
pretends out of his Notes, to tell what I Preached at Pinners Hall, Jan. 17.
1673. and Aug. 11. 1674. (so long since.) And he begins with a gross untruth,
that I said, [A man's first believing is by external Arguments, not by the
Operation of the Spirit, but his after believing is by the Spirit.] I do not
believe that the man purposed to lie, but trusted h^s false Ears, and Notes.
The World knows how voluminously I have written to the contrary: Never such
an Opinion came into my head: But contrarily I have copiously proved, that even
common Faith, much more the first justifying Faith, is the work of Gods Spirit:
My Catholic Theology, proves it all at large. I doubt not but both first and
second Faith is by Scripture Argument; but never dreamed that it was not the
Work of the Spirit: Indeed I find few of his accusing Notes, that be not
falsific^tious by his defective or patcht Recital.

I am sorry that he has wronged the Memory of such good men as Mr. Fowler, and
Mr. Cole, by telling the World how unstudied, and yet how confident they have
been in some points. But he did worse in citing Dr Manton, that incurred their
Censure for defending me in that very Pulpit, where he says I Preached against
such accusers as he; and was wholly of my judgment. And reciting ArchBishop
Usher, who perused my Confession written against the Antinomians, and altered
not a word in it, before I published it; I got him and Mr. Gataker to read it
(and it was the last Work that Mr. Gataker did in the World, as his Epistle and
his Sons show.)

Had the Prefacer read but that one Book, my Confession. written in 1655. and
there the explications of the Controversies, and the many score plain Texts and
Arguments, and the hundred Testimonies of Synod, and Protestant Divines, for
the Doctrine which I defend; and specially if he have read my Explication of
all these Controversies, in my Catohlick Theology, and Methodus, and Dispute of
Justification, and of Justifying Righteousness; and yet h^d called for an
answer to Mr. Cole or Mr. Fowler, I should have told him that he, and such as
he, are too hard or deaf for me to answer.

But he impertinently cites other men, that say, we are justified by Free
Grace, and the Righteousness of Christ, and not by Works; as if he would falsely
intimate that I deny it, when I neither trust to, nor know any Righteousness
that is not merely subordinate to the Rig^teousness of Christ; and take his
Righteousness Habun^l, Active and Passive, to be the only and perfect
Meritorious Cause of our Justification, and Salvation of Grace and Glory: And I
wonder not, that Paul counted his own Righteous^ess by the ^aw to be dung in
compa^ison of being found in Christ, having his Righteo^sness. But I abhor the
opinion, that C^rist's Righteousness given us, is all without us, and none
within us, when Christ dwells in us; as if 600 Texts of Scripture were all
false, that speak of the necessity of an inherent and act^ve Righteousness. I
abhor the opinion of any works necessary to Justification or Salvation, or to
any common Blessings in the sense of Paul; such as make the reward to be of
Debt, and not of Grace. I think few men living, are less tempted to magnify or
trust to any worth of their own, than I am. I look not for a bit of Bread, or
an h^urs Ease, or Life, or the Pardon, or Acceptance of one Duty, or of my
Holiest Affections (so faulty are they by their great Imperfection) but merely
from the Free Grace of God, and the Merits and Intercession of Christ. But
should I take all for Error that this Preface recites as such, and all for
truth that Dr. Crispe and such men write; I should look for wiser men than him
or Mr. Cole, to Anathematize me, rather as an Anti-Gospeller, than a mere
Antinomian. And I am the sorryer for the prefixing of the Twelve Reverend
Names, when I find by their Epistles that they had read this Preface, so full
of false Citations and gross Error, and say not a word against it, nor against
such a Book.

Mr. Cockain, in his Epistle, directing it to them that live Godly in Christ
Jesus, t^lls them, that the Kingdom of God within them, shall never be shaken;
and the Divine Nature that has swallowed them up, shall for ever satisfy them
with variety of Contentments. And is not that ours which is within us? And is
this Kingdom and Divine Nature, nothing but that which Christ did without us,
imputed to be done by us? And if this be no subordinate Righteousness, what
does the word signify so many hundred times used in the Scripture?

Let them but grant Justification by Faith, and let them assign Faith what
Office therein they can reasonably imagine, without flat denying all Paul's
Doctrine, and they will confute Dr. Crispe. Say but that Faith is imputed to us
for Righteousness, and give not the lie to Paul, and sure we shall be
reconciled. But if they will tell us that by Faith, Paul means not Faith, but
Christ's Righteousness; they must prove that they have more than a Papal Power
to make God's Word, by making the Sense, when God makes but the Letter, before
we can renounce the Scripture and believe them. And yet, if they will expound
Imputation soberly, we shall grant them the matter (that Christ's Righteousness
is accounted to us of God, as the only Meritorious Cause of our Justification
and Salvation) though we believe that by Faith, Paul means Faith.

But if they still say, that by Faith is meant only the Object of Faith, and
not the Act; could we but get them to forbear Anathematizing Men for being so
Learned, as to understand English, we might yet hope at least, to keep the
flame of their Zeal out of the thatch within the Chimney; by telling them the
difference between the Object of Faith, as such, and the person that is the
Object, otherwise considered. In real Existence, Christ, though not yet believed
in, is the sole meritorious Cause: But it is only in esse cognito, that Christ
is the Object of Faith. And School-Boyes that have no damnable Learning, may
teach these confident men, that the Object as an Object believed, is the very
form in specie of the Act of Faith: It is an Act without it, but not this Act,
viz. the Christian Faith. As sin in esse real is damning, but in esse cognito
objectivo, it is the form of the Grace of Repentance; so is it here. But if
they will grant that by Faith is meant Faith, and not say that Paul condemns
Justification by Faith, as being but Justification by Works; let them but tell
us, how it justifies: I say not efficiently at all; but only as a mere
receptive qualification: If they say as an Efficient Instrument, they give it
much more than I do; and lay it on the Act or the (...) Credere, as they speak:
For, what else is the Instrument; I hope they mean not that Christ and his
Righteousness is but the Instrument: But of this, more after.

I thought it meet to have recited many hundred Texts of Scripture, which they
directly contradict, which good Men should rather believe than them: But if the
Reader will peruse my Confession, he will find it there done already.

And I thought it necessary to commend the good Lives of many of them
(excepting the Schism and Unrighteousness that Faction does involve them in)
lest the Grosness of their Verbal Errors, which come from unskilfulness in
Words and Methods, should tempt many to judge of the Men by their Words, and
Opinions; and should harden the malignant to justify all their hard Censures
and Usage of the Non-Conformists for their sakes. And yet Mr. Crispe is one of
my sharp Censurers, for charitably excusing Men from lesser Errors than his
own (while he falsifyeth my Words about our difference with the Papists.)

I have said often, and long ago, that I cannot be so hardened against God's
miraculous Judgments in New England, on Mrs. Hutchison and Mrs. Dyer, and the
Case of their Governor, and Mr. Wheeler, recited by Mr. Weld, in his Book,
called, The Rise and Fall of Antinomianisme in New England, as to depise those
with the Scripture, to bear Satan seeming an Angel of Light or Righteousness. I
once more counsel them that are prejudiced against my Writings, to read Mr.
Bradshaw (an Independent) of Justification, Mr. Truman's Grand Propitiation,
Ant. Watton de Reconciliatione, Mr. Gataker against Saltmarsh, and on Lucius
and Piscator. Ben. Woodbridge (the first Graduate of the New England College,)
Mr. Thomas Warren, Mr. Hotchkins, Mr. Gibbons of Blackfriars, his Lecture at
Giles, Placeus in These. Salmuriens. Testardus, Codurcus; but above all, Vinc.
le Blancks Theses; and the Breme Divines, S. Charles Wolsley of Justification,
and the foresaid Book of Mr. Weld a New England Congregational-man: The Subject
of which, I suppose two or three of the Twelve Epistlers (the two Mr. Mathers,
if not Mr. Chancy also) will give you a truer Account of, than Dr. Stubs (a man
miserable in life and death) did do.

Once more I conculde, that if Christ was one Person with the Elect, before
they were men, he was one Person with these that were no Persons: If he were
one Person with them, before their Conversion, he was one Person with Millions
of wicked men, and slaves of the Devil, and the haters, and persecutors of
Himself, and of Holiness. And seeing they hold that this Union is not
dissolvable, do they not feign him now in Heaven to be one Person with all the
Elect wicked sinners on Earth?

I still say, I will not lose my Charity as to the Persons of these blind
Zealots, and unskilful Talkers: But how conscionably soever they live, it is no
thanks to their ungodly unchristian Doctrine. If they prevail to make England
believe that elect wicked Infidels are as righteous as Christ; and that it is
impossible that any sin should hurt them, or that any Prayer or Duty should do
them any good, (the express Words of Dr. Crispe) and that to intend their own
good by any, is to wrong the Free Grace and full salvation by Christ (with the
rest like this): I should have more hope of the Turks and Heathens, than of
that Land that receives and practices these Principles, notwithstanding Mr.
Cokain's Benediction to those that practice what this Doctor taught.

The God of Truth and Mercy, save a poor Nation from the extreme Factions that
run deeper daily into the guilt of Impenitency and doleful Divisions; and let
not sober Peacemakers mourn in despair, over a hopeless Generation of
self-destroyers, as having labored for Peace in vain.

Jan. 15. 1689/90
A further Advertisement to the READER.
HE that will know whether I rightly cite Dr. Crispe, must read his own Books,
es^ecially, Lib. 2.Sermon. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.15. and Vol. 1. Sermon. 9, 10, 11. He
is so large, that I must give you but a Taste of his Doctrine, in his own Words.

Vol. 2. Sermon. 3. page (Edit. 1644.) 88, 89, 90. It is Iniquity it self that
the Lord has laid on Christ. -- It is the Fault or Transgression it self -- To
speak it more plainly, Have thou been an Idolater, a Blaphemer, a Despiser of
God's Word, a Trampler on Him? Have thou been a Despiser of Government, a
Despiser of thy Parents, a Murderer, an Adulterer, a Thief, a Liar, a
Drunkard? Reckon up what thou can against thy self, if thou have Part in the
Lord Christ, all these Transgressions of thine become actually the
Transgressi^ns of Christ, and so cease to be thine, and thou ceasest to be a
Transgressor, from that time they were laid on Christ, (which he often says, was
before we were born) to the last hour of thy Life: So that now thou art not an
Idolater, thou art not a Persecutor, a Thief, or a Murderer, (Why will not our
Judges believe this, but hang innocent Men?) Thou art not an Adulterer, thou
art not a sinful Person, (Why did Christ then justify the confessing
Publican?) Reckon what Sin soever you commit, when you have part in Christ, you
ARE ALL that Christ was, Christ is ALL that you were, 2 Cor. 5.21. mark it
well: Christ is not himself so completely righteous, but we are as righteous as
he was: Nor we so completely sinful, but Christ became, being made sin, as
completely sinful as we: Nay, more; The righteousness that Christ has with the
Father, we ARE the same righteousness; that very sinfulness that we were,
Christ is made that very sinfulness before God; so that here is a direct
Change: Christ takes our PERSONS, and Conditions, and stands in our stead; we
take Christ's PERSON and Condition, and stand in his stead: What the Lord
b^held Christ to be, that he beheld his Members to be; and what he beheld the
Members to be in themselves, that he beheld Christ himself to be. -- Christ
himself is not more righteous, than this Person; and that Person is not more
sinful than Christ was.

Page 91, etc. He at large striveth to prove that it was not only the guilt of
sin, or the Punishment that God put on Christ, but the very sin it self. So p.
108. (Having well proved, that Imputation signifies not, That God lied, or
mis-reckoned, but only reckoned that to be, which truly is: He says, [That
Christ became as really and truly the Person that had all these sins, as he
that did commit them really and truly, had them:] Read more, Sermon. 6. page 139.
There is not one Passage of Scripture that speaks of imputing our sins to
Christ.

Vol. 1. Sermon. 10. page 242. For ANY HURT that such sins can do to us, it is
not possible; for Christ has made satisfaction. page 239. Though sins be
committed, there is no peace broken, because the breach of peace is satisfied
in Christ. p. 234, 235. That they are to do, they are not to do it with ANY EYE
to their own Advantage, that being already perfectly completed to their hands,
before they do any thing: But with an Eye to glorify God, and to serve their
Generation. And page. 236, 237. he is large in threatening them that pr^y or do
any thing for Life, or furthering our Salvation, Do this, and live; being the
Voice of the Law, therefore we must do nothing that we may live, (or as
e^sewhere he says) to ^e ever the better for it.

P. 230, 231. There is not any Duty you perf^rm, when you have attained the
highest pitch, that has any prevalency or availableness, to produce to bring
forth any the le^st Good to your selves: I say again, There is nothing you can
do, from wh^ (...) you ought to expect any Gain to your selves by doing; you
ought not to seek to find in what you do, etc. -- No Believer for whom Christ
dyed, should have the least Thought in his heart, of promoting or advanceing
himself, or any end of his own, by doing what he does, but to glorify God, and
do good to men.

You cannot propound or intend to your selves any possible Gain by Duty, etc.
Why then do men plow, and sow, and trade, and eat, etc. Is it not as much
against Christ to do good for others, as for my self? Is glorifying God
inconsistent with seeking to be saved?

Reader, I give thee but this Taste, to show thee how truly I cite him in all
the rest. I have Five Arguments against these Men. 1. The Essential Nature of
Man. 2. The Nature of God, and his Government. 3. The Office and Work of
Christ, and Grace. 4. The whole Bible. 5. The Consent of Mankind, especially
Christians.

The dismal Effects: 1. The confirming of Thousands in Popery, seeing our
horrid Errors. 2. Hardening Malignants in Impenitency, as being but against
odious Heretics. 3. Seducing ignorant Zealots, cheated by good Words and
Names. 4. Threatening the Land with uncurable Division. 5. Disaffecting Rulers
against us as intolerable.

To the TEACHERS of Dr. Crispe's Doctrine.
THE laudable Conversations of many of you, show, that you are not wholly v^id
of Religi^n: B^t it is no thanks to your irreligious Doctrine. It is no wonder
that such men would cast out Reason from Religion; for their Religion seems
to be by mere instinct: But if it must be without Reason, it is hard that they
will make it all against Reason. While Reason is essential to man, no wonder
then if Religion meet with much Resistance; and if, as one of Mr. Crispe's
Authors says, (nigro Carbone notandus) That to cause one to believe in Christ,
be as great a Miracle as Christ 's Resurrection, and as great an Instance of
Almightiness, as any Work that God has made: No doubt, but it is a hard, and
great, and special Work, and an effect of Omnipotency, or else it were no
effect of God: For, omnis potentia est Dei est Omnipotentia. A Hand or tongue
moves not but by Omnipotency; but all that God does, are not equal Instances
or Demonstrations of Omnipotency; nor are they all Miracles, and as great
Miracles as the Resurrection of Christ. Is not the Preaching of the Gospel a
means of men's believing? And is that as great a Miracle as Christ's
Resurrection, that is wrought by so rational a means, used by man? I am sure
St. Paul used not so much to prove the Truth of Christianity from this Medium,
[ some believed it; ergo, it is true] as by the Resurrection of Christ: Nor is
every Woman or Man's Belief as good a Proof that the Gospel is true: I would not
have Infidels taught to say, If God damn me for not believing, it will be for
not doing that which is as great a Miracle as Christ 's Resurrection, and as
great an Instance of Almighty Power, as the making of Sun and Moon, and of the
World: Overdoing is undoing.

But if the men that I oppose, be religious, I cannot deny but it must be by
Miracle or Madness: Consider and judge.

Is it any other to be for Religion, and to preach and labor, and suffer for
it, if it have no Goodness in it, and will do no good, and must thus be
believed? That is good that does good. Dr. Crispe is large and earnest in
telling us, that nothing that we do, must be done to do us any good, or give us
the least Gain or Advantage, nor must such a Thought come into our hearts, that
we shall be ever the better for it; for Christ has already done all that we
need. And if it do us no good, it does good to none. To God it can do none; if
we be righteous, what do we give him. Our goodness extends not to him, by
adding any thing to him. Psalm. 16.1, 2. And to men it can do no good, if it can
do none to our selves; for either those men be elect, or not: If they be elect,
all their good was perfected by Christ, as well as ours before they were born:
And it will be as great an injury to Christ, to endeavor to do them any good,
as our selves: And this either to their Souls or Bodies; for Christ has
purchased all good for both: Oh what an Antidote against Charity is here, and
against doing good to all men, especially to them of the Household of Faith, and
against feeding Christ in his Members!

But if they are not elect, these men say that Christ dyed not for them, to
purchase them any good, and to do them good, is impossible; and what a Wrong
would it be to Christ, for us to pretend to do men good without him, or his
purchase?

But they say, we must do it in Thankfulness, for being saved already: But what
good is in that Thankfulness, when it does no good to God or man, to our selves
or others? Is not this to trust to works? All Acts with them are Works, and
Thankfulness is an Act or Habit.

And if we are never the better for Love, Thanks, and Praises to God on earth,
what the better shall we be for them in Heaven? What do these men preach for?
What do they gather Churches for? And what do they exercise strictness for, by
their self devised terms of their Church Communion? What do they write for and
wrangle for, while they profess that it is not to do any good, to God, to
themselves, to the elect, or to the reprobate (which undenyably follows)? I
know you speak for Faith, Prayer, and Holiness, and I think you pray your
selves: But to what end, Christ says, ask and have, seek and find; Dr. Crispe
says, seek not to find: O think not that you shall be ever the better for
praying, or any thing else that you do in the greatest height of Piety. Is
Prayer only a Thanksgiving? I knew an old Man (one Dishforth, by Calverley near
Bradford in Yorkshire) who went among the Followers of Hacket and Coppinger,
called, Grundletonians (from the Town where they lived): And going for Novelty
among them, they breathed on him, and he came home so transported, that he left
his former way of Praying in his Family, with Confession and Petition, and did
all by Ecstasy, and Thanksgiving, and Praise, and so continued about a
Fortnight, and then returned to Humility, and repented (himself and his Son
were my Informers.)

I wonder that it is not so with all that think praying, hearing, reading,
meditating, and Sacraments do no good: And all from a sottish Exposition of [Do
this and live,] as if forbid doing any thing that we may live: And from an
Unchristian Conceit that Christ gives us all that ^e decrees or purchases,
as soon as the Price is paid: And that because he freeth us from the Law ^f
Works, and of Innocence, he makes us lawless; or is a Kin^ that has no Laws,
or Laws that are neither the Measure of Duty or Judgment, the keeping of which
is no subordinate Righteo^^ness in tantum; because it is not as Christ's, a
purchasing Price, and justifi^th not prim^rily n^r in totum: Or as if Christ
comma^^ed and ^ave a Righteousness which is no Righteousness; and that because
all justifying is not making Righteous, therefore making Righteous is no
Justifying, nor any part of it. Its a shame to stay to cite many ^^xts ^gai^st
these men, where the whole Bible, but especially all Christ's own Preaching,
and Parables, are so expressly against them, that I admire with what f^ce th^se
men pr^fess to believe the Scripture. And I w^n^er not that some of them say,
that all the w^^tt^^ Word is a Covenant of Works, and only the Spirits i^wa^d
Work is the Covenant of Grace: And when they tell us (as Crispe, p. 242. Vol.
1. Ed. 1.) That for any hurt that such sins can do us, it is not possible, for
Christ has made satisfaction. I wonder why they preach against that which does
no hurt; and why they excommunicate men for sin; and why they scruple Perjury,
Liturgies, Parish-Communion, or any Point of Conformity; yea, why some of them
will suffer rather than conform, when it is impossible for any sin to hurt
them: Why do your hearers pay you for Preaching against a harmless thing? Why
make you so much Complaint against Vnreforme^ness? Sin does God no hurt; it
does not the Elect any hurt by your Doctrine; for Christ has satisfied and
born all: And the Reprobate are incapable of good, for want of satisfaction for
them. I pray you do not speak out this Doctrine to the World: If you do, I
shall be glad that you are confined to your seduced ignorant Congregations. If
you will tell the World, If you are elect, no sin can possibly hurt you;
whatever Murders, Adulteries, Perjuries you commit it is none of your sin, but
Christ's: It cannot be his and yours too; and if not elect, you have no hope;
and if you be elect, you will be never the better for praying, considering,
charity* or any Act of Religion, or Justice, which you do, nor must once think
to gain any thing by it: How many Converts is this like to make? And what would
such a Nation come to? I hope few of the public Preachers that you call
scandalous, preach so scandalously as this. I have one Request to you, that if
you, or any other be questioned by the judges for Murder, Adultery,
False-witness, Perjury, or Robbery, you will not say as Dr. Crispe has taught
you [I am no Murderer, Adulterer, perjured Robber, etc. It is Christ that is
such a one, and not I; it cannot be my sin, when he has made it his]; for I
doubt, neither the Judges or Jury well believe you: If you believe not we, ask
the Judges, whether it be you or Christ that is the sinner? I doubt it is you
that will be hanged.

If you say, [for what may not ignorance say] That it is not at the Bar of man,
but of God only, that Christ is the sinner, and not we: I Answer, Know you not
that Judges and Princes are God's Officers, and that the Judgment is the Lords;
and that what they do according to his Will, he does by them: He does not
command Rulers to hang men for a sin that is none of theirs. All men's Judgments
are Nullities, that are against the fore-known Judgment of God. It is the King
that punishes when the hangman executes: God punishes men by Rulers, and
does it righteously.

I write all this, the rather because Mr. Cokain, in his Preface, exhorts
Preachers to go on where the Dr. left: I humbly beseech them first to read and
believe, Mat. 5. and 6. and 7, 8. and 13.18.25. and all the Sermons and
Parables of Christ; and not downright to give him the Lie, and call it exalting
him: And for them that report that there are no such Words in Dr. Crispe, as I
report, I wonder not while they think that lying can do them no hurt, and is
not their sin, but Christ's.

And they that believe they are under no Law, may believe that they have no
Transgression, nor Christ for them, when they had never any. And to them that
talk of inherent Righteousness, as less necessary than God has made it; I
desire them but to mark what Christ says of it, and to remember that sin is
much of Hell, and holiness of Heaven: And that Christ came to save his People
from their sins, as more righteous than the Scribes and Pharisees inh^rently,
and to make them a peculiar People, zealous of good Works, and holy as God is
holy; and to bethink them whether to disgrace the Building, be to honor the
Architect; and whether the ^orth, or the worthlesness of the Work, more honor
the Workmen; and whether the Cure of the Sick dishonor the Physician: And
whether to say, that my Clock or Watch will go by artificial means, or only no
longer, than the Work mans-Finger only moves it, do more honor the Artist:
And whether the Psalms would so much call us to glorify God for his Works, if
all that is ascribed to his Works, were taken from his Honor. The Lord teach
us better to understand that Word, that makes the simple wise, and not to set
Christ against himself, and against his own Honors, Government and Laws,

A Defense of Christ, AND Free Grace, etc.
Chap. 1. Prefatory.
Ortho. Sir, Having my self, and the Congregation which I am Related to, been
in danger of the Errors called Antinomian; I wrote to you, to entreat you, who
have done so much heretofore, to Conquer and Extirpate those Errors, to get
the London Ministers, to publish their Judgments against Dr. Crispe 's Book,
and such others, now Reprinted, and rising up with re-newed danger.


Reconcil. You did so, and I answered you; 1. That I thought it not seasonable,
till the acceptance and success of that Book and such others, made our danger
so notorious and great, as would clearly justify our Confutation: I have
written on that Subject so much already, 1. In my Confession of Faith. 2. In my
Apologies against Mr. Craud^n, Mr. Aaires, and others. 3. In my Disputations of
Justification. 4. In my Life of Faith. 5. In my Justifying Righteousness, and
there against Dr. Tully; and my last Animadversions on Mr. Cartwright. 6. In my
Cathol^ck Theol^gy, especially the five last Chapters. 7. And in my Methodus
Theologiae. All which, are unanswered to this day, that I know not why I should
be forward to write much more: For they that will not read this that has been
so long written, are not like to read it if I yet write more.

And I am so fearful of stirring up the hidden spark of this mischief, that
having written Fourteen Years ago a short Decision of a multitude of these
Controversies, I suspended it, lest it should kindle New Oppositions.

2. And I told you, that we have now such public and dangerous Controversies,
about Royalty, Prelacy, Conformity, etc. that it is very unseasonable to make a
noise of the Errors and Factions among the Tolerated, though they should
somewhat increase by advantage of our silence, till we see what public
settlement there will be.

3. And I confess, I have an opinion that accidentally the Books which you
fear, will so effectually confute themselves, that they will occasion more good
among sober knowing Christians, than hurt to the ignorant professors, that will
be tossed up and down with every wind of Doctrine. For, 1. The whole tenor of
the Bible is against them. And will not Christians read the Bible? 2. The
Divine Nature on the Soul, and all Christian Experience is against them. And
will not Christians know that Work and Doctrine of Gods Spirit in them?

For Ins^ance* 1. Will they that are saved from Atheism ever believe that the
most Holy God is the maker of sins, yea, and m^de his own Son the greate^^
sinner in the World, when the Devil himself cannot make one man a sinner, but
only tempt him ^o be su^^; yea, that God made himself (in the second Person) a
sinner.

2. Will Christian^ eas^ly believe, that our Savior came to del^ver us from
sin^ by making himself worse (...) becoming the greatest ha^er of God and
G^^^ness, the greatest Infidel, Atheist, Blasphemer Murderer, Adulterer, Liar,
Thief, etc. in all the World, and consequently like the Devil, hated of God,
and having a Hell in himself? All Christians believe that our sins were laid
upon Christ as to their penalty, that he was Vicarius poenae, that he suffered
for us, the just for the unjust, to reconcile us to God, and that he was made
for us, a Sacrifice for sin, that we might be healed by his stripes, and washed
in his Blood.

But what Christian can believe Dr. Crispe and his Sectaries, that Christ took
not only the punishment and guilt (reatum poenae) but all the very sins
themselves of all the Elect, habitual and actual, privative and positive, of
omission and commission, and so really became the most wicked man in all the
World; and that lie saves us from sin, by becoming a thousand times worse
himself, than any of us; when it cannot be proved that any one Devil had so
great a hand in man's sin, as to make all our sins his own? And Dr. Crispe well
vindicateth God from false Imputation of that sin to Christ, which was not his:
But it is by Blasphemy, making that his, which was never his, even the very
sins of all the Elect. 3. And do you think any Soul that has the Spirit of
God, and reads and believes the Scriptures can believe this Dr. that no sin
can possibly hurt the Elect, because they are fully saved already by Christ?
And that it is against Christ and his Grace, to intend our Salvation, or any
good to our selves by any Duty we do, or to look to be ever the better for
praying, obeying, believing, but must do all only in thankfulness, and for the
good of others.

4. Do you think that a man (not to say a Christian) can believe that the
torments of the Stone, Gout, Colic, Convulsion, etc. are no hurt, or no
castigatory Penalty? And that it is no hurt or punishment for an Elect Person
to be under decays of Holiness, increase of Sin, prevalency of Temptations, the
terrors of God, and loss of his Consolations, and fears of Death: He that can
believe all this, may believe Transubstantiation against all the senses of
mankind. A Hundred of such Instances may be named, which have so ugly a
countenance, that men that loved their Souls, will be affrighted from
Antinomianism, by the reading of them. And I further tell you, that too sudden
and eager disputing against Heresy, does but engage men to stretch their wits
to find out what to say to defend it, and to take those for Enemies to God and
them, who shame their folly.

And I must confess, that though I am much for Ministers associations and
consultations in order to Concord and mutual Edification; I am not much for the
way of deciding doctrinal Controversies by majority of Votes, remembering what
Councils have done that way these 1300 Years, and how often either error or
unskilful decissions have the greater number; so that though now with us, they
will consent against errors; it may be taken for a precedent for erroneous
pluralities, to Tyrannize or tread down truth hereafter.


Ortho. But shall we therefore let Heresy spread unresisted.


Reconcil. No, But you will let it pass uncured, whether you will or not: You
let not ignorance, and pride, go unresisted: But if it were not uncured, there
would be no such Heresies. If all the Ministers in England subscribe a
detestation of gross ignorance and pride, do you think it would cure them? Does
it cure Atheism, Infidelity, Drunkeness, Lust, though all Preachers condemn
them?

If you can prevail with these men, to read and consider but one half of that
which I have written on these Subjects, instead of reviling that which they
never read or tried, you will not need to call for more Confutations of them.


Ortho. But a Confutation short and newly published, will be read by those that
will not read Books old and large.


Reconcil. I have staid since your first motion, to see whether there be like
to be any apparent necessity of any renewed opposition to this infection; and I
acknowledge, that now some necessity appears to me, in the new and zealous
attempts of the erroneous: But God in great mercy, has raised up many that are
fitter to oppose them, than I that in pain and languishing weakness, have time
little enough to meditate on my approaching change. But because the erroneous
have learned of the transformed Angel of Light, and his pretended Ministers of
Righteousness, to call their Errors, the Preaching of Christ, and Free Grace,
and to say, that all they Preach not Christ, but the Righteousness of man, that
wrong not Christ as much as they; I shall by God's help attempt briefly to try,
whether indeed they Preach Christ, or Preach against him; and whether they
Exalt him, or Deny him; and whether they Preach up Free Grace, or as Enemies
Reproach it. And I shall publish a brief Decision of the many Controversies of
Justification, which I cast by these Fourteen Years, lest I should provoke any
to revive the allayed quarrels: But their new and earnest Attempts, do now call
it out, by telling us, that this evil Spirit is again at work, and calls us
to a renewed Defense of Truth.


CHAP. II. An Enumeration of the Errors which have corrupted Christianity, and
subverted the Gospel.
Reconcil. BEfore I give you a Confutation of the Errors of the
Anti-Gospellers, I will promise these two things:

1. I will here give you a Catalogue of their Errors which I am Confute. 2. I
think it needful to caution you, what to think of the Persons, that you Censure
them not too hardly, though the Errors as worded, be very great.

I. And 1. As the general Fault of their Errors, is the confounding of things
which greatly differ; so by this, they corrupt the Doctrine of Adams
Communication of sin and guilt to his posterity, and thereby raise more
dangerous Errors, They feign, that God made a Covenant with Adam, (and all his
Posterity say some, as in him) that if he stood, God would continue him and his
Posterity; and if he fell, God would take it as if all his Posterity then
personally, sinned in him; and so, that either we were all then personally in
him, or God by Imputation would take us to have so been: And so that God's
Covenant and Imputation, made Adams sin, ours, further than it is by natural
propagation; not truly distinguishing between our being Personally in him, and
being but Virtually, and Seminally in him: And feigning God to make Adam not
only the Natural Father and Root of Mankind, but also Arbitrarily, a
Constituted Representer of all the Persons that should spring from him; and so
that God made them sinners, that were none, and that, before he made them men.

II. Whence they infer, that Christ was by Gods imposition and his own
sponsion, made the Legal Representative Person of every one of the Elect taken
singularly; so that what he did for them, God reputeth them to have done by him.

III. Hereby they falsely make the Person of the Mediator, to be the legal
Person of the sinner, and deny the true Mediatorship.

IV. But they cannot agree, when this Personating of the Elect began: Some say,
It had no beginning, but was from Eternity; because Election was from Eternity,
and we were Elected in Christ; and so were Persons from Eternity in him.

V. Others say, That it began at the making of the World, Christ being then the
first of Gods Works in a Super-angelical Nature, emaning from the Divine, which
contained all our Persons in it; as the Beams are of, or in the Sun.

VI. Others say, that this Personation began at the giving to Adam the first
Law or Covenant of Innocence, and that Christ was a person in the Bond or
Covenant: And that the meaning of it was, Thou or Christ personating thee,
shall perfectly Obey; or Thou or He shall Die the threatened death for Sin.

VII. Others say, that this Personation began at the making of the Promise,
Genesis 3. of the Se^d of the Woman, etc. And so, that Christ personated none
under the first Covenant.

VIII. Others say, that it began at Christ's Incarnation, when he took the
Nature of Man, and therewith all our Persons.

IX. Others say, that it began on his Cross, or at least, at his Humiliation,
and that he only suffered in our persons.

X. Others say, that it begins at our Believing and our Union with Christ by
Faith; and then he by Union personateth us.

XI. They deny Gods Covenant or Law of Innocence, that required our Personal
Obedience, as the condition of Life.

XII. They forge a Law that God never made, that says, Thou, or thy Surety,
shall Obey Perfectly, or Dye.

XIII. They falsely say, that God justifyeth none that are not really or
imputatively perfectly Innocent, Obedient, and such as never Sinned, but kept
all that Law.

XIV. They confound Gods Covenant with Christ as Mediator, imposing on him his
Mediatorial part, and the Covenant of the Father and Son, with fallen Man,
imposing on them the terms of Recovery and Life.

XV. They hold that the first Law (and some of them also Moses's Law) is done
away as to all the Elect, but is still in force to all the Reprobates, and was
in force to Christ: But whether it bound him to Obedience as our Representative
antecedently to man's fall, or only consequently, they are in their confusion at
a loss. And they hold that its curse and penalty sentenced after the fall by
God, fell on all the Reprobate and on Christ, but none of it on any of the
Elect, as having been suffered by Christ fully for them.

As I have said, The promissary part of that Law ceased, and so did the
condition of the promise, by man's sin making it impossible; but the threat did
transire in sententiam: And if Christ was antecedently in the bond of Obedience
for us, he was bound not to Eat of the forbidden Tree, and bound to dress the
Garden, and bound to take Eve for his Wife, etc. which are all false.

If he were bound by it as our representative after the fall, it bound him when
it ceased, and bound not us, which is false: And therefore it was only the Law
of perfect Innocence anew imposed on himself, by the Mediatorial Covenant that
bound him.

And if the Penal Sentence and Curse, be Executed on all the Reprobate, then it
is not ceased: And then it must be a Penalty, and that Curse, even on the Elect
before they believe, because till then, they have no part in Christ. And after
they believe, they must bear part of that Penalty, called a Curse, which was
fixed, and not reversed and pardoned; that is, The privation of those degrees
of Grace, Peace, and Joy, which they should have had if there had been no sin:
The Curse on the Earth, Sorrow in Childbearing, and Death: These cease not now
to be Penals, but are Sanctified Penalties. A Curse turned to a Blessing; an
Evil made a Medicine to our good; Correction is truly Penal, though profitable;
Christ suffered to attain his own Ends, and not to cross them, His Ends was not
to free the Elect from his own Government, or Correcting Justice.

XVI. They affirm, that the Covenant is made only with Christ, for us, but not
with us: As it God made none with man, and Baptizing and Christianity were not
Covenanting.

XVII. They feign God to have made an eternal Covenant with his Son; that is,
God imposing on God, the Law of Mediation.

XVIII. They most dangerously affirm, that Christ took not only the punishment
of our sin, and that guilt, or Reatum poenae, which is an assumed obligation to
suffer the punishment deserved by us, (to be Vicarius poenae) but all our very
Sins themselves: the very Essence of the Sin of all the Elect; the Reatum
Culpae: So that, though he never did sin himself, yet all our sins, habitual and
actual, positive and privative, of commission and omission, became truly and
properly Christ's own sins: And so, that he was truly judged a hater and
blasphemer of God and Holiness, and the greatest murderer, adulterer, thief,
liar, perjured Traitor in all the World, the sins of all the Elect being truly
His sins. Of which Dr. Crisp is positive and large.

XVIIII. They say, that God laid these sins of ours on him, and made him
properly sin for us, and not only a Sacrifice for sin: And so, that God is the
Maker of the greatest Sin.

XIX. They say, that Gods Imputation being truly but the accounting one to be
what he is; had not God made him a Sinner, his imputing or reckoning him such,
had been a Lie; which is true, though they nifer Falsehood from it, taking
Imputation of Sin, strictly for a true Estimation.

XX. They that make this Imputation to be before the Incarnation, make God to
make himself this great Sinner; that is, Christ while he was mere God: And so
make us a wicked God. When Satan can but Tempt us to sin, and its not proved
that any one Devil is guilty of all men's sins, they make God guilty of all;
yea, they that lay it on Christ only after his Incarnation, lay it on him that
is God.

XXI. They that feign Christ to have personated us in his first Covenant of
Redemption, make us by him, to have Covenanted to Redeem our selves, and to do
the Mediator-work.

XXII. They feign Christ to have made such an Exchange with the Elect, as that
having taken all their Sins, he has given them all his Righteousness; not only
the Fruit of it, but the Thing in it self: So that they are as perfectly
Righteous as Christ himself, and so esteemed of God.

But here they differ; 1. Some say we have only all his Passive Righteousness:
Some say also all his Active: 3. Others also all his Habitual: 4. Others, all
his Essential Divine Righteousness; and so are Goded.

XXIII. This perfect Righteousness, they say we have at least from the time of
Christ's death, before we were born, or had any personal Being.

XXIV. Hereby they must needs feign Christ, and us to be one and the same
Subject; or else the same Accidents, Habits, Acts and Relations to be in diverse
Subjects, still the same, which is a contradiction.

XXV. Hence they say, that the elect have no sin, because it is all Christ's,
and cannot be his and theirs also.

XXVI. They say that Christ having perfectly done the Work of a Savior, we are
perfectly saved, and want nothing necessary to Salvation.

XXVII. They say all sin past, present, and to come, are pardoned, even that
not committed (that is no sin.)

XXVIII. They say, that it is not possible that sin can do an elect Person any
hurt, Christ having been a perfect Savior from it all; so Dr. Crispe.

XXIX. They say, that no Prayer, or Duty, or Act of Man, can do us any good, or
further our Salvation, Christ only having done it already for us: so Crispe.

XXX. They add, that to pray, hear, read, obey, or do any Duty, as a means to
our own Good, or Salvation, is to sin against the Free Grace of Christ: But
that we must do it, 1. In thankfulness to Christ, that has saved us. 2. And
for the good of others.

As if it were not as injurious to Free Graece, to seek other men's Salvation as
our own; or we might not do good in love to our selves, as well as to our
Neighbors: Or, as if we ought not to plow, sow, labor, eat, drink, build,
etc. for our good; beca^se Christ is all: By this it seems, that Dr. Crispe
did not p^each or write his B^oks to do any good; because he took that to be a
denial of Christ's Grace.

XXXI. They say, that under Moses Law, David and the Elect, were not pardoned,
till they had sacrificed: But under the Gospel, all the elect are absolutely
pardoned, without any delay, or condition, or means on their part; as if there
had been so vast difference between the Fruits of Christ, and the way of his
Justification, then and now.

XXXII. They say, that Pardon and Justification are absolutely perfect at the
first, and so no more sin to be after forgiven, nor any punishment to be
remitted or removed.

XXXIII. They say, that no elect person suffers any the least punishment;
because all is forgiven, and Christ suffered all; and that no Pain or
Correction is now penal, or for sin.

XXXIV. They talk of our being freed from the Law, in so undistinguishing
universal Words, as if they knew no Law, but that of Innocence to Adam, and
that of Moses to the Jews, and thought it were a privilege to be lawless, or
that Christ had no Law: and so there were no Transgression.

XXXV. They hold, that Christ was no Lawmakers, and so must infer, that he was
no King, and had no Laws of his own, to Govern or Judge by; and so deny a chief
Part of his Office, and his Kingdom, and Government, who is King of Kings.

XXXVI. They say, If God should punish any sin of the elect, it would be
injustice; because it is all punished already on Christ, and the Debt is fully
paid by him.

XXXVII. They take God's Covenants and Laws to be things so different, as that
a Law is not his Covenant, nor his Covenant a Law: Whereas, (...) signifies
both; that is, God's Statute Law, containing the determinate Terms of Duty,
Reward and Punishment, Life and Death; and both have the same parts, his Law
having Precepts, Prohibitions, Promises, and Threatenings; and his Covenant, as
his has the same: And when it its (...), it becomes a mutual Covenant by man's
Consent; and the Law binds Subjects to that Consent.

XXXVIII. They are so much for a Christ without us, that they write as if the
Work of Christ within us, and by us, were a Dishonor to Christ, that causes
it, if we praise it: As if the Pr^^s^ of the Structure were a dishonor to the
Builder; or the Cure were a dishonor to the Physician, or the Glory of the
World, if praised, were a dishonouring of God. God praises his Servants, and
their Grace and Works; but if we praise them, they say, we rob Christ of his
honor.

XXXIX. They seem to hold, that Christ does all the Work of our Salvation,
immediately, without Instruments, or Means: And all that is ascribed to
subordinate Causes, were derogate from him: And so Apostles, Miracles,
^cripture, Writings, Preaching, were no Means of Good, or injured Christ; as if
Sun and Moon, Angels and Men, dishonored God.

XL. While they say, that no Duty must be done, for our own good, or salvation,
they destroy natural necessary self love, and directly would drive out all true
Religion from the World, and harden all the wicked in ungodliness, by taking
away those Motives, without which, no men are converted, or saved, and kept
from sin.

XLI. They hold, that whatever Law or Promise in Scripture, has any condition,
is part of the Law of Works: And that the Law or Covenant of Grace, is only of
what God will actually and absolutely himself effect, or that Efficience it
self; as if the Gospel were a Law of Works.

XLII. Accordingly, they hold, that God does not make any conditional Promise,
or threatening a means of his Spirit, or Christ's communicating of Free Grace:
And so that the Gospel has no conditional Promises, though there be conditional
Words; not understanding that God, who is Life, Light, and Love; Power, Wisdom
and Goodness, works by all three, and printeth the Image of all on his Elect,
working by efficient Motion, sapiental Order, and amorous attractive
communication.

XLIII. They hold, that no men's sins were the cause of Christ's Sufferings, but
the Elects: And that the rest are damned for want of a sufficient Sacrifice
offered for them.

XLIV. They hold, that all the Mercies that the Non elect have in all the
world, are given them without the Purchase of Christ.

XLV. Yea, many hold, that none but the Elect have any Grace, or any Mercy:
because it will end in their Damnation: And so Conscience has no just
Accusation, in Hell, or here, as for any sinning against Mercy; nor do they owe
God thanks for any.

XLVI. Whereas God has made, through Christ, a general Act of Grace, or Gift
of Christ, Pardon, and Life eternal, to all the World, on condition of fiducial
Acceptance of it as a Free Gift, and commanded the Offer of it to all; and will
doubly condemn the final Refuser; and by this Gospel-gift, as his Instrument,
pardons, and justifies the believing accepters. These men deny the very
being of this Gospel Act: They deny it to be either Christ's Law, or Covenant,
or Grant.

XLVII. They hold, that Christ, in our stead, did all that the Law bound us to
do; as if he had been a Husband, a Father, a Soldier. etc.

XLVIII. They say, That Christ's satisfaction by Sacrifice, was the the s^lutio
ejusdem, the payment of the same debts of suffering that was due to us; and not
properly satisfaction, which is, Redditio aequivalentis, or tantidem alias in
d^biti: as if he had suffered death Spiritual by loss of Holiness, and the
torments of Hell by an accusing Conscience, and the hatred of God.

XLIX. They say, That by the Imputation of his Righteousness, habitual and
actual, we are judged perfectly Just; that is, such as have no sin, yet he
suffered in our Person for our sins; which we are reputed never to have.

L. They say, That the Inherent and Active Righteousness which consists in
our Faith, Repentance, Love, and sincere Obedience, wrought by Christ in us,
does not Constitute us Righteous in Subordination to Christ's meritorious
Righteousness, in any part or degree; that is, that it is Righteousness, that
in tantum, makes no man ever the more Righteous, than if he had it not; q.d.
Albed^ quae non f^cit album, or Pat^rnitas quae non constituit Patrem; not
distinguishng universal and particular Righteousness.

LI. They talk of Justification, in mere ignorant confusion; not knowing the
various senses of the Word, or the diverse parts of the Work: They deride, that
distinctions which no reason can deny; they confound Justifying Efficiently,
Justifying Constitutively, Justifying Virtually, by the Gospel-Gift, or Law of
Grace* Justifying by E^i^e^ce, Justifying by Witness, Justifying by Plea and
Advocate, Justifying by Judicial Sentence, and by Execution. They set the
Causes against each others, as if it were a thing that had but one Cause; when
they meet with the word used for Sen^e and Justification by decisive Judgment;
they Exclude all the included and supposed Acts, that is, making Men just
Efficiently, constitutive Matter and Form, or Subject and Relation; the Gospel
Donation and Condonation, and all such previous Acts: And when they have done,
not knowing what they affirm or deny; they only cry up, the name of Christ's
Righteousness Imputed, not knowing what Imputation is, nor what sort of Cause
Christ's Righteousness is, whether Efficient, or Material, or Formal by
Constitution, and and think its true Meritorious Causality is too little. And
in their description, excluded sentential decisive Justification, which they
had denominated it to be, making it to be only the Donation of Christ's perfect
Righteousness as in its Essence, to be ours; and so joining the efficient and
constitutive Causes, yet leaving out the Instrumental Efficient, which is the
Gospel Donation, or Covenant-Gift, and calling Faith the instrumental Cause,
which is no Efficient Cause, but a Moral Reception of the Free-Gift, and a
Moral Qualification as a Receptive Condition, for our Title to the possession:
And whereas God never Judged a man* Righteous, till he had made him Righteous;
they say, That to Justify, is not to make Righteous, but to judge Righteous,
and yet describe judging by making: Yea, and exclude the sentential
Justification at the day of Judgment, thinking that it is all perfectly at our
first Justification Sentenced. As if God the Father, Christ as King, or
Prophet, the Holy Ghost, the Covenant of Grace, Faith, had no hand in our
Justification, but Christ's Righteousness imputed only.

LII. They talk much against being Justified by the (...) Credere, the Act of
Faith; and when they have done, ignorantly, are the maintainers of it against
those that deny it. For when we say that Faith does not Justify us, as that
Phrase signifies Efficiency, but that we are only said to be Justified by it,
as signifying a Receptive Condition, or Qualification; they say, that it
Justifies us as an Instrument which is an Efficient Cause: And it is the very
Act or (...) Credere (or nothing) which they call that Instrument: And thus
they make a War against themselves, while they ignorantly accuse they know not
what.

LIII. They blindly take Paul by Works to mean all humane Acts; when as, 1. The
whole scope of his disputing, is, against Justification by the Wor^s which are
set in opposition, or competition with Justification by Christ, and by Free
Grace, such as the Jews thought the keeping of Moses's Law was; which is the
Law that he does all along speak of. 2. And he expressly describes the Works
that he exclu^eth, to be those that are supposed to make the Reward to be of
Debt (for the value of the Work) and not of Grace: And do they know any
Protestant that is either for Justification, or Salvation by any such Works, or
for the being of any such? 3. And is not Faith a humane Act? And does not Paul
most plainly and frequently say, we are Justified by it? And did he call Faith,
Works?

LIVE. But to answer this, they err as grossly, saying, that [by Faith imputed
for Righteousness] and our being Justified by Faith] is not meant the the Act
or Habit of Faith, but the O^ject, Christ's Righteousness; not sticking hereby
to turn all such Texts into worse than* Nonsense; Put Christ's Righteousness
instead of the Word [Faith] in all those Texts, and try how it will run? And
why is Faith named if it have no part in the Sense? They say, That it
Justifies not as a Work: I say, it Justifies not efficiently at all; much
less as a Work in Paul's sense, that makes the Reward to be not of Grace, but
of Debt. Nor does it Justify as an Act in genere; for then, a quaten^s ad omne,
every Act would Justify; nor yet as a mere good Act or Work: For then, every
good Act would Justify as it does. But we are Justified by, 1. This Faith in
specie, which is our Fiducial Reception of Christ. 2. And that as it is
formally made by God, the condition of our participiation of the Gift, which is
Christ and his Justifying Meritorious Righteousness. Christ is not instead of
Faith, and Faith is not instead of Christ: It is Christ believed in, and
received; and not Christ without belief and reception.

And when they say, That it is the Object and not the Act; they multiply the
Proclamations of their undistinguishing ignorance, unskilfully pretending to
distinguish: For the Object Christ, is considerable; 1. In esse reali, in
himself. 2. Or in esse objectivo, which is, but in esse cognit^, in Idea or
Notion: Christ in esse reali, indeed, Justifies us, by Dying for us, and
Meriting for us, and doing that which Faith never did: But Christ in esse
objectivo, or cognito, and in our minds, is the form of this Faith in specie it
self, and not to be Justified by the Act of Faith in Christ, is not to be
Justified by the Object as such; for the Object essentially specifieth the Act;
thus illogycal heads confound Holy things.

LV. But these that must have the O^j^ct of this Faith only to Justify, exclude
most essential parts of the Object it self. The Baptismal Faith, is not their
Justifying Faith: Belief in God the Father, and in the Holy Ghost, is none of
it, and so God the Father, and the Holy Ghost, are none of the Justifying
Object; when as it is essential to Christ, as the Object to be one with the
Father, and sent by Him, and to be his express Image, and the way to Him, etc.
And to be Conceived by the Holy Ghost, and to be attested and to operate by him.

LVI. Yea, these undistinguishers are such dividers, that they exclude most
that is essential to Christ himself, as Mediator, from being the Object of
their Justifying Faith: It is not his Prophetical Office, nor his Holy Example
or Doctrine; nor his Kingly Office, either in Legislation or Judgment; though it
be as King, that he Justifies by Sentence and Execution: It is not any part of
his Priestly Office, but his Righteousness, habitual, instead of habitual and
original Righteousness; active, instead of our active Righteousness; and
passive instead of our punishment. It is not his Priestly Intercession in
Heaven, nor his giving the Holy Ghost, nor his Raising, Judging, or Glorifying
us, that are the Objects of this Faith.

LVII. But yet they will fallaciously seem subtle by distinguishing, and say,
that though none of these are the Objects of Fides qua Justificat, Faith as
Justifying, yet they are the Objects of Fides quae Justificat, of that Faith
which Justifies by another Act, mere fallacy. 1. Here they must take Faith for
the Habit; for if it were for the Act,, two diverse Acts are not the same. 2.
How is that Habit quae Justificat, when they say only Reception by its
Instrumentality Justifies; and that is only the Act? 3. But qua Justificat
fallaciously implies that Faith Efficiently Justifies, whereas it is only a
Dispositio Moralis Receptiva as a Condition (and they deny its constitutive
Causality) and that (Fides qua Fides, Justifies at all) and as a dispositive
Condition, it is a belief in much more than Christ's Imputed Righteousness.

LVIII. And these ill dividing men, pretending to subtilty, telling us, that it
is but one Act of Faith by which it justifies, are so far from being able to
tell what that one Act is, That, it is enough to cast all their Disciples into
despair, if, till they know it, they must not know that they are justified.

LIX. For they feign it to be one only Physical Act, whereas, in Moral
Subjects, an Act contains many Physical Acts: Faith in Christ is a
Covenanting Act, like a contract of Marriage, or between Prince and Subjects,
or Captain and Soldiers, which is many Physical Acts.

LX. Hereupon they are at a loss in what faculty it is, whether the Intellects
Assent, or the Wills Consent, or Affiance or Practical Obedience; and whether
it be one Act only ^am^ro, or only specie, and what individuates an Act?

LXI. And they unavoidably cast men upon their supposed justification by works,
while they seign all Acts, save that one (they know not what) to be Works: Yea,
many take every Act to be Works, as is aforesaid.

As when they say, that it is only resting on Christ's Righteousnes^, as made
ours in it self by imputation; they hereby make the Belief of the Godhead, and
of the truth of the Gospel, and of the Life to come, and Repentance, and
Confessions, and Love to God and to Christ, and Thankfulness, and Prayer, and
Self-denial, to be all works of the Law, which Free Grace in this excludes.

If Assent be that one Justifying Act, then he that thinks it is Consent, or
Hope, or Trust; or that denying his own Righteousness is any part of it, is
fallen from Grace, by looking for Justification by Works.

LXII. They do not only say, that Grace is not free, if it have any positive
Condition, but also if it have any negative Condition; that is, that if a
pardon be offered a Traitor, on Condition that he will not refuse it, cast it
in the fire, and spit in the Face of him that offers it, or will not seek his
Death: this is no free pardon, unless he may have leave to hate and stab the
Prince that pardons him.

And here you see what these take for Works; even such things as are neither
Works nor Acts at all, but mere nothings. Not to resist, oppose, refuse,
despise Grace: not to believe the Devil and his agents, that call Christ a
deceiver, and that deny God and the life to come: I do not say, that such mere
negatives are all the condition of pardon and justification; but these are
included in the positive condition; and yet to take any of these for any part
of the condition, is supposed to be, to look for Justification by Works,
because all such conditions are taken for Works, save one simple Act of Faith.

LXIII. This is because they know not what a mere Condition is, when they have
laid Salvation on the denial of it; when as it is no cause at all (as such) of
the effects, but as imposed, it is a bar put to the effect till the Condition
be performed; as the Lawyers say, Lex addita negotio quae do^^^ praestetur
eve^tum suspendat; and as performed, it is the removing of that imped^ment.
Opening the Windows, or not shutting them is no cause of the Light; nor opening
our Eyelids any cause of our seeing; but a removing of that which hinders
the light: It is a necessary disposition of the Receiver, but no efficient
cause of the effect; and so is Faith to our Justification or Pardon.

And therefore note, That whereas many Reforming Protestants write for the
isntrumental Interest of Faith in our Justification, I number not them with
the forementioned subverters of the Gospel; for by Instrumentality they mean no
Efficiency, but Receptivity; unhappily using the name of an Instrument
improperly and without due expl^^ation; and as Dr. Twice tollerably calls it,
Causam dispositivam subjecti recipientis; so Dr. Kendal likeneth it to boys
playing at ball or cat, that make their hats the instruments to catch the ball
or cat in: This gives them no efficiency, so that they only miscarry by
choosing an equivocal Name, and placeing too much of the Controversy on that
Name, when there be proper words enough at hand; and also in that they
distinguish not duly between Physical and Moral Reception, when they should
tell us that Faith is not the Physical, but the Moral Reception of Christ, to
Receive in sensu Physico, is nothing else but to be the Passive t^rminus, of an
Agents efficiency, and is signified by Passive Verbs. To receive Justification,
Sanctification, Adopti^n Physically, is nothing but Justificari, Sanctificari,
etc. to be Justif^ed, Sanctified, Adopted: But to receive Morally, is Accipere,
to accept the gift by consent, and exercise that consent by contract, and
contains (as is a^oresaid) many Physical Acts; as to receive a Tutor, a
Master, a Physician, a King, a Husband, etc. And such is Faith, a receiving
(not of righteousness only) but of Christ with all his offered benefits.

And when they say, that other Acts or Graces may be Conditions, but none but
Faith is the Instrument; 1. Certainly that called by them Instrumentality, is
but the (...) creder^; the Act it self in specie, and the Conditionality is the
nearest reason of its Interest in our Justification. 2. And there is nothing
more in the Nature of Assent, Trust, or any Act of Faith, be^^des mere
Acceptance or Consent, why they should be called Receiving, than in Love,
Desire, Glad^ess, Hope, or Seeking. 3. And Accepting Christ as our Teacher,
King, and Intercessor in Heaven, is as much conditional and necessary to our
Justi^^cation and Salvation, as accepting his Justi^^cation and Deliverance
from Punishment. That which men are most averse to (Love, Holiness, and
Obedience) is made the Condition of that which men more easily accept.

And indeed those that (in sensu Phy^ice) they call Other Conditional Acts, are
but modifications, or parts of the same Moral Act which is the Condition. The
Faith by which we are justified, is that true Christianity which includes our
believeing consent to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; our belief of
Christ, and our thankful acceptance of him to be our Teacher, Intercessor or
Priest, and King, with his offered Grace; and that this acceptance is with
Desire, Love, and Hope, expressed in a holy Contract or Covenant. This is the
Souls Marriage with Christ, and Allegiance to him, and it includes the
renouncing our trust in all Creatures, or in any Righteousness of our own, so
far as they would usurp the least part of Christ's Office. Work, or Honor.

None of all this is Justification by Works.

LXIV. They erroneously tell us, That nothing is Properly a Condition, which is
it self a Free Gift. As if God could not Command and Give the same thing, and
make his Command a congruous means of Giving.

LXV. They erroneously hold, that nothing can be called a Condition of one Gift
of the Covenant, which is not a Condition of all: Whereas God has many
Anticedent Gifts before any Condition be so much as imposed: Without any
Condition, he gave us our Being, and gave us a Savior, and the Gospel, and the
conditional Covenant, and offers of Grace: And why may not the reception and
use (or not rejecting) of a former Gift of Grace, be made a condition of the
giving of more? To him that has, shall be given: may not Faith be the gift of
God, and yet be the condition of Justification and Salvation?

LXVI. They erroneously hold, that when a man is once justified, the
continuance of his justification is Absolute, and has no imposed conditions:
contrary to Christ's own words, Joh. 15. and many plain texts of Scripture.

LXVII. They erroneously put Free Grace and Free Will in such opposition, as if
nothing could be an act of Free Grace, which imposes any condition on Free
Will: which is true, if by Free Will they mean Freedom of Natural sufficiency,
as Free without Grace from vicious habits and inclinations; for we have no such
Free Will: But these men know not what Free Will is, nor distinguish Freedom
from Prohibitions, and from Constraint, and necessitating predeterminating
efficient Premotion, from Moral Freedom.

LXVIII. In some points forementioned about Faith and Justification, the unapt
Words and Methods of some Reformers give them advantage; But Dr. Crispe and the
gross Antinomians, take Faith to be neither Cause nor Condition of
Justification, but merely the receptive belief, that we are Justified already
(before we were born); so that Faith justifies only in our consciences, which
is but to be conscious that we are Justified.

LXIX. Accordingly Dr. Crispe maintains, that Election and Justification are
known only by two means, The Spirit within revealing it, and Faith receiving
it; that is, The Spirit inwardly saying, Thou art Elect and Justified, and
Faith believing this; so that neither of these Justify us, but only make us
know it.

LXX. They m^stake the meaning of the Witness of the Spirit; As if it were but
an inward Inspiration and Impulse equal to a voice, saying, Thou art Elect and
Just^fied; Whereas it is an Inherent Impress, and so an objective Evidencing
witness, even the Divine Nature, and Image of God, and the habit of Divine
^^lial Love, by which Gods Spirit marketh us out as adopted: As likeness of the
child to the Father, and love, are an evidencing witness of true Sonship: And
as Reason is a witness that we are Men, And as Learning is a witness that we
are Learned: So Sanctity is an evidencing witness that we are the children of
God; Holiness to the Lord, is his Mark* And he that names the name of Christ,
departing from iniquity, has Gods Impres: Yet there are other subsequent parts
of the Spirits witness; that is 1. Causing us to exercise; 2. And to know the
Grace that he has given us; 3. And exciting in us a joyful perception of it.

LXXI. Hereby they destroy the assurance and comfort of most (if not almost
all) true Christians in the world; because they have not that inspiration or
certain inward word of assurance, that they are Elect and Justified. I have
known very few that said they had it: And of those few, some fell to
Debauchery, and some to doubting. And though Prophetical Inspiration prove it
self to them that have it, its not possible for others to know, but that a
counterfeit Fanatic conceit may be it.

LXXII. Hereby the Ungodly are dangerously tempted to damning presumption, and
security: while, if they do but confidently believe that they are Elect and
Justified, they are quieted in sin.

LXXIV. Dr. Crispe copiously maint^ineth, that a Man cannot be sure that he is
Justified either by S^^cerity, or V^iversal Obedience, or love to the Go^ly, or
any such Grace; To the dishonor of Holiness, the contradiction of Scripture,
and the ov^^throw of the comfort of Believers.

LXXV. They tell us, that we must not fix s^t times for Prayer, or other
Worship,, but stay till Gods Spirit move us, or tell us when to Pray. As if God
were not the God of Order, but of Confusion; and did not move us as reasonable
creatures, by a rational guidance of us: They would be loath to follow their
crooked Rule in common things, and to keep no set-times for their Trading,
Labors, Diet and Rest; and not to work or eat, or sleep, till the Spirit
moves them. And God makes use of Reason and Order, in things Spiritual as
well as in things Natural: And the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets.

LXXVI. They reprove us for persuading Unconverted Men to Pray, because the
Prayer of the Wicked is abominable; and they should stay till they have the
Spirit of Prayer: And is a Tavern or a Whore-house, a sitter pl^ce to get that
Spirit, than on their knees by Prayer? when God himself says; To thee shall
a^l flesh come: se^k the Lord while he may ^e foun^; call upon him w^ile he is
near: Let the Wick^d ^^^sak his way, etc. wicked Prayers of wicked men, that
are but to quiet them in sin, are abominable; and no prayer of an Impenitent
unbeliever has any promise of certain success. But A^ab, and Ni^eve, and
millions of Sinners have found, that there are some prayers of the
unregenerate, that are better than none. And do they think, when we persuade
them to Pray, that we persuade them to continue Impenitent? No, it is but
persuading them to Turn and Live: For praying is a returni^^ motion, and we say
but as Peter, Repent and Pray, if perhaps the thoughts of thy heart may be
forg^^^^ thee. Not to exhort men to Pray, is not to exhort them to desire
Grace, and true Conversion: Common Grace, and Natural Self-love have their
desires, which are not all in vain; its better to be near the Kingdom of God,
than to be dispisers of it.

God has fixed the time of the Lord's day, and the undisposed must not say, we
will not keep it till the Spirit move us; As it is a dut^ to Relieve the Poor,
so it is to Pray, as soon as God commands it; and none must say, I will not
Give or Pray till the Spirit move me, but wait for more help of the Spirit in
the way of duty.

LXXVII. That, because no man can come to Christ too soon, therefore no man can
too soon believe that he is Elect and Justified, though he have no evidence to
prove it, and though he know not God, or Christ, or the Spirit, or the Gospel.

LXXVIII. That men are bound to Believe that Christ Believed for them, and
Repented for them, and must no more question their Faith and Repentance than
they must question Christ (as Saltmarsh speaks), as if Christ had had Sin to
repent of, or a Savior to save him from it; and, as if this were no
Covenant-Condition required of our selves, as necessary to our Justification.
They may next say, Christ that is Holy for them, shall be Saved in stead of
them.

LXXIX. That to Believe, that we are Elect and Justified, is fides Divina, a
Believing the word of God, because his Spirit's witness of it, by inspiration
is his word.

LXXX. That nothing done by an unregenerate man, by common Grace, makes him
any fitter to Believe and be Converted, that if he were without it, because it
is sin.

LXXXI. That it is no Grace, which is not unresistible; and because we cannot
Merit it, we cannot resist, and forfeit it.

LXXXII. That Pardon and Justification, being perfect, the first Moment of our
Faith, therefore it is only one momentous Act of Faith only that Justifies us;
and no Act of Faith it self Justifies us after that hour. This is held by the
more moderate sort, who say not, that we are Justified before Faith.

LXXXIII. That we must act from L^^^, but not ^or Life; as if Natural Life were
not to be used for Spiritual Life.

LXXXIV. They hold, That Sin being all (past, present, and future) Pardoned at
first, we must not ask Pardon any more, but only the fuller Belief and Sense of
Pardon.

LXXXV. They hold, that no Sin, or declining of a Justified Person, should ever
make him doubt of his Justification.

LXXXVI. They hold, that the meaning of Romans 8.28. is, That all the sin that an
Elect, or Justified man commits, shall certainly work for his greater good,
when the Text speaks but of Enemies and Sufferings, and all the Providence
of God; As if it were the way of God's Wise and Holy Government, so far to
encourage men to sin, as to assure all that love God beforehand, that the more
they sin, the better it shall be for them, whereas he has filled the Scripture
with so many terrible threatenings against Sin and Backsliding. And, as if ^o
^usti^ied person, by sin, did ever gnow wor^e than before, or love God l^^^, or
at all disple^se him. Or it were for our good to be worse, and love God less,
or displease him, or lose a^y me^sures of Grace and Glory (...) Title*

LXXXVII. They take Justification in the Great day of Jud^m^^t, to be none of
our proper Justification by Faith, because that was done before but a
Decla^^^^^^ of ^^: As if Justification had but one degree, and the word but one
sense; or any were persect^r Justification than that, and a De^isive Sentential
Declaration, were not the most eminent.

LXXXVIII. Those that confess works of Obedience to Christ, to be the Condition
of Glorification, yet deny it to be a Condition of Justification in Judgment;
when as to Justify us in Judgment, is to Justify our right to Impurity and
Glory, and so the Condition must be the same.

LXXXIX. Though God often, and plainly says, That all men shall be judged
according to their works, and according to what they have done in the Body,
[good or evil]; and to judge, is either by decisive sentence to Justify, or to
Condemn; or executively to Reward and Glorify, on to Punish; yet many that
Confess that men shall be so Judged, do deny that they shall be so Justified,
though Justifying be Judging.

XC. Though the word [According to their works] do plainly signify, The Cause
to be then decided, in order to the sentence of Salvation or Damnation; and
Christ Mat. 25. and elsewhere, has largely enumerated the parts of the Cause,
and call it Righteousness, and that with a Ca^^al particle; and though the
Scripture mention our inherent and acted Righteousness, (in terms of the same
signification) above Six ^undred times; and that as the thing that pleases
God, and that he loves, hateing the contrary; telling, us that the unrighteous
shall not enter into Heaven, etc. Yet do they feign, that all that Godliness
which has the promise of this Life, and That to come, and which God, is said
as a Righteous Judge to Reward and Crown, is mentioned only as a sign of the
Elect and Right^ous, and of Faith, and not as the Cause to be then decided, or
as a Rewarded thing. And for whom is this s^^n so solemnly produced? God
knows us without Signs: His Light in our Consciences will make us know our
selves, by Internal Per^eption. And if it be to confute the Devil and his
servants that slander us, it is for want of Righteousness, and not only for
want of si^^s of it, that we are accused; and it is more than sig^s that must
confute them for our Justification. And the Judgment is not to be managed as at
a human ju^icature, by talking it out with every Person, but by an universally
convincing Light, that at once can show every man in the World his own
part^cular case, as in it self; it is not Sig^s, not Ri^ht^ousn^s^, that has
the promises of R^w^rd: And there is no Righteousness that so far makes not a
man Righteous, and so far Justifiable.

XCI. They (some of them) say, that we shall need no Justification against any
false Accusation. For who should accuse us? Christ will not, Cons^ience will
not; and Devils, say they, will have something else to do: And they know, that
false accusation will be in vain before such a Judge. The sum of this, is, that
there will indeed be no day of Judgment, and no Justification by decisive
Sentence; yea, and no Salvation; for actual Glorification will be a Sentence,
manifested by Execution (which Mr. Laws^n thought was called the Judgment.) And
if no Judgment, then no Judge, no Reward, no Condemnation, and no Punishment:
If any Judgment, there must be Persons, and a Cause to be tried and judged. 1.
The Cause of that day, will not be, whether Christ be a sufficient Savior, or
have made sufficient satisfaction? It is not for Christ to judge himself: It is
not to judge God, whether he elected us? It is not to judge, whether we were of
the Seed of Adam, or whether we ever sinned? Or whether the Law of Innocence
condemn us; And our sin deserve everlasting Punishment? There is no justifying
us against any such Accusation: It must be all confessed we were the sinful
Children of Adam; we deserved Condemnation. But the Cause will be, 1. Whether
we are liable, by Guilt, to future Punishment? And against this, our Pardon
justifyeth us. 2. And, whether we have Right to the Heavenly Inheritance? And
in this, the Gospel-Donation, Covenant, or Promise, justifies us; and both
through the Merits of the Sacrifice, and Righteousness of Christ. 3. And the
other part of the Cause of that day, is, whether we have part in Christ, and
the Merits of his Righteousness? In which our Faith, and God's Covenant will
justify us. 4. And the Question, being, Whether this Faith be that which had
the promise, and not a Counterfeit; the description of it, by its Acts and
Part, and not only by adventitious Signs, must be our justifying Evidence: The
faith that has the Promise, is essentially Christianity, or a Covenant,
accepting of God the Father, Son, and Spirit of Christ, as our Teacher, Priest,
and King, by affiance, expressed in assent, consent, and subjection: And all
that is essential to this; yea, the necessary integrality and modification have
their parts in being the Cause of the day.

And as to the Case of Accusation; 1. A Virtual Accusation by the Law, which we
have broken, and condemns us, requires a Justification, if there were no
more. 2. The Glory of Christ's Merits, Righteousness and Grace, requires a
Justification of us, against our real Guilt. 3. And is not Satan the Accuser of
the Brethren, and that before God? And did not his Malice so work against Job,
though God contradicted him?

It is certain, that sentential and apologetical Justification relates to
Accusation (virtual or actual) and Condemnation. Who shall condemn us, it is
God that justifies us? And if we are not justified against false Accusations,
we shall never be justified against any.

But we all confess, that we are made righteous, efficiently by Grace, and
constitutively by Righteousness, in despite of all Satan's true accusations,
and against all our own unworthiness, ungodliness, (antecedently) and guilt;
and that before all Works and Perseverance, save a true accepting Faith in
Christ: But if we shall in judgment be decisively de^lared righteous, by that
which constituteth us righteous; (of which, no knowing man herein can doubt,
God judging all things truly as they are) then certainly will men by decisive
declaration, be judged righteous, as being pardoned and adopted by the Merits
of Christ, and qualified by true Faith, Repentance and Obedience, for that
Gift.

XCII. They absurdly hold, that to be justif^ed, as to the sincerity of our
Faith, from the charge o^ Hypocrisy, or unsoundness, it is not the
Justification of the Person: A contradiction that I am ashamed to be long in
confuting. Is it the Fa^ and not the Person that is to be judged? Is it not as
it is the Persons Faith? What is it to ^^stifie his Faith, but to justify him
to be a true ^elieving Christian, and so to be an Heir of the Pr^mise: The
necess^ry qualif^cation of Faith ((...) ^t be operative) is as truly a part of
the condition of the Promises, as that Faith be Faith indeed*

Indeed some sound Divines say, [That Fait^ just^fi^th us as sinn^rs, and Works
justifi^th our Faith, as ^c^us^d Believers.] But they never meant th^^ by
justifying our Faith, it ^usti^eth not our Persons: But that we are at f^rst,
co^stitut^d just, and adopted, upon the ^^ndition of a consenti^^ covenanting
Faith, b^f^re we h^ve time to she^ it by outward Works, and that we are
conti^ue and judged, j^stified and entitled ^^ Li^e, o^ condition of our
Performance of the Essentials ^f o^ Covenant.

XCIII. Th^^ hold, that we are justified ^^ the some Law or C^v^^^^t of
Innocence, which condemns ^^: Because ^ay they, we have fulfilled it in, and
by C^^^^t; falsely (as is aforesaid) supposing, that C^r^st was either such a
Surety as w^^ in the same Bond, di^j^nctively with the principal, or else that
the principal (man) was allowed to do his Duty, or ^ear his Suffering by
another: And so they deny the Gospel Covenant, and Gift, which is that indeed,
which justifies us by the way of Redemption, falsely supposing, that the very
damning Law does justi^e us, by way of Prevention, as innocent, as having
fulfilled it in Christ.

XCIV. They suppose, that Christ will not judge and justify us, ac^ording to
any Law, by which he governed us, but only by declaring his absolute De^ree and
Will; giving no Reason of his Sentence, from the cause of different
performance, or ^on performance of the Pers^ns j^dged; and so that Judgment is
no act of Moral Government, or of Reward, contrary to all the Scripture.

XCV. They falsely suppose, that Pa^^^ of si^, i^ no Justification,
constitutive, or sente^ti^l. Because, say they, that does but save us from
Punis^ment; but to be Righteous, is to be by imputation, such as have kept all
the Law, and so h^ve never sinned. But we have no such Righteousness a^ they
thus feign; when the Question is, whether we are s^nners? We must confess it,
and ^ot plead that we have no sin. But when the Question is, whether we are to
be condemned, Pardon is o^r Righteousness; and having the Pardon of all sin
original, habitual and a^tual, of omissi^n and commission, we are in st^^^^
(...) p^^^u^^; and if th^^ (...) enough, to entitle u^ t^ Glory, A^option added
to it, is: And so (...) Ri^ht is ^^sti^^^d.

XCVI. They (...) th^^ to hold, that C^^^s^, Righteousness and Me^i^, i^ to
make our F^i^^ and holy Obedien^e, (...), is a P^^^sh Doctrine against F^^^
Grace: A^ if C^ris^ had (...) ^^me to save his People from their sins, and to
make them holy, and zealous of L^ve and ^ood Works; or God were grown so
indifferent to his (...), and to Christ within us, and so forgetful of all his
Promises of Reward, that he would ac^ept and reward our Fidelity, and Obedience
to Christ, ^ever the more for all C^r^st's meritorious Sacrifice, Righteousness
and Intercession, which is the only Price that purchases our Acceptance; and
as if Judgment should make no difference between men's rewardableness, but only
judge Christ to have been a Savior to the Elect.

XCVII. They devise a Plea for the justifying of all the wicked damnable
Hypocrites in Judgment; while they tell them that there will be no need of a
Justification against the Charge of Hypocrisy and Unholiness, but only against
the Charge of being sinners; and so they can say, that all were sinners as well
as they; and that Christ was offered them as a Savior that had made a
sufficient Sacrifice for their forgiveness: And they professed to believe in
him, as their Savior: And as to the soundness of their Faith, there will be no
need of Justification. And if Christ say, I was hungry, and ye fed me not, I
was naked, and ye clothed me not, etc. They are taught to say, The
Righteousness of their own personal Holiness or Obedience, is none of the Cause
of the day, to justify them, or to be tried, and justified.

XCVIII. Some say, that Christ Reconciled Man to God, but did not Reconcile God
to Man; because God was at no enmity with the Elect, but loved them from
Eternity; and to the Reprobate, he is unreconciled. It is true, that Christ
made no real change on God by his Reconciliation: But by his Sacrifice, and
Merits, and Intercession, he made it a thing Just and Meet for God to forgive
and save us, notwithstanding all our Guilt, all his Holiness, Justice and
Truth; and so dissolving our obligations to punishment, and removing the
impediments of our Reconciliation; he is by extrinsick denomination said to be
Reconciled to us, when he is no way bound to Damn us; and this without any
change in God; But the Clouds being thus dispelled, that were between God and
us, his Face as Reconciled, shines on us. God was in Christ Reconciling the
World to himself, by making them capable of personal plenary Reconciliation, by
purchasing a Free Pardon to be offered to all; though they have after need to be
entreated to be personally and actually Reconciled to God* 2 Cor. 5.19, 20.
Gods Love of Benevolence, goes before his Love of Complacence, though the change
be really in the Object only.

XCIX. Dr. Crispe, and all that say, that our own Obedience and Duties and
personal Righteousness do us no good, nor further our Salvation (Christ doing
all that) and that it hinders Salvation to do any thing for Salvation, do
plainly make Heavenly Blessedness, and God himself, as sought, loved and
enjoyed to be against our Salvation. For all our Sanctity, is but our Love of
God, and our Fruition of him: And the perfection of this, is our Heaven and
Happiness; and Holiness is here the beginning of it: And if it be against the
Grace of Christ, to seek Heaven and the Fruition of God, and to be receptive of
it by Holiness, and to seek God, be the way to keep us from him (as not going
out of our selves to Christ); How then is Christ the way to the Father? How
does he bring us to God? Why does he Sanctify us, and bid us seek and strive to
enter? Will Heaven be against Heaven, and God against God to us? If so, then
striving to be saved from Sin, and Hell, is the way to bring us to Sin and
Hell; which none would hold, that knows how much of Hell Sin it self is, and
how much Holiness is of Heaven.

C. They falsely reproach the Orthodox that err not with them, as Enemies of
Free Grace, and as not going out of themselves, and by odious Words, as being
for Justificatio^ by Works: When it is they themselves that overthrow all
Justification, and the Gospel, as Justifying us, and Justi^^cation by Faith it
self, calling it To Cre^^re, and a Work: Ridiculously, making To Cred^re and
Faith, to signify diversely: And tell us not when it is the Phrase, and when it
is the the Meaning, that they oppose. If it be the Phrase that they oppose,
they condemn Christ, and the Scripture; that say, Men are Justified by their
Words and Works. If it be the Sense, let them tell what that Sense is, which
they accuse; and not consound the Controversies of the Name, and of the Thing.
Those that they reproach, Renounce all Works for Justification or Salvation,
that arrogate the least part of the Office, Merits, or Grace of Christ; or that
make the Reward not of Grace, but of Debt: Yea, all that Honor not Christ and
Grace, more than if he had not required them; and did not, as dwelling in us by
his Spirit, cause them, and make them acceptable to God: But we will not
renounce Christ living in us, nor the use, and worth of the Image of God.


CHAP. III. To moderate M^^s (...) C^ns^ri^g the E^r^^^ (...).
Rec^^cil. HAving enumerated a Centur^ of their Errors, I shall next t^ll ^ou,
how, and why* notwithstanding all these gross Corruptions, you should m^^erate,
and regulate your Censure of the Men, and of other such.


Ortho. Yo^ ^av^ (...) sufficiently what to think of them, when you have told
me what they hold; I must neither judge of the Faith by the Man, ^or forbear
judging ^f the Man by ^is Faith. Can any man judge (...) hardly of men that
overthr^w all Religion? They s^^m to me to be Atheists, Infidels,
Anti-Christians, Profane, and open Enemies of all that is Holy and Good, ^ave
only the Name of God, and Christ, and Fr^e Grace, and that Good which they
opp^se.


This Charact^r of them, I gather from your ^wn Words.

I. They deny the only true God, and feign or make us another God: The true God
is Holy, and hates sin: But they feign a God, who is the maker of sin; yea,
that (...) his own Son the greatest sinner in the World, by m^king all the sins
committed by all the Elect, to be really his sins, and so making him the worst
of men.

II. Yea, whereas Devils can but tempt men to sin, they feign God to translate
our sins themselves Essentially on Christ, and so to make him a sinner that
could not be tempted to it.

III. They make us another (pretende^) Christ, and so deny the true Christ, and
so are Antichrists. The true Christ had no sin, but only became a S^crifice
for our sin; which were laid upon him, no further than to suffer for us. But
they feign a Christ, that was a hater of God, an Atheist, a Servant of the
Devil, and the greatest sinner in all the World, and yet sinned not himself.

IV. They deny G^d dwelling in us as Love, and Christ living in us by his
Spirit, by feigning us to be never the better for his Grace and inward
Operations, as to any furtherance of our Salvation; as if the Life of Christ
within us, were not saving.

V. They deny the great Ends, and use of a Savi^ur, to save us from Sin, as a
means to save us from Hell, and as the means of our Glorification; and as a
Prophet by his Doctrine and Example, to teach us how to seek and obtain the
purchased Salvation.

VI. They deny the Holy Ghost, by denying that his Sanctifying Work and Grace,
must be esteemed and used as a furtherance of our Salvation: Because Christ
has saved us by himself already.

VII. They d^ny the Gospel, while they deny it to be the Law or Do^ation of
God, which as an Act of Oblivion, is his Instrument of our Justification and
Pardon; our Title to life ( for Titulus est fundamentum juris;) And as the
Instrument of our virtual Justification.

VIII. They do as Anti-christians, deny Christ's Prophetical Offi^e, by which,
by Doctrine and Example, he teac^eth us what w^ must do to be saved; And his
Kingly Office, by which h^ makes Laws to Rule us, or to Ju^ge us by, as the
imposed term of Life and Death.

IX. They deny the Law of Innocence, and forge another of their own instead of
it, which names Christ as instead of us.

X. They hold all the Elect Lawless, and so no Subjects of Christ, while they
say, they are under no Law.

XI. Hereby they deny God and Christ's Government by Law.

XII. They have no humiliation for sin, and say, they have no sin; for since
Christ's death, it is none of theirs.

XIII. They hold, that there is no such thing as sin in the World (of the
Elect) because Christ took it from them (before they were born or had it;) and
he has none now in Heaven.

XIV. They deny all Justification by Faith, and say, that it is not by Faith,
but by the Object of Faith only.

XV. They make Christ no true Mediator, but such a surety as was a party in the
Bond with us, and suffered for his own sin, and was condemned by that Law of
Innocence for us.

XVI. They deny Justifying Faith it self, while instead of it they feign a mere
belief that we are Justified.

XVII. They harden ungodly men in their damning presumption, o^trudi^g on them
a belief, that they are Elect and Justified, though un^odly; and telling them,
that this is coming out of themselves to Christ, and that they cannot believe
this too soon; and that Christ has Repented, Believed, and been Holy for them.

XVIII. They di^ectly fight against all men's Salvation, by telling them, that
they ought to do no Duty inward or outward, as a means of their Salvation, lest
it be against Christ and Free Grace which saves them. And that nothing that
they do, can do them any good, nor any sin, possibly can do them any hurt,
because they are already perfect, and saved only by Christ.

XIX. They expose Christianity to the scorn of Infidels, by telling men, that
it consists in that which every novice in L^gick or Reasoning, knows to be
impossible; that one man's Sins, and one man's Righteousness, should be made
another: Not only so far as that others partake of the Effects (Christ of our
sins in sufferings, and we of the benefits of his Righteousness) which we all
maintain; but that the thing it self, is essentially thus transferred: And so
the Accidents do transire a Subjecto in Subjectum: And whereas Sin and
Righteousness, are Accidents in the three predicaments of Habit (or Privation)
Acts, and Relation, they feign the Habits, Acts, and Relation, of ^^^us
deformity of all the Elect, to become in themselves the Habits, Acts, and
R^lati^ns of Christ: And the Habits, Acts, and Relations of perfect
Rig^teousness in Christ, to becom^ ess^nti^lly the very Ha^its, Acts, and
Relati^^s of every Person Elect.

XX. They do (like the Papists that hold Transubst^nti^tion) teach m^n to
re^ounce ^ m^^^^ s^^^^ and reason, in believing that no pain, or l^ss o^ Grace,
is a punishment (t^^' but castigatory) t^ the Elect, because all punish^ent is
suffered by Christ. As if C^rists thre^tning [wh^m I love, I r^^^^e, and
chasten] were a denying ^f himself.

XXI. T^^y deny the very essenti^l principle of s^lf-^^^e, w^ile t^^y t^^^h men
to do n^thing for their Salvati^^.

XXII. They co^s^que^tly teach men to d^ nothing for t^eir Liv^s, H^alth, or
any Corporal good; to Pio^, ^r So^, or Lab^ur. For if they must do nothing for
t^^ go^d (...) the Soul, much less of the Body: For Christ is suffici^nt f^r
b^th.

XXIII. They he^eby, dest^oy all Preaching, and all (...) to ^^hers: For we
must love others, but as ^^r s^lves; and if we may do nothing as for our o^n
^ood, th^n not for any others.

XXIV. They read in Scri^ture, above Six Hundred T^xts, that speaks of
I^herent, and Acted Personal Ri^^t^ousn^^^, j^yned with the pr^mises of life
and G^ds acc^ptance, and threatenings to them that have it ^^t: And yet they by
putid Contradictio^, say, It is a Rig^teousness that makes no man Righte^us,
t^^' ^ut in tantum, subordinate to the me^^^^^^us perf^ct Righteous^^ss of
Christ: And that we are J^^tified never the m^re for it, than if we had it not.
And so it is, as Learning that makes not Learn^d, or li^eness that makes not
like, etc. That is, It is Righteous^ess, and no Righteousness.

XXV. They make the Baptismal Covenant, and the Lords Supper, to be no
Covenanting, or to have no Condition: And yet their own Church-Covenants have
Conditions, and are of Works.

XXVI. They deny all the Scripture-promises of reward.

XXVII. They deny and reproach Heaven it self, a great part whereof is in the
perfection of Holiness, while they make Holiness here, and the Exercise of it
to do us no good, or save us.

XXVIII. By all this, they would make, 1. The Concord of Christians impossible,
as if they must agree in all this Error. 2. They harden Papists in contempt
and scorn of Protestants. And, 3. They notoriously militate for the Kingdom of
Satan.

And now tell me, whether there were ever damnable Heretics in the World, if
these be none?

Reconcil. Many that hold some of the forementioned Errors, yet hold not all
the rest: All speak not so grossly, as some do. Therefore lay your charge, but
where it is due.

And all are not properly Heretics, that hold the same Error that Heretics
do. If all Error were Herefy, all men were Heretics.


Ortho. But he is a Heretic, who subverteth the Fundamentals.


Reconcil. If he do it directly and knowingly, he is an Infidel: For he is not
to be called a Christian, or a Believer, who denies any thing Essential to
Christianity. But you must distinguish between, 1. Denying the Words, and
denying the Thing signified by them. 2. Between denying Directly, and denying
by Consequence.

1. When Words are used in diverse Senses, he that denies them in one Sense,
denies them not in another: And he that mistaketh the meaning of a Word, may
deny the Word, and yet hold fast the matter signified by it And he that
speaks the greatest Error in Terms not understood, may mean and hold the
truth.

2. And Consequences not dis^erned, will n^^ prove a man to be a real Heretic,
or one that holds not the truth, which by such consequences he subverteth:
Therefore all Pa^i^ic^t^^s conclude, that Consequences are not to be charged
too far, when not understood.


Ortho. Who k^oweth men's minds but ^y th^i^ Words? What ev^r they be to God who
searches the heart, they are damnab^e Heretics in foro Ecclesiastico*


Reco^cil. I excuse not the Words which I have largely accused: I would save
others from them, I confess it is W^rds that the Church must judge of, and
judge by. But it must be Words as signif^cant of the M^tter, and of the Mind of
the speaker. And therefore the Church must try the speakers meaning by
informing and convincing questions and explications. I pray you tell me, when
you are Catechizing your Parishioners (young or old) do you me^t none that in
ignorance speak words that subvert the Foundation? And yet when you better
search their meaning, you may find that they mean better than they speak. I
write against all their dangerous words, especially to save others from being
drawn by them to error, and to Prevent the error that the Church and Gospel
may receive thereby.


Ortho. But if they defend them, they are Heretics: For how else shall we know
whether they deny not Fundamentals?


Rec^ncil. I will tell you how; Ask him first, whether he believe the
Fundamental Truth? If he say, yea: Ask him whether if he knew that his
Consequence contradicted or subverted it, which of the two he would let go? And
by that, you may know which it is that he holds fastest.

For Instance, Ask such a one as Dr. Crispe, whether he would hold that Christ
was really a sinner, and God made him such, and the Essence of all our sins
were his, and none of ours, if he knew that this were inconsistent with the
perfection and Office of Christ, and the truth of the Gospel? Ask him whether
he would hold that the sin of the Elect cannot possibly do them any hurt; nor
any Duty that they do, be any means or help to their Good or Salvation, if he
knew that this were contrary to the Gospel and Free Grace, and tended to men's
damnation? Ask him whether he would hold that our inherent and acted
Righteousness did not make us so far Righteous, and no whit furthered our
Justification or Salvation, if he knew this were a contradiction, and against
Christ?


Ortho. By this Rule, we shall judge none Heretics, but Infidels; f^r who will
^xpresly renounce Christianity but they?


Reconcil. The Word Heretics, is variously used as men are inclined: 1. Of all
that are stiff in any hurtful Error, against sound Doctrine; and so all or
most Christians are Heretics. For all have many Errors, and all men are too
stiff in their own conceits. 2. For those that consequentially subvert
Essentials.

Amesius is not singular, who says (in Cas. Consc.) that Theology is so
concatenated, that every Error by consequence (near or remote) subverteth the
Foundation. I would except only Genealogies, Chronologies, Topography, Grammar,
and some Prophecies and Positives: But of mere morals it is not improbable.

3. For all that Schismatically separate from the Apostolical Churches and
their Commmunion, and gather Sects to themselves, for the promoting of their
Errors; I provoke you to name to me any Text of Scripture, that calls any by
the reproved Name of Heretics, that did not separate from the Catholic
Church? Though all Schismatics be not Heretics (for some cause divisions in
the Church, and yet depart not from it): Yet all Heretics in ^cripture-sence
were Schismatics; for (...) signfieth ^ot only the choosing of a new Doctrine,
but also a new separated Sect and Church, for the promoting of it.


Ortho. Th^se Libertines are generally Separatists.


Reconcil. You are historically mistaken: Dr. Crispe was a Conformist himself;
and so have been many hundreds, who have held some of the forementioned
mistakes. Have you read Luther on the Galathians? And Aepinus, and Gallus, and
Am^s^^rphi^s, and S^hlusseloergius, and abundance such Lut^erans, who damn
George Major for saying, That Good works are necessary to Salvation, and that
maintained, that they were hurtful to Salvation (though no doubt they meant, that
confidence in them was hurtful). Have you read Islebius, that turned from
Antinomianism to be a Papist Bishop, and helped to rectify Luther's Phrase, by
calling him to oppose him? Have you read Learned Beza himself, and many, and
many such excellent men, both Calvinists and Lutherans, of imputed
Righteousness, and against Imputing Faith for Righteousness, and of the
definition of Faith? Till Camero, Pla^eus, Amyraldas, Capellus, Testardus,
Codurcus, Bloudel, Dallaeus, Drelincourt stopped them; and before them
Melanchthon, Bucer, and after Cargius, Olevian, Vrsine, Parcus, Scultenus,
Wendeline, Ludovicus Crocius, Conradus Bergius, Johannes Bergius, Martinius,
and such other great Divines stopped them in Germany: How many speak
indesensibly? How many Bishops and Conformists in England, have held, and
written unjustifiable words about Justification? Was Dr. Tully a
Nonconformist? No, nor Mr. Ro^orough, Mr. Walker, and many such, before the
Assemblies times.

Though Dr. Gell, Mr. Thorndike, and many such did ill, in inveighing against
imputed Righteous^^ss, in undistinguishing words; yet too many by a very ill
sense and sort of it, gave them too much occasion; which put so many Learned,
Judicious Divines to explain it, of whom in England the chief were Ant. Wotton,
Mr. William Bradshaw, Mr. Tho. Gataker, Bishop Davenant, Bishop Ro^ert Abbot,
Mr. William Fenner, and other Zealous Converting Preachers; such as Jo^n
Rogers, Tho. Hooker, Tho. Shephard, and the New England Churches against Mrs.
Hutchinson, and Mr Wheeler, that by Mr. Weld published the Narrative ^f the
Antinomian Errors; and of the strange Monsters from Mrs. Dyer, and Mrs.
Hutchinson, and her death; and of late, Mr. Benj. Woodbridge, Mr. Tho.
Hot^hkis, Mr. Tho. Warren, Mr. Graile, Mr. Jessop; but especially Mr. Truman,
Mr. Gibbons of Blackfryers, and Dr. Stilling fleet. It is not a thing unknown,
that it was not only such as you call Separatists, but many Bishops and
Conformists, that in opposition to Popery, for want of distinguishing, have
such words about Imputation, as encouraged the Antinomians. Therefore you
cannot take all as Heretics in the Scripture-sence, who hold the same Errors.


Ortho. Then we shall not know what H^resie is, i^ men d^ not segregate
themselves to propagat^ it.


Reconcil. You may know what opinions are pernicious, (or if you will
Heretical) when you know not whether the man be a Heretic that owneth them:
Even the Heretic Hereticating Papists say, there must be an obstinacy against
sufficient light of evidence. And all ten^tiousness through prejudice,
ignorance, or incapacity is not obstinacy. If your Scholar or Apprentice be
seven years learning what you teach him, it may not by that be proved obstinacy.

The word Heretic is used as please the speaker, in various senses. 1. Some
call all Heretics that obstinately oppose any Opinion (or truth) which the
Church determines to be Believed. 2. Some call all Heretics that gather any
segregate Church to maintain or propagate any Error. 3. Some call all
Heretics, who oppose any Poi^t essential to Christianity; though but
ignorantly by remote consequence. 4. Some call those Heretics, who deny some
one essential Article of Christianity, directly and knowingly, while they own
the rest. 5. And some call no^e Heretics but those that join together, the
denying of some essential Arti^le directly or by plain evident consequence, and
gather segregate Churches to propagate it, and do this obstinately against
sufficient light: If you will use the Name, tell men which of these you mean.


Ortho. Y^u encour^ge Heresy, by making it so hard to know a Heretic: May we
not know them by their Doctrine?


Reconcil. You may know what is Error, and Heretical, when you know not the man
to be an Heretic: do what you can justly, to save men from their Error,
without unjust and uncha^itable censuring of the persons. To which end I
remember you of the writing of worthy Dr. Fow^^^, that H^li^ess is the design
of Christianity: If then it prove that many of these that hold these ^ad
opinions, are men of sincere Holiness, then Christianity in them has reached
to its design: Now ^^nd that the most of them that I have known, seem to me to
be persons of serious Holiness (notwithstanding their infirmities): They are
Zealous toward God; they greatly honor Christ; they avoid known Sin; they
live justly and charitably toward men; yea, it is the Piety and Strictness of
the lives of many of them, which has drawn many well-meaning ignorant persons
to their Errors. Bu^nian, an unlearned Antinomian-Anabaptist, wrote against the
foresaid Book of Dr. F^wler; yet (abating his separation) I never heard that
Bunnian was not an honest Godly man. If then he attained the design of
Christianity, was he not a Christian?


Ortho. Could ^e be Godly that said and did so ^u^h against the Truth, and so
much to draw men t^ his Errors?


Reconcil. There is no man without many Errors: And do not all desire that
others should take that for Truth, which they take to be Truth? And how few be
there in the world, that embody not with some Sect or Faction, for the
promoting of their Opinions? And how few that do not over-vilifie and wrong
those from whom they differ?

And Bunnians last preachings give me hope that he repented of his Errors; for
he Zealously preached but the common acknowledged doctrine of Christ's
readiness to receive and pardon converted sinners.


Ortho. But unholy Doctrine will not make men holy, nor cosist therewith.


Reconcil. 1. It is Holy Doctrine, practically received, that makes them Holy;
and that which is Unholy, is received but notionally, and so prevails not
against the power of truth. No doub^ but false unholy Doctrine greatly tends
to unholiness of heart and life; Therefore let us all do our best to cure it.
But it is not the sharpest censures, nor the greatest fierceness, or foulest
words, or punishments, that are the right o^ wisest way of cure: But the
clearest explication of the Truth, and the most loving and meek instructing
opposers, if God peradventure will give them repentance, to the acknowledging
of the Truth.


Ortho. I am sure General Councils, and H^ath^ns, Bishops and Emperors also of
old, were severe against Heretics.


Reconcil. What will you say, if I fully prove, that Heretics themselves, as
such, did not more hurt to the Church, than the stir and violence used against
them that were accounted such, has done, and still does? No, nor so much hurt:
But what need I more proof of this, than what Popery has done these 800. or
900. years in the World? Did Heretics ever murder so many hundred thousands as
the Papists did of the Waldens^s, B^hemia^s, French Protestants, Dutch, Irish,
English, Polanders, Hungarians, etc. by Wars, Massacres, Inquisitions, etc.


Ortho. Those men were not Heretics, but men fals^y a^cus^d of Heresy: Why
instance you in Papist Tyrants?


Reconcil. And who think you will be Judge who shall suffer as Heretics? Will
it not be those that are uppermost, and get greatest strength? And are those
usually the wisest: Who is the Judge, now in the Turks Dominions? and among
Christians? who is Judge in Muscovy, where Preaching is forbidden?


Ortho. But it is the Clergy that is the Judge of Heresy.


Reconcil. And how small a part of the Earth is so happy as to have the major
part of the Clergy, wise, sound, honest and orthodox? Where Is the Clergy so
powerful as in the Roman Kingdom? And where more erroneous, or more cruel?


Ortho. But you must instance in times of the Churches Purity, and not in the
time of Anti Christ's Reign.


Reconcil. Few of us are agreed, when the time of the Church-Purity ended, from
the Apostles days; till the Fall of the Pagan Empire, there were great Numbers
of Heretics in the Church; and no Sword was drawn, or desired, against them,
by the Churches: And yet all the Number of that time, mentioned by Epiphanius,
hurt not the Church, so much as the Pride and Contention of the Clergy, even
before Dioclesia^s Persecution, if Eusebius may be believed, lib. 8. c. 1.

And for long time after, the Church abhorred the use of the Sword, or
Violence, against Heretics: Or else Martin had not with such abhorrence,
separated from the Bishops that were for the use of the Sword, against the
Priscilian Gnostics.

And whereas Austin is cited as the chief that changed his mind herein, his
instance is but one, and it is usually abused. 1. It being not against Heresy,
but Schism, that he writes: The Donatists were Prelatical Zealots, that
thought themselves the greater Number, and so called themselves the Church; for
being the supposed Majority in Africa, and having the truest Bishop, as the
Papists and some Prelatists arrogate the Name of the Church on those Accounts:
What Error had they more than Cyprian, and all his pious Councils had, saving
their Factiousness for their own chosen Bishop.

2. And it was not this Shism neither, that Austin, was for Violence against,
but to repress Force with Force; for the Donatists used Murder and Violence.

But come to the Times and Councils that suppressed Heretics with the greatest
Zeal. I have nothing herein to say against the Council of Nice; though some
good men think that they had done better to tolerate the Easter Day different;
yea, and to have done less to stir up Disputes about One Substance: But do you
think Nestorius did more hurt, by saying, That Mary was not to be called, The
Mother ^f God; but, [The Mother of him who is God,] than was done by banishing
him? Who was so far from being a Sectary, that he was the greatest Patriarch,
and so deadly an Enemy to the tolerating of men, called Heretics, that he
began with urging the Emperor to prosecute them; and was justly so used for
his Violence, as a Heretic himself: And being banished, set up so great a
Party in Syria, and other Countries, to this day, called Nestorians, as
continue the abhorrence of the Council of Calc^don and Ephesus, and the Church
of Rome, and the great Divisions of the Christian Church, Would the tolerating
of the accused Phrase have done so much Hurt as this?

And did the Bishops and Councils, that condemned his Adversaries, Eutiches and
Dioscorus, and banished him that was the second Patriarch of the East, do less
hurt to the Church, than it would have done, to have patiently instructed them
in what sense Christ's Nature remained Two, and to have granted, that in other
sense and respe^t, they might be called One, as agreeing and united? When now
the Eutychian Jacobites, by Dioscoru^ Banishment, fill the vast Country of
A^a^sia, and many other Countries, in Divisions from other Churches, and
Opposition to the Council of Calc^d^n.

And did the Monothelites do so much harm, by saying, that Christ might be said
to have but One Will and O^eration, (by Concord, called One) as all the
Councils and Bishops did, by their condemning and prosecuting them, till the
Imperial Churches were by it broken all to pieces?

And did the three Words in the Writings of Theodor^t, Ib^^ and Theodore
Mopsuest, do so much hurt, as the Councils that condemned these Tri^ Capitula
did, by woeful Divisions?

Or did they, that Justinian called Corrupticolae, do more hurt, than he did,
by murdering thousands, and wasting Aegyp^, and other Countries, by his blind
Zeal against Heretics? Surely there is no Comparison in the hurt.

Epipha^ius himself records how much hurt Hereticating Heat did, against
Audius and others called Heretics: And Luci^er Calaritanus was made a
Heretic, for his inordinate Zeal against the Arrians themselves. And I think
few now doubt, but the blind Zeal of Epiphanius himself, and of Cyril Alexand;
and the Council that condemned Chrysostom, as if he were not hot enough against
Origin, did a great deal more harm than good: And that Atticus and Pr^clus, by
their Indulgence to the Joanites, were fain to heal the Wounds that those men's
Heats had made. And more than Socrates and Zozomene tell us, that the said
Atticus and Proclus did the Church more Service, against the Novatians, by
Gentleness and Liberty, than their Predecessors ever did by their zealous
Fierceness.

The Church has suffered much by Sects and Heresy, but, I think, much more by
the ignorant Tyranical Attempts of suppressing them, and of such as are falsely
accused of them.


Ortho. But the Errors of former Times must not stop our Zeal against Error,
nor reconcile us to Heresy.


Reconcil. But why do we not enquire how far, even the godly
Orthodox-Ministers, in these times, also have been guilty of occasioning that
which they justly reprehend?

I have seldom observed any Heresy or Error to rise up, but what the Orthodox
were a culpable Cause of: The Chief Rise of Anabaptisty has been by our most
vile Abu^e of Infant Baptism, 1. Receiving all Infants of Atheists and
Infidels. 2. And that, on an unproved Title, and on the perfidious Vows and
Sponsions of Godfathers and Godmothers, that never owned them, nor intended
to perform their Vows. 3. And forceing Ministers to baptize them against their
Judgments. 4. And worst of all, instead of causing them at age, solemnly to
renew their Christian Covenants, cheating thousands of ignorant Souls, with a
Ceremony, called, Confirmation.

So have the Separatists risen from the Corruptions of the Clergy and Church,
and their wicked Lives, and Tyrannical Impositions and Persecutions.

And so have these Antinomians risen, first, From the Papists False Doctrines,
about their Good Works; and next, From many godly Protestants, seldom, and
unskilful opening the Mystery of Redemption and Grace, and preaching almost all
for Humiliation, and too little of the wonderful Love of God, revealed in Jesus
Christ; till Dr. Sibbes and such others, led them into another strein: And,
thirdly, by their unskilful Managing the Doctrine and Cont^oversies of
Justification; till the Breme and French Divines abroad, and Dav^nant, Ant.
Wotton, Bradshaw, Gataker, and such others at home, taught them to speak more
distinctly and solidly, (which Le Blanck has done above all before him.)

And they, that by Unskilfulness have occasioned other men's Extremes, should
not be over-rigorous against them.

Enquire into the Temper and Lives of most of this sort of men, among us of
late, [even Dr. Crispe, Lancaster Town, Walter Cradok, Saltmarsh, Den, Hobson,
and such other] and you will find, that though they had their Temerities and
Blemishes, they were in the main, Men, far from wicked and profane Lives; much
more, Mr. Walker, Mr. Roborough, Mr. Craudon, Mr. Eyir, blind Mr. Troughlar,
Dr. Tully, and such other that came too near them.

I will now instance more largely, in one, who, in the Fervor of his Zeal,
Preached at Pinners-Hall-Lecture, and after printed a zealous ignorant Sermon,
against such of us, as judge not as confusedly and erroneously as himself; when
I had avoided Preaching on any such Subject, and Printing what I had long
before written on it, lest I should revive the Strife; and yet he is known to
be a worthy virtuous Man.

I will give you yet another Proof, that such may be serious godly Men, who
Preach a Doctrine, quoad Verba, Heretical or Anti-evangelical. The Renovation
of an unsanctified Soul, requires a Change so great, on all our Faculties, as
must turn a mere natural man into a spiritual; and give a man a new End, new
Principles, and a new Heart and Life; and this by Divine transforming
Influence: But to cure one of these Erroneous Men, there needs not so a great
Renovation, but only the better informing of an ignorant man's Judgment, that
was carried away by Education, Prejudice* the Veneration of his chief Teachers,
and the weakness of his own dull undistinguishing Mind; yea, perhaps, the Cure
of his Ignorance, in Grammar or Logic, in some one word, may make him Orthodox.

Could you but get out Prejudice and Ignorance, so far, as to teach these men
but Two or Three Distinctions, in all likelihood, it would cure them, E.G.

1. To distinguish between a Surety antecedent, and subsequent.

2. To distinguish between the Righteousness of Christ, given or imputed to us
in se it self, (one man's Accidents made another) and his Righteousness given
us in its Effects and Benefits, reputed the sole meritorious Cause.

3. Between Justification by Efficiency, (principal and instrumental) and
justifying us constitutively, (as Matter and Form) justifying by Grant in Law,
or by Evidence, or by Witness, or by an Advocate Defense, or by Judicial
decisive Sentence, or executely; and these, as supposing actual or legal
Accusations.

4. Between the Law or Covenant of Innocence with Adam; the Mediatorial Law or
Covenant to Christ; the Common Law of Grace, made with Adam and Noah; the
Covenant of Preculianity with A^rah^m; the Political Law of Mos^s to the Jews;
and the Law or Covenant of Christ, of Grace, of Faith, by which Christ does
Govern, and will Judge his visible Church. Get unstudied dull heads, but to
understand these four distinctions, and you cure them without a new
regeneration: And does not this prove that they are Godly?

To instance no more, but in the first; an Antecedent Surety is either, 1. A
party in the Bond; 2. Or an Instrument of the party Bound.

1. If two persons be bound disjun^tively (this or that) to a Duty or a
Penalty, the bond is answered if either of them perform it. If the Law to Adam
had either said, thou, or Christ for thee shall perfectly Obey, shall dress the
Garden, shall take Eve for thy Wife; or that thou or Christ shall suffer for
not doing it; then Christ's performance had antecedently freed us from Guilt
and Punishment.

2. Or if the Law had said or meant, thou shall Obey or Suffer by thy self, or
by thy substitute or p^r alium as a man may pay his debt by his Servant, or
appear by his Attorney; then Christ's Righteousness or Suffering would have
proved us guiltless.

But a subsequent Surety, who, after the guilt, does voluntarily, as a
Mediator, undertake the discharge of the guilty, is no strict or absolute
Representative, but, as a Mediator, purchases the Captive, to receive his
Grace on the terms, and to the ends, which by a Law or Covenant of Grace, the
Mediator shall appoint.


CHAP. IV. My Reasons against a tedious needl^ss C^nfut^ti^n.
Sect. 1. THE chief thing that I intended next to be done, that is, To Confute
the Hundred Errors before named; I am, on further thoughts, discouraged from
performing: 1. Because, upon perusal, I find that I have already done it so often
and largly in many Books unanswered, that repetition is like to be
disgracefully nauseous: 2. And they that will neither answer nor read what I
have written 34 years ago, or 20, are not like to read what I shall write now.

In my Confession of Faith, Printed 1655. I have so largely opened this
Controversy, about Justification, Faith, and Works, in necessary distinctions,
and many score self-evident Propositions, and many score Arguments, and
abundance of express Texts of Scripture, and above an hundred Testimonies of
Protestant Churches Confessions, and eminent Divines, that I find very little
needful to be added: And why should I think they will read more that will not
read that?

In my Apologies, I have Answered them that have opposed, and have had no reply.

In my Treatise of Justification, I have done it over again.

In my Catholic Theology, I have thrice overdone the same by Explication and
Confutation distinctly.

In my Treatise of Justifying Righteousness, in a Disputation, and an Answer to
Dr. Tully, and to Mr. Cartwright, I have done the same, perhaps too largly.

In my Methodus Theologiae, I have opened the Case methodically and briefly.

In my Life of Faith, I have clearly explained it: And must I expect no Answer,
and yet do all again?

2. But my great disswasive is, that it will swell the Book to so great a
magnitude, that few will read it; should I cite all, or mo^^ of the plain Texts
of Scripture that confute them, how great a part of the Bible must I
Transcribe? Yet do they lay Salvation on points that no one Text of Scripture
mentions.

Sect. 2. 1. If I should cite all the Texts that prove that we are truly
Sinners, though Christ has been a Sacrifice for our sin, and that the guilt of
Fact and Fault, on us, is not taken off by Christ's taking the penalty; but we
are verily sinners still; How great a part of the Bible may I recite to prove
it?

Sect. 3. 2. If I must prove that Christ is and was no sinner, by true
imputation of our sin, as to the guilt of Fact or Fault, but only as a
Sacrifice bear the Penalty; it would be a reproach to the Adversaries, to need
a Confutation of their Blasphemy, and all the Gospel would confute them.

Sect. 4. 3. Should I cite all the Texts that prove us to need, and have an
Inherent and Acted Righteousness by Grace, besides Christ's Personal
Righteousness Meriting for us, above six hundred Texts of Scripture expressly
prove it; and how tedious and needless a work is this?

Sect. 5. 4. Should I prove that All Righteousness, so far makes Righteous;
and that making Righteous, is a Justifying, which goes before Judging us
Righteous; and that it is a putid contradiction, to say, that any Righteousness
does not make Righteous, in tantum, Schoolboys would turn it into a derision
of the opposers.

Sect. 6. 5. Should I prove by Argument, that no Accident can by ye same
numerically in diverse Subjects, nor tra^si^^ a Subjecto in Su^jectum; and so
the Habit, Act, and Relation of Righteousness in Christ's Person, cannot ^n it
self be our Habit, Act, or Relation, unless our Persons, and Christ's, be
really the same; every novice in Logic, would be too much occasioned to insult
over the ignorant gain-sayer.

Sect. 7. 6. Should I prove, that to Justify Efficiently by making Righteous,
and to Justify Constitutively (being our Righteousness) and to Justify by Plea,
or by Witness, or by Evidence, and to Justify in Estimation or Account, and to
Justify by decisive Sentence of a Judge, and to Justify Executively, and to
Justify privately in Conscience, and to Justify publicly before Rulers or the
World, or more publicly, at the Bar of God, are several senses, of the Word
Justification, and several sorts; what man of sense would not pity the
Confounder that denies it, and talk, as if the Word had but one sense?

Sect. 8. 7. Should I prove that by Imputing, Paul means truly accounting a
man Just that is so; reckoning that to him which he has, and not feigning him
to have what he has not; even Dr. Crispe has spared me that labor, venturing
to say, that the contrary sense of Imputing, makes God a Liar, or deceived.
God never judged a man Righteous, that was not first made so.

Sect. 9. 8. Should I prove, that by Works, Paul means those that make not
the Reward of Grace, but of Debt; and James means those that are ^he effects
of Free Grace, and purely subordinate to Christ, as commanded by him; the
express Texts do make it needless.

Sect. 10. 9. Should I prove, that Christ is our King, and Rules and Judges
by his own Law, and has not made us Lawless, and all Judgment on Rule is now
committed to him, and that the very Law of Nature, is now his Law; and also the
Law of S^pernatural Revelation, called by Paul, the Law o^ Christ, the Law of
Faith and of Gr^^^; and by James, the Law of Liberty; the whole scope of the
Gospel, s^veth me that labor.

Sect. 11. 10. Should I prove, that Christ in ^sse objectivo, as the Object of
Faith, is the very specifying form of that Faith it self; and so, that to be
Justified by the Object as such, and not by that Faith it self, is a notorious
putid Contradiction; or should I stand to prove that Faith it self, is said by
Paul, to be Imputed for Righteousness in mere subordination to the meritorious
Sacrifice and Righteousness of Christ, and in conjunction with Free Pardon and
Adoption purchased by Christ; how needless a work is this made by the Text?

Sect. 12. 11. Should I stand to prove, that Elect Infidels, Atheists, or
wicked Men are not Justified, while such (save as God makes them Just by
Conversion and Pardon) all the Scripture tell us, it is needless, and that
Eternal Electing to Justification, is not Justifying; nor yet Christ's dying for
us, till He be given to us, as well as for us.

Sect. 13. 12. Should I stand to prove, that men shall be judged according to
their Works, and that God is the Rewarder of them that diligently seek him; and
that Christ has frequently promised Rewards, and that the same Salvation,
which, as to Value, is no Debt, but merely a Free Gift of Grace through Christ,
is yet, as to the Order of Conveyance, given on Condition as a Reward, that
Fatherly Love may attain its ends by Saptential means, and not only by Power;
Morally, producing Moral Effects, in conjunction with Love and Power; and thus,
that the pardoning and saving Acts of the Covenant, impose Conditions, as
receptive qualifications, which yet are all the Effects of Grace, the whole
Scripture makes this a needless task.

Sect. 14. 13. Should I prove the distinctness; 1. Of the Law and Covenant of
Innocence. 2. And of the Law and Covenant of Mediation. And, 3. Of the
Mediators Law and Covenant of Grace imposed on us, and sealed in Sacraments;
and that the same is both a Law and Covenant, and that the Covenant of Grace,
is the Instrumental Gift of Pardon and Justification; How much of the Bible
must I transcribe?

Sect. 15. The like I may say, of most of the rest, which I doubt, I have been
too large in proving in all the six, or seven, or eight Books before named. I
thought also, to have distinctly answered the Printed Pinners-Hall Lecture, but
he that cann^^ find it more than fully answered, in the foresaid Books, either
never read them, or Answers to such a man, will be vain.

And I am sorry, that the same hand in another Lecture, elsewhere publishes,
that [That any are brought to believe in Jesus, is as great a Miracle, as the
Resurrection of Christ from the dead] p. 223. And after [There is not a greater
Instance of the Power of God in the whole World, than this, in bringing over
the heart of a sinner to believe in Christ.]

It grieveth my Soul to think what Scandals are thus given by good Men to
Papists, Infidels and prejudiced Scorners, and what work they will make with
it. No doubt but Faith is a great and difficult Work, and wrought by Almighty
Power: For God has no other Power, but Omnipotency: omnis Dei Potentia est
Omnipotentia, quia Infinita. Gods Power is his Essence: But the Instances and
Demonstrations of it, are as various as the Effects. Your Finger or Tongue,
moves not, but by Omnipotency: But every Motion or Fly, is not as great an
Instance or Demonstration of Power, as Faith is. Nor Faith so great an Instance
as the making of Angels, Men, Heaven and Earth, Sun, Moon, and Stars, their
Natures, Motion and Order: Divines have hitherto taught, that Power is
eminently manifested in Creation and Natural Preservation, though with Wisdom and
L^ve; and Wisdom Eminently manifested in Government, and Love in Glorifying
(though they were conjunct in each) Man cannot work Miracles, and that so great.
And I do not believe that God damneth all unbelievers, as for want of an Act as
great as the motion of the Sun, or making the World.

And if it be a Miracle, and as great a one as Christ's Resurrection, How can
any believer doubt at all? Why was Christ's Resurrection Preached by the
Apostles, so much as the Proof of the Truth of Christianity, and not the Faith
of every believer? Then we need not go far to prove the Christian V^^ity: Every
poor Boy or Woman that believes, has the fullest Proof, and as great and
miraculous as Christ's Resurrection, Why send we not Infidels and Doubters to
this Miracle, which is about them in all ages in thousands: Over-doing is
undoing.

And yet no doubt, the Author says truly, that Faith in Christ is so hard a
Work, that he that never found it hard, has none (or has it but in the seed,
and yet unrooted, or untryed. But alas! Infidels find it too hard to them.

To conclude, Instead of the larger part of the Proof or Confutations which I
intended; 1. I shall with this, Annex a brief Treatise, resolving a multitude
of Controversies about Justification, which I have laid by, about Fifteen Years.

2. I refer you to the foresaid former perforformance of it.

3. Were I not disabled by Pain, and the approaches of Death, I would be ready
to Answer any sober, rational Objector.

A Postscript.
Sect. 1. WHereas diverse say, they were drawn in to prenx their Names to this
Drs. Book, because they were told, that the Errors were expunged: Upon
perusal, I find that it is no such matter; but in Vol. 3. Ser. 3, 4. etc. the
Author rather more frequently inculcateth the worst of them, viz. [That sin
cannot hurt any that are Elect, or that Christ dyed for.] And that [ in 1. Joh.
It is a powerful means to k^ep them from sinning, to believe that if they sin,
it can do them no hurt.]

Sect. 2. The Text drew him to use the Name of sinning. [I write to you, that
you sin not.] But did not the Contradiction of it to his Doctrine convince him,
while he read the Text against sinning; judge whether he took not the thing to
be impossible? He says, Though such do Murder, commit Adultery, Blasphemy,
Idolatry, or any such thing, they are no Murderers, Adulterers, etc. or
Sinners; because it is Christ's sin, and not theirs, and cannot be his and
theirs too; so that they may live in the Act, but cannot sin.

Object. But it was their sin once, before it was Christ's sin?

Answ. No; He says, that it was Christ's sin, if not from Eternity, at least
above Sixteen Hundred Years before we were born. And he that had no being,
could have no sin: And Gods foreknowledge of future sin, makes not sin: Nay,
he could not foreknow, that which would never be; so that indeed, Christ could
not take our sin as his, which was not ours, nor ever would be at all: And if
he had, yet I hope they will not say, that now in Heaven he is the greatest
sinner. And so, there neither was, nor is, any sin in us or Christ.

Sect. 3. But as he repeateth this Error, I will repeat my Lamentations and
Warning to this tempted Sect. Hear it as Speculatoris Tubam, the Watch-mans
Trumpet, that would deliver, if it may be, more than his own Soul.

1. Is it possible, that that which is evil, and the greatest evil it self, can
be in us, and done by us, and do us no hurt?

2. Can that do no hurt to the Elect, that makes such calamitous Confusions in
the World? What, that which fills the Earth with the darkness of Ignorance,
Idolatry, Infidelity, bloody Wars, Persecutions, Torments, Flames, Famine,
Malignity, and yet do no hurt to any that are Elect, no, not while they are
such themselves?

3. Did Paul call himself mad against the Saints, unworthy to be called an
Apostle, a wretched man, for that which did him no hurt?

4. Did David write all the lamenting Words of Psalm. 51. and many others; and
Asaph, Psalm. 77, etc. for that which did them no hurt?

5. Did God pronounce all the Curses, Lev. 26. and Deuteronomy. 27. etc. against that
sin that will not hurt the Elect that then lived?

6. Are the recitals of the Jews sins and punishments, Psalm. 78. and 105, 106.
etc. of things that cannot hurt the Elect?

7. Did God send the Jews into Captivity to Babylon for sins that do the Elect
no hurt; even for penitent Manasses's sins?

8. Are all God's threatenings in the whole Scripture, even such as Christ's
Words, Joh. 15. Heb. 6. Heb. 10. and Rev. 2, and 3. against things that are so
harmless? Must we serve God acceptably with Reverence and Godly Fear, because
he is a consuming Fire; and because it is a fearful thing to fall into the
Hands of the living God, if no sin can possibly do us any hurt?

9. Does not this opinion contradict every Article of the Creed, every Petition
in the Lords Prayer, and everyone of the Ten Commandments?

10. If it be no hurt to be tormented with possessions of the Devil, to be
Lunatic, Blind, Lame, Dumb, Torn, etc. Why is Christ so Praised for healing
such, and why appealeth he to his Works against unbelievers?

11. If it be no hurt to be mad, what is Bedlam good for? Or to be tormented
with Stone, Colic, Convulsion, or any Disease; why will these Phanaticks seek
to Physicians, use Medicines, and groan in Pain? Possidonius would confute his
Tongue by a sower-face or a groan; when he said, O Pain, thou shall not make me
confess that thou art (malum) ill, or bad.

12. Why do we not take up with the three first Petitions in the Lords Prayer,
if our own Interest be not next to be regarded and prayed for?

13. Why pray we for our daily Bread, if there be no hurt to want it; or for
the pardon of sin, if punishment be impossible, or hurt not; or against
temptations and the evil one, and evil things, if they be no such?

14. Should none pray but Reprobates, if others have no hurt to deprecate?

15. Why should we compassionate the poor, or sick, if sin do no hurt to them?

16. Why do men Plow and Sow, and Labor, and Eat, if Famine hurt not, and
Labor do no good, because Christ has done all?

17. Why do Ministers Preach so much against sin, if it can do no hurt?

18. What is it that we are to repent of, if sin do no hurt?

19. Why must fasting, and watchfulness, and resisting temptations be used
against Lust, and other sin, if it can do no hurt?

20. What is Baptism, the Lords Supper, Confession, and Absolution then for?

21. Why then should we exhort each other daily, lest any be hardened by this
deceitfulness of sin?

22. Why is he called Least, in the Kingdom of God, who breaks the least
Commandment, and teaches men so?

23. Why is the Education of Children so great a Duty, and he that spares the
Rod, hates his Child, if sin will do them no hurt?

24. What is God's Governing Justice good for, in punishing sin, if it hurt not?

25. Why must Rulers be Just, and a Terror to them that do evil, if sin do no
hurt?

26. How can that hurt any other Elect Person, that hurts not the sinner
himself?

27. Why is it worse to be cast into the Sea with a Millstone, for
scandalizing the least, if that scandal cannot hurt them?

28. Why do Libertines labor to escape Prisons, Banishments, Fines, or Hanging
for sin, if it can do them no hurt?

29. Why is man's nature afraid of Devils, and the Serpents seed, if they
cannot hurt us?

30. Why hurt we others by Self-defence* and War, if nothing can hurt us?

31. Why has God put Fear into our Nature, if nothing can hurt us?

32. Was it no hurt to the Elect to be long the Devil's Servants, and to have
our Conversion so long delayed, as with many it is?

33. Is sin worse than suffering, if it can do no hurt?

34. Is it no hurt to live and dye in terrible fear of Gods displeasure, and in
doubts of our everlasting state?

35. Is it no hurt to have Faith, Love, Desire, and Joy, weak, and to have
still the remnants of unbelief, and other such like sins?

36. Is it no hurt to lose some degrees of Love and Holiness, which we have had?

37. Is it no hurt accordingly to have the less of Glory in Heaven?

38. Why are these men for Separation and Church Discipline, if sin do no hurt?

39. Why pray they for Reformation, and Church-prosperity, and the Thousand
Years Glorious State, if sin be so harmless a thing?

40. If all that Christ Merited, be really the Elects, immediately on his
purchase, are not all the Elect in Heaven already; yea, before they had any
being; whence then is all the gross Ignorance and Error, and blind Defense of
Satan's falsehoods, under the Name of Christ and Truth? Why censure they
Conformists and others that differ from them? If all that Christ has, be
already ours, and we are as perfect as he, what can Duty, or more Grace, or
Heaven, add to us? And why would they have men read their Books, to do no good,
and avoid no evil? Is it to make up any imperfection in the Obedience or
Righteousness of Christ?

41. Did Christ redeem us from under his own Government, and the Law of Grace?
Are we not under the Law [of Christ and Faith, and Liberty] to Christ? Or is
there any transgression, if no Law? Or is it Law that we shall not be Ruled and
Judged by?

42. Is it no greater Mercy and Grace, to make us like our Savior in Holiness,
and Gods Image, and the Divine Nature, than not? Are Christ's Graces his
dishonor?

43. Is it not a vile abuse of his Grace, to contemn it, because it is our own?
And to take Righteousness to stand against Free Grace, if it be but our own?
And to pervert Paul's Words, that accounted as dung his own Righteousness, which
he sets in competition or opposition to Christ, calling it that Righteousness
which was of (Moses) Law; when at the same Word, he sets against it a
Righteousness also made his own, which is by the Faith of Christ. Could Christ's
Righteousness Justify us, if it were not in some kind of Causality
(meritorious, material, or formal) made our own: Can an Accident of another
Subject be an Accident of us? And will not distinct personality continue to
Men, as well as to Angels for ever? We abhor the thoughts of any Righteousness
that is of our own possessing or working, otherwise than as given and wrought
in us, by the Merits of Christ, and the Free Gift of undeserved Grace; or any
that must not by the same Divine Power and Grace be continued. And all that
pretends to the least part of the Office or Performance of Christ; but only
what he freely gives, and which advances the Honor of his Merits and Love,
and tends to Please and Glorify God, and attain the designed End of
Redemption and Salvation.

AS to the Twelve Names that are prefixed to the Book, I leave it to
themselves, to speak their own Cause: Only I can say, that one of them takes
the Words, if meant, as they are written (and indeed inculcated) to overthrow
Christianity, and Humanity. And I doubt not, but some of the rest are of the
same mind, and had not read the Book, or the Preface, so as to know what was in
them.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. 1. Prefatory. page 1. Chap. 2. An hundred of their Errors described. p.
6. Chap. 3. To moderate the over-hot Censurers of their Persons. p. 38. Chap.
4. Reasons for present forbearing a tedious Confutation of them, as being fully
and often done by me already, and as further, needless. p. 58. Postscript. p.
65.
Three BOOKS Lately Published by Mr. BAXTER, and Printed for Tho. Parkhurst.
1. ENglish Nonconformity, as under King CHARLES the Second; Truly Stated and
Argued.

2. Knowledge and Love.

3. Cain and Abel.

THE Vanity of Continuing Ceremonies in the Worship of GOD; by a Minister of
the Church of England.

An Healing Attempt; Conscience Satisfied, in Submitting Obedience to King
WILLIAM and Queen Mary.


