Universal Concord.

The first Part.

THE* Sufficient TERMS Proposed for the Use of those that have liberty to use
them: And as the Authors Profession of his own Religion, in a contentious,
dividing Age.

By Richard Baxter.

The First and General Part, is preparatory to the Second Part, containing the
Particular Terms of Reconciling the several differing Parties that are
Reconcilable.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Nevil Simmons, Bookseller in Kederminster, 1660.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
I Must acquaint thee, What it is that is here offered thee, and To what use
and purpose. Here is, 1. The Articles or Sum of the Christian Religion, both
briefly in the Ancient Creeds, and more Largly and Explicitly in a Profession,
1. Of Christian Belief, 2. Consent, 3. And Obedience.

2. Here is a Form of Agreement for the Pastors of such Churches as are left to
Voluntary Associations and Communion.

3. Here is a larger Description of the Ministerial Offices and
Church-Ordinances.

The first of these (which was formerly published as a Catechism, and is now
corrected) was to me a work of greater difficulty than greater Volumes; which
those will understand, that have tried what it is to avoid Defectiveness,
Redundancies, and Disorders in such a draught, (which yet I know I have not
perfectly attained). The Uses to which it was intended are these. 1. Whereas
Mr. John Dury (who has labored above thirty years for the healing the
Divisions among the Protestant Churches) did send to the Ministers of this
County of Worcester, to give him their advice and assistance in that most
desirable work; and whereas one principal part of our Advice was, that the
Churches should hold their Unity and Concord in Necessary things, and Liberty
in things not necessary, and Charity in both, and that they should each send to
other a Confession of their Faith, containing only such Necessary things, and
thereupon desire the Acknowledgement and Communion of their Brethren: This
Profession is purposely fitted to that Use; containing as much as
neighbour-Churches should require; in order to that distant Communion with us
or others, which several Churches are capable of; and containing nothing but
what all Christian Churches are agreed in. And whereas many have said, that it
is defective, because it contains nothing but what a Papist will subscribe; I
answer, It is so much the better: The Churches had a perfect or sufficient
Symbol or Confession of Faith, before Popery (Name or Thing) was known in the
world: And they are not bound to alter and enlarge it, as often as errors shall
arise: The Rule must still remain the same, and [A Rejection of all that is
contrary to this Rule] is that which we must do in opposition to Heresies and
Errors. We have no new Religion, but the same ancient Faith which was before
Popery was conceived. If we have nothing but what they confess to be true, then
our Faith is justified by them, (and so we are on the surer side): but they
having much which we deny, their Faith as Popish is condemned by us, though
their Faith as Christian we approve.

2. Another use of this Profession is to be a sufficient test for particular
Church Communion; (where Authority leaves it to the Church.) I will not reject
him as defective in the Articles of his Belief, who believes but what is
comprehend in this Sum.

3. It is also useful for the Catechizing of the Ignorant, and the clear
explication of the Creeds and the ten Commandments, to the understandings of
the weak. I know it is an inconvenience to children, to have Answers so long to
some of the Questions: Which I would have redressed, if I could have done it
without greater inconveniences. And I know that there are hundreds of
Catechisms abroad already: But if I could have told where to have found one
that had contained as much as this does, in as few words, and no worse order, I
had spared this labor. Since the first Edition of this* I received the
exactest that I have taken notice of, in certain Propositions, from the most
Learned Author Mr. Thomas Greaves, much suited to the same designs as this.

To this last use some will think that there is wanting the Definition of the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper: But to them I say, 1. The ancient
Church did purposely conceal the mystery of the Eucharist from the
Catechumenes, till they were baptized. 2. And then it was by sight and
observation of the actual celebration, that they first and chiefly learned the
nature of it. 3. And he that names them with their Uses and Ends, (as I have
here done) supposing that he speaks to such as have seen the Administration,
may perhaps escape the censure of omitting any thing that is of true Necessity;
the Doctrine and Thing signified by them being before explained. 4. But yet I
have afterward given a Description of them, page 29. and 46. These. 8. and 34.
from whence it may be fetched for the use of the Catechized.

4. It is also useful to my self, and others in my case, that have swarms of
malicious accusers, that would fain be questioning the soundness of our Faith,
and accusing us of Errors; and that have need to make it known what indeed is
our Religion to Magistrates or Brethren, for their satisfaction and our just
defense. If any question* What is My Religion? It is here expressed: It
consists in [ my Belief of all that God reveals to me, and my Love of God
in himself and in all the appearances of his Goodness; my Trust in his
fidelity, and Hope of all his Promised Mercies; and my Obedience to him in all
his Laws; My Assent and Consent in General to all the Will of God revealed in
Nature or the Holy Scriptures, as far as I can understand them: and in
particular and more distinctly to all the parts of this Profession.] This is my
Religion; I doubt not but this much will be acceptable with God, and sufficient
to salvation: If it be not acceptable to men* nor sufficient to my being
Reputed Orthodox, and accepted into their Communion, the Day is at hand that
shall reveal, whether the fault was theirs or mine. I will reject no man of
this Religion from my Charity or Communion: I will censure, or molest, or
persecute none such: If they will do otherwise by me, the suffering will at
last be greatest, where the fault was greatest.

And yet (though I adhere to the ancient simplicity) I will not be wanting to
satisfy any as far as I am able: And therefore I have added the other two
parts: The Agreement of the Associated Ministers, is intended for nothing else
but a sufficient enumeration of all those things which Pastors, being left to
so much liberty by the Magistrate, should Agree in voluntarily among
themselves: But observe that it is only for such times and places of Liberty;
(and there it may serve instead of all the Volumes of Canons and Decrees:) But
in places and times of greater strictness, where the Civil Rulers grant no such
Liberty to the Churches, much of the Articles of Agreement are in vain, and not
to be practiced; especially much in the sixth and seventh Articles: And as we
justly swear in the Oath of Supremacy, that the King is the only Supreme
Governor of this Realm, in all Causes Spiritual or Ecclesiastical (that is, as
to all Coercive Government about such Causes, distinct from Spiritual
Government by the Keys of the Word upon men's Consciences) so we must
accordingly obey him; and no Agreements, or Covenants, or Canons of our own or
others, without a true and certain prohibition from the Law of God, must be
pretended against our obedience to lawful powers. For Gods Law having already
bound us to obey our Rulers, we cannot by any Power, or Covenants, or
Agreements of our own, disoblige our selves: Otherwise men might evade a great
part of their duty; and while they pretend to dispense with the Laws of God,
they should, in a sort, set up themselves as above him. But if man command us
to disobey our Maker, we must disobey that command, though with patient
submission to sufferings, without resistance, or reproaching of our Governors.

And because some men of narrow principles, are calling for Assent to many more
particulars (especially about Church-Offices, and Worship, and Discipline) and
will not bear with those that in smaller things dissent from them, especially
if Ministers; I have added 80. Theses about the Offices of the Ministers of
Christ, containing such things as one would think, for Number and Quality,
might be taken as sufficient for our Concord and Communion with those whose
Opinions hinder not the prosperity of their Charity and of the Church.

And now call me by what Name or Title thou see cause; here thou have my
Profession and my Judgment about the matters of the Church: If thou desire to
see the practical part that will bear it, exemplified in any Forms, I should
not refuse to give thee such satisfaction upon any just occasion. I know of no
Title that well agrees to the nature of that Religion which indeed I hold, and
which I have here proposed, and which I think would be fit for the Churches to
agree in, but CHRISTIAN and CATHOLIC, and these I own: If thou give me any
other, let him that makes or uses it, be responsible for it.

Understand also that this General Part, containing the Positives of the
Catholic Religion, and fit materials of Catholic Concord, is but the first
Part of the Book, the second intended being somewhat large, as containing the
particular terms on which the Abassines, Armenians, Greeks, Romanists,
Lutheranes, Calvinists, Arminians, Contra-remonstrants, Episcopal,
Presbyterian, Independents, and moderate Anabaptists should be agreed: and
discovering that with most of the parties, the present disagreements are not
such as should break Communion, and cause them to reject each other as too many
uncharitably do.

I conclude with one necessary Advertisement to thee, that if thou would not
be cheated of thy Religion by those that are still persuading men that the
essentials or Fundamentals of Religion as distinct from the Integral parts
cannot be known, because no one certain perfect form of words is given to the
Church which contains those and none but those, remember that it is the
matter and sense believed, Loved and Obeyed that is the essence of Religion and
necessary to salvation for it self; but the Words are only Necessary as
revealing or expressing the Matter: And therefore the same form of words or
sentences is not Necessary alike to all. The most General words, are most
comprehensive, and most certainly take in all the matter: But then the
particular things which must necessarily be understood, are not alike conceived
of by all men by the help or use of General expressions: A wise understanding
Christian when he says but [ I believe in God the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost,] does distinctly conceive of all those things that essentially
constitute such a true belief; when perhaps an ignoranter weaker person must
have those Generals opened by more distinct expressions, and more particularly,
before he can have a true apprehension of such essentials. And therefore the
more Ignorant any person is, ( caeteris paribus) the more large, distinct and
particular his Creed or Profession should be; because he conceives of nothing
but by very particular distinct expressions, when the judicious by a few words
conceive of as much as the ignorant by many.

Though much of the second Part of this Treatise be long since prepared, yet so
great are the threatenings of God to deprive me of opportunities of public
serving him, and so wonderful is the impatience of men against Peace makers,
(as crossing their opinions, interests and designs) that I have great reason
to question whether ever it will see the light: And therefore I entreat thee at
the present to accept of this imperfect piece alone, from him that is resolved
by the help of Christ, and in confidence on his promise, Matthew. 5.9. to
continue his endeavors (though weak and unsuccesful) for the Churches Peace,
though it cost him a thousand more injuries and slanders, and all that furious
prosperous malice can inflict, as being

His servant who will bear our charges, and save us harmless in his work.
Rich. Baxter.


Errata.
Page 4. l. 22. for [ the seventh day] read [ the Sabbath day]. page 10, 11.
Those that would have more brevity, may blot out [ to reconcile and bring me
unto God] and all after [ Sanctifier] to the end of that Paragraph. Page 24. l.
12. blot out [ and Consent] Page 61. l. 1* blot out [ any] Page 68. l. 3. for [
great] r. [ urgent] and l. 6. for [ omit] r. [ over-pass]


