THE Safe Religion.

OR THREE DISPUTATIONS For the Reformed CATHOLIC RELIGION, AGAINST POPERY.

Proving that Popery is against the Holy Scriptures, the Unity of the Catholic
Church, the consent of the Ancient Doctors, the plainest Reason, and common
judgment of sense it self.

By Richard Baxter.

Contra Rationem, nemo sobrius:
Contra Scripturas, nemo Christianus:
Contra Ecclesiam, nemo Pacificus,
Senserit. August. de Trinit. l. 4. c. 6. fine. London Printed, by Abraham
Miller, for Thomas Underhill at the Anchor and Bible in Paul's Churchyard, and
Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in Fleet Street, 1657.

TO THE Protestant Reader.
WHen the motion was first made for the Publishing of these Papers, it seemed
to me to be as the Casting of water into the Sea; so great is the Number of the
Learned Writings of Protestant Divines against the Papists (which will never be
well answered) that the most elaborate addition may seem superfluous; much more
these hasty Disputations prepared but for an exercise which is the Recreation
of a few Countrey-Ministers at a monthly meeting, when they ease themselves of
their ordinary work. But upon further consideration, I saw it was, The Casting
of water upon a threatening fire, which the Sea it self does but restrain. It Is
more Engines than a few that are openly or secretly at work at this time, to
captivate these Nations again to the Roman Pope. When so many hundreds, if not
thousands are night and day contriving our seduction, under the name of
Reconciling us to the Church; if no body counterwork them, what may they not
do. It Is not enough that we have had Defenders, and that their Books are yet in
the World. Old Writings are laid by, though much stronger than any new ones:
But new ones are sooner taken up and read. The Papists have of late been very
plentiful, and yet very sparing in their Writings. Plentiful of such as run
among the simple injudicious people in secret, so that the Countries swarm with
them; But sparing of such as may provoke any Learned man to a Confutation: That
so, they may in time disuse us from those Studies, and so disable the Ministry
therein, and catch us when we are secure through a seeming peace, and fall upon
us when we have lost our strength. And I am much afraid that the generality of
our people (perhaps of the best) are already so much disused from these
studies, as to be much unacquainted with the Nature of Popery, and much more to
seek for a preservative against it, and a through confutation of them. So that
if Papists were once but as fully set out among us in their own likeness, as
they are under the names of Quakers and other Sects, what work would you see in
many places? I doubt many would follow their pernicius ways, and fall like
Sheep of a common rot, or people in a raging pestilence, especially if they had
but the countenance of the times: Not through their strength, but because our
people are naked, and unmeet for a defense.

The work that now they are upon, is, 1. By Divisions, and Reviling the
Ministers, to loosen the people from their Guides; that they may be as a
Masterless Dog that will follow any body that will whistle him.

2. To take down the Ministers maintenance and encouragements, that they may be
disabled so vigorously to resist them.

3. To hinder their union, that they may abate their strength, and find them
work against each other.

4. To procure a Liberty of seducing all they can under the name of Liberty of
Conscience, that so they may have as fair a game for it as we: And ignorance
and the common corruption of nature (especially so heightened by a custom in
sin) does befriend the Devils cause much more than Gods; or else how comes it
to pass that the Godly are so few, and Error, Idolatry and impiety does so
abound in all the earth!

5. To break the common people into as many Sects and parties as they can, that
they may not only employ them against one another, but also may hence fetch
matter of reproach, against our profession in the eyes of the World.

6. To plead under the name of Seekers against the certainty of all Religion;
that men may be brought to think that they must be either of the Popish
profession or of none.

And indeed when all Sects have done their worst it is but two, that we are in
any great danger of (And of those I think we are in more danger, then the most
are aware of) And that is, 1. Papists: who plead not as other parties, only by
the tongue, but by exciting Princes and States against us, and disputing with
the Faggot or Hatchet in their hands: And if we have not Arguments that will
confute a Navy, an Army, or a Powder Plot, we can do no good against them.

2. Profaneness; animated by Apostate Infidels: This is the Religion that men
are born in. And men that Naturally are so endeared to their lusts, that they
would not have the Scripture to be true, will easily hearken to him that tells
them it is false.

Yea so much does Popery befriend men in a vicious course, that some are apt to
join these together, thinking at the heart that Christianity is but a Fable:
but yet for fear it should prove true, they will be Papists, that they may have
that easy remedy for a reserve.

If God will preserve us but from these two dangers, Popery, and Profaneness
animated by infidelity, it will go well with England.

The most of my former Writings having been bent against the later; I thought
it not amiss to let go this one against the former. That so I may entice the
common professors to a little more serious Study of these points, and furnish
them with some familiar Arguments that are suited to their capacities, that
every deceiver may not find them unarmed. And here I thought it best to defend
our own profession and overthrow theirs in the main, and not to stand long upon
particular controversies, except that one of the Resolution and Foundation of
our Faith, which is the great difference. Yet that private unstudyed men may
understand wherein the particular differences lie, I have given them a
Catalogue of them in other men's words in the end, as resolving not to do it in
my own.

In short, I have here made it plain that Popery is against Scripture, Reason,
Sense, and against the Unity and Judgment of the Church.

1. Either Scripture is True or not true: If not, Popery is not true, which
pleads its warrant from it (And some of them argue, as if they purposed to
disprove the Scripture, and to imitate Samson, in pulling down the house on
their own heads and ours, in revenge for the dishonor they have suffered by the
Scriture.) If it be true (as nothing more true) then Popery is not true, which
palpably contradicts it, as in the points of Latin service, and denying the
Cup in the Lords Supper, and many other is most evident.

2. Either the Catholic Church is one, or not: If not, then Popery is
deceitful, which makes this its principal pretense, for the usurping the
Universal Headship. If it be One then Popery is deceitful, which is renounced
by the far greater part of the Catholic Church, and again renounceth them, and
separateth from them, because they will not be subject to the Pope, who never
yet in his greatest height had the actual Government of half the Christian
world.

3. Either the Judgment of the Ancient Doctors is sound or not: If not, then
the Church of Rome is unsound, that is sworn to expound the Scripture only
according to their concent: If it be sound, then the Church of Rome is unsound,
that arrogate a Uiniversal Government and Infallibility, and build upon a
foundation, that was never allowed by the Ancient Doctors (as in the third
Disput. I have fully proved) and which most Christians in the world do still
reject.

4. Either Reason it self is to be renounced or not: If it be, then none can be
Papists but mad men. If not, then Popery must be renounced, which foundeth our
very faith upon impossibilities, and teaches men of necessity to believe in
the Pope as the Vicar of Christ, before they believe in Christ, with many the
like which are afterward laid open.

5. Either our five Senses, and the Judgment made upon them, is certain and
Infallible or not. If not, then the Church of Rome, both Pope and Council are
Fallible, and not at all to be t^^^^ed. For when all their Tradition is by
hearing or reading, they are uncertain whether ever they heard or read any such
thing; and we must all be uncertain whether they speak or write it: And then we
must not only subscribe to Fransc. Sanchez, Quod nihil scitur, but also say
that Nihil certo creditur. But if sense be certain and Infallible, then the
Church of Rome, even Pope and Council are not only Fallible, but certainly
false deceivers and deceived. For the Pope and his Council tell the Church that
it is not Bread and Wine which they take, eat and drink in the Eucharist. But
the senses of all sound men, do tell them that it is. I see that its Bread and
Wine, I smell it, I feel it, I taste it; and somewhat I hear to further my
assurance: And yet if Popery be not false, its no such matter. One would think
the dullest Reader, might be quickly here resolved, whether Popery be true or
false. Look on the consecrated Bread and Wine, touch it, smell it, taste it,
and if thou can but be sure that it is indeed Bread and Wine, thou may be
as sure that Popery is a delusion. And if thou can but be sure; that it is
not Bread and Wine, yet thou may be sure that the Pope or his Council, nor
any of his Doctors are not to be believed. For if other men's senses be
deceitful, theirs and thine are so too.

But these things are urged in the following Disputations.

Its worth the observing how much they are at odds among themselves, about the
Resolution of their Faith, and how near some of them come to us of late, as in
Tho. White's Sonus Buccinae, and Doctor H. Holden de Resol. fidei, and in
Cressy and Vane and others may be seen: And their silly followers in England
think verily, that theirs is the common Doctrine of that Church. And how
solicitous Cressy and others are to take that Infallibility out of our way as a
stumbling stone, which the Italians and most of them, make the Foundation and
chief cornerstone. What a task were it to Reconcile but Bellarmine and Holden?
Knot and Cressy (both in English.) White had so much wit in his Defense of
Rushworths Dialogues, when he wrote in English, to carry on the matter as
smoothly, as if they had been all of a mind. But when he writes in Latin, How
many ways of Resolution of Faith, that are unsound can he find among the
Papists as different from his own? Vid. de fide and Theolog. Tract. 1. Sect.
28.29.

Reader, Adhere to God, and the Righteousness of Christ, and the Teachings of
the Holy Ghost, by the Holy Scriptures, and a faithful Ministry, in the
Communion of the Saints, and as a member of the Catholic Church, which arising
at Jerusalem, is dispersed over the world, containing all that are Christians;
renounce not right Reason, or thy senses; and live according to the light which
is vouchsafed thee; and then thou shall be safe from Popery and all other
pernicious damning errors.

Marc. 10. 1656/7. R.B.

To the Literate Romanists that will read this Book.
Men and Brethren,
A Writing that so much concerns your cause, I think, should tender you some
account of its publication, especially when I know that not only the
divulging, but the holding of the Doctrine contained therein, is so heinous a
matter in your eyes, that if I were in your power, the suspicion of it might
bring me to the Rack and the Strappado, and the confession of it would expose
me to the flames. I have many times considered, that you could never sure
endure to torment men in your Inquisition, and consume them to ashes, and so
industriously to embroyle the Nations of the earth in blood and miseries, to
work them to your minds, and set up your own way, if you did not think it
right, and think them exceeding bad whom you thus destroy. I find that my own
heart would serve me to use Toads and Serpents, and destroying Vermin, half as
bad as you do Protestants, that is, to put them to death, though not to torment
them so long: but for gentler and more harmeless creatures, I could not do it
without a great reluctance of my nature. I must needs therefore by your works
bear you record that you have a zeal for God; but so had some before you that
guided it not by knowledge, Romans 10.2. And I suppose your way is undoubtedly
right in your own eyes, or else you durst never prosecute it with such
violence: And yet one that was once as zealous in his way, and shut up the
Saints in prison, and received authority from the high Priests to put them to
death, and compelled them to blaspheam, did afterward call all this but
madness, Acts 26.9, 10, 11. But methinks I find my self obliged, when I see men
differ from me with such height of confidence, to give them some Reason of my
differing thoughts: And yet it is no great matter of success that I can expect
from this account. To make any addition or alteration in your belief, I have no
great reason to expect; while you read my words with this prejudice, that they
are damnable heresy; and depend upon him whom you suppose infallible, for the
fashioning of your Faith. And if I should say that I expect satisfaction from
you, with any great hope, I should but dissemble. For I have not been negligent
in reading such writings of your own as might acquaint me both with your Faith,
and your Theological Opinions; and can scarce reasonably expect that any of you
should say more to satisfy me, then these contain. For any of you to recite
the Canons or Decretals of your Church or Popes, in a writing to me is in vain:
For I have them at hand already, or can have them at a trice. And if you say
any thing to me by way of Answer, which is not in those Canons or Decretals, or
solemnly pronounced already by your Church to be de fide, you can give me
little assurance of its verity; but your own writing must incur all those
reproaches, which Knot bestows on the Doctrine of Chillingworth, and we hear
from you so frequently, for ^he defect of Infallibility. But yet, let what will
come of it, I shall leave some slender Te^timony to posterity, that I dissented
not from ^o many confident men, without giving them ^ome of the Reasons of my
dissent.

I was born and bred here among the Pro^essors of the Reformed Catholic
Christian Religion. When I was young, I judged of ^our Profession as I was
taught, and the pre^udice which I received against it, did grow up ^ith me, as
yours does against us. Yet receiving much good to my soul by Parsons Book of
Resolution corrected (when I was but sixteen years of Age) it run much in my
mind, that sure there were some among you that had the Fear of God. When I was
capable of it, by Age and Studies, I made some diligent search into your
Writers, that I might know the true state of the controversies betwixt us. But
still I confess I read them with prejudice and partiality; till at last I
attained (as far as I can understand by my own heart) such a love to the truth,
and an impartiality in my Studies and judgment of these things, that I read
your Writers, with as free a mind (I mean, as willing to find what truth was
there to be found) as I do the Writings of Protestants themselves. When I had
discovered undoubtedly that in some doctrinal points, the differences were made
by most on both sides much greater then they were, and much greater then the
most Learned on both sides tha^ had any moderation, did conceive them to be* I
was the more confirmed in my resolutions to be impartial in my Studies, and so
have proceeded (if I be a competent judge of my own mind) to this day. And
after all, I am left in the dissatisfaction which I here manifest* And by what
sheps my averseness to your wa^ has been brought on since I began to search in
to it impartially; I shall here further declare.

First, I have been most offended with those doctrines and practices, that did
most notoriously run against the stream of the Holy Scripture; for here the
case was so plain that without any singular acuteness it might be discerned: as
in your Latin Service of God with those that understand it not, your
administering the Bread in the Lords Supper without the cup; that Image Worship
which your Writers do maintain, forbidding Priests marriages, with many such
like. And yet suspecting my own understanding, I read what your Writers say
also for these: But when I saw how palpably they forced the text, it increased
my dislike: And then knowing that you contradicted the Scriptures in these, and
finding withal that you build your faith upon your Churches Infallibility, I
was exceedingly turned against your profession, when I saw your foundation so
clearly overthrown. But yet this was not all: There was scarce any thing that
more offended me, then the tendency of your Doctrines, to destroy the Knowledge
of the people, and lead them on in ignorance, and please and deceive them by a
company of ceremonies, instead of a Reasonable service of God: and the manner
of your worship I could never digest. Other things did grate very hard upon
those truths which I was confirmed in, but these went against the very bent of
my heart, and crossed the very ends of my Religion and my Life. Your keeping
the Scriptures from the Laity, as far as you do; and maintaining it so commonly
to be the Original of Heresies to translate them into a known tongue; and
making it so deadly a crime to have a Bible which they can read; with your
Latin Service aforesaid, and the formalities and scenical worship in which you
train up the ignorant vulgar with many other things in your doctrine and
practice, are such as leave me but little room for deliberation, whither I
should own them or not, because they are so plainly against the very end of
the Christian Religion. Had these things come under my consideration in a
carnal state, when the flesh was my end, and not God I know not how I should
have entertained them. But your own Doctors consent that God must be my end,
and chiefly Loved, desired, and sought: And will you teach a man this, and
whoodwinke him when you have done? Will you bid him love God, and keep him from
the Knowledge of him? Will you bid him desire and seek him, and when you have
done lock him up in the dark? Or will you bid him serve and obey him, and yet
forbid him to search after the knowledge of his laws and will? If you would
bring me to be of these opinions, your reasonings would be to as much purpose
as if you should persuade me to put out my eyes and put them in your pockets,
for fear of missing my way in my race, when my life is at the stake: Or as if
you should persuade me to be ignorant of Plowing and Sowing, and Merchandise,
and yet to seek after provision and riches in the world. I am as easily
reconciled as another to those that step out of the path that I am in, if they
go toward the same end: But if you would teach me to turn my back upon Heaven,
as the only way to attain it, this will not easily down with me: I know that
God is light, and with him is no darkness; and that Christ is the light of the
world, and his spirit is the illuminater of the Saints, and the word is a light
to our feet, and gives wisdom to the simple: And yet would you have us refuse
this Light, and choose the Darkness? I know that Satan is the prince of
darkness, and a state of death is a state of darkness, tending to outer
darkness: and that it is the saving way of God to translate men out of
darkeness into his mavelous light: And yet would you persuade me that this is
the way of Life? What a difference is there between this doctrine of yours, and
the very scope of Scriptures, and ancient Writers, and the sense of a gracious
soul? Solomon would have men to Hide the commandment with them, and incline
their ear to wisdom, and apply their hearts to understanding, and cry after
knowledge, and lift up their voiec for understanding, and seek for it as
silver, and search after it as for hid treasure, Prove. 2.2, 3, 4. And is your
Doctrine like this? Isay bids, To the Law and the Testimony. Is. 8.20. And the
Bereans are commended for searching the Scriptures daily to see whether the
things were so that were taught them even by Apostles: And will you forbid
this, and burn men for to promote their salvation? Did not Paul write his
Epistles to the Laity as well as to the Clergy? You must strip me of the grace
of God, and reduce my mind to a state of darkness, before I can ever entertain
these principles of darkness: For light and darkness will not have communion.
If by Arguments you would persuade me, so plainly against the life of nature,
as that I am bound to blind or kill my self in order to my good, there is
somewhat within me that would confute them besides reason: And why should not
the Life of Grace also be a principle of self-preservation? As for your Reason,
that men must let alone the Scripture and hearken to their Teachers for fear of
heresies, it will never take with me till I can believe you to be less
suspected guides then Christ and his Apostles, and till I can believe that a
Scholar may not learn of his Book and his Teacher both without any
contradiction.

And then for your devotions, it is not all the Arguments in the world, that
would ever reconcile me to them, while I have that Law in any prevailing
measure written in my heart, that teaches me to worship God in Spirit and in
truth. What man of Spiritual experience can choose but distaste your way of
worship, that does but read over one of your offices, and Lady's Psalters, and
see the affected repetition of words, and the ludicrous kind of devotions,
which you teach the people, more like to charms then serious prayers to God!
especially if he also observe the huge number of ceremonies which the very body
of your worship is composed of. As there is somewhat in nature, that hinders
a man, from delighting to eat chafe, or feeding upon mere air; so is there
somewhat in the new nature of a Christian, that is against this trifling and
jesting with God.

The abominable wickedness of your party, even the Roman Cardinals themselves,
is proclaimed by many that have been your Priests and turned from you: as
Copley, Sheldon, Boxhorne, and many more says Sheldon (in his Survey of Rome:
Miracles, p. 18. having spoken of the Cardinals Sodomy) [Believe it Reader, the
abominations which are committed by these purpured Fathers, and the Supreme
Fathers of that Synagogue are so detestable, that they pass all narration
either of modest or immodest pen.] And it is long since Petrarch, Dantes,
Aventine, Parisiens. Clemangis, Sabellicus, Grosthead, Ferus and more of your
own Writers have said enough, to satisfy us of your sanctity. Many a one that
has been ^iced to Popery in England, have been cured by a journey to Rome,
seeing the abominations of that place.
Another thing that has increased my distaste of your ways, is the common
ungodliness of your followers. I have endeavored as well as I could to be
acquainted with them where I came and I have known but very few of them, but
have been either Whoremongers, or Swearers, or Drunkards, or Gamesters, or
sensual livers: nor did I ever meet with one to this day, to my best
remembrance, that manifested a spiritual frame of heart, or had any delight to
speak of the workings of God upon the soul, and the sweet communications of the
love of Christ, or could give any savory account of any such spiritual workings
in them: but all their Religion was to stick to the Romish Church, and go on in
their ceremonious forms of worship, abstaining from this meat, or that, and
rioting and pampering their flesh on Holidayes, etc. If I had known this to be
the case only of the common people in Italy, or Spain, or France, I should not
have wondered: for I know that most of the people, do take up their Religion
but upon carnal accounts, and accordingly will use it: But to find it thus in
England, where your number is small, and you pretend to hold your Religion in
so much self-denial, the state being against you; and therefore your party
should be the purest zelots, and show the face of your doctrine in its greatest
glory; this makes me judge of the tree by the fruits. And the observing of
this has made me admire, that ever you can make the holiness of your Church,
the matter of so great ostentation as you do: Yea that such men as H.P. de
Cressy can have the face to pretend that your admirable holiness in comparison
of ours, was the means of their conversion to you. Unhappy man! with whom did
he converse while he seemed a Protestant? or where did he live? But this was
not his fate alone; but of diverse of his strain. When they are carnal
Protestants, abhorring the power of the Religion, which they profess, and
avoiding and reproaching the practicers of their own Religion, and so have no
communion with them, nor experience of their holiness; it is a righteous thing
with God to leave them to so much blindness, as to run from England to Rome for
holiness; and that because they abhorred purity, they should be so blinded as
not to discern the beauty of it, and yet to dote on the name and coat of it,
which may be put on in the morning, and off at night. And indeed this has
somewhat increased my aversness; to observe that by how much the more godly and
conscionable any are of our profession, the more they are against yours: and
that so few of this sort are turned to you, that I yet know not certainly of
one, that ever seemed a Godly person. And the common ignorant sort of people
that know not what a Church is, nor what Religion is, and that live in
sensuality and wickedness, are the favourablest to your ways, yea so forward
to promote them that many of them would quickly be yours if the times were but
changed to you; and these are the people that I have known become your
proselites. When we have lost our labor upon them, and left them in their
wickedness, and they that were filthy are filthy still, then some of them turn
Papists, and this forsooth in admiration of the holiness of your Church: When I
confess for some of them, I have not been sorry to hear that they were turned
to you: for I thought, it may be the liking they have to you, might make them
hearken more to your reproofs, then to ours, and possibly you might persuade
them from Whoredoms and Drunkenness, and Swearing, and Lying, when we were out
of hope: But when I perceived that they fled to you for an indulgence in their
sin, because some of these are but venial sins with you, and they have a
palliate ceremonial cure at hand to befool them; I then acknowledged the
justice of God against them. I am none of those that think that there is none
among you shall be saved. I have read that in some of your Writers, that
persuades me it came from a sanctified heart. I am ready to acknowledge and
honor the Spirit of Christ wherever I can discern it. But I must profess that I
was never yet so happy as to converse with a Papist, that manifested an
experienced, gracious, heavenly mind; though I am truly willing to make the
best of them. And that your Church should be as the sink or channel, to receive
the excrements and filth of ours, is no great argument of its holiness in my
eyes. And if a few that are less sensual turn to you, it is commonly, as far as
I can discern, the Tenants or servants of some of your way, that are led by
worldly respects, and they are such ignorant souls that they know not what the
Religion is which they are turned to, nor are able to give a reason of their
change. I have spoke with some affected to your way, and some turned to it,
that have thought our doctrine was yours, and yours was ours: for instance,
that we taught that men might live without sin, and you taught otherwise: and
have denied that you hold the doctrine of man's merits, and diverse the like. Are
not these good Catholics, and well converted, that be of our mind, and do not
know it? And I observe among your own Writers, that usually those that write in
the most heavenly strain, are those that give some wound to your profession, by
some considerable opposition, as Mirandula, Gerson, Bernard, and many more.

And it has more disaffected me to your way, to observe how low the design of
your Religion is, in comparison of ours: You can let the common people be as
blind as Moles, and worship they know not what! And you almost confin Religion
unto Votaries and Cloisters. When as the design of our Religion is to make the
generality of our Pastoral charge more holy by far then your retired Votaries.
And (as far as I am able to learn) I do verily think that there are in the
small Town that I live in, some hundreds of souls, that have more true
self-denial, humility, acquaintance with the saving works of Grace, abhorrence
of sin, delight in God, and believing serious thoughts of heaven, then is to be
found in twenty of your Monasteries. When I am in one of their meetings which
you account but a cursed Schismatical conventicle, I can behold their diligent
attendance, their humble learning, their modest, orderly, serious devotions,
and afterward their painful recollections and improvement of what they learn.
But among you, I should see a dumb show, a pompous ostentation, compounded of
Ceremonies, and words which are as no words, being not by the people
understood. And I am certainly informed by travelers that have known them, and
by your own confessions, that you have Priests even like your people and your
services. Even unlearned men, that are but able to read their Mass; like some
of the worst of our old Readers, whom we have cast out: However you may have
learned Jesuits and Friars, that are bred up chiefly for your Theological
wars, while the people that live in peace under you are famished.

It has also much increased my disaffection, to observe, by what gross kind of
cheating you carry on your cause. You make a noise with the ostentation of
Miracles; but we can never see one of them, nor have certain proof of it. I
confess if I could see them, they would work on me much: and I would go from
Sea to Sea to see one: but I know not whither to go with the least hope of such
a sight.

You talk much of perfection, and keeping the Law of God without sin: But how
long will it be before you will show us one of those sinless perfect men? I
have enquired of those that I thought most likely, and they have told me that
such men there be in the world, but would not be entreated to show me one of
them. Nay, it amazeth me, that you should glory of perfection, where it is so
hard to find sincerity, and to meet with a man that will not curse and swear,
and whore, and be drunk. Yea more to find that after this ostentation of
perfection, you come so low as to make those to be perfect which we suppose to
be in a damnable state: For how many abominable sins do you make to be venial?
Do I need to tell you what some of your own Writers say of Fornication; and of
a Priest rather keeping a Concubine then a wife; and what gains have come to
the Church by Whorehouses? and what a trade it is at Rome and Venice, etc. To
give instance but in the sin of lying, how light do you make of it? yea you
fear not to teach your English Proselytes, That [A lie is a mortal sin, when it
is any great dishonor to God, or notable prejudice to our neighbor; Otherwise
if it be merely officious or jesting it is but a venial sin] They are the words
of H.T. (they say Henry Turbervile) in his Catechism, page 160. Yea he says
page 268. That [By this we must know when a sin is mortal, and when venial:
Because to any mortal sin it is required, both that it be deliberate and
perfectly voluntary -- ] And then set altogether, and consider what your
Writers make of venial sin: no worse then your Doctor Thomas, says, that [
Venial sin has not perfectam rationem peccati, but is Analogically called sin:
and that non est contra Legem; quia venialiter peccans non facit quod lex
prohibet, nec pretermittit id ad quod lex per praeceptum obligat, sed facit
praeter legem: It is not against the Law, nor forbidden by it, but beside it.]
12. qu. 88. art. 1. ad 1. And that it deserves not damnation; and eternal
punishment is not due to it, but temporal only, 12. q. 87. a. 5. c. and q. 88.
a. 1. c. And that it induces not a blot on the soul, 12. q. 89. a 1. c. But
only as it hinders the luster of Grace, and therefore may be done away
without the infusion of habitual grace, 3. q. 8.7.2. c. Apply this now to your
last instanced case. It seems now that the Law of God forbids not Lying,
when it dishonoreth God but a little and not greatly, or when it is a prejudice
to another but not notable; It forbids not men to lie Officiously or in jest;
as H.T. speaks. Nay it seems if you curse or swear or blaspheam the name of
God, or kill your own Father or Mother, it is but a venial sin, if you do it
not deliberately, and perfectly voluntarily. And is not here a fine doctrine to
make men perfect? Have you no way to make your selves perfect, but by making
the Law of God imperfect? How can you persuade us to value such perfection?
Does H.T. think that a man that has the use of Reason is not bound by God to
deliberate of all the weighty actions of his life! And if a man shall kill and
blaspheam in passion, and say [ I did not deliberate; and therefore it is no
sin: God did not forbid it me:] Shall this excuse him? Or is such doctrine to
be endured among Christians? If God do not make it a reasonable man's duty to
use his reason in the greatest things, and to deliberate of what he says or
does, I know not what either Reason or Law is made for. I think on the contrary
that [Not deliberating, especially in weighty cases is a heinous sin, and the
principal cause of all other sin, in many of the ungodly. So I say of the other
limitation: that (it be perfectly voluntary] Passion may make a blasphemy or
murder but imperfectly voluntary; and yet that proves not that God forbids
it not. For the will it self is under a Law, which puts it upon duty, and not
only restrains it from sinful volition or nolition: And therefore if the will
do but suspend its act, in whole or in part, and thereby let the commanded
faculties miscarry, I shall yet believe that this is forbidden, and a proper
sin. What if you have a charge of the souls of your flock; and you sleep while
they are misled: Or if you were a Physician, and had charge of your patients
lives; and you fall asleep till they are past recovery; are you no sinner, and
do you not go against the Law? Yes, you are a murderer: For though the thing be
not voluntary quoad actum voluntatis, it is morally or imputatively voluntary,
propter omissionem actus. If Wolverhampton Papists be fed with such doctrine as
this; they may well be many, but they are unlikely to be good.
Inconsiderateness (which I took for one of the most destroying sins) it seems
is a notable preservative from sin: For be sure you deliberate not, and you
break no Law of God what ever you do. And if there be no Law against Lying,
except the lies of the higher strain that are by H.T. excepted, no wonder then
if Papists be Liars.

And can you think it any injury to you if from hence I interptet, not only
many of your Historical writings (such as the Image of both Churches, etc.) but
also much of the jug^ing that is in England at this day. If you put your selves
in the Garb of Quakers, Enthusiasts, Anabaptists, etc. and pretend that you
are of their opinions, and deny your selves to be what you are, as long as you
think that these lies are pious, and rather honor God, then greatly dishonor
him, and rather do good to others, by promoting the Catholic cause, then
notably injure them, can any man say, that's of your opinion, that they are
against the Law of God? And why call you that a venial sin, which is against no
Law, when sin is a transgression of the Law, and where there ^s no Law there is
no transgression, 1 Ioh. 3.4. Romans 4.15. And why say you that veniam meretur,
when yet you say that ^aenam aeternam non meretur! How can there ^e venia sine
merito vel debito paenae? What ^eed you any pardon of that which was never
^eserved by you? And what need you ask forgiveness of these sins, or be
beholden to God ^or it, if the punishment to be forgiven were never due? Will
you beg the remission of a debt which is no debt? Aquinas makes venial and
mortal sin to differ as Reparabile and irreparabile; because from an inward
principle the one may be repaired, but the other not without infused
supernatural grace. But is it ever the less sin, because it is reparabile? Nay
what needs it reparation if it be not a transgression? But what is this
Reparation that he speaks of? Is it the remission of the guilt and punishment?
No sure: for eternal punishment he says, it deserves not; and internal
principles do not sure forgive the punishment of sin? Can we forgive our
selves? What is it then? Is it the removing of the blot? No: properly peccatum
veniale non inducit maculam, as before said? Is it that venial sin is easier
conquered and forsaken then mortal? No sure: For Aquinas tells us that a man
may live for a little while without venial sin, but not long; but without
mortal sin, Veniale, culpa non est, sed dispositio ad culpam. Reinerius. Cont.
Waldens. ubi. infra.
they may easily live till death. What this reparation then is, I do not
certainly know. But whatever it is, methinks it should suppose a proper sin,
and not only Analogical, an a desert of eternal punishment to be remitted.

And here I must add, that another thin^ that lately has much disaffected me
to you^ profession, is to see by what actual fraud and juggling it is
propagated. Do you think I see not the game that you are now playing in the
dark in England, in the persons of Seekers, Behmenists, Paracelsians,
Origenists, Quakers, and Anabaptists? I must confess I naturally abhor
collusions and dissimulation in the matters of God. If your way were of God, it
needed not such devices to uphold it, nor would it suit so well with works of
darkness? If you have the truth, produce it naked, and deal plainly, and play
above board! For my part I do not fear being cheated out of my Religion, by any
thing but seeming force of Argument: for I mean to know what I receive before I
take it, and to taste and chew it before I let it down: but the blind
incautelous multitude, and half witted giddy persons, and discontented
licentious half studied Gentlemen, may possibly be caught by such chafe as
this.

Another of your dissimulations which increases my dissatisfaction is, Your
pretending ^o the ignorant people, that you are all of a mind, and there are no
divisions among you, and making our divisions the great Argument ^o raise ^n
odium against our doctrine, calling us Schismatics, Heretics and the like.
When ^ndeed no one thing does so much turn away my heart from you as your
abominable Schism. Do we not know of the multitudes of Opinions among you,
mentioned by Bellarmine and other of your Writers? If you call me out to any
more of this work, I mean the next time to present to the world a Catalogue of
your Divisions among your selves, that it may appear how notable your unity is?
If the Jesuits are to be believed, what a silly sottish generation are your
secular Priests? If your Priests are to be believed, what a seditious
hypocritical, cheating pack are the Jesuits? I speak not the words of your
Protestant adversaries, but of those of your own Church. Do I not know what
Guiliel. de Sancto Amore and many another say of your own Church? Do you think
I never read Watsons Quodlibets, and the many pretty stories of the Jesuits
exploits there mentioned by him? I do not think that you suffer many of your
own followers to read these books that are written against one another by your
selves. But the great division among you, that quite overthrows your cause in
my esteem, is that between the French and Italian, in your very foundation
which all your faith is resolved into. You have no belief of Scripture, nor in
Christ, no hope of heaven, you differ not from Turks and Infidels, but only
upon the credit and authority of your Church: And this Church mus^ be
infallible, or else your faith is fallible: A^ least it must be of sovereign
authority. And when it comes to the upshot, you are not agree^ what this Church
is? One says it is the Pope with a General Council; and another says it is a
General Council, though the Pope dissent. One says the Pope is fallible, and
the other says a Council is fallible. One says, a Pope is above the Council,
and another says the Council is above the Pope. And now what is become of your
Religion? Nay is it not undeniable that you are of two Churches specifically
different? Certainly a body Politic is specified from the summa potestas. And
therefore if the French make a Council the summa potestas, the sovereign power;
and the Italians make the Pope the sovereign, and a third party make the Pope
and Council conjunct^only, the sovereign, are not here undenyably several
Churches specifically different?

And then you have another deceit for the salving of all this, that increases
my disaffection. You glory in your present judge of controversies, and tell us
it is no wonder if we be all in pieces that have no such judge. And what the
better are you for your judge; when he cannot or dare not decide your
controversies? No, he dare not determine this fundamental controversy, whether
himself or a Council be the sovereign power, for fear of losing the French and
those that join with them. So that it must remain but dogma Theologicum and no
point de fide, what is the summa potestas; and yet all that is de fide, even
our Christianity and Salvation must be resolved into it? And does not this
directly tend to infidelity? Would you have serious Christians deliver up
themselves to such a maze as this for the obtaining of unity? What the better
are you for a judge of controversy, in all those hundreds of differences that
are among your selves, when your judge either cannot or will not determine
them? Are not we as well without him as you are with him? Plain things that are
past controversy have no need of your judge! It is no controversy with us
whether Christ be the Messiah, whether he rose, ascended and will judge the
world: And if we go to darker points, your own judge will say nothing or worse.
Why do you cry out so much against expounding the Scripture otherwise then
according to the sense of the Church, when your Church will give you no
interpretation of them? Do not your expositors differ about many hundred texts
of Scripture, and neither Pope nor Council will decide the controversies? These
are therefore mere delusions of the world, with the empty name of a judge of
controversies. And indeed you sometime show your selves that you have no such
high conceit of your Pope (whatever you would make the world believe) as to
trust his judgment. Your own Priest Watson tells us in his Quodlib. page
56.57. That the Jesuits [Preached openly in Spain against Pope Sixtus the last
of all holy memory, and railing against him as against a most wicked man, and
monster on earth: they have called him a Lutherane heretic, they have termed
him a Wolf; they have said, he had undone all Christendom if he had lived: and
Cardinal Bellarmine himself as judge paramount being asked what he thought of
his death, answered, Qui sine paenitentia vivit, and sine paenitentia moritur,
proculdubio ad infernum descendit: and to an English Doctor of our Nation he
said, [Conceptis verbis, quantum capio, quantum sapio, quamtum, intelligo,
descendit ad infernum.] And yet we must hold our Belief in Christ on the credit
of such a man's infallibility.

But yet I have not come to that point of your Schism which above all things
in the world does alienate my mind from your profession. And that is your
separation from all other Christians in the world! I find in my self so great
an inclination to unity, and the title [Catholike] is so honorable, in my
esteem, to them that deserve it, that if I had found you to have the unity and
Catholic Religion and Church which you boast of, it would have much inclined
me to your Church and way. But when I find you like the Donatists confining the
Church to your party, and making your selves a Sect and Faction, and
unchurching and damning the far greatest part of the Christians in the world;
this left me assured that you are most notorious Schismatics. When I saw so
much knowledge and holiness comparatively among the Reformed Catholics, and so
much ignorance and wickedness among the Papists (even here where are but a
remnant that adhere to their Religion against the course of the Nation) and
when I read so many plain promises in Scripture, that Whoever believes in
Christ shall not perish, and that if by the spirit we mortify the deeds of the
body we shall live, and that if we Repent our sins shall be forgiven, yea that
Godliness has the promise of this life and that to come; and then when I find
that the Papists for all these certain promises, do unchurch and damn us all,
because we believe not in the Pope of Rome as well as in Christ; this satisfied
me as fully that you are most audacious Schismatics, as I am satisfied that
you are Papists, What! must I be a Papist on such grounds as these? Must I
believe because you tell me so, that all the most conscionable heavenly
Christians that I am intimately acquainted with are unsanctified, ungodly, and
in a state of damnation? When I am a witness of the earnest breathings of their
souls after more communion with God; When they would not live in one of those
sins that you call venial, for all the world; When they mortify the flesh, and
live in the spirit, and wait for Christ's appearance. And yet that such as the
Papists shall be saved that are so far below them, because they believe in the
Pope of Rome? Why you may almost as well persuade me to become a Papist by
telling me that you have eyes in your heads, and noses on your faces, and the
rest of the world have none. Does Christ say, He-that believes, and repents
shall be saved; and must I believe that all Protestants shall be damned, let
them believe and repent never so much? This is to bid me [cease to believe
Christ] that I may believe the Pope [Cease to be a Christian] that I may become
a Papist. I am confident I shall never be Papist, if it may not be done but by
believing that all the Godly that I am acquainted with are ungodly, and in the
way to hell.

And (to speak of the quantity as well as the quality) I feel a kind of
universal charity within me, extending to a Christian as a Christian, and
therefore to all the Christians in the world, Armeniorum Ecclesiae, and
Ethiopum and jndorum and caeterae quas Apostoli converterunt, non subsunt
Romanae Ecclesiae Reinerius cont. VValdens. Catal. in Biblothe^. Par. T. 4. p.
773.
which will not give me leave to believe if a hundred Popes should swear it,
that the far greatest part of Christians shall be damned, because they are not
subjects to the Pope! The Papists are but a handful of the Christians in the
world; at least the smaller part by far! The most of them never acknowledged
the sovereignty of your Pope. And a few ages ago, before Mahometanism and
Heathenism diminished the number of Christians in Asia and Africa, the Papists
were but a small proportion. There are but lately taken off from the Christian
Religion, its probable, twice as many as all the Papists in the whole world: If
it were but the Kingdoms of Nubia and Tenduc, how far would they go on this
account? A Bishop of your own, and Legate of the Popes that dwelt in those
Countries, says, that the Christians in the Easterly parts of Asia alone,
exceeded in multitude: the Christians both of the Greek and Latin Churches:
Jacob. a Vitriaco Hist. Orient. c. 77. And which is more; the whole Church for
many hundred years after Christ were far from being the subjects of the Pope of
Rome! And indeed had Christ no Church till the Pope became universal Monarch?
Must Paul be damned because he was not one of Peter's subjects? Do not your
consciences know that swearing obedience to the Pope of Rome, was a thing
unknown for many hundred years, yea that it is a novelty in the world? Must
Christ lose for ever the most of his Church, even those that never heard of
Rome; because they believe not in the Pope? Never shall I be Papist while I
breath, if I must be engaged to send the most of the Christians on earth, to
the Devil, and that upon such an account as this. These things are so
uncatholike, so unchristian, so inhumane, that I wonder and wonder a hundred
times, how any learned, sober men among you, are able to believe them. For my
part I am a resolved Catholic; that own the universal Church of Christ; and
cannot limit my charity to a corner or a faction; especially so gross a one as
yours. I own not the errors or other sins of any of the Churches, so far as I
can discover them: But if I must make them Heretics and unchurch them for
these (yea even those that go under the name of Nestorians, and Eutichians) I
must needs put you in among them, who I think do err more grossly then they.
But I am none of your judge: Nor none of your most rigid adversaries. I am one
that have been often called a Papist in print, for avoiding some of those
extremes, into which some others have run from you. I am one that cannot choose
but hope that there are thousands that shall be saved that profess themselves
of your Church and way. But that I cannot do so my self, and the Reasons why I
cannot do it, I have thought good here to let you know. Many more there are,
but I have mentioned some of them in the following Disputations, to which I
refer you. I can truly say this in the presence of the Lord that knows my
heart, that if I knew it my self, I would most gladly turn Papist before I
sleep if I could discern it to be the way of God: Yea if I had but any
probability of it, and knew but the man that could give me satisfactory
evidence on your side, I would wander from Sea to Sea to find him, as weak and
unfit for travail as I am. And therefore if any learned man among you, have so
much confidence of his way, and charity to my soul, as to persuade me to his
opinion, he shall at any seasonable time be wellcom, and I shall thankfully
entertain any evidence that he can bring, according to my capacity. But then I
must desire him to deal plainly and come bare face't, and not to juggle under
the vizor of a Seeker, or any other Sect; for that way will never take with me.

And I must further here profess that this paper comes not with any cruel or
bloody design against you. I write not to exasperate the Governors against you,
so far as to deal unmercifully with any of you. And whereas under the vizor of
the sects before mentioned you are of late so earnest in pleading for a
toleration, deal but impartially like honest men, and I will set in with you.
Procure but a toleration for the Reformed Christian Religion in Italy and
Spain and your part of Germany, Portugal, etc. and I should willingly petition
the sovereign Powers in England that you might have as much liberty here: But
that you shall have full liberty here, and Protestants have none where you can
hinder it, this is not equal dealing. But how comes it to pass that you that
pretend so much to unity are in this also of so many opinions; the English
Papists are for liberty of Religion, and the Spanish and Italian are against
it? But I must cry you mercy: I now consider, It is but your selves that you
think have right to liberty here, and others should have it but in order to
yours. As hardly as you think you are used in England, you live openly among
us, and no man that I hear of lays hands on you: When you know if a Spaniard
or Italian be known to be a Protestant, he is as sure tormented and burnt at a
stake as the coat is on his back. Do you not know this to be true? Were I in
those places where your Religion has its will, I know one leaf of this book
would cause me to be burnt to ashes: that I am alive is because I am not in
your power: But for my part I wish not the shedding of one drop of your blood,
nor your imprisonment or banishment, but only your moderate and necessary
restraint from open iniquity and seducing of those that are unfurnished to
encounter you.

I have some invitation to make this profession, by the usage of a Justice of
Peace of this County; who was so far your friend as to censure me and others
for a late Gratulation, and petition to his Highness the Lord Protector,
subscribed by many Justices, and by the Grand Jury and thousands of the County;
and to censure the said petition to be of a cruel and bloody complexion;
inserting to your honor and the reproach of the Reformed Churches, a
vindication of your Religion from the guilt of the Powder Plot and Spanish
invasion, and other foreign bloody acts, and charging as much on the Reformed
as can be charged on you, according to the History, called [The Image of both
Churches.] And what was this bloody petition of this County? Why? when you had
murdered, and banished, and starved such a multitude of the poor Protestants
in Savoy, and we were assured of it by a Narrative from the Lord Protector
himself, inviting us to contribute to relieve the remnant, in the sense of your
continued bloody dealings, and of the sad case of those poor people, and the
favor of his Highness toward them, we returned him a thankful acknowledgement
of his care, and added our desires to use the most effectual means to hinder
the growth of so bloody a doctrine, lest it should reach our selves at last,
yet adding that we desined no rigor as to your persons: but craved the
promoting of the Reformed Religion, and of unity among our selves as the means
of our preservation. The world is come to a fair pass: when our brethren are
murdered by thousands, we are bloody for mentioning it, and blaming you for it,
and desiring our selves to be preserved from your doctrine and rage, so as
without any rigor to our persons. Alas poor Protestants! When your throats are
cut by the merciful Papists, you are cruel and bloody for saying so; When they
have killed one half, the other half is bloody if they desire to escape. By my
good will I Will never come to the Bench for Justice where this Gentleman has
power: For if I accuse a thief for robbing us, or a murderer for murdering
twenty of my friends, I may on these terms expect to be accounted cruel for
complaining: Yea though I add [I pray Sir spare the person of the Murderer:
only do your best to prevent the death of the rest of my friends] I may look
to be told its a bloody request. But perhaps if leisure serve I may say more to
this Gentleman, in a full Reply to his paper.

Yea I am so far from desiring your blood, that I hope I have given you no
abusive language. Sure I am, I come far short of the language that you give one
another, where you may judge me to be most sharp. I had once very Reverend
thoughts of your Father Parsons when I read his book of Resolution, and thought
that if you had any good one it was he. And yet your own Priest Watson calls
him [ An Atheal stratagemitor, page 160. A bastardly Vicar of hell, p. 157.
Judge paramount on earth under the Devil in Hell, p. 156. The arch cousener, p.
149. That he was a bastard, unhonestly begot, basely born, a Wolsey in
ambition, a Midas in immundicity, a traitor in action, p. 108. That all
Catholics must depend upon the Archpriest, the Archpriest upon father Garnet,
father Garnet upon father Parsons, and father Parsons upon the devil, the
author of all rebellious conspiracies, treasons, murders, disobedience,
heresies, and all other such diabolical and bloody designments as this wicked
Jesuit has hitherto devised] p. 151. One that as sure as you live on earth,
does care no more for the lives of all the Catholics themselves, then for so
many dogs lives, in a time of infectious plague.] p. 153. Yea (says he)
questionless he could wish in his heart, to see all the seculars and other
Catholics in England hanged rather then to be frustrate of his conceited
Japonian Monarchy. Yea I verily think he would be the hangman of them all
himself, rather then his platform should fail, if it stood upon so desperate a
point: as a fitter office for such a base irregular bastard, then to come near
Gods holy Altar, etc.] Quodlib. page 153.154. I will not foul my paper with any
more concerning him.

And of the Jesuits in general I have thought that there are among them some
temperate virtuous men: but your Priest Watson says, Quodlib. p. 346. [ I call
them Jesuitical, that is, the Faction of Jesuits, by a^breviation, to avoid
circumlocution, in one word expressing them to be a factious, seditious,
ambitious, avaritious, treacherous, turbulent, Machivilian, Atheal consort,
that abusing the rules of their society, and quite perverting the course,
cause, institution, and intent of their order, etc.] The reasons he gives at
large, p. 340. And p.. 108. [The Jesuits have a special privilege in two
things. One is to make all things to be believed as Gospel, be it never so
false that they speak or write: another, to make all things be judged false, be
it as true as the Gospel it self, that any other shall write or speak without
their approbation: But if directly against them; out upon it; it is not to be
heard, spoken of, or once looked upon -- And withal, the vilest parts that can
be played, are counted acts of zeal among them, if done by a Father: so as it
may be any way covered with either of their two principles, scilic^t, propt^r
bonum societatis, vel ^rdine ad Deum.] And p. 149. he makes their principles to
be, Omnia pro tempore, ^et divide and impera. And p. 150.151. he affirms that
it was the Jesuits own choice and doing that the Papists had not to^eration in
England, because by sufferings they would have the people more passionately
serve their designs.] This is the language of your own brethren (even more as
well as he) but not mine.

To conclude, concerning these following Disputations, I need not tell you,
that they are none of the elaborate writings of any champion of the Protestant
cause, challenging your Answer: but a few hasty (yet considered) lines,
delivered in a monthly meeting of a few Country Ministers, for mutual
edification, by one that never pretended to much skill or will for such
Disputes. If any of you have a mind to try your strength, we boldy challenge
you to do it on those mentioned by me in the end: to whom let me add Dr.
Craken^horpe, especially against Spalatens* and Dallaeus on several particular
subjects, as de Paenis and sa^i^fact de Imaginitus, de I^juniis and the rest. I
pretend not in so small room to handle the particular differences between you
and us, but to give my general reasons against you* and to choose out one
particular about our foundation and yours. For I had read in Costerus Enchir.
c. de sum. Pont. p. 151.152. That No men Petrae plus includat quam fundamentum*
fundamenta quippe edificium sustinent, Petra aut^m s^u Rupes ipsa fundamenta,
and Apostoli ali^ fundamenta dicuntur. Petrus vero ut Rupes solidissima, etiam
fundamenta ipsa continet, and ^ in errores and vitia labantur detinet
authoritat^ pastorali.] And Skulkenius says Apol. pro Bell* c. 6. p. 255.
Pontificia potestas est veiut cardo, fundamentum (and ut uno verbo omnia
complectar) summa fidei Christianae.

Gretser says Def. c. 1. l. 1. de verb. Dei p. 16. Id solum pro verbo Dei
veneramur ac suscipimus, quod nobis Pontif^x ex cathedra Petri, tanquam
supremus Christianorum magister, omniumque controversiarum Iudex definiendo
proponit.]

Bellarm. says lib. 4. de Pont. c. 1. In controversiis Religionis ultimum
judicium est summi Pontificis. and cap. 3. solum Petrum Christus vocavit
Petram, and fundamentum; non petrum cum Concilio. Et ibid. Petrus and quilibet
ejus successor est petra and fundamentum Ecclesiae -- Ejus praedicatio and
confessio est radix mundi, and si illa errare^, totus mundus erraret. -- Ex quo
apparet totam firmitatem conciliorum esse a Pon^ifice, non partim a pontifice,
partim a Concilio.] The Pope then is your foundation, yea your Church: For
says Gretser Def. c. 10. l. 3. de Verb. Dei. p. 1450. Per Ecclesiam
intelligimus pontificem Romanum, qui pro tempore Ecclesiae naviculam moderatur.
Et p. 1451. Ecclesiam papam interpretantur: Non abnuo.]

But the French have another foundation. But that we renounce both yours and
theirs, I thought meet to tell you in the third Disputation. Acept this account
from, Your friend

Ri. Baxter.

THE CONTENTS. Disp. 1.
Q WHether the Reformed Catholic Christian Religion, commonly called
Protestant, be a safe way to salvation? Aff. The terms explained to page 11 The
first Argument p. 11 The second Argument p. 14 The third Argument p. 16
Argument fourth p. 17. to 26. Obj. 1. True Religion is but one, answered p. 26.
Obj 2. The true Religion has still had a visible Church professing it. p. 32
Obj. 3. Your Religion has no certain test to discover it p. 40 Obj. 4. You
have separated from all the Churches in the world p. 41 Obj. 5. You are divided
into Sects, and have no unity among your selves p. 42 Obj. 6. You have no
infallible certainty of your Religion p. 43 Obj. 7. You want many Articles of
the faith p. 45 Obj. 8 ^ou condemn one another ibid. Obj. 9. Your titles show
you are Sectaries p. 46 Obj. 10. You found us in possession: where was your
Church before Luther? 47. to 52 A Defense of Bishop Ushers Sermon of the Churches
unity, against the confutation of Paulus Veridicus: p. 52. to 77. Wherein the
common Arguments of the Papists against us are refelled. Disp. 2. Q. Whether
Popery be a safe way to salvation? Neg. p. 78 The term [Popery] and the rest
explained, to p. 84 Twelve propositions for the full answering of the question
p. 84 Argument 1. Popery is built upon and resolved into a a notorious falsehood
p. 91 Argument 2. They hold Christianity it self on a ground utterly uncertain,
if not, certainly false. p. 93 Argument 3. They are disagreed among themselves
in the very fundamentals p. 104 Argument 4. Popery is a novel profession,
unknown to the Apostles and Primitive Church p. 106 Argument 5. They make a new
Catholic Church p. 110 Argument 6. They are the greatest Schismatics on earth
p. 126 Argument 7. Popery is an uncertain changeable thing, so that a man can
never tell when he has it all p. 128 Argument 8. They expressly contradict the
word of God, and set up man above it p. 142 Argument 9. They worship the
creature with Divine worship p.153 The monstrousness of Transubstantiation p.
154 Arg. 10. They turn Gods worship into scenical formalities and Ceremonies p.
161 Arg. 11. Popery is upheld by most wicked means, and so by Satan p. 164
Arg. 12. They add to all, impenitency and uncureableness p. 171 Arg. 13. It
plungeth men into certain perjury p. 172 Objections for Popery. Obj. 1. It is
delivered dow^ from the Apostles: p. 175. Obj. 2. They are ^ true Church: p.
177. Obj. 3. A Papist may be saved: p. 179. Obj. 4. There is but one true
Church, and that's theirs p. 180 Obj. 5. They have unity, universality,
antiquity, succession: p. 181. Confuted. Disp. 3. Q. Whether the infallible
judge^ent of the Roman Pope and his Clergy must be the ground of our belief
of the Christian doctrine, or of our receiving the holy Scriptures as the word
of God? Neg. p. 186 The Resolution of the Protestants faith ibid The Popish
confusion about the resolution of their faith p. 189 Three questions contained
in this one. 1. Whether the Pope and his Council be judge of controversies? The
truth opened in ten propositions p. 195 Arg. 1. p. 199. Arg. 2. p. 200. Arg. 3.
p. 202. Arg 4 p. 20^ Obj. Shall every illiterate person be judge of the sense
of Scripture? p. 205 Q 2. Whether the Pope be infallibie in this decisive
judgment which he pretends to? p. 208. What infallibility we hold p. 209 An
answer to that which Bellarmine says for the Popes infallibility p. 213. to
221 An answer to Knots arguments against Chillingworth p. 221. to 240 Arg. 2.
against their infallibility from common sense p. 240 Argument 3. from
experience: p. 248. arg. 4. p 152. arg. 5. p. 253. arg. 6. p. 256. arg. 7. p.
257. arg 8 p. 258. arg 9. p. 259. arg. 10. p. 260. arg. 11. p. 262. arg. 12. p.
267. arg. 13. p. 267. arg. 14. p 268. arg. 15. p. 207. arg. 16. and 17. p. 272.
arg. 18. p. 274. arg. 19. p. 277. arg. 20. p. 278. Q 3. Whether our faith must
be resolved into the infallibility of the Roman authoritative judgment p 278
Two more Argu. against the Popes judgment p. 279 That we must not receive our
Religion on the credit of his judgment, manifested in twenty queres p. 281 How
Dr. H. Holden shuns the circle p. 282 The ancient Fathers and Church fully
against them p. 295. to 351 Their Obj. against us for our want of
infallibility, answered p. 351. to 356 More out of antiquity against them p.
357. to 364 Their own usuraption against Scripture p. 365 Vincentius Lirinensis
against them p. 368. to 373 Dr. Fields Catalogue of Popish errors p. 375
Appendix, Bishop Downames Catalogue of Popish errors: p. 381. to the end.
Errata.
PAge 11. line 33. read go p. 12. l. 21. dele it p. 12. l. 25. r. from p. 20. l
8. r. necks p. 22. l. ult. d. purposely p. 29 l. 3 r. good p. 3^. l. 22. r.
satisf^ctory. 38 l. 28. r. us p. 38. Mar. So Dr Whi^^* etc. should be printed
p. 39. l. 20. d. not p. 44. l. 13. r. the p. 41. l. 9. r. ^here p. 48. l 24. r
decide's p. 50. l. 1 r. symptoms p. 52. l. 33 r. Egyptian Ch^istians p 58. l.
6. r. Sacran. l. 7. r. E^t^ri l. 25. d. and the Maronites l 25 r. the p 59. l.
24. r. cause, or as p. 60 l 11. r. The Lutheran^ p ^^ l 26. r. will and p. 74.
l. 1. r. of most of the p. 7^. l. 26. d. and by ^bsignation p 76. l 30. r hold
p 86 l 1. r Council^ p. 86. l. 24. r d^ffident l. ult. r. on p. 91. l. 29. r.
seated p. 101. l. 30. r John and p. 1^7. l 17 r necessarily p. 1^0. l. 8 r.
n^wer l. 14. ^. conc^l^is l. 14. r. ^ractarentur p. 114. l. 28. d. to be new p.
115. l 29. r. Teminum p. 120. l. 17. r consequence p. 122 l. 1. r name p. 130.
^ 29. r. there p. 131. l. 3 r. a^ p 134. l. 24 d. not p 135 l 2. r. an
uninterrupte^ p ^38 l 14 r. school 140. l 13. r they l. 32. d. so p 146. l.
ult. 1 pro^ul hinc p. 148. l 1 r. last p. 149. l 26. r 17, 18 19. p 154. l. ^.
r. his p. 166 l. 22. r. they may p. 167 l. 11. r. Belsec p. 172 l 1. d. we p
7^. l. 26 r. is p. 17^. l. 25. r. saf^ way l. ult d it p 187 l. 27. add by p.
189 Mar add some ^92 l. 4 add and p 202 l. 22. r. u^ p 209. ^ 7. d. the p. 226
l. 3. r. mentioned l. 2 r was ^. ^6. r. unquestionably p. 233. l. 1 add not p
243 l. 7. r. ^lludi^g p. 247 l. 9. d. sell p 249. Mar. r. Krantzius p. 250 l
10. r the tw^nty second l. 27. add not 251. l. 15. r. decrees p 255. Mar. r
succeedi^g p. 2^8 l 33. r will p. 27^ l. 11. r. episcopis p 2^1. l. 25. r.
(...) p. 283 l 11 r. ^xp^rt^m p. 2.4 l 2 r. the p. 28^. l ul^. r. ^mpartito p.
286 l. 7. r. ap^rtum p. 29. l. 21 d. it p. 308 l. 18. r judicial p. 309 l. 28.
r. confute p. 314. l. 28. r theirs p. 331. l 17. r. Montanus p 333. l. 8 r.
Tatianu^ p. 41. l ^2. r caeteri p 342. l. 1^. r. suburbi ^r^^ l. 32. ^. headed
p. 34^ l ^6 r. to us p. 348 l. 2. r R^ma^e l. 4. r. authors p. 355. l. ^0 r.
word l. 23 r. prove^^ p. 356. l. 2. r. rather than p. 358. Marg. add de l. 28.
r. literis p. 59. l. 31. r. secura p. 364 l. 11. d. i. e. p. 366. l. 8. r.
Gloss p. 370. l. 8. r. fu^sse and p. 371. l. 28. add in l 3. add other p. 377 l
5 r. knew l 28 r. these p. 380 l. 23. r. in p. 379 l. 12. r. ^atalogu^. p. 217.
l. ^2. after [faith] add [ Or the object of faith, even Christ himself (which
indeed is the true sense, agreeable to 1 Cor. 10.4. And that Rock was Christ.])

QUERY. Whether the Reformed Catholic Christian Religion, commonly called
Protestant, be a safe way to Salvation?
THE great business of the Devil the Enemy of Mankind, is to keep man from
that Salvation, which Christ has so dearly purchased, so graciously offered,
and has appointed us such excellent helps to attain: To which end it is his
first endeavor, that men may not know or Believe that there is such a Felicity,
and what it is, and how much to be desired; and his next, to keep them from
knowing the way to it, and the last is, to keep them from walking in that way
when they know it. By the first means he keeps from Salvation, all Atheists and
Heathens that know not, or believe not the life to come: by the second, all
Infidels that Believe not Christ to be the way, and all Heretics that Believe
not those Truths which are of absolute necessity in subordination to Christ:
and by the third, all Hypocrites and unsanctified, ungodly, impenitent men, in
the visible Church, that yet have a superficial Belief of these Truths.

Our Question in hand is for the escaping the second of these snares, by
discovering which is the safe way to Salvation? The Policy of the Devil has
always endeavored to hinder the world from knowing this way, by these two
means: First, if it be possible by keeping them in utter darkness, that this
way may not be revealed to them, or being revealed, may not be understood:
Secondly, or if that will not do, by making such a number of by-ways on every
side, that the true and only way may hardly be discerned. And this is his end
in raising so many Heresies; and this is the course he takes to mislead them
that have escaped from the darkness of Infidelity. He begun this trade betime,
even in the days of the Apostles: They saw the multifarious offspring of the
Deceiver sprouting up apace in their own times: yet did it never enter into
their thoughts to tell the Church, that by this, all Heresies should be known,
That the Church of Rome should condemn them, or to send it down to all
posterity as the true touchstone to tell them which was the only right way
among all these Heresies, to wit, That which is believed by the P^pe or Church
of Rome. This had been a ready and easy way for the Apostles to have
prescribed, and for us to have received, if it had been true. It might have
saved them much labor in giving us that Body of sacred Doctrine which they have
made indeed the Touchstone of the safe way; and it might have spared us much
more labor of searching and studying which is the way; and we might all have
sent to Rome, and been resolved without any more ado. Surely the Apostles were
not so envious to our ease and safety, as to have silenced this easy way if
they had known it themselves. But as every Heretic when he finds out a New
way, does condemn the Old, as inconsistent with his New, so do the Papists;
Since this new way has been cried up, that [ No man can come to heaven but by
Rome] it is their business to deter people from any other way, and to that end,
to tell them that there is no safe way but theirs. As the Quakers tell us, that
there is no way to Heaven but theirs, and some Much contrary to Damascene, who
says that the Rebaptized do crucify Christ again, Orthod. fid. li. 4. c. 5.
p. (mihi) 296. (Though I suppose he is as far on the other side.)
Anabaptists say there is no way to Heaven but by being Baptized (again as they
are) so do the Papists tell us that there is no way to Heaven but by Believing
in the Pope and Church of Rome, and obeying him as the head of the Church. I
never saw the place, but sure that Town has some admirable excellency in it,
that the God of Heaven should so much set his heart upon it, as to endow it
with such a stup^ndious Prerogative, that no man should be saved from
everlasting Torment that does not Believe in the Bishop of that City, and obey
him as the universal head. Its a wonder to me, that he that set not his heart
so much on his Temple at Jerusalem, or on that chosen people, as not to forsake
them for their sins, and that has the Heavens for his Throne, and to whom the
Sun it self is as Darkness, should yet be so taken with a Town called Rome,
built and long inhabited by Idolaters, defiled with the blood of thousands of
Martyrs, against which the fouls under the Altar cry out [ How long Lord Holy
and true will thou not avenge our blood etc.] as to ordain that no man in the
remotest parts of the world, even the Antipodes that never heard of the name of
Rome, can be saved, though he should never so much believe in Jesus Christ,
unless he Believe in the Bishop of this Town and obey him when yet with
Andradius and other Papists, its a hard question whether a man may not be saved
in those heathen Countries without believing in Christ himself. Is it not a
marvel that we never read that Rome was once named by Christ himself, and
that it never was put into our Creed as one of the necessary Articles to
salvation? especially when we find there the Catholic Church, and Communion of
Saints, which sure would have been some way intimated to be the Roman Church
or that which is headed by their Bishop, if it had been so indeed. I find but
three names (strictly so called) in the Creed, and the Popes or Roman Churches
is none of them: One is Jesus Christ, and the other is hers that bore him, and
the third is his, that Judged him to death; and this indeed was a Roman name,
and if the honor of it in the Creed will do them any service, let them make
their best of it.

But however, this advantage the enemy of the Church has got by it, that the
new Roman Title, has made the old Catholic Title seem questionable to many,
and now so great is the audacity of the usurping Pope, that he not only
questioneth whether any Christians shall be saved that believe not in him as
well as in Christ, but he flatly denies it; and what he cannot get by
Scripture and reason, he would get by threatening and terrible words to affright
the simple, telling them that Protestants are not of the true Church or
Religion, nor in a safe way to salvation, because they will not be the subjects
of the Pope of Rome: Well, we shall briefly prove our way to be safe, if not to
the satisfaction of perverse, ambitious, or passionate and prejudiced men, yet
I doubt not to the satisfaction of all humble, impartial, diligent persons,
that are willing to know the truth, and deny themselves, that they may know it,
and do not stifle it by their lusts, or imprison it in unrighteousness in their
biased resolutions. And first we shall briefly open the terms.

By Religion in the first sense seems to be ( as Martinius) proprie actio ejus
qui res divinas studiose Relegit, pictatis ergo, though the word be thence
variously used.

(2) Lactantius says (Instit. li. 4. c. 28.) Hac condition gignimur, ut
generanti nos Deo justa and debita obsequia prebcamus, hunc s^lum noverimus
hunc sequamur. Hoc vinculo pietatis obstricti Deo and Religati sumus un^e ipsa
Religio n^men accepit; non ut Cicero interpretatus est a Relegendo. Melius id
nomen Lucretius interpretatus est, qui ait, Religionum se nodos exolvere.
Hierome in c. 9. Amos, and August. de via Rel. c. 55. and Retract. l. 1. c. 13.
and li. 10. de Civit. Dei. c. 4. are for the same derivation.

(3) Macrob. Saturn. li. 3. c. 3. Servius Sulpitius Religionem esse dictam
tradidit quae propter sanctitatem aliquam remota ac seposita a nobis fit, quasi
a relinquendo dicta, etc. vid. Martin in verb. Sometime Religious is taken for
the same with sacred, and so is applied to Persons, Actions, Things, Places,
Times, etc. we here take it for a prescribed way to salvation, or that which by
us is Believed or professed to be such: and this is our Religion.


[Religion] here we mean, the Doctrine de credendis and agendis, about matters
to be believed and practiced, which we hold and profess as of Divine
Revelation, and injunction, in order to Gods Glory and our salvation. For
though this be but the means toward those holy Affections and practices which
are of nearer necessity to our salvation, as being the necessary effects of the
former, yet is it not this later; bu^ the former that we are now inquiring
after: Not of Subjective, but Objective Religion: not of the fides qua, but the
fides quae ^creditur; not whether we be true to our Religion and so truly
Religious, but whether we be of the True Religion, or hold that Doctrine which
will save them that are true to it, in Belief and Practice. I shall not much
stop the plain Reader therefore with any further and unnecessary inquiry into
the Etymology of the word Religion, which some derive (1) a Relegendo, some (2)
a Religando, and some (3) a Relegando and Relinquendo: But as long as we
understand what is meant by the word, we shall not stick at the Etymology or
propriety.

By the [Reformed] Religion, we mean, the Christian Catholic Religion, as it
is separated from Popery: and so by this word we do distinguish our Churches
from the Roman Sectaries. For, it is not every Reformation (much less every
thing so called) that here we have respect to, but the Reformation by which we
cast off Popery it self, which because it was in one Country done by a solemn
Protestation of certain Princes and Cities against Popery, has been since
called the Protestant Reformation, and our Churches the Protestant Churches and
our Religion, the Protestant Religion.

Our Religion is called Catholic, because it is ^he Religion of the Catholic
Church, which is so ^alled a (...), because it is universal, consisting not
only of Jews and their Proselites, as heretofore, nor of one Town like Rome,
and those that will be ^he subjects of the Bishop of that Town, as the Papists
dream, but of all that Believe in the name of Christ through the whole world,
holding the Foundation or points of absolute necessity to salvation, and not
again denying them by any such contradicting Errors, as will not consist with
the practical belief of the said Fundamentals.

As that was called A Catholic Epistle, which was directed to the whole
Church, and not to any one person or people; so is that the Catholic Church
which contains all Christians.

As Austin was wont to describe it against the Donatists (who would have
confined it to the adversaries of Caecilianus and followers of Donatus in
Afric) that the true Church was that which was spread over the world by the
Gospel which was commanded to be preached to all Nations, beginning at
Jerusalem: so do we.

By the Christian Religion, I suppose we are agreed, is meant the Religion of
Believers in Christ, or that whereof Christ is the Foundation and prescriber,
and faith in him the first act, which must contain all the essential parts
(though it may possibly want many integrals) or else it is not to be called the
Christian Religion. They that were called Christ's Disciples were afterward
called Christians first at Antioch, Act. 11.26. To be a Christian therefore,
and to be Christ's Disciple is all one.

Note therefore, that as the word Religion denotes the sum of doctrines and
way of salvation absolutely necessary, so it is but One in all the worl^
(that is true and saving) and that is the Christian Religion. So that if a
Heathen, Jew or Mahometane ask me what Religion I am of; in opposition to
theirs, I will say, I am a Christian, and not only that I am a Protestant: But
if a Christian ask me what Religion I am of, I will say, I am a Reformed
Catholic Christian: for such a question in the mouth of a Christian usually
implies that I am a Christian, and intends the discovery of what sort or
party of Christians I belong to. But indeed Christianity is not many but one,
and therefore Christians as Christians are not of many Religions, but of one:
No nor Christians at all, that are truly such, if by Religion you mean, a
systeme of doctrines in the main, necessary or sufficient to salvation (or
conceited so to be:) For, as there is no such Body of Doctrine but Christ's, so
no man that is indeed a Christian, can believe that there is, seeing such a
Belief contradicts the essentia's of Christianity. But among those that call
themselves Christians, there are some Heretics that deny or plainly subvert
some part of the essentials of Christian Religion. And among those that are
Christians, some have such dangerous corruptions as do much hazard the
salvation, and tend to frustrate them of their benefits of the Christian Faith,
and these very corruptions they Entitle by the name of Part of their Religion,
as the Papists do: In which sense I must say, I am not of the same Religion
with them, though I hold the same Christian Doctrine as they, because I hold
not their mixture, and add not those corruptions which they make a part of
their Religion. The name Protestant I reject not, because it was taken up on a
just occasion: but I take it to be too extrinsecal, and private to be the
standing denomination of my Religion; as being not taken from the nature of the
thing, but from an occasional action of a few men in one Country; though it
intimates that all of their judgment in all other Countries, do virtually at
least make the like Protestation in the maine. I do therefore rather choose to
say that I am a Reformed Catholic Christian; and when I call my self a
Protestant, this is my meaning.

So that by the name [Christian] which expresses all my Religion it self
Positively considered, I am differenced from Heathens, Jews, Mahometans, and
all Infidels, and those (by some called Heretics) who usurp the name of
Christians, while they deny part of the very essentials of Christianity. And by
the name [Catholike] I add nothing Positive to the former, but only intimate
that I am of the Universal Church, and negatively exclude my self from all
divided parties, or from any that are yet in that Church, and yet take up any
dividing titles or ways therein, though they withdraw not from it; as they are
such, I am none of them, and therefore disclaim (when I express my Religion)
such private names; I am no Lutheran, Calvinist, Arminian, Papist, Socinian,
etc. but a Catholic.

But yet when I say I am a Reformed Catholic, I purposly disclaim the
Corruptions of Popery, and in that word renounce their Errors as such, as by
the word Catholic I renounced their Schism: And so I may agree with Luther,
Calvin or any man in Reformation, so far as they hold to the word of God: so
that if malicious adversaries will put the name of Sect upon the Catholic
verity, and call it by the name of Zuinglianisme, Lutheranisme, Calvinis^^ or
the like, pretending that it had its spring from these men, they shall not by
such unworthy means, remove me from the Catholic Religion, nor yet cause me to
own their Corruptions, because they have named the opposition of them as a
Heresy Augustine would not turn Donatist, because they named the Catholics
Caecilians; nor would Prosper turn Pelagian, because they called the Orthodoxe,
Predestinarians or Fatalists, nor would Athanasius before them turn Arrian
because they called the Orthodoxe Tritheists. It is not other men's fastening
upon us the name of a man, or of a Sect that proves us Sectaries, or that we
had our Religion originally from that man. Yet do we so much reverence their
names, that we rejoice in their labors for the Church, and bless God for them,
and endeavor to imitate them in their holy doctrine and lives, though we make
none but Christ the Lord of our Faith

As for the terms of the predicate they need no great explication. By salvation
we mean principally Everlasting Glory in Heaven: By the way to it, we mean the
means appointed by God for the attaining it. The principal means indeed is
Christ himself, who is eminently called, The way, and no man comes to the
Father but by him. But in subordination to Christ all other means are the way.

By a safe way, we mean a way that in suo genere is sufficient to the
attainment of the end; so that all that sincerely are that way shall attain
that end; A certain means of happiness to all that faithfully use it. For it
must be known that no Religion (or sound Doctrines) will save a man that is not
faithful in the reception and improvement of them. A True Religion will not
save him that is not True to his Religion. And therefore it is no wonder if
multitudes even of Protestants do perish, though their Religion be the only
Religion in the world. For they are not heartily of the Religion which they
profess. They have that doctrine which is the seal, and fit enough of its own
nature quantum in se to imprint the image of God upon their souls: But if they
keep this seal in their Chests, and apply it not effectually to their hearts,
they may have unholy hearts and lives, though they profess a holy faith and
Religion, and therefore may perish for all that profession; yea and perish most
deplorably because their profession does aggravate their sin. If a man's
Religion (or believed doctrines) be bad in the maine, the man himself must
needs be bad too; and therefore no man of such a Religion can be saved: But if
a man's Religion (or professed doctrines) be never so good it is possible he may
be bad that does profess them: and then no Religion can save a wicked man. So
that of the true Religion some are saved, but not all: but of a bad Religion
(in the main) no man can be good, or be saved.

I come to the Arguments by which I prove the Affirmative, that [ The Reformed
Catholic Christian Religion, commonly called Protestant, is a safe way to
salvation.

Arg. 1. That Religion which best agrees with the word of God, above all other
Religions in the world, is a safe, yea the safest way to salvation: But the
Reformed Catholic Christian Religion commo^^^ called Protestant, does best
agree wit^ the word of God: therefore it is the safest way to salvation.

One would think among Christians the Major should be unquestionable: But here
the corrupt Romanists have presumed to make a new word of God, that so the
determination of the case might be impossible, unless we will go up to these
Philistines to sharpen our weapons: For they deny the holy Scripture to be the
whole word of God, or sufficient to be the Rule for deciding of controversies
in matter of says, and tell us, that unwritten Traditions are another part:
And those Traditions are such as are received by the whole Church as delivered
down from the Apostles; and that whole Church is only the Roman party: and
thus do they by their own Authority undertake to damn all the rest of the
Christian world, and make themselves only the Catholic Church: and by this
trick of wit they have got one half of Gods word into their closets, and that
it is his word, which they say is his word: And that you may know that they are
no blabs or revealers of secrets, they have for some hundred years kept this
close as a secret to themselves, yea from themselves as well as to us: so that
when the common Proverb takes that to be a secret which one or two knows, but
not when three know it; yet these men have a word of God which all the
Catholic Church is the keeper of, and yet those that keep it, know it not
themselves, much less can we that stand by come to the knowledge of it; but we
must all wait till the last Pope have breathed out his last determination,
before the Catholic Church that is said to keep it can come to know what is
the whole word of God. And so among them it is ^ome to this pass; that to be
judged by Gods word, is to be judged by the Pope and his entrusted Subjects.

But if any man whatever bring us forth a Tradition, and say, that this is the
word of God and came down from the Apostles, we shall desire more then ^his
word for the proof of it. And when he brings us as good proof that his
Tradition came from the Apostles, as we shall bring him that the Scripture came
from them, then will we cheerfully receive his Traditions: but not without
sufficient proof, upon the boastings of corrupted interessed men.

As for the Minor, that our Religion is most agreeable to the Scriptures, I
shall now say but this to the proof of it. First, we take the Scriptures for
the only Test or Rule of our faith and practice; and we tie not our selves to
any other by-rule which may force us to a misunderstanding of it. It is only
the Scripture that we still profess does contain our Religion: And it is the
chief part of the quarrel between us and Rome, that they will not take this
word for the perfect or sufficient Rule of Judgment. It is this word only
that we appeal to, and desire to be judged by: And the Papists wilful declining
of this Trial and Judgment does give any impartial observer sufficient cause
to suspect, that they take the Scripture to be against their cause, or else why
should they not have as much confidence in it, and commit their cause to it as
well as we.

2. To run over every point of difference between us and them, and prove our
part by Scripture, would be a very easy work, but it would make this
Disputation swell too big. And it is done so largely and often already by our
Writers that it is less necessary. If any of them complain for the omission ^
this part, let him but assure me that he will stand t^ the Judgment of
Scripture, and I shall quickly a^^ willingly enter the lists with him, and go
over th^^ part of the task again. In the mean time let it su^^^ to tell young
Students, that Amesius his Bellarmi^^ Enervatus has spoiled all their cause of
this defense and manifested Scripture to be fully against them, i^ a little
room; which may spare them the reading o^ many larger. And for the mere English
Reader, Mr. Ri. Bernard in his book called, Look beyond Luther, in his help
annexed to it, has given a brief and effectual discovery that Scripture is not
on their side, in an enumeration and proof of many of the point^ in difference,
between them and us: which for brevity, I refer them to.

In a word, if the Scripture be true, then that Religion which agrees with
them is a safe way to salvation: But the Papists confess that the Scriptures
are true: Therefore, etc. The Major is plain, in that Scripture affirms of it
self, that it is able to make us wise unto salvation, and furnish us to every
good work, and is written that we might believe, and believing might have life
in Christ's name, etc. Joh. 29.31. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. Of which we have said
somewhat in a s^ort Determination of that Question by it self.

Arg. 2. That Religion is a safe way to Salvation, by which the Apostles and
the Churches in their days were saved: But by the Reformed Catholic Christian
Religion, now called Protestant, were the Apostles and the Churches in their
days saved: therefore it is a safe way to salvation.

The Major with reasonable men needs no proof. There is not many Religions
but only one that are a ^^fe way to Salvation: and that which the Apostles ^ent
in and the Churches in their days, is undoub^edly that one. God has not since
taken down that Religion and set up another, and made that way safe to us,
which was unsafe to them.

The Minor is thus proved, The Apostles and Churches in their days were saved
by that Religion which is contained or expressed in the holy Scri^tures: But
that is the same with this which is called ^he Protestant Religion. For proof
whereof I refer you, and offer as abovesaid. Yield once that Scripture shall be
the Rule to judge by, and the controversy will soon be ended betwixt us.

And I need not to say but these two things for proof of the point.

1. That their own Writers confess that the Affirmative or Positive part of our
Religion, as it was here in England professed, was not against the word of God,
contained in the holy Scriptures, only they told us that the Negatives were, of
which we shall consider further anon.

2. As it is the great care of the Papists to keep the Scriptures from the
people, accounting it the Original of Heresies to have them translated (as
Arboreus and many expressly say) and burning men to ashes for reading the
Scriptures, when God will burn them in Hell, if they obey them not (which they
are not like to do without knowing them) so experience has convinced them that
where the reading of the Scriptures in a known tongue is but permitted, there
does our Religion most increase, and Popery decay; so that if this one means
were but permitted, in Spain and Italy as it is whether they will or no in
other parts, undoubtedly the Popes Kingdom would soon come down: I say, if they
durst but permit men to read the Word of God in a known tongue. They know this
well enough, or else they would never so torture poor Christians by the
Inquisition for having a Bible in their houses. They have sure some humanity in
them, as well as others: and therefore could never go so exceeding far beyond
the Turk in Cruelty to Christians themselves, but that they know their whole
cause and Kingdom is concerned in it, and if once Scripture get in, they are
gone. In a word, multitudes of volumes have already proved that Scripture is
against Popery.

Argu. 3. That Religion is a safe way to Salvation, in which the Church in the
three or four first Ages at least was saved: But the Church in the three or
four first Ages at least was saved in that Catholic Christian Religion, which
now is called the Reformed or Protestant Religion: Therefore this is a safe way
to salvation.

I mention not the former Ages as if all other following Ages had come to
heaven by any other Religion, then the former; but 1. because in them alone
there is a sufficient proof of the Major Proposition: None could be saved in
it, especially not so many Ages of the purest times, if it were not a safe way.
2. Because some Popish Errors began among the worser sort of Ambitious,
Superstitious Prelates to creep in betimes; and Popery it self appeared in the
world soon after the six hundredth year, and was openly established about the
thousandth year. And according to the degrees of corruption in the Church there
was a greater difficulty of salvation, because more impediments: but still
those that were saved, were all saved in and by the same Religion of the former
Ages; and if they were saved in any Corruption, yet not By it, but from it, or
against it.

As for the proof of the Minor as it requires a full volume of it self, to
produce the particular Testimonies of the Fathers for us, so is it already done
in many Volumes: And because the continual clamor of the Papist, is, that
Antiquity is on their side, I shall anon disprove them in the fundamenta^
difference between them and us, in the following Disputation, about their
pretended Sovereignty and Infallibility; and in other particulars desire them
to give some reasonable answer to what is already alleged by Bishop Usher, Dr
Field, and many more of our Writers, before they expect we should regard their
vain immodest pretenses: And still let is be remembered that for all the
Positive part of our Religion, they themselves cannot deny but that the
Churches still held it. Our Religion is the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures;
and doubtless that was entertained by all the Churches; and in that Religion
they were saved.

Argu. 4. That Religion is a safe way to Salvation, whose faithful Professors
have a promise of Salvation made them by God in his holy word: But such is the
Reformed Catholic Christian Religion, commonly called Protestant: therefore it
is a safe way to Salvation.

The Major cannot be denied: for God cannot ^ye, or break his promise. And the
Minor is easily proved by parts. Our Religion is to believe all that is in the
Holy Scripture to be the true word of God^ and more particularly we believe all
the Articles ^ the Creed called the Apostles, the Nicene Creed, and that of
Athanasius; with the Doctrine of the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords
Supper, an^ we confess that in a larger sense other sacred mysteries may be
called Sacraments: we believe that every man must unfeignedly Repent of all
sin, and t^^^ from it to God, and Love God above all, and (...) neighbor as
himself, and faithfully obey the who^^ revealed will of God; with other
parciculars which may be seen at large in our several confessions. An^ he that
faithfully Believes and does all this, has many promises of Salvation in the
Scripture, John 3.26 God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him should not peris^ but have everlasting life.
But Protestants believe in him; and subvert not, nor nullify that belief by
any contradiction; therefore they shall not peris^ (if they be true to their
profession) but have everlasting life.

Mark. 16.16 Go and preach the Gospel to every creature: he that Believes and
is Baptized shall b^ saved. But Protestants believe and are baptized Obj. So
Heretics and wicked men may say. Ans. But not truly: For 1. Heretics truly
so called, that cannot be saved, do not Believe the whole Doctrine which is
fundamental or of Absolute necessity to Salvation. Let them show that by us if
they can 2. As Heretics have not the true faith, so wicke^ men are not true in
the faith: The former want the fides quae and qua both, that is, both true
objectiv^ and subjective faith: and the later want true subjective faith at
least. And so they will confe^^ that many a Pope has done.

Romans 10.9. If thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thy heart that God ^aised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. For ^ith the
heart man believes to righteousness, and ^ith the mouth confession is made
unto salvation. ^ut thus do the Protestants; therefore they shall be ^^ved.

The Doctrine which Peter preached to Cornelius as sufficient to save him and
all his house, Act. 10.14. ^ut every word of that is believed by the
Protestants, ^^erefore it may save them.

The Jailer is promised, Act. 16.31. that if he ^^ll believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ he shall be sav^^. So Heb. 10.39. Luke 8.12. It is not said, If ^^ou
wilt believe in Christ and the Pope of Rome ^^ou shall be saved, Act. 4.12.
[Neither is there ^alvation in any other: for there is none other name ^^der
heaven given among men, whereby we must be ^^ved] Therefore not the Popes name.
In Act. 15.1. ^^s said that certain men came down from Judaea ^^^ught the
brethren, that except they were circum^^sed after the manner of Moses they
could not be ^^ved: against these Paul wrote the Epistle to the ^^latians,
where you may see how to think of such: and in the like manner do the Papists
teach men, that ^^cept they believe in the Pope of Rome, and except ^^ey
believe that there is a Purgatory, and that Im^^es may be worshipped, and that
the consecrated ^^st may be adored, and that we may pray to ^^ints departed,
and that the Priest must take the ^^crament while the people only look on, and
that (...) the Priest must receive it in both kinds, and the ^ead alone may
serve the people, and that prayers and other Church Service should be in the
Latin tongue when the people understand it not with abundance more of their
vile inventions I say, those that believe not all this, they say cann^^ be
saved: But what say the Apostles, Elders, an^ Brethren at Jerusalem, when the
former case ^ brought before them? They would not have me tempt God, by putting
a yoke on the most of the Disciples, but believe that through the Grace of the
Lord Jesus Christ, those that used none of the ceremonies should be saved as
well as the Jews, Ver^ 10, 11. And the sum of their Decrees or answer is that.
[Those men who went out from them and tro^bled people with such words, did but
subvert the^ souls, by saying that they must be circumcised a^ keep the Law,
and that they gave them no such commandment; and that it seemed good to the
Hol^ Ghost and them to lay upon the Gentiles no great^^ burden than these
necessary things, etc.] The P^pists thus go out as from the Apostles,
pretendi^^ an Apostolical Tradition, and impose upon the who^^ Christian world
a multitude of Ceremonies and D^ctrines as necessary to salvation, which are
not ^ be found in the holy Scripture. How shall we kno^ whether these men
indeed have any command ^ Tradition from the Apostles for any such course Why
1. Let them show their Commission, and t^^ proof of their Traditions. 2. We
fully dispro^^ them from the Apostles own words. It seems go^ to the Holy
Ghost and the Apostles to lay ^ the Gentiles no greater burden then the
^^cessary things here named; and by these they m^ be saved, and they that teach
otherwise are p^nounced by them subverters of souls, that had ^ ^ommand from
them for what they did. But it ^emeth good to the Pope and his faction to lay
on ^^e Gentile Churches unnecessary things, and mul^^tudes of them, pretending
a necessity of them, ^hen they are none of the four that are here only ^ade
necessary by the Apostles, nor are so made by any other word of Scripture; and
some they impose ^n pain of damnation, which they will not pretend ^o be of
necessity themselves. By proportion therefor we may hence judge, that the
Papists are mere ^lse pretenders to Apostolical Tradition, and sub^erters of
souls, and that the Protestants may be sa^ed for all their presumptuous
sentence to the con^^ary.

The Gospel which Paul preached to the Corinthi^^s, and which they received,
was such as would ^^ve them, if they kept it in memory, viz. that christ dyed
for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that he was buried, and that he
rose again the ^^ird day, etc. as Paul witnesses, 1 Cor. 15.1, 2, 3, 4, and
the Corinthians by the belief of this Doctrine, ^ere a Church of God and
sanctified, 1 Cor. 1.1, 2. ^ut the Protestants believe all that the Corinthians
^^ceived to make them such a Church and sancti^^ed and saved; Therefore the
Protestants are so ^o.

John wrote his Gospel that men might believe, and believing might have life,
Joh. 20.30, 31. There^^re he that believes that Gospel shall have life: at the
Protestants believe all that Gospel; therefore ^^ey shall have life (supposing
it to be a true faith ^^at works by love.) The Jews that heard Peter's ^^rmon,
Act. 2. were converted and added to the church (even thre^ thousand souls) and
put into a state of Justification by Believing that Sermon, (...) 37, 38, 41,
46, 47. But the Protestants believe ^ that Peter preached in that Sermon:
there^^ they also are of the Church and justified.

And least the Accusing Devil or Papists, sh^^ trouble the peace of any of his
people, Christ (...) protested it with his own mouth, Joh. 5.24 [Ve^^ly, Verily
I say unto you, He that hears my word (...) believed on him that sent me,
has everlasting life and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed fr^^
death to life] Me thinks this should make any ^^liever tremble at the thoughts
of condemning tho^ that Christ has protested shall not be condemned.

Christ has promised that all those that receive ^ words, and in whom his
words abide, shall be beloved of the Father and have everlasting life, and ^
heard in what they ask, Joh. 14.23. and 15.7. Doub^less that which Christ
himself preached was the t^ Gospel, and so far sufficient that whoever believe^
it shall be saved. Otherwise Christ could not ^a^ converted any soul, so far as
to have brought the^ into a state of Salvation by his Doctrine: and the^ Peter
and the rest of the Apostles were not tr^^ Christians by the belief of the
Doctrine of Christ, (...) if the Doctrine which Christ preached be sufficie^^
to make true Christians and Church Members o^ those that receive it, then the
Protestants are such* For, they believe every word that the Evangelists record
of the Doctrine of Christ. And if the Papi^^ say that there is more of his
Doctrine necessary t^ salvation, which the Evangelists did not record i^
Scripture, 1. We call for their proof of it, and 2. W^^ ^^ow that the
Evangelists did purposely write the ^^ur Gospels or Histories of Christ, of
purpose to ac^uaint the world with his Nature, Birth, Life, doctrine ^eath and
Resurrection, etc. Luke professes that he ^rote his Gospel upon perfect
understanding of all ^^ings from the very first, which conteyneth a Decla^^tion
of those things which are most surely believed among us, even as they were
delivered by them that ^^om the beginning were eye Witnesses and Ministers ^f
the Word, Luke 1.1, 2, 3, 4. And he tells us Act. ^.1, 2. that he wrote his
Gospel of all things that jesus began both to do and teach, until the day in
which he was taken up. It would therefore have ^een an exceeding blemish to the
Evangelists that ^rote of set purpose both the History of Christ's ^ife and
Doctrine, if they had left out any part of it that was of necessity to
salvation. Protestants therefor that believe all the Gospel do believe so much
^s may bring them safely to salvation. If Christ himself be not a sufficient
Teacher, nor the Gospel it self a ^ufficient Doctrine of Life, Then whither
shall we go to seek it? Then Peter himself was not the Rock, ^or a true
Christian by Christ's Teaching: And then ^he Pope could not derive that from
Peter which he ^ad not. But Peter himself thought and taught o^herwise. He
says [Lord whether shall we go? we know that thou have the words of Eternal
Life] For my part I will take Peter's counsel, and go to Christ for the words of
Eternal Life, which are purposely recorded by four Evangelists in the Gospel:
Let who will go to the Pope for another Gospel, to supply the supposed defects
of this, for I will not.

In Act. 22. and 26. and other places Paul preaches so much of the Gospel, as
might have made true Believers, and all that, the Protestants receive.

The Church of Rome when Paul wrote his Epistle to them, were a true Church,
Romans 1.7. and all the Doctrine that Paul writes to them we do believe:

Paul tells the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20.27. that he had not shunned to
declare to them the whole council of God: and this is summed up in [Repentance
toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ] verse. 21. And whatsoever
Paul has written to these Ephesians or any other Churches or persons, we
believe.

But what should we talk any more with such an arrogant unreasonable sort of
men, that dare maintain that the belief of all the Holy Scripture is not large
enough to salvation. Atheists and Infidels say of the Scripture, that it is too
big to be all true: And Papists say that it is not big enough to bring a man to
heaven that believes and obeys it. Shall the Holy Ghost endite a Volume as
big as the Bible, and when he has done shall any pretending to be Christians,
persuade the world that he that believes all this, shall be damned if he
believe not the closet. Traditions which the Roman Bishop pretends to be the
keeper of?

Nay see the strange contradictions of this giddy fiction! They lock up this
Scripture it self from the common people in an unknown tongue: They damn the
translating of it as the root of all Heresies, and burn men to ashes for using
the Bible; when they cannot keep it unknown any longer, they translate it
themselves as far as they can to their own advantage and put it forth with
their perverting Annotations; and yet when they have all done, they condemn
any that read it without a special license from their Ordinary: which in
England and France they sometime grant to avoid suspicions; but in Spain,
Italy, etc. too few if any at all. And when they have written voluminously to
prove that the Scriptures are not necessary to the people for salvation, and
that Ignorance is the mother of devotion, they come back again, and dispute
against the Protestants, that the whole Scripture is not sufficient to
salvation, and he that believes but the Scriptures is not in a safe way to
salvation. It seems then that the Popes Canons are more necessary then the
Scripture: For a man may be saved without the knowledge of Scripture, but not
without the knowledge of the Canons of the Pope: Yes, that he may too: if some
of them mistake not, if they will but implicitly believe that the Church of
Rome is the Catholic Church, and that the Pope is the infallible sovereign of
the Christian world, and believe some Articles of the Creed upon his credit, he
may be saved without either Scripture or Canons, so he be but ready to believe
and obey whatever shall be offered to him by the Pope for the time to come.

Moreover Christ and his Apostles do frequently promise Remission and salvation
to all that truly Repent, that love God in Christ, that mortify the flesh,
etc. but all this do the Protestants, and their Religion teaches them to do
it. Paul concludes that, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, that walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, Romans 8.11. But the
Protestants are in Christ Jesus, and their Religion teaches and engages them
so to walk: therefore there is no condemnation to them (that do so) and they
may with the same Apostle, Romans 8.33, 34. Challenge all the Papists in the
world. It is God that justifies, who shall condemn us?

Paul tells Timothy that the holy Scriptures are able to make him wise to
salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. therefore they may make us also wise to salvation. And
he adds, that [All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works,] verse. 16, 17. It were endless to recite all that proves the
salvation of them that believe and obey the holy Scriptures. But this all true
Protestants do. I shall therefore leave this task, and next hear what the
Papists can say to the contrary, and what they are able to produce to prove
that we are not in a safe way to salvation.

Obj. 1. There is but one safe way to Heaven: The Protestant Religion is not
that one way: Therefore not a safe way. The Minor is proved thus: That Religion
which the Church has owned from the Apostles days till now* is that one way:
The Protestant Religion is not that which the Church has so owned: therefore
it is not that one Religion. The Minor is proved by parts: 1. As to Doctrine,
2. as to Discipline, 3. as to worship. 1. The Church ever since the Apostles
days, has maintained the Doctrines of, 1. Free Will to good or evil, 2. of
Predestination upon foreseen faith, 3. of man's merits, 4. of Justification by
Inherent Grace, 5. against the certain Perseverance of all the Justified, and
consequently against their certainty of salvation. 6. Vowed Chastity and
Monastical Life. In Discipline the Church ever held, 1. The Popes Supremacy and
Universal Jurisdiction; 2. The Government by Bishops over Presbyters: 3.
Ordination by them, and not without them. 4. Penance and Confession of sin. 3.
In matter of Worship the Church has still used* 1. Chrysme to the Baptized. 2.
Imposition of hands in confirmation. 3. The sacrifice of the Altar. 4. The
Cross. 5. Holy days. 6. Fasting days. All which the Protestants have cast
off: Therefore they are not of the same Religion.

Answ. 1. To the Major Proposition of the main Argument, I answer. The word
[safe] refers to some Danger that we are safe from: The way may be called
safe therefore, either in respect of sin or damnation: Also this way may be
called [one] in respect of the Essentials of Religion, or else in respect of
some inferior truths and duties, that are not of absolute necessity to
salvation. And so I say that there is but one Religion as to the Essential and
absolutely necessary points, in which a man can be safe from Damnation. And
there is but one Religion as comprehending all the Integral parts, in which a
man can be safe from sin: But yet that Religion which in the Essentials and
Absolutely necessary points is but one, may yet consist with errors in lower
and lesser things in the minds of those that hold it; and yet be a safe way to
salvation, though not so safe as to freemen from all sin. And consequently
there may be differences among true Christians that shall be saved, though
there be nothing but perfect Harmony in the entire Doctrine of Christian
Religion as delivered from Christ and his Spirit: Because no man holds that
Doctrine entirely and perfectly without any error or ignorance, and therefore
there will be much difference among those that shall be saved. To the Major of
the Pro-syllogisme, I answer, Implicitly and in Generals the Church has owned
the perfect truth in all ages, because it has Believed that all that God says
is true, and that the Scripture is his word: But explicitly and particularly
the Church has not held all the truth of Religion, in any one age since the
Apostles. For every man on earth has been Ignorant, and the most knowing men
erroneous in some things: seeing we are all imperfect, and here know but in
part. And so one particular Church might err in one thing, and another in
another thing, as the differences about Easter, Rebaptizing, the Millennium,
Infants Communicating, etc. show they did. And of the same Church one Member
might err in one thing and another in another thing: it being as certain that
no two men on the earth are in all things of the same mind, as that none on
earth are perfect in knowledge. To the Minor I answer, that the Religion called
Protestant is the same in all points absolutely necessary to salvation which
the Church has still owned! And in other inferior points, the Churches having
not been all or always of one mind, some ages were more pure, and others more
corrupt: The Protestant Religion is nearer to that of the purer times then the
Papists is: It is the same in the Essentials; it is the nearest it in the
Integrals; it is more remote from latter corruptions introduced in times more
remote from the Apostolical purity.

To the particular instances of our differences from the former Churches, I
answer particularly. 1. For Free will to God, if you mean a natural freedom,
which is [the wills self-determining Power] so the Protestants maintain it as
well as the Fathers. If you mean a moral freedom from ill-inclining habits,
which is properly a right-disposition, so the Fathers maintained it not.

Obj. Let Scultetus in Medulla Patru^ and others of your own Writers be judge
who still number this inter naevos Patrum.

Answ. Scultetus and Calvin and others might mistake the Fathers sense and
think that they spoke of moral Freedom, when they spoke but of natural, which
is inseparable from the will. And its like that they did so, seeing the Fathers
maintained Original sin, which is that pravity of humane nature, which is clean
contrary to moral Free Will. 2. And if the Fathers were for a Free Will in a
moral-Ethical sense, so is one part of the Protestants as much as they were*
And if they were in the right, so are those Protestants? If in the wrong then
the other part of the Protestants are in this, in the right. 3. This is a point
that men may differ in, as much as the Fathers did from us, and yet be in a
safe way to salvation. 4. The Dominicans and the Jesuits differ about it as
much as we and the Fathers; yea, they cannot yet agree, what natural free will
is. 2. For Predestination upon foreseen faith. In this the Ancients differed
among themselves Austin and his followers being for absolute Predestination and
for Reprobation upon foreseen unbe^ief: and others being for Predestination (
i. e. Election) upon foreseen faith.
1. There is no Declaration of the Churches mind in those times about it, but
what is found in the wrigtings of particular Doctors. 2. We confess that men
are Elected to Glory and Justification from guilt, upon foreseen faith: But we
say withal that they are Elected to that faith; and that God did foresee it as
a thing which he intended to give, and not as a thing which corrupted
unregenerate nature would produce. 3. And we say also, that this is a point
that men may differ in that yet are in a safe way to salvation.

3. As to the point of man's merits, we say; that the Fathers differed from us
but in word and not indeed: It seemed good to them to call every moral aptitude
or Ordination ad Praemium, that is, the Rewardableness of our actions, by the
name of merit; and every Rewardable work meritorious. We think it fittest to
forbear this name. This Verbal difference makes not two distinct Religions.

4. As to the point of Justification, we confess that the Fathers commonly
called that Justification which we now call Sanctification. And we our selves
maintain that Sanctification does consist in Inherent Graces This difference
therefore being but verbal, the Religion and the way to salvation is
nevertheless the same.

5. As for the points of Austin, Prosper Fulgentius, etc ^ fully maintain the
Perseverance of all the Elect, ^hou^h not of all the Justified.
Perseverance and certainty of Salvation, and Virginity or vowed Chastity, with
the supposed merit thereof, and of a Monastical or Eremetical life; we think
that most of the Churches since the first century, have departed from the
Apostles Doctrine in these points; and therefore we appeal to the Scripture.
But yet we know that these are not points of absolute necessity to salvation;
so that whether those Churches, or we were mistaken, yet is our Religion the
same, and both they, and we in a safe way to Heaven.

2. For matters of Government and Discipline we say 1. That we undertake to
manifest it as clear as the light, that the Popes Supreme Headship, and
universal jurisdiction, is a novelty introduced above six hundred years after
Christ. 2. For Diocesane Episcopacy and their ordination, some of the Reformed
Churches do own it: But it is not a matter so necessary to Salvation, as that
all men that will be saved must needs be of one mind in it. 3. We confess and
maintain the necessity of true Penitence and such confession of sin as is
necessary to manifest Penitence to the Church after a notorious scandal: and of
confession to those that we have wronged: and of private confession to our
Pastors, in case that we cannot have a through cure of our wounds, or comfort
to our consciences without it. Lastly, as for the Ceremonies mentioned which
the former Churches used, and as for the bare name of a Sacrifice and Altar
(while they agreed with us in sense) we take them not to be matters of so great
moment, as must make them and us of two Religions; as if both were not in a
safe way to salvation. The best men on earth may differ in as great a matter as
one of these: and if they in a mistaken zeal shall depart from the Apostles, so
that we cannot imitate both the Apostles and them, we had rather of the two
leave them then the Apostles; yet holding with them still in the maine.

Obj. The Religion of Protestants differs from the Abassine and Greek Churches
and all the world as well as the Roman, and therefore cannot be a safe way.
Answ. 1. If that be not a safe way which differs from the Greeks, Abassines,
etc. then the Papists way is much less safe then ours: for they do not only
differ from them, but un-Church them and condemn them to Hell, and so do not
we. 2. We are of the same Religion with them: only we have by Gods great mercy
cast out of that one way some stones of offense, which they have not yet cast
out.

Obj. 2. The true safe Religion has had a visible Church professing it from
Christ's time till this day: But the Protestant Religion has not had a visible
Church, professing it to this day: therefore it is not the true safe Religion.

Ans. The Major I easily grant and disclaim the needless snift of them that
would deny it. But the Minor I deny: If they call for the proof of that visible
Church, and ask where it was before Luther, we say that it was wherever Christ
had a Church: From Christ's time till many hundred years after, even at Rome it
self and many other places: and from Christ's time to this day it has been in
Ethiopia, Greece, Egypt, Mesopotamia, and many other Countries, if not still
among the Romanists themselves: for full proof of which, note, that it is from
the Essentials, and points of great necessity that we denominate our Religion;
and every difference in ^esser things does not make a distinct Religion: else
there were as many Religions in the world as men. Note also that the main
difference between us and the Papists is, not that they deny the substance of
our Religion directly, but that they superadde a great many of new Articles to
the old Creed, and have made their Religion much larger then ours, many of
their new Articles consequently subverting the Fundamentals which they profess.
So that our Re^gion is, and still has been among the Papists, and other
Churches: and if they ^dde more to it, that makes it not cease in it self to be
what it was Our Religion is wholly contained in the Holy Scriptures* and that
all the Churches have still allowed of: The Papists themselves confess it all
to be the Word of God, which we appeal to as the only Touchstone and rule of
our faith.

Obj. So you would make our Religion and ^ours to be all one. Ans. As the word
Religion sig^ifieth the Essentials of the Christian Faith, or the ^oints of
absolute necessity to Salvation, so our ^eligion is with you, and is owned or
confessed by ^ou: As it signifies all those points that are conceit^d
necessary to Salvation with the professors, so your ^eligion is not all, but
part, with us: And as it com^rehendeth also all those Integral parts, which a
man ^ay confessedly be saved without, so he do not wil^lly reject them, so
yours and ours do much differ^nd that your Religion is not all with us is no
loss to ^; because the points of yours which we disown ^e both novel additions
of your own brain, and al^^ such as contradict the acknowledged verities.
Wherever then Christ had a Church that did believe all the Doctrine of the
Scripture, and specially the Creed, the Lords Prayer, the Decalogue, the
Doctrine of the new Covenant, Baptism, the Lord Supper, and the Ministry,
there was our Religion before Luther: If any added hay and stubble, if the^
work be burnt, and they suffer loss, yet our Religion among them is the same
still.

Obj. But do not you make this Negative a part ^ your Religion; that nothing
but Scripture is to ^^ believed fide divina? and what Church was of the Opinion?

Answ. 1. We have often at large showed that m^^ of the ancient Doctors of the
Church have asser^^ the Scriptures sufficiency at large, and appealed ^ them as
the full Revelation of Gods will concerni^^ all things necessary to salvation,
and the sufficien^ Rule to Judge of controversies. 2. If they did (...) of them
think that the Church had a supperad^^ Revelation by Tradition, in points of
order, of ^ necessity to salvation; this does not make them ^^ us to be of two
Religions, or ways of Salvation as long as they do not introduce any dangerous
^ destructive points under that pretense.

Obj. But the Church still held those things as ^^cessary to Salvation which
you deny. Ans. W^ deny that to be true: Some of the points in differ^^^ are
novelties of your own, which the ancient Chur^^ did never hold: the rest are
such as they never ^ such a stress, as men's salvation upon.

To conclude, Let it be considered whether the Argument may not damn your
selves which I t^ against you Thus. The true safe Religion has (...) a visible
Church professing it from Christ's time ^ ^^w: But the Religion of the Romanists
(as com^^ehending all points of their faith, or made by them be necessary to
salvation) has not had any visible ^^urch professing it of many hundred years
after ^^rist: Therefore it is not the true Religion, nor a ^^e way to
salvation, The Minor I shall undertake ^^re seasonably to make good: And our
Divines ^^e done it already.

No doubt but common reason and justice requir^^, that you that call to us so
earnestly for a Cata^^gue of the Professors of our Religion in all Ages ^^uld
be as much obliged your selves to give us a ^^^alogue of yours: yea and to give
it first, because (...) are the first in pleading the necessity of it.
Un^^^take this task therefore, and perform it well, and ^u shall carry the
whole cause. Give us a Cata^ue of any, besides impeached Heretics, that did ^n
your main points of Popery for many hundred ^^rs after Christ, and we will give
you a full ac^^nt of such as contradicted those conceits and be^^^ed as we do,
and let both be compared together, ^ let the most satisfaction and the fullest
evidence ^^^ry it. You make a mere empty noise among the ^^gar, of Antiquity
and Universality, and call for ^roof of the perpetual or continued visibility
of ^ Church, as if in this you had the advantage, ^ the balance did turn on
your side: When as ^^ough we know that there is no such necessity of ^ proof in
this as you pretend yet) we know your ^dvantage here to be so great, that if
you will ^ be persuaded to this way of trial, it will be to the ^^^er shame and
confusion of your cause. What Is the ^^tter else that you still appeal to the
latter or pre^^t Church, and that is only to the Roman, and that's only to
your selves? If we do but invite you to trial by Scripture, and the Fathers and
Records the three first ages, you presently scorn the mo^ and fall upon the
Fathers with accusations, as if the had not understood or believed all that was
necessa^^ to salvation, or to the being of a Christian or Church; for you say
they did not meddle with the controversies; and so you call us down to the la^
or present times, as having equal authority with ^ first: To which we say, 1.
That the silence of ^ first times concerning these matters, if there w^ no more
(as yet there is) is sufficient to prove t^ they were not then taken for any
necessary points faith. For, Though our Records of the sec^ Age be very short,
yet both they and m^ more those of the third and fourth Ages contain such
purposely undertaken, explication^ the Christian faith, that we cannot imagine
suc^ multitude of necessary points would have been o^ted. 2. And though the
Pastors of the present ^ have equal Authority in Ruling their Congregation with
those of the second, yet they cannot give ^ sure an account what was the
doctrine and prac^ of the former Ages, nor any way prove it to us ^ by
producing such records.

The Papists themselves are so far from deny^ that the Ancient Fathers and
Churches did hold ^ Positive part of our Religion, that they hold it
themselves; For they themselves profess to believe ^^ book of holy Scripture
that we do: They say ^ believe the Creed called the Apostles, and the ^cene and
Constantinopolitane Creed, and that of ^^thanasius; and so do we (still taking
the holy Sc^pture only for our Rule) so that their own tong^ ^ust confess the
Antiquity, and Universality, and ^ccession of our Religion: For this is ours.

But all that they have to ob^ject is this, That we ^n name no Churches or
Fathers that held our Negatives. To which I say, 1. The Negatives at least, for
the most part of them, if not all) are ^e mere consequences of the Affirmatives
and Posi^ves, and employed or plainly included in them: For ^xample, when our
Religion says [Thou shall wor^ip the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve] ^is includes the Negative [Thou shall ^ot worship or serve Saints, Mat
4.10.
Angels or any other, save only by a service and honor duly ^bservient to the
service and worship of God: and therefore that we give not Divine worship to
the ^onsecrated host, or the Virgin Mary, or to any ^ther mere creature. Our
Religion teaches us [to ^o all things to edifying] 1 Cor. 14.26. This
includ^th the negatives [that we must not worship God in ^n unknown tongue or
unedifying manner, bleating and bellowing out our prayers in hideous or
ridicu^ous tones.] Our Religion makes it the Ministerial Commission, to teach
the Nations and Baptize, Mat. 28.19, 20. This includes the Negative that women
or lay men should not so teach (that is, as Commissioned officers) nor baptize:
Mat. 28.19.
This affirmative [ Peter was sent to Dis^iple Nations] includes this Negative
[ Peter was not sent to be the fixed Bishop of Rome, and there ^o reside. This
affirmative [The Apostles are the Foundation of the Church] includes this
negative ^ Peter alone is not the Foundation of the Church] This Affirmative
[It is bread and wine which we take and eat and drink in the Eucharist]
contains or implies the Negative, that [It is not Christ's flesh and blood,
which the bread and wine is transubstantiat^^ into] I might thus instance in
many more: Our N^gatives are contained or imply^^ in our Affirmatives which yo^
hold or confess your selves. So Dr. White confesses that we cannot bring a
Catalogue of those that in all ages have maintained our Negations of their
corruptions, because the Corrupters were (...) then risen up; and how should we
prove that the Church opposed an error before it was hatched.


2. I answer further, that we have express negatives also both in Scriptures
and Fathers, in the main points of difference between us and the Papists We
have a plain [ Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image, etc. Thou
shall not bow down to them nor worship them, etc.] We have a plain [I^ the
Church I had rather speak five words with my understanding that I might teach
others also, the^ ten thousand words in a tongue] (unknown) 1 Cor. 14.19. We
have a plain [See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant] Rev. 22.9. And
so of the chief differences through the rest.

3. If we had but this one point proved, that [the holy Scripture is a
sufficient Rule of Faith] it fully warranteth all our Negatives wherein we
differ from the Papists. For, to Believe all that is in Scripture, and that
this is sufficient, will surely warrant as to exclude their additions. And we
have often proved that the first ages did maintain the Scripture sufficiency.
This one answer does fully justify us against this c^vil of the Papists. The
Ancient Church and Fathers believed the Scripture and the sufficiency of that
Scripture as containing all points of faith: And so do we. And so all Popish
faith is excluded (Though we ^onfess many Ceremonies and points of order ^ere
then admitted as from the Church.

4. Negatives became necessary to be expressly as^erted by occasion of Heresies.
And therefore who ^an wonder if many of them are never mentioned till those
heresies did call them out. When there was ^o man so impudent as to say that
[The Pope of ^ome is the Universal Bishop and Governor of the whole Church] or
that [God must be worshipped in ^n unknown tongue] or that [Images must be
wor^hipped] who could expect that the Church should have occasion in words to
express it as a part of their faith that [The Pope is not the universal Bishop;
not infallible, etc.] and so of the rest? If Popery had risen sooner, it had
sooner been contradicted.

5. There may be an hundred Negatives made necessary hereafter by heresies,
which it is not necessary now to put into our Creed or confessions, because
they are not yet sufficiently contained or employed in the contrary
Affirmatives. If Heretics arise that say that man has seven souls; that the
soul returns to be Gods Essence, and was so eternally; that there are fourteen
Sacraments; that Infants must take Orders; with a hundred the like; then it
might be necessary for us expressly to deny these; and shall they then tell us
that our Religion is new and theirs old, because we cannot prove that any did
before deny theirs? So what if we could not prove that any before had said [The
Pope is not the Universal Governor?] that is because there was none so shamless
for six hundred years as to say he was. Whose Religion then is proved new by
this, ours or theirs?

But I shall say somewhat more to this anon in the end*

Obj. 3. That Religion which cannot be known (...) having no certain test to
discern it by, can be no sa^^ way to salvation: But such is the Reformed
Religion, therefore, etc. The Minor is proved: If they have any such test,
either it is Scripture, or so^^ confessions of their own: But neither of these:
therefore not Scripture: For that is appealed to by many Religions, and
therefore can be no proper Test to discern one of them from the rest: Besides
it knows not so much as the name of the Refor^^^ Protestant Religion: Not any
confession: for they have no one which they agree in, but one disclaimeth what
another owneth: And they have none agreed on by a General Council, or by all
themselves.

Ans 1. The Test of our Religion is the holy Scripture; This we profess jointly
to be the Rule of our faith and life: To this we still Appeal, If we
misunderstand it in any point, we implicitly renounce all such e^rors, because
we explicitly in general renounce all that is contrary to the Scripture. This
may be the true Test of our Religion though others falsely pre^end that theirs
is more agreeable to it. Many things may be tried by the same Touchstone, and
weighed by the same balance; whereof some may be current* and others unfound,
or light. May not the Law of the Land be the true Rule of our obedience to our
Governors, though in the Rebellious or disobedient should pretend to be Ruled
by the same Laws.

2. They are not all distinct Religions which the Papists call so: Many appeal
to the same Scriptures, who agree in the maine concerning the sense, and
disagree only in some inferior things. These are not several Religions.

3. Our confessions do show how we understand the Scripture; wherein we agree
in the main, as the Harmony of Confessions testifies, though in some lesser
things we differ.

Obj. 4. They that have causlesly separated from all the Churches in the world
are not of the true Religion nor in a safe way to Salvation: But so have the
Protestants done: for they are divided both from Roman Church, the Greeks,
Abassines, Armenians, and all: therefore they are not in a safe way.

Ans. Its one thing to withdraw from some corruption of a Church and another to
withdraw from the Church. 1. We that are now living did not withdraw from Rome
or any of the rest: for we were never among you or under you. 2. Our Fathers
withdrew not from the Church as Christian or Catholic, but from the particular
corruptions of the Roman faction, in Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship;
rejecting their lately usurped Tyranny, by which they would have still obliged
them to sin against God. As we are commanded to withdraw from each particular
Brother that walks disorderly, so must we from a particular Church when they
will be so disordered, as to Tyrannize over the universal. 3. The Church of
Rome rejected us by a causeless excommunication, who were not de jure under her
power. 4. We still profess our selves of the same Church with the Greeks,
Abassines, Arminians, Copties, and all others on earth that hold the
Scriptures, and that so hold the Anticent Creeds or fundamentals of
Christianity; as that they do not evidently subvert it again by contradictory
Errors: If they hold no Errors but what may consist with a true belief of the
Fundamentals in the same persons (though by an unseen consequence they may
contradict them) we separate not from that Church so as to disclaim it from
being a true Church: And therefore its not true that we so separate from all
the world: but as to the Local Personal Communion or presence, we dare not join
with the truest Church in the least known sin: But in that respect we cannot be
said to separate from the Greeks or Abassines, that we have no opportunity of
Local Communion with. While all men are imperfect, one may see that Error which
another sees not: and to separate merely from a sin of one man or a Church is
not simply to separate from the man or Church.

Obj. 5. That Religion which has no unity in it self or consistency, but is
broken into many Sects, and still running further, is no safe way to salvation.
But such is the Protestant Religion, therefore.

Answ. We deny the Minor. Our Religion is one, simply one, and most consistent,
and having one sure standing Rule, not subject to changes as yours is; even the
word of God himself. The same Rule that the first Churches had, and the same
Test by which the Christian Religion was known of old, when the Belief of the
Scripture, and particularly the Ancient Creeds, and the actual Communion with
the true Church, was the test of a Catholic, the one in Doctrine, the other in
Communion, as freeing him from Schisms. We believe all the same Articles, and
we divide not from the Catholic Church. If any depart from Scripcures as to
the sense in points absolutely necessary, they cease to be of our Religion. If
any depart from it in lesser things, they may yet be of the same Religion with
us; but so far we disown them, if we know it. Popery has no, sure test, or
means to prevent mutation. But we have in that we fix on the Immutable Rock. If
Anabaptists, Separatists, or any erroneous persons live among us, so far as
they hold those errors, so far they are none of us: And if any err, whom we
dare not reject, we yet reject their errors, and take them for no part of our
Religion. And if this Argument hold, it will much more condemn the Romanists,
who have more diversity of opinions and ways among them then the Protestants,
as may in due place be showed.

Obj. 6. That is not the true Religion nor a safe way to Heaven, which men can
have no Infallible certainty of. But the Protestant Religion is such: For they
all profess their Church to be fallible.

Answ. We must distinguish between a man that May be deceived, and a man that
Is deceived: And between Infallibility in the Object, and in the Subject or
Intellect. And between Infallibility in the absolutely necessary points, and in
some Inferior smaller matters. And so I Ans. 1. The Rule of our Religion, viz.
the word of God, is Infallible, yea the only Infallible Rule of Religion: and
therefore we have an Infallible, and the only Infallible Religion. 2. The
weakness of the Recipient must be differenced from the Religion which has no
such weakness There is still the certainty and Infallibility of the Object,
when the believer through his own weakness may be uncertain. 3. No man is
Falsus actually deceived, while he believes that doctrine of our Religion, that
is, the holy Scripture: And this we are certain of. 4. No Christian in sensu
composito, nor no Church is fallible, or can err in the Fundamentals or points
absolutely necessary. For if he do so, he cease to be a Christian, and that
to be a Church. 5. In sensu diviso, he that was a common believer, may
Apostatize from the faith, and so may a particular Church: and therefore is
fallible, but is not, as is said, Deceived, till it turn from the Infallible
truth. 6. The best man or Church on earth does know but in part, and therefore
erreth in part, and therefore is fallible in part or in lower things. So that it
is not the least proof of the fallibility of Scripture or the Reformed
Religion, that men may Apostatize from it, or that they may stagger in
Believing an Infallible Truth, or that we are fallible in lesser things. All
true Believers are actually Infalliblly persuaded of the Truth of Gods Word,
and particularly of all things absolutely necessary.

Obj. 7. That Religion is not true nor a safe way to heaven which wants many
Articles of faith; But the Protestant Religion wants many Articles of faith:
Therefore.

Answ. 1. We must distinguish of our Religion as it is in the Professed Rule,
and as it is Impressed in the minds of men: In the former respect, we say that
our Religion wants no Article of faith: for Gods perfect Word is our
Religion: But in the minds of men Religion is more or less imperfect according
to the strength or weakness of men's faith. 2. We must distinguish between true
Articles of Faith, and false ones made by the Church of Rome, We are without
the latter (but want them not) but we expect that they who call them Articles
of faith, do prove them so.

Obj. 8. Your Religion is unsafe by your own Testimony: You condemn one
another: the Lutheran condemns the Calvinist as Blasphemous, impious, and
damnable: the Calvinists condemn the Lutherans: the Anabaptists both: and
every sect is condemned by others: Therefore.

Ans. 1. The Churches confessions pass no such condemnation; nor any moderate
sober men. 2. If two children fall out, and call one another Bastard, they are
never the more Bastards for that, nor will the father therefore call them so;
else what will become of your Jesuits and Dominicans.

Obj. 9. The very name of Lutherans, Calvinists, Protestants, do plainly
express a Sect or party, different from the Name [Catholike] which denotes the
true Church which only holds the true Religion: And the very name [Reformed] is
novel, and no proper title of the Catholic Church, but only a cloak for your
Schism, which discloseth the novelty of your Church and way.

Answ. 1. And of how much better signification think you, is the name [Papist]
or [Romanist? You call your selves Catholics, and we call our selves
Catholics: You scornfully call us Lutherans, and Calvinists which are names
that we disclaim, and then argue from your own imposed names. Would you have
us do so by you? And as for the names of Protestants, and Reformed, we use them
not to express the Essential nature of our Religion, but the Accidental Removal
of your Corruptions. So that though Scripture or Antiquity talk not of [A
Protestant, or Reformed Religion] by name, yet it commends to us that same
Religion, which we now call [Protestant, (...) Reformed] but then it could not
so be called, because you had not then hatched your corruptions and
deformities, which are presupposed to our Reformation. The man that fell among
thieves, when his wounds were healed, was a [Cured man] whereas before he was
not a cured man, because not a wounded man: And yet he was the same man as
before; and the Thieves that wounded him would have made but a foolish ^lea, if
they would have dispossessed him of his In^eritance on pretense that he is not
the same man, and have proved him not the same, because he has ^ot the same
name, it being not a Cured man that owned that inheritance before.

Obj. 10. Where the Catholic Church is, there the Catholic Religion is, and
no where else: But the Catholic Church is not with you, but with us* For, you
found us in Possession of the name and thing and then departed from us as
Heretics in former ages did from the Church: Therefore it is not you but we
that have the true Catholic Religion, which is the only safe way to salvation.

Answ. 1. The Church must be known to be true and Catholic by the Religion
which it owneth, and not the Religion by the Church. You begin at the wrong
end: As if I would prove such a thing to be a Virtue because it is in such a
man, as I esteem, when I should rather prove him to be honest and Virtuous,
because that which is first, proved honesty, and Virtue dwells in him. 2. Did
we not find the Greek, Ethiopian and other Churches in possession of the name
of the Catholic Church as well as you? Yet you would dispossess them. 3. We
found you in Possession of All in your own account: and all is yours if your
selves must be Judges. But in the account of the Greek, Abassine and other
Churches we found you in Possession but of the name of [A Church] and not [The
Church] a Part of the Church Catholic, and not the whole; a Corrupt part and
not the Head, (...) the Purest part. 4. We departed not from you as ^ Church,
much less as the Catholic Church, but ^ corrupted: Nor do we yet deny you to
be a Church but to be a sound Church or the Catholic Church.

Concerning this and the former Queries, especially [when our Church was in all
Ages before L^ther] we shall clear our selves by giving the true state of the
case, which will Justify it self.

Christ came to be the Physician of diseased souls* In his Gospel he
proclaims his office, and call them to himself for cure, and prescribes them
the means: But he takes the time of this life for the accomplishing it, and
cures no man perfectly (...) death. His Church therefore is as an Hospital or
^ City so infected, that there is not one in it that is perfectly sound: One of
the deepest radical diseases is Pride, which corrupted the blood even of the
Apostles themselves. So far that it broke out into such an Itch, that they
could not forbear contending who should be the greatest even in the presence of
Christ himself. He derides the controversy, telling them [with you it shall
not be so, but he that will be great shall be the servant of all.] This disease
of Pride was still alive in part, even wherever it was mortified, so that such
like desires of superiority were excited by it also in the Apostles successors,
the Pastors of the Church in following ages. But it came but to a troublesome
Itch till Constantines time* For the nails of Persecution did so claw it, that
the corrupt blood was let out, and the Itch was frequently abated by the smart:
But when Constantine lifted up the Bishops with honors, revenew, and the
ad^unction of secular power to their wills or censures, ^hen the itch turned to
a plain Scab, the corrupt blood continuing, and the scarifying scratches of
persecution ceasing. But this overspread not the whole body, the Catholic
Church much less all a^ike: but it seized mainly upon the Clergy who should
have been examples of humility and self-denial to the rest: And principal^y on
the Clergy of the Roman Empire, and some others that they ^nfected: But on
none so much as the Bishop of Rome, and his Clergys. For Rome being the
Impe^ial seat, and drawing to it the glory, riches, and observance of the
world, the Bishop of that place must needs be accordingly magnified and
observed: especially because that he being at the Emperors ear might have
pleasured or displeasured almost any Prince or Prelate in the Empire. At last
by translation of much of the Glory to Constantinople, the heat of the disease
was conveyed thither too, so that John of Constantinople and Gregory of Rome,
contended about the Universal Supremacy: John laid the first ^laime to it,
because he was Bishop of the Imperial ^eat. Gregory lays no claim to it
himself, but contradicts John's, pronouncing it a note of Antichrist ^o claim
the title of Universal Bishop, little think^ng that his own successors would
have claimed it so ^oon. At last Phocas being helped by the Roman Bishop to
possess the throne of his murdered Prince, does help the Pope to the Title of
Universal Bishop, and the glory and strength of Constantinople abating, Rome
did the more easily hold what they had go^. By this time the Seab was turned to
a Leprosy, which drew on many other concomitant diseases a^ its symptuous: The
rest of the Church was some of it infected with some of the foresaid Scab, some
more (...) some less, and some of them still were only tro^bled with the old
itch, though none perfectly sou^ nor was that to be expected; much of the
Weste^^ parts comply with their Leprous Patriarch, and ^^mit to him while he
calls himself Universal Bisho^ and Head of the Catholic Church, some conse^^
some say nothing though they dissent, and inde^^ the power was got into his
hand, so that for fear ^ persecution few durst contradict, and specially when
they saw no likelihood of doing good: Yet some i^ all Ages even under his nose,
did signify their disl^^^ and offer some help to the cure. At last in Luther^
days whole Countries do withdraw from the R^mane Leprosy (as thousands called
Albigenses, W^^denses, etc. had done before them) and so free themselves from
the infection, and get off the very scab and make fair attempts for the Cure of
the very itch. Now what does the Roman Clergy, but cry out after us as
Heretics and Schismatics, and as^^ us [where was our Church before Luther?]
and who were of our Religion till then? We answer them that if they have the
Leprosy, and the times before them had (in most parts) the scab, and the
former times the itch, cannot we prove that we are Men as well as they, unless
we prove that we have the Leprosy, Scab, or Itch as they had? Are these
Essential or Integral parts of a man? As humane nature is still with a Leper,
but Leprous; and still with him that has the Scab, but scabbed: so our
Religion and Church was at Rome and still is, but Leprous since the Usurpation
before mentioned: It was before that at I^^^e, but forely scabbed: It was
before that Rome troubled with the itch: It is still in Greece, Abassia, and
other parts, but somewhat scabbed: is in millions of the people free from that
scab, ^ho in all Ages disliked the Clergies usurpations: ^^ough we cannot
expect to hear this from them in a ^eneral Council, where they are not to be.
But ^e take the people to be a true part of the Church. ^e have separated from
you as from Lepers, not from the Dead. We bury not your title of a church or
Christians, so you will add [Leprous] and a Leprosy proves most commonly a
killing dis^^se. We have reason to secure our selves from our infection, though
our love to you were never ^ dear.

So that here is the quarrel; and here is our defense. ^ all Christ's Hospital in
the Western part of the ^orld, have much increased the disease that he would
^ave cured them of; it does not follow that any man ^^at is cured of their
Leprosy, cease presently to ^e a man, that he that is reformed of those
vices, ^easeth to be a member of the Catholic Church: ^r that such Reformed
Churches are new things that ^ere not before: The Reformation may be new as ^o
the latter Ages since corruption prevailed, but ^^e Religion or Church State is
not new. Its a sad case ^ith the Church when its corruptions are come to be
^^counted of its essence, so that he that will not re^ine the corruptions, must
not be accounted to be a ^hristian or a Catholic at least, and he that will be
^ured must be accounted to be killed; The Church ^as a Church before it caught
the Romish Scab or Le^rosie, and therefore is a Church where that is cu^ed; and
I think far better without it, then with ^t.

By all this therefore it evidently appears that a Papists do most vainly
charge us with novelty (...) call for a Catalogue ^ the professors of our
Religion, How far we account the Church of Rome a true Church* and yet the
Papacy no true Church. See Junius in his exact book de Ecclesia Cant. Bellarm.
oper. Vol. 2. col. 1019. And the judgment of several of our Divines by Bishop
Hall in his Defense against Burton.
when the no^ty is theirs, and themselves do yet profess ^ Religion, though to
^ they have added the corrupting Lepros^^ Though we cannot ^^der take to prove
that the Church was perfect (nor never will be, till it co^ to heaven) yet we
have often proved that it was man Ages without their Popery, and are ready to
unde^take the further proof: Of which the next Disp^^tion shall give you a taste.

There is a Railing Pamphlet extant, called [ ^ brief confutation of certain
absurd, heretical (...) damnable doctrines, delivered by Master James Ush^^ in
a Sermon preached before King James at Wanste^ Jun. 20. 1624.] The Author calls
himself Paul^ Veridicus: Its printed at St Omers, 1627. Because take the same
way against the Romanists as this Reverend Bishop of Armagh takes, and has
led me i^ that Sermon, I think my self the more obliged (...) consider of what
is said against it.

The first onset of this Mr Maledious, page 9.10, 11* Is against our assertion
that we are of the same Re^gion, and Church as the Grecians, Egyptians,
Christians, Aethiopians, etc. and that all these are not ^ be damned as
Heretics and unchurched, because they ^re not subjects of the Pope. To this 1.
He con^^sseth that even the Greeks themselves are not subject to the Pope; and
that [they soon departed ^om the (seeming) union made in the Council of
^^lorence, about the year 1439.] 2. He confesses ^at their doctrine about the
Procession of the Holy ^host a patre per silium and not a patre filioque, was
^ch, that [when they had explicated it they were ^und to believe very
Orthodoxly and Catholikely in ^e same matter, and for such were admitted.] ^.
He affirms that [he finds not that in any sub^^antial point they do dissent
from the Roman ^atholike Church, excepting the matter of Primacy.] Let us
first observe the consequences of this much. ^. From hence it follows that
the Greek Churches ^e guilty of no Heresy, but non subjection to the ^ope of
Rome. 2. And that therefore indeed they ^re no Heretics. 3. And therefore it
is not of ne^essity to the being of a Church or Catholic Chri^ian to be
subject to the Pope: And that the Pope ^r Roman Church is not to enter the
definition of ^he Catholic Church: for as the Greeks may be Ca^holikes without
subjection to Rome, so may others* ^. And therefore they are no General
Councels ^here all those Churches are absent, as at Trent, Constance, etc. And
that its a false excuse of Bellar^ine and the rest, to say that the Greeks and
the rest ^re Heretics or Schismatics. 5. And therefore it ^eclareth to all
the world, both that the Popish de^gne and Religion is carnal and selfish, to
exalt themselves above the whole Church of God, and ^lso that they are more
then barbarously tyranni^al censorious, and most extremely schismati^al, that
will presume to cut off from Christ and the Church, the greatest part of the
Christi^^ in the world, even those that themselves confess ^ be in all other
things Orthodoxe, and that me^^ because they will not be the Popes subjects. ^
now proceed to the next.

The substance of his Answer consists of t^^ gross untruths in a public
matter of fact, where many millions of men are able at the first hearing ^
prove him a bold false witness, making falsehood ^ prop of his ill cause. The
first untruth which ^ lays down, is that the Grecians do claim that
^^preamacy to their own Patriarch of Constantinople which they deny the Pope:
and therefore if it be h^ it is as bad in them as the Papists, and so they are
^ Protestants. To which I say, it is not true: whatever any private or
particular man may say, its we^ known that its not true of their Church in
comm^^ nor found in any of their Church confessions, ^ utterly and ordinarily
disclaimed by them. Thoug^ John of Constantinople did claim the title of
Universal Bishop because of the Emperors residence there yet did he not get it,
much less to be the Universal Governor, and yet much less is it now claimed wh^
the Christian Empire is removed. To be Episc^p^ prima sedis is as much as is
desired by the Patriarc^ himself; which yet he is content to leave, and ta^^
the second place, though neither of them concer^eth an Universal Episcopacy.

Can they read such books ^ Nilus You may see it in Mich G^ld^stus d^ Monarch.
pag^ 30. Tom. 1.
Archbishop of Thessalonica de primatu Pa^ Parham, and many other of the
Greeks, and yet belie^^ themselves in these fictions? Why do we read or hear
nothing from the Patriache of Constantinople in^iting and persuading us all to
submit to his Government, as we and all the Christian world almost have ^een
solicited by the Popes Emissaries to submit our ^elves to him? A short Reply
may serve to such ^mmodest false assertions as this nicknamed Veri^ieus makes
the chiefest part of his confuta^ion.

The second untruth which constituteth this part of ^is answer, is, that [ The
Grecians, Moscovites, and Egyptians do in one only point dissent from Rome, and
^n no point at all agree with the Protestants sin quan^um such, and dissent
from their Catholic Church.]

This one great falsehood contains two not small ones in it, and each of those
two contain abundance more.

1. That all these Churches differ from you in no one point but the Popes
supreamacy is a falsehood beyond all modesty. For besides the supremacy they
believe not your pretended Infallibility, nor do they pretend to the like of
their own: They believe not your Purgatory: they own not your pardons for
easing the pains of Purgatory, nor prayers for the dead to that end; nor the
application of the treasury of the Saints Merits to that end, or for
satisfaction to the Justice of God. They own not your Transubstantiation: They
have the Scripture in their known languages: They worship God in their
Liturgies in their known languages, the Moscovites in the Moscovian tongue, the
Georgians in the Iberick; the Arabians in the Arabic; and so the Carmanians,
Slavonians, Greeks in theirs: They administer the Eucharist in both kinds, and
detest your Sacrilegious withholding of the cup: They reject your confirmation:
so do they your extreme Unction* They admit Priests to live with their wives
which were married before ordination: They reject the Religious use of graven
Images or Statues: They teach that the holy Scriptures are a sufficient and
perfect rule of faith: they believe that they should not be locked up from the
people: They maintain that God is to be worshipped in understanding, and they
a^hor your praying by Beads and tale: They think not to wash away sin or drive
away the devil by holy water: They take not Traditions to be one part of Gods
Word, necessary to supply the defects of Scripture; but take them and Church
customs and constitutions to be only for matters of order and determination
of such circumstances as it belonged not to the perfection of Gods Laws, to
determine, but were to be left to the wisdom of Governors; the Scriptures
containing sufficient for salvation: They believe with the Protestants that
Justification is not by the Merit of works: And that it is impossible for us
properly to Merit ex condigno the least mercy, much less the Kingdom of Heaven
at the hands of God: They have but one order of Monks, viz. of St Basil, and
those not such as the Papists; that live a private, unprofitable, droanish
life; but their Monasteries are as Colleges to fit them for the service of God
in the Church, and thence they often proceed to be Priests and Prelates: They
take your Pope to be condemnable for his pride, cruelty and presumption: his
pride for pretending to an universal jurisdiction, and usurping a power to
depose Princes and dispose of their Crowns: his cruelty in persecuting other
Christians for their differing judgments: and his presumption in granting
pardons and deliverances from Purgatory. In a word they take the Papists for
Schismatics and a^cordingly condemn them with a solemn condemnation. The
Muscovites and Russians admit not Priests or Deacons to Ordination unless they
be married: and they refuse to communicate with the Roman Church. The Egyptian
Christians allow not of Baptism in any necessity whatsoever but only by the
Priest and in the Church, and administer the Sacrament of the Eucharist in both
kinds: they give not the Lords Supper or extreme unction to the sick. They deny
Purgatory and prayer for the dead: They marry in the second degree of
consanguinity without dispensations: They elevate not the host: They reject all
the general Councels after that of Ephesus: They repute the Papists to be
Heretics, and avoid their communion no less then of the Jews: Most of these
^lso is common to the Abassines, who also admit Marriages of Priests and
Bishops, and eat flesh on Fridayes, communicate standing in both kinds.

Are all these nothing? What, no one difference, with this Popish Veridicus? I
will not desire him to take my word for all this, because I will not take his
for the contrary, nor will I turn him to any Protestant for satisfaction,
unless he will better use that one which himself cites ( Sands Relation of the
West. Relig. or Europae Specul. p. 234. etc.) But I may with reason entreat him
to believe his own brethren the Papists, and the Greeks themselves: And in some
of them he may see many more differences then I have here named: For example in
their Possevin. de Rebus Moscov. at large. See also Council. Florent. Sess. 18.
Jerem. Patriarch. Constable. in Resp. 1. ad Germ. Zonar. Ann^l. T^m. 3. in Imper.
Leo. Nilus de Primat. Papae. ^a^lam de Primatu Papae. figebert in Chron. ad
(...) 1054. Leo and Epist. ad Episcop. Constant. Jacob ^ Vitriaco histor.
Orient. Sigism. de Rebus Musc^. Guagu. descript. Muscov. Saecram de Errorib.
^^the^. Boleri. Relat. Thom. a Jes. Conver. Gent. G^iliel. de Rubri. Itiner.
Tartar. Oforius de Reb. Emanuel. Saligniac. Itiner. Alphons. a Castro contr.
Haeres. Damian a Goes. Prateol. de Haerefib. Alvarez hist^r. Ethiop. (which yet
have much falsehood) Gui^ sum^. de Haerefib. Burchardus Descript. te^^. Sanct.

If our confuter cannot have leisure to read all these, let him only read
Thom. a Jes. and Possevin. de^eb. Moscov. and Apparat. Sacra. and see to his
shame what his own friends say against his falsehoods.

And that all these Christians are as considerable as all the Papists in the
world, far over matching them for number, is apparent: Much more when we add
to the Grecians and Moscovites, and Copti's, all the Syrians, the Georgians,
the Indians of Saint Thomas the Abassines, the Nestorians, the Jacobits, the
Armenians, and the Maronites, and to them as Protestants, where then is the
Papists Universality, and how few are they comparatively, and how plainly do
they play the Donatists (but that it is on a far worse ground?)

The Patriarch of Constantinople alone has under him in Asia (as Brierwood
notes) the Christians of Natolia (excepting Armenia the less and Cilicia) of
Circassia, of Mengrelia, and of Russia: And in Europe also the Christians of
Greece, Macedon, Epirus Thrace, Bulgaria, Rascia, Sextia, Bosnia, Walachia,
Moldavia, Podolia, and Muscovia (till lately) together with all the Islands of
the Aegean Sea, and others about Greece, as far as Corfu, with much more.

And as is noted in Curopalat. de Offic. Palas. Constant. and Offic Mag. Eccl.
he has under him, The Archbishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia; 2. Ephesus, 3.
Heraclea, 4. Ancyra, 5. Cizicum, 6. Sardis, 7, Nicomedia, 8. Nice, 9. Calcedon,
10. Mitylene, 11. Thessalonica, 12. Laodicea, 13. Synadae, 14. Iconium, 15.
Corinth, 16. Athens, 17. Patrae, 18. Trapezuntium, 19. Larissae, 20 Naupactus,
21. Adrianopolis. These are all Archbishops, and have many Bishops under them,
viz. Of Muscovy 17. of Larissae 13. of Athens 11. of Corinth 10. of Tessalonica
9. etc.

And if these be under the Patriarch of Constantinople alone, how great a
number are all the rest in the great Empire of the Abassines, and elsewhere
through the rest of the Christian world?

I do not mention all these to intimate either that multitudes prove them or
any to have the best cause, if we were in all things of their minds, or as if
I preferred them for Arts and Civil Policy to the Romans, but to show both the
haniousness of the Popish Schism that would unchurch so many, and the cruelty
of their censures that would damn so many, and the Impudency of their pretense
of Universality, and their vain boasting of [All the Church] when they are so
small a part of the Church, and more bad then small.

But we have been too long on this: let us come to the confuters next untruth;
and that is [That the Grecians, etc. do in no one point agree with Protestants
as such] what has been said does sufficiently shame that fiction.

But he instanceth in our differences: And 1. he says [ The Grecians hold one
supreme head of the whole Church under Christ] Repl. An immodest fiction to
uphold a cause that's like it.

2. He says [ The Grecians hold the Real presence of our Saviors body and
blood in the Eucharist] Repl. not Transubstantiation; which they deny: The But
Protestants do hold some kind of Real presence.

3. He says [ The Grecians defend the necessity of Baptism to salvation, and
that Original sin is remitted thereby] Repl. And the Protestants hold it
necessary necessitate praecepti, and as an ordinary means where it can be had:
And neither the Greeks nor all your own dare damn all Infants that dye before
Baptism, when it could not be had; but you say that the Votum may serve turn.
And also Protestants hold that if the Infants be within the Covenant, as it
pardons their Original sin primarily, so Baptism pardons it by way of
obsignation and solemn conveyance: But what is all this to your error that
Original sin is not only remitted, but quite extinct or done away out of our
natures by Baptism; so that the new baptized Infant, is perfectly without any
Radical sin, as well as without the Guilt of it?

4. He says [They say that works do justify with faith: You not] Repl. They
say that we are not justified by the Merit of Works, but by the alone Merit of
Christ; and so do we. We deny not in every sense that [we are Justified by
Works, and not by faith onely] for in James his sense we maintain it; else we
should deny the Scripture: The question is not therefore absolutely, whether we
are Justified by Works? but, In what sense we are, and in what not? We say that
Christ is the only Satisfier of Gods Justice and Meriter of Righteousness; and
that Faith is the only Receiving Condition; and that the Works of the Law that
Paul excludes have no hand in it; and that the Works of Grace which James
takes in, are but conditions without which our Justification (begun without
them) shall not be continued, and of our final Absolution or Justification in
Judgment; and so are but a Particular, and not an Universal or Legal
Righteousness. (Of which I have given a full account in my Confession.)

5. He says [They maintain Freewill, even in the best actions. You not] Repl.
Freewill is either 1. Natural; which is but its self-determining power, with
spontaneity; and this we deny not (For who denies man to be man, and to have
the Facultatem Volendi?) Or it is, 2. Moral, and that is 1. Political, when a
Governor gives the subject leave to do a thing; and so we maintain that God
gives our Wills Freedom to all good, and to no evil: Or 2. Ethical, which is
nothing but the right inclination and Habits of the will with the absence of
the contrary Habits: And so we say that, the better men are, the Freer, that
is, the better are their Wills: And the unconverted have not this Freewill: nor
the converted in perfection till they come to Glory: For the Freedom is the
Goodness. And seeing the Will so far Free Ethically as it is Good, Virtuous or
Holy, the Question then is, Whether every man's Will be Good and Holy? which I
am conceited you will not dare to affirm. A covetous man, a drunkard, ^^
ungodly man, is as much or more denominated such, from the habit as from the
act: he is most vicious that is Habitually so: To say therefore that such a
man's Will is Free in this Ethical sense is to say that he is habitually no
covetous man, no drunkard, no ungodly man no sinner: which being contrary to
unquestionable experience, me thinks should be easily deserted. If you know of
any thing else called Freewill besides these three before mentioned, we should
be glad to know it too. The natural Essential Freedom, viz. A spontaneous
self-determining power, we all confess: The Political Freedom, yea and
obligation none denies: The Ethical Freedom, that is, Virtuous or holy
Inclinations in wicked men, you will deny your selves; where then is the
difference between us and either the Greeks or you.

Why you will say, perhaps, that its here, That we deny the will to have that
Indifferency which you affirm, as to opposite objects. But we are loath to
sight with you in the Dark. Do you mean by Indifferency an Indifferency of
Natural Power, or an indifferency of inclination or Habit? The first we do not
deny: The will is a natural faculty that has naturally no determination to
One, where many means are propounded, but is undetermined, and has a natural
Power to determine it self to either: But yet you know the Wills Natural Power
is exercised according to inclining Objects and Habits: And you cannot expect
that men who are Habitually in^ined earthwards, should Will Heavenly things and
^^nounce earthly things, merely because they have a ^atural Power of choosing:
for they want that in^^ination, which is called commonly the Moral ^ower: And I
should suppose that in regard of this ^oral Power, you will not affirm your
selves that he ^ath indifferentiam ad oppositum? To say that a man's ^ill is
indifferently inclined to Good and to Evil, ^ to say that the man is habitually
neither good nor ^ad, unless as privation of due inclinations denomi^ate him
bad. I say the more of this, Dr. IT.
because I find others of your party, and ^ome that seem to disown both you
and us (as a late Treatise of Repentance among others can witness) ^o harp so
much on this string, and confusedly talk ^f Freewill before they tell us what
they mean, and ^o persuade the world that we teach that God has said such a
natural necessity on man to sin as he has ^o eat and drink and sleep, and that
God might as well damn men for being hungry or sleepy, as for being sinful in
our sense! As if there were no more faultiness in a vicious disposition of the
Will it self, then in a necessary natural inclination or Appetite of those
faculties which were never made to rule themselves, but to be moderated by the
Will of Reason. It may be these men will either deny the truth of the words of
the Holy Ghost, that They that are accustomed to do evil cannot learn to do
well no more then a Leopard can change his spots, or a Blackamore his skin; or
else they will think such men excusable because they are so strongly inclined
to evil; and so if a man habituated to Lust shall vitiate their wives, or a man
habituated to malice shall beat them often, or maim them, or kill their
friends, they may think that he deserves (...) punishment but pity, because he
is so bad that (...) could not (morally, that is, he would not) (...) it.

But they say, we teach that men's Wills have a ^^cessity of sinning imposed on
them. But we h^^^ learnt that Habites do not determine the Will nat^^^ally, nor
always infallibly, but leave it free to a ^^tural self-determination: But yet we
know that (...) ordinarily determines it self according to predominant habits.
And there must be somewhat extra^^dinary to procure the Will to determine it
self (...) good where it is habitually inclined to evil. So much may serve to
vindicate our Doctrine about Freewill* And as for the cause of its captivity,
it belongs no^ to this subject to speak of it, but to that of Original sin
(where the said Doctor so notably plays his part) to which we shall not now
digress.

The next instance of the Papist is this [ They (i^^ the Greeks maintain) seven
Sacraments, you not.] Repl. 1. This is another very immodest untruth: I wonder
that men dare venture their souls upon a Religion that must be thus upheld by
falsehoods. Your own Writers before alleged, witness that the Greeks deny the
very use of confirmation and extreme Unction: and how then can they account
them Sacraments! Nor do they take Marriage for a prop^^ Sacrament. 2. We cannot
dispute this point wi^^ you upon the bare name; Give us the definition of a
Sacrament, and we shall give you our Reply. As a Sacrament signifies any
Christian mystery, or mysterious Ordinance signifying some spiritual thing, we
doubt not but there are more then seven Sacraments, but not as it signifies,
an instituted sign, to seal the Covenant of Grace, and exhibit its great
^enefits. Calvin has yielded to you, that in a ^^rger sense Ordination is a
Sacrament.

He next adds [They say that Christ dyed for all ^ankind; You say not, but
only for the Elect.] Repl. ^till more confusion, do not your own Schoolmen and
other Divines say that he dyed, for All men suf^^ciently, and for the Elect
only effectually? And (...) do we! where then is the difference? Not so much
(...) this point as in another conjunct: You say that ^^s man's Free Will, that
is the chief differencing ^ause, in making Christ's death effectual for the
sal^ation of the Elect; and we deny it, and say that (...) is Gods special
Grace. 2. Do not you know that about this and the former point of Freewill, you
differ as much among your selves, and that we say ^o more then your Dominicans
do (no nor so much (...) the point of predetermination.) 3. Do you not ^now
that half the Protestants (those whom you ^all Lutherans) do hold universal
Redemption as well as you? Be it right or wrong therefore you should not impute
the contrary to all.

We say that it was the sins of all mankind and not only of the Elect that lay
upon Christ in his ^uffering: and that God as Legislator of the old vi^lated
Law has received a sufficient satisfaction for ^ll, and that hereupon a
conditional Pardon is grant^d to all by a Law of Grace, and that the condition
(...) but their Acceptance of what is freely offered (ac^ording to its nature
and use) and that all and only ^hey that perform this condition shall have
Actual pardon and salvation. But then we do not say, that Christ did equally
intend the procurement of the performance of this condition: but that he gives
some an inseparable special Grace which shall infallib^^ procure it, which he
does not to others, who y^ have so much as shall leave them in their own
consciences and at his bar without any just excuse. I pra^ you show us next
what the Greeks say more then th^^ In particular that Reverend man against whom
y^^ write has an excellent M.S. abroad for Univer^^ Redemption.

The next feigned difference between us and the Greek is this [They confess
that God has given sufficient Grace to every one to be saved: You (...) but
only to the Elect] Repl. You again wrong them show us where they say so if you
can. You own the Doctrine your selves it seems; and thereby discover your
enmity to Grace; Do you think that every child, ignorant sot, or wicked person
ha^ Grace sufficient to salvation? If he have sufficient, either he needs no
more, or he may be saved without more. And then it seems converting Grace i^
needless to an Infidel, for he has enough already: then it seems, you will be
beholden to God for no more Grace after the first hour of your conversion, nay
after the first hour of your life or use of reason, to your death. For if you
had sufficient for salvation the first hour, then what need you any more* you
will it seems pray God to keep it to himself, for you have enough already. I
will tell you what the Greeks and we, and some of your selves hold, th^^ is,
that every man has so much Grace (th^^ is, Help and Mercy contrary to Merit)
as is in ^ own kind sufficient to make him better then he is, and to bring him
nearer to Christ or salvation, and which his own will is obliged to make
effectual by ^ right entertainment and improvement, and might do: But we do not
say that all men have sufficient ^race to believe to justification, or
sufficient to sal^^tion; nay we say that no Believer has sufficient grace to
salvation, till the soul pass from the body: ^r still he has need of
preserving Grace to the last ^eath. Men that are at a great distance from
Christ ^ay have sufficient Grace to come near to him; ^d justly perish if they
refuse or abuse such Grace, ^ough they never had Grace sufficient to believe;
because it is their own fault that they had it ^ot.

The next pretended difference, is [They pray and ^er Sacrifice for the dead:
You not] Repl. I will see ^our proof of this too, before I will believe you. ^e
know they do it not in the Popish sense, that for delivering souls out of the
fire of Purgatory, because they deny such a state. If you will read this
^everend Bishop whom you oppose in his Answer to ^e Jesuits challenge, on that
point, you will see ^e difference between the Ancients (and so the ^reeks)
praying for the dead and yours.

He adds [They invocate Saints and Angels; you ^ot] Repl. Of this also see
Bishop Usher in the fore^ted place. We take this for their error: and we ^o not
take our selves to be of a different Church or ^eligion from every one that
erreth.

He next adds [They worship the Cross and Im^ges: you not] Repl. But they do
it not as many of ^ours, with Divine worship. Their worship is but ^everence
for the Relation sake; and they will not so ^uch as use any Statues or Graven
Images as you ^o. And do not those you call Lutherans, do as ^hey in this
(though how rightly I say not?)

He adds [They honor relics: you not] Rep. (...) honor them as far as they
have any true Relation (...) any honorable person. But we will not therefo^^
carry them about us to keep away the Devil, (...) forge a multitude of lies
about tbe cures which the miraculously perform: Nor do the Greeks so far (...)
I know or hear.

The next is [They maintain Traditions: you (...)] Repl. They renounce your
Traditions which are pretended to be part of Gods Word, supplying the ^^fects
of Scripture which is but the other half: (...) they maintain the sufficiency
of Scripture to salva^^on. And some Traditions both they and we maintai^ As the
Tradition of the Scriptures themselves do (...) to our hands; the Tradition of
the Sum of Chri^^^anity in the Creed and Baptism, etc. Of which (...) what I
have said elsewhere, in the Preface to the seco^^ part of the Saints Rest Edit.
2. etc. And in the d^termination in a book called, The unreasonableness (...)
Infidelity: And see what the Bishop, whom you oppose has said against the
Jesuit on Tradition.

The next is [They Au^icular confession: you not*] Rep. 1. The Christians that
deny your communion are divided in this: These called Nestorians and ^^ny more
deny Auricular Confession: and others (...) it. 2. We deny not our selves, but
that it is the duty (...) Christians when sin lies on their consciences, (...)
when they have fallen into it, and know not the wa^ out again to have recourse to
their faithful judicio^^ Guides for advice herein for the safety of their sou^^
and so far to confess as is necessary to such advice a^^ safety. But we do not
believe that we are bound to tell the Priest of every sin, no nor of every
^^^^ous sin: for in some cases we may have a fitter cure* will not go to a
Pyhsician for every prick of a pin, ^ cut finger, which many neighbors or my
self can ^re as well as he: I will not so far needlessly trouble ^m: Nor will I
go to a bad unfaithful Physician, ^hen I can have a better; nor yet to an
ignorant ^an, because he has got the degree of a Doctor of ^hysicke, when I
may go to an able man that pro^sseth not Physic. You know the Applicati^n.

Its next said [They Euangelical councels and works ^ supererrogation: You not]
Rep. We acknowledge that there are many very good works. 1. Which ^re the duty
of some few Christians upon some speci^l occasions, and not of all or most. 2.
Which are so ^he duty of those few, as that yet many of them are ^aved that
perform them not; being not made of the ^ame necessity to salvation as some
other duties are. And we see not how any man can reasonably imagine, that there
is any work more excellent than others, which yet is not a duty; when God has
commanded us to love him with all our heart, and might, and ^trength; and to
employ all talents to the utmost for his Glory: and that any Duty can be
neglected without sin, is as absurd. How the Greeks and we differ in this, we
shall better know when you show and prove it to us

He next adds [They the Merit of good Works: you not] We acknowledge, that Good
Works are pleasing to God through Christ, and rewardable; and they say in sense
no more: We think not meet to quarrel about the mere name. They renounce and
abhor the Popish Merit of condignity ex proportione operis; as is before said.

In the next place the confuter alleges his proofs of all these differences
from us, and consent with them. The first proof is out of Act. Theolog.
Witte^berg. in Crispin. de statu Eccles. in these words [ The Greek and Roman
Church are divided only in the contoversie of Primacy, and variety of
Ceremony] Rep^. I have not Crispinius now by me, and therefore (...) make no
other answer but this, that if he be truel^ alleged, yet 1. Abundance of great
differences ((...) about Sacraments, Orders, Traditions, etc.) may be comprised
in that of Ceremony. 2. Else your own Writers will tell you that this is a
mistake.

His second proof is from Sir Edwin Sands Europ^ Specul. To which I say 1. How
unworthily did you conceal the multitude of differences mentioned in the same
Author in the same place between you and the Greeks, and say there was but one?
2. By Purgatory Sands tells you after he means not your Purgatory: And its
known the Greeks deny it: Though they think that the Saints have some less
degree of glory distant from the face of God before the resurrection. 3. About
Transubstantiation and the M^ss Sands is mistaken. The Greeks hold a kind of
Real presence, but not Transubstantiation: And the Mass of the Papists does
abundantly differ from theirs (as in the denial of Transubstantiation,
elevation, etc. may appear, and is at large by many of ours e^pressed, which
may save me the labor of a recital.)

Next the ignorant Priest would by a Syllogism prove the Bishop a Papist, and
in the making of his Syllogism he is out before he could reach the conclusion,
and begins again, and yet would not blot out his former error, so wary is he
that he lose not a line of his own writing. The mended Syllogism is his [
Those who embrace the Communion of the Greci^n Church notwitstanding the error
of supremacy, cannot in reason refuse the Communion of the Roman ^or the same:
But Mr. Ushers Church embraces the Communion of the Greek Church
notwithstanding that Error: Therefore, etc.] Repl. 1. To the Major it is ^alsly
supposed that we refuse your Communion for that Error alone: It is for that
with abundance more. 2. To the Minor, I answer by denying it: and say you
shamelesly slander the Greek Church: They main^ain not any Power of Governing
the whole Church as the head of it, and Christ's Vicar general, nor any
infallibility, etc. as you do.

Next he will prove that Mr. Vshers Church can have no Union or Communion with
the Greek Church at all: and that by this Syllogism [ That Church which is a
member of another Church, that other Church must also be a member of it: But
the Greek Church is no member of Mr. Ushers Church: therefore Mr. Ushers is no
member of the Greek Church.] The Minor he proves from Jeremias Patriarch of
Constantinople and Respons. Basil. Ducis Moscov. Rep. 1. The part is not a part
of another part, a member is not a member of another coordinate member; but of
the whole. 2. I say the proofs of your Minor are vain. It is not two men's
sayings that ^an make the Greek Church and the Protestants so dis-joyned as not
to be members of the Universal Church. If Italy tell France, and France again
tell Italy that they are no part of Europe, it is not therefore true. If
Canterbury tell York that they are not a part of England, it is not therefore
true. Every child is not a Bastard that is so called by an angry brother. If
Patriarch Jeremiah fit yo^^ turn (which I know not, for I have not seen him)
why may not we as well plead the consent of Pat^iarch Cyrill, whose Protestant
confession you may see in Alstedius's Euclucopaedia, and elsewhere?

Next he comes to the Abassines, where (after the mention of their
circumcision) he as falsely affirms, that [In all other things they profess
the faith of the Catholic Church acknowledging the Pope the supreme head
thereof, and Christ's Vicar upon earth] which he proves by a confession
exhibited to Gregory the 13. and recorded by Possevine. Rep. This is to make
the foundation like the superstructure, and defend falsehood with falsehood: If
you were so ignorant your selves as not to know the Roman juggling about that
confession, you could not imagine the learned Bishop so ignorant. Not only
your own Godigam de rebus Abassinorum, may tell you, but the generality, of
your faction may sure inform you by this time, that all your cunning industry
cannot get the Abassines under your Papal Yoke. And if you should prevail for
the time to come, that's nothing to the time past. The Abassines (to let pass
their errors wherein they differ from you and us) do communicate in both kinds,
they believe the souls of Infants departing unbaptized to be saved because they
spring from faithful parents: They reject Statues ^^ massy Images: They elevate
not the Sacrament, nor reserve it after Communion: Their Priests, labor, but
beg not: The Emperor conferreth Bishoprics and Benefices: They use no
confirmation nor extreme unction: They admit a first marriage in Bishops and
Priests: They eat flesh on Fridays. And yet this man says they differ not from
them.

The second Chapter is the mere ebullition of foolish malice, deserving no
reply to those that do not desire to be deceived. He would prove that according
to these laxe principles of our charity, we may agree with Jews, Turks,
Mahometans! As if we needed a dispute to prove that these are no Christians,
and that the Greeks, Abassines, etc. are: But such disputes do the Papists put
us upon.

The Bishop had concluded in his Sermon, that [ If we should survey the several
professions of Christianity that have any large spread in any part of the
world, and put by the points wherein they differ one from another, and gather
into one body the rest of the Articles wherein all generally agree, we should
find so much truth in them, as being joined with holy obedience may be
sufficient to bring a man to everlasting salvation; neither have we cause to
doubt but as many as do walk according to this rule, neither overthrowing that
which they have builded by superinducing any damnable heresies thereupon, nor
otherwise vitiating their holy faith, with a lewd and wicked conversation,
Peace shall be upon them and Mercy and upon the Israel of God.]

And what has the Confuter to say against this? Why first he begins with the
Sacraments, to try whether those commonly agreed on may save. And here he first
tells us, that [Some Churches are for seven, some for three, and some for two,
^^d no more: therefore here is no agreement] Rep. 1. Le^ the nominal
differences about the word Sacrament be first laid by (unless you think that
word necessary to salvation) and then we shall the better see what real
difference remains. 2. The two Sacraments then are confessed by all, and the
use of the rest which you call Sacraments: This much (in its own place) then
may save, where no more is confessed. 3. You vainly put in the exclusion of
more, for that's none of the things that all agree on: All agree that there are
two Sacraments: and those may save. But all agree not that there is but two.
This man therefore seems to dote; when he should gather up the common
agreements according to the Bishops proposal, he gathers up the disagreements,
or vainly pretends that we agree in nothing. What, do not you confess that
Baptism and the Lords Supper are Sacraments? and do not we do so too?

Next he comes to the use of Baptism, and says that [ The Romans and Greeks,
say, that there is no other use of baptism but to wash away sin: The
Protestants of England and Geneva say, that it is no laver of Regeneration at
all, but only a seal of Gods promise made to the party baptized: and that the
child unbaptized may be saved and the baptized damned.] Repl. 1. You make your
selves (much more the Greeks) worse then you are. Do not your own maintain that
Baptism admits into the Church and grants many other privileges, besides
washing away sin. 2. We say, that to the children of promise it does
secondarily and by obsignation wash away (or pardon) sin by way of obsignation
and solemn exhibition, as the promise does primarily as a deed of gift or
legal Grant: as also that in the same way it secondarily conveyeth further
Grace according to the capacity of the subject, and admits into the Church.
And all this is commonly confessed by your selves and all Christians of the Greek
or Abassine Churches, etc. This much alone without your additions is as much
(at least) as is necessary to salvation, to be believed concerning baptism.

Next he comes to the Lords Supper, and says, that one party holds the real
presence and the other not? And what of this? Does that prove the insufficiency
of what all are agreed on? what we hold, you deny not: We hold the signifying,
and sealing and exhibiting use of the Sacrament (though we deny
Transubstantiation) And dare you deny these? We hold that it is the
commemoration of the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood offered once on the
Cross for the sins of the world: and that it is a means of Church Communion:
And dare you deny these? Lay by your Additions, and that which we are all
agreed in is enough to salvation.

His next instance is about Faith; Because we say, that Historical faith may be
in Devils, and Miraculous faith in the wicked, and Calvin defines justifying
faith to be a firm and certain knowledge of the love of God to us, etc. and
the Lutherans, that it is an undoubted persuasion of the pardon of our sins and
adoption, etc. and this faith is by the Council of Trent condemned to the pit
of hell, therefore he concludes that there is no saving faith common to
Papists and Protestants.

Repl. Here again you vainly and fallaciously bring in the disagreements, and
over pass the agreements. 1. We are agreed that all those which the Protestants
call the Canonical books of Scripture are the word of God: and true, and
particularly all the Articles of the Creed, and many things more: We are agreed
that Christ and life is offered by the Universal promise in the Gospel to all
that hear it: and that all must first believe the truth of this promise and
then heartily consent to the offer and accept the benefit, and also believe and
fear the threatening, and join sincere love and obedience to all this. This we
are all agreed in: And this is certainly saving to all that sincerely believe
and do as they thus profess. But then, whether Historical faith be common or
not? whether assurance or strong persuasion of pardon, be faith, or justifying
faith, with other the like, these we are not agreed in; and without these we
may be saved.

The next exception is only this, The Bishop tells us not what be those
Heresies that destroy this common faith. Rep. And does that cross his former
charitable conclusion? What? because he undertakes not an alien task? Why in
general, they are any thing that is so held as that the common Articles of
faith cannot be held with it, and that practically.

The sum of the next passage, is this [ That its absurd for us to call them the
true Church, or say they may be saved, when we have charged them with so much
error and idolatry, etc] Repl. 1. We only say that you are a polluted part of
the Church. 2. If your salvation be made so difficult by your errors look you
to that: The Bishops conclusion (of the sufficiency of the communiter credita)
is nevertheless sound, though you destroy your selves by your corrupt
additions. 3. Multitudes among you believe not your Infallibility,
Transubstantiation, and many the like errors. 4. Many that behold them as
opinions speculatively, may yet hold the contrary truths practically, not
discerning the contradiction.

I would gladly have showed the vainty of the rest of that Pamphlet, because I
see he has contracted most of their common cavils into a narrow room; but the
rest is less to our present purpose, and the same things are already answered
by many; and therefore I shall no further Digress in the pursuit of this
Confuter, having already said so much against the chief of their objections, as
may leave the impartial Reader confirmed in it, That notwithstanding the Popish
cavils to the contrary, it is apparent, that the Christian Catholic Reformed
Religion commonly called Protestant is a safe way to Salvation.

Query. Whether Popery be a safe way to Salvation? Neg.
IT is not as other men's Judges that we determine this Question; to their own
master do they stand or fall: but it is to render an account of our own Belief
and practice, and for our further confirmation in the truth for the defense of
it against gainsayers, and for the establishing of our people against the
sophistry and seduction of Deceivers.

For the explication of the terms, I shall tell you 1. What I mean by Popery.
2. What I mean by Salvation. 3. What by the way to it. 4. What by the word Safe.

1. Popery is a certain farrago, a mixture of many grievous errors in the
doctrine of Faith, Government and Worship, expressed in their Authorized
writings, especially in their decretals and Councils, corrupting the Christian
Religion which they profess; the whole being denominated from that one
falsehood, that the Pope of Rome is, the Universal Bishop, and Visible Head of
the Universal Church and Christ's Vicar General on earth, and that only is the
Catholic Church, and those only Catholics that so believe.

Where note 1. That the Papists professing to be Christians, do first own the
substance of Christian doctrine, and then corrupt it, and contradict it by this
fardle of their own inventions superadded. They profess to believe the holy
Scriptures to be the word of God, and to be true: every Book that we believe
(and more) They profess to believe all the Articles of the ancient Creeds
commonly called the Apostles, the Nicene, or Constantinopolitane. It is not the
Christianity or true doctrine which they profess, which we call Popery. 2. It
is therefore only their own invented corruptions, by which they contradict the
Christian verity which they profess, which we call Popery. 3. Note, That the
common denominating corruption, is the forementioned doctrine of the Popes
Universal Episcopacy and Headship, or a supreamacy at least, if not
Infallibility: and that the Catholic Church, and the Roman Church is all one:
and the Pope is the visible center of its Unity. 4. Note also that as to the
rest of their corruptions, they agree not among themselves what is to be
esteemed of their faith or Religion, and what not: and therefore it cannot be
expected that we should give you an exact enumeration of the points of their
faith, and so a complete description of Popery, which is such a
self-contradicting unreconcileable hodg podge. But their errors may be
distributed into these three ranks. 1 Those that are established by the Pope
and his (supposed) general Council: These they all receive and own. 2. Those
that are established by the Popes Decretals without a Council. These some own
as points of their faith, and some reject them. I will not add as the third*
those that are established by a Council without the Pope; not because there
never was a Council that dissented from him in Good, but because it is a
difficult matter at least to find any Council that did go beyond or without him
in Evil, or erred without his Approbation. 3. The third sort therefore shall be
those opinions that are commonly maintained by their most Approved Writers
which are published in books that are licensed and commended by the Popes
Authorized agents, but are not determined by the Pope or his Council. These
though they contend for, and lay great weight on them in their disputations,
yet dare they not own them as any part of the matter of their faith, lest they
seem to be what they are; divided and mutable* A man would think that those
volumnious hot disputes about Divine things, did intimate that the Authors did
fide divine believe those points which they do so zealously dispute of. But if
it be their pleasure, that we should so distinguish, we will call the rest the
Popish faith or Religion, and these last, the Popish opinions, because we would
fasten on them nothing but their own.

If you ask me, which be those doctrines which they take for points of faith,
which we call Popery; I must refer you to their Decretals and Councils on one
side, and Gods word on the other; and all the Doctrines in those their Canons
or determinations that are against the word of God, are the doctrines which we
mean by this name. If they do lay greater stress upon any one point than
others, its likely to be on those that are put into their Creeds and Vows, and
therefore I shall only recite the latter half of their Tridentine Creed,
seeing they will own that or nothing: When they have begun with the ancient
Constantinopolitane Creed, containing the true Principles of Christian
Religion, and have ended that they proceed thus as follows.

The Apostolical and Ecclesiastical traditions, and the rest of the
Observations and constitutions of the same Church, I do most firmly admit and
embrace. I admit also the sacred Scripture according to that sense which the
Holy Mother the Church has held and does hold, to whom it belongs to judge
of the true sense and interpretation of the Holy Scriptures: and I will never
take and interpret it, but according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers. I
do profess also that there are seven truly and properly Sacraments of the new
Law instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord, and necessary to the salvation of
mankind, though not all to every one; to wit, Baptism, Confirmation, the
Eucharist, Penance, extreme Vncti^n, Order, and Matrimony: and that they
confer ^race; and that of these, Baptism, Confirmation, and Order, cannot be
reiterated without Sacrilege. I do also receive and admit the received and
approved Rites of the Catholic Church in the solemn Administration of all the
aforesaid Sacraments. I do embrace and receive all and singular things which in
the Holy Council of Trent were defined and declared about Original sin and
Justification. In like manner I do profess that in the Mass there is offered to
God a true p^per, and propitiatory sacrifice for the living, and f^ the dead;
and that in the most holy Srcrament of ^ Eucharist there is Truly, Really, and
Substanti^^y the body and blood, together with the soul and Di^^nity of our
Lord Jesus Christ; and that there (...) change made of the whole substance of
Bread ^ the Body, and of the whole substance of Wine (...) blood; which change
the Catholic Church c^l^ Trasubstantiation. I confess also that under one
(...) only, whole and entire Christ, and the true Sa^^ment is taken. I do
constantly hold that there is a P^rgatory, and that the souls there detained
are h^lp^^ by the suffrages of the faithful. As also that the Sai^^ reigning
with Christ, are to be reverenced and called upon, and that they do offer
prayers to God for m^ and their relics are to be reverenced (or honored) I
do most firmly assert that the Images of Christ, and of the Mother of God-ever
a Virgin, as also of other Sai^^ are to be had and kept, and that due honor and
V^^ration is to be given them. I affirm also that the power of Indulgences is
left by Christ in the Church, a^ that the use of them is most wholesome to
Christian people. I acknowledge that the holy Catholic and Ap^stolike Church
of Rome, is the Mother and Mistress ^ all Churches: And I do promise and swear
true Obedience to the Pope of Rome successor of Blessed Peter Prince of the
Apostles, and the Vicar of Jesus Christ Also all other things delivered,
defined and declare^ by the sacred Canons, and Ecumenical Councils, a^
especially of the holy Synod of Trent, I do with^^ doubting receive and
profess: and also all things c^^trary, and all heresies whatsoever condemned by
the Church, and rejected; and Anathematized, do I i^ like manner condemn,
reject and Anathematize. This ^rue Catholic faith, without which no man can be
sa^ed, which at the present I do voluntarily profess, and truly hold, the
same will I take care to hold and ^onfess entire and inviolate, by Gods help,
most con^antly, even to the last breath of my life; and as much ^s in me lies,
to be held, taught and preached, by those that are under me, or those whose
care belongs to ^e in my office. This I.N. do Promise, Vow, and ^wear, so help
me God, and these holy Gospels of God.

So far the Trent Confession, which I the rather recite that you may see what
their Religion is ^ their own words and oaths; where you see also ^^at this is
but a small part of it; for it is moreover ^ large, as all the Council of
Trent, and all other ^ecumenical Councils and holy Canons; of the
Im^ossibilities and self-contradictions of which faith, we shall say more anon.

So that I conclude that it is not Christianity, but ^is additional Leprosy
which we call by the name of ^opery: they believe this much more then we (or a
^reat part more) and by believing more, they believe ^ss, while they destroy
the sound faith which they before seemed to profess.

2 For the next term to be explained [Salvation] ^e mean by it principally,
Everlasting Glory; and ^ithall those beginnings of it inclusively which we ^ve
in this life, consisting in our Justification, A^option, Sanctification,
Consolation, and Perse^erance.

3. By the term [Way] we mean, such necessary ^eans as are prescribed us by God
for the attainment ^ Salvation, either as to our Belief, or our Affection and
Practice according to the directions of the doctrine which we do believe.

4. As to the sense of the word [Safe] it signifies that which is free from
danger, or which tends to a man's welfare. Now here is a double safety
considerable in Doctrines answerable to a double danger. First, its one thing
to be safe from any sin in the way to Salvation; and so we may well say that
Popery is no safe way which leads to so much sin: But that's not all that is
here intended: But its another matter to be so deep in sin, as not to be safe
from the Everlasting Punishment, but that salvation it self is endangered
thereby: and this we principally intend. And whereas there are several Degrees
of Danger, we mean that true Popery heartily entertained and practiced, does
leave but small probability, if any possibility, of the Salvation of any that
do persevere impenitently therein to the end.

Though you may see what I deny in what is already said, yet for the greater
perspicuity, I shall express my sense in these few Propositions following.

Prop. 1. That Christian doctrine contained in the holy Scriptures which the
Papists do profess to believe, is of it self without their corruptions, a safe
way to salvation.

Prop. 2. Whatever errors are held by Papists or any others, which do consist
with a true practic^ belief of the foresaid Christian doctrine which they
confess, and we are agreed in, those errors sh^^^ not exclude the erroneous
from Salvation.

Prop. 3. The Papists do not expressly in terms and sense deny any fundamental
point of faith.

Prop. 4. Its possible even practically to hold an error, which by remote
consequence contradicts a fundamental Truth, and yet to hold that truth
practically, and so to be saved. For either all moral ^errots in Theology (as
Amesius thought) do contradict the Foundation by consequence, by reason of the
necessary concatenation of Truths; or most at least.

Prop. 5. There are some errors so great that if they were cordially and
practically held, would be inconsistent with the cordial practical holding of
the Foundation; which yet may be held but speculatively and notionally in
consistency with the cordial and practical belief of the fundamentals; and the
person not knowing the contradiction may be saved.

Prop. 6. Multitudes of people while they take common terms in Divinity in a
wrong sense, do maintain Propositions which by plain consequence, if not
directly contradict the Fundamentals according to the proper genuine sense of
the words; when yet in the sense as they mistake and misuse them in, there is
no contradiction. Even as many on the other side, do hold the Christian verity
in words, who in sense deny it.

Prop. 7. We have great reason to think that many millions of the Laity among
the Papists, if not the far greatest part of them, do not cordially embrace the
most of the Popish corruptions in doctrinals, nor the most dangerous of them.

1. Because they do not understand them, and so cannot so much as speculatively
receive them. It is not one of a hundred, perhaps of many hundreds among them,
that knows all contained in the Council of Trent alone, much less in all the
rest of the Council, and Canons and customs wherein they place their Religion.
Nay perhaps its but few of their Clergy that know this comparatively. So that
it is but an implicit general belief that they can give to such Canons as are
unknown, which is not a belief of the particular doctrines contained in them,
as such.

2. Because (I hope among most or many of them) they are first taught the
Creed, the Lords Prayer, and ten Commandments (or at least the Creed, and
Decalogue, though the Lords Prayer be usually taught them in Latin) which
contain the Fundamentals of Christian faith and practice: and therefore we have
reason to hope that these are deeper in their minds then any contradictory
doctrines: especially when they must have so much time afterward, to build upon
this foundation their hay and stubbles, that we have great reason to hope that
it is but few that thoroughly understand or entertain them.

3. Because we know that the generality of the people, or a very great part of
them, do look upon their Clergy as having a carnal self-interest to carry on,
and so far have hard and different thoughts of them; though they are yet
captivated by them too much.

4. Because we see that the Pope is feign to keep them in subjection by the
most cruel force of secular power: by the bloody inquisition, tormenting and
burning them, or rasing wars against them to ruin them; or else by worldly
honors, dignities, and riches to entice and ensnare them; which were needless
if he could carry it by the cogent evidence of his doctrines or their
understandings.

5. Because we see by experience, that even here with us among their few most
zealous and voluntary Proselites, it is but very few that call themselves
Roman Catholics, or Papists, that indeed know what Popery is: Nay most of
them, if you do but name some points of the Popish faith, will tell you that
you slander them; and they hold no such thing. I have talked with many of the
Laity, and find very few that will own the doctrine of man's Merits, but profess
to rest on the Merits of Christ only: The like I could say of other points: By
which it is plain that the Priests do hide from the Laity so much of the venom
of their doctrine as they think will prove distastful to them, and dare not let
them know the worst.

Prop. 8. These persons before described, together with that part of the
Clergy, who cast off much of the Roman corruptions, and yet adhere to their
party, are not full and complete Papists, but only Papists secundum quid,
incomplete, and of a lower sort, and so are not in so great danger of damnation
as the rest: even as the Scab is not so bad as the Morphew, nor the Morphew so
mortal as the Elephantiasis, or the full Leprosy; though all are of kindred
one to another.

9. Pro. Yet these better sort of Papists are commonly tainted with so much of
their corruptions as makes their salvation much more difficult; so that we may
well judge that it is fewer by far that are saved among them, then in the
Reformed Churches. Even as it is possible for men to escape catching the Plague
that live among the infected, and its possible for the infected to escape with
their lives, but where one scapes many dye, and its I think more dangerous to
live in an infected house or air then in a sound one.

Prop. 10, A man that cordially and practically receives the whole body of
Popery, and so is a co^pleat Papist, is in so great danger of eternal
damnation, as that it is a very hard question whether it be possible for him at
the same time to hold cordially the fundamentals of Christianity, and so to be
in a state of Salvation? Which because it is so hard a question that Protestant
Divines are of different opinions about it, some thinking it possible for such
to be saved, and some impossible, I will not presume here to determine it,
seeing the matter in hand does not call for the determination of it.

Prop. 11. Whosoever is saved among the Papists; whether he be more or less
tainted with theirs errors, it is not By Popery that he is saved, but from
Popery, or against it by the Christian faith. So that if a Papist may be saved,
it must be as a Christian, and not as a Papist: Popery and Christianity having
some contrariety; so that it must be by the prevalency and predominency of the
Christian faith against Popery if ever he be saved. If a liar might be saved it
must not be by lying, but by faith in Christ and repentance. If a Leper, or one
that has the Plague, or the like diseases, may live, it must not be by the
Leprosy or Plague that they must live; but by natural vigor and the help of
Medicine by which they are preserved from the killing power of these diseases,

And here you may take notice, what a fond and vain delusion it is, by which
the Priests do persuade the poor people that their Religion is a safer way to
heaven then ours, even because that we confess a Papist may be saved, but they
affirm that a Protestant cannot be saved. For 1. Some Protestants think they
may be saved, and some deny it. 2. Those that think they may be saved do
withal think that it is not by Popery, but against it and from it. 3. And they
think that its very hard, and therefore that they are very few that are saved
among them, in comparison of the number saved among us. And is not this a fair
and comfortable encouragement to their poor seduced followers, that some among
us confess that as its possible for here and there one to escape of a raging
Pestilence, so may some Papists be saved. 4. Their condemning of all
Protestants does make themselves worse, but it makes us never the worse, nor
our case ever the more dangerous. Christ has told us that all men shall know
us to be his disciples, by Loving one another, and has bid us, judge not that
we be not judged, for with what judgment we judge, we shall be judged: and
Paul tells us, that charity thinks not evil, but hops all things: Is it
then a good and Christian arguing to say that they are safer then we, because
they are more c^nsorious, and rash condemners of others? Then he that has
least Charity is of the safest Religion. Suppose that a company shut up in a
Pesthouse, being raging mad with the Plague, or otherwise distempered in their
brain, should cry out, that all the Town are sick and will certainly dye,
except themselves. Were it wise reasoning now to say [You confess that some of
those that are sick in the Pesthouse may escape; but they say that none of you
that are out can escape, therefore it is safer to be with them then with you.]
Even such is the reasoning of the Popish Priests in the present case. It is the
disease of Popery that of its own nature causes them to condemn all the world
except themselves: And it is because we are free from their disease, that makes
us not so rash and hasty in condemning them: But yet as charitable as we are to
them, we are so charitable withal to our selves, that we would not be in their
case, for all the world.

Prop. 12. We may well conclude therefore that whether a Papist may be saved or
not, that certainly Popery is no safe way to Salvation.

If a cup of Poison be tempered for the killing of men, and one drinks it all,
and dies, another drinks almost all, and dies, another drinks less, and yet
using no remedy dies, another drinks but a little, or taking more, yet uses
some effectual Remedy, and so with much ado scapeth death. I think,
notwithstanding the scaping of these last, we may well conclude that [Poison is
no safe or wholesome food.]

I come now to prove the Proposition last expressed.

In general 1. Popery is No way to salvation; Therefore it is no safe way. God
has no where prescribed it as a way to salvation; therefore it is not a way to
salvation.

2. It is the way toward damnation, and from salvation; therefore it is no safe
way to salvation.

The proof of all together shall be next fetched from some general reasons drawn
from the dangerous nature of Popery; For if I should descend to every
particular error I must be voluminous, and do that which is sufficiently done
by multitudes already.

Arg. 1. Those doctrines which are founded upon a Notorious falsehood, and
resolved into it, are not a safe way to Salvation. But such are the doctrines
which we call Popery: Therefore.

For the Minor, They are founded on and resolved into the doctrine of the Popes
Infallibility, or at least his Councils: This the Papists do confess and
maintain. But that this is a Notorious falsehood, is evident.

1. In that it is notorious that Popes have erred, and judicially erred, and
erred in matters of faith. Bellarmine is put to answer to no less then forty
instances of erring Popes; and how shamefully or shamelesly he does it, any
Learned man that will search the records and peruse the case, may soon discover.

2 It is notorious that Councils have erred. I shall not now intermix my
Testimonies to interrupt the plain course which I have begun, but rather give
you the proof of all this distinctly by it self in the next disputation.

3. The Papists themselves confess this that we affirm. I mean, One part of
them do confess that the Pope may err (as the French) and the other (the
Italians and Spaniards) confess that a Council may err. One says the
Infallibility is not seated in the Pope; and the other that it is not sealed in
a Council, particular or general, of which see Bellarmine de Conciliis lib. 2.
cap. 10. and 11. In which last he seeks to prove that a General Council may
err. 1. When they dissent from the Popes Legates. 2. And when they consent
with the L^gates, if those Legates do cross the Popes instructions. 3. Yea if
the Legates have no certain Instructions, the Council and all they, may consent
in error: And he proves the two former by the instance of the second Council of
Ephesus, and the Constantinopolitane Council in the time of Pope Nicholas the
first, which erred, says he, because the Popes Legates followed not his
instructions. The third he proves by the Council of Basil Sess. 2. which
together with the Popes Legate did by common consent Decree, that the Council
is above the Pope, which now (says Bell^rmine) is judged erroneous.

4. Some Popes themselves have confessed that they are not the seat or chief
subject of the infallibility: As Adrian the sixth who has wrote his judgment
of it, that the Pope may err out of Council. And in my opinion we shall do the
Pope much wrong if we shall not believe him when he speaks the truth, and tells
us that he is fallible. Did Bellarmine better know Pope Adrians understanding,
then the Pope knew his own? Surely I must do as I would be done by: and if any
man should persuade me that I know that which I do not know, or that I am
infallible, when I know my self subject to error. I should confidently expect
that all men would rather believe me of my self then believe another of me that
speaks the contrary: And so will I believe Pope Adrian that he was fallible.

But of this more in the next disputation; where you shall have fuller proof.

Arg. 2. If Popery do build even the Christian Religion it self (as held by
them) on a foundation that is utterly uncertain, or else certainly false, then
is it no safe way to salvation: For it would extirpate Christianity it self.
But the Antecedent is true, as I shall thus prove.

1. They are divided and disagreed among themselves even their greatest Learned
Doctors about the very foundation of their faith, as I shall further show in
the next argument: They believe upon the infallible judgment of the Church,
and they are not agreed what that Church is.

2. They build the assurance of their faith upon such a ground as none of the
common people, no nor any Doctors in the world, can have the knowledge of:
therefore their faith must needs be uncertain. To manifest this I shall review
one leaf that I wrote heretofore on this subject in the Preface to the second
Part of the Saints Rest.

It is the Authority of the Church they say, upon which we must believe that
the Scriptures are the word of God, and were it not for the Churches
authoritative affirmation, they would not believe it (says one of them, no
more than Aesops Fables) Now suppose they were agreed what this Church is, and
that we now take notice of their more common opinion, that it is, all the
Bishops of the Church headed by the Pope, or a General Council approved of and
confirmed by the Pope, I would fain know how the faith of any of us that live
at a distance, yea or of any man living, can be sure and sound, when all these
following particulars must be first known, before we can have such assurance.
1. It must be known that God has given to the Church this power of judging
what is his word, and what is a point of faith, and what not: so that that is
so to us, which they judge so; or that we are bound by God to believe them. Now
which way does God give the Church this Power? Is it not by Scripture, or
unwritten tradition in their own judgment? And by what means does he oblige us
to Believe the Church in such determinations? It must be also by Scripture or
unwritten Tradition by their own confession: For if they fly to universal
Tradition, and natural obligation, they give up their cause, and let go their
Authoritative Tradition and Obligation, as from their Roman^ Church. So that a
man must (according to their doctrine) believe that the word of God (written or
unwritten) has given Power to the Church to determine what is the word of God
before he can believe the word of God, or know it to be the word of God: that
is, He must know and believe the word of God before he can know and believe it.
Here is one of the impossib^lities that lie at the very foundation of the
Roman way of faith.

2. Before men can know the Scripture to be Gods word, yea or their supposed
unwritten verities, infallibly, according to the Roman way of believing, they
must first know that the Church is infallible in her judgment, and this also
must be known by the word of God, which is supposed not to be known yet it self.

3. They must also know, that it is the Church of Rome in particular that is
the true Church and has this power given from God.

4. To this end they must know that all those perverted Texts (or some of them)
that speak of Peter's own person, were also spoke of certain successors of his,
as well as of himself (as that on them the Church shall be built, and their
faith shall not ^ail, etc.)

5. They must know that the Pope is this successor of Peter.

6. To this end, they must not only know that Peter was at Rome (of which read
well Vlricus Velenus in Goldastus) and was Bishop there, but they must know
that he was the only Bishop there, or at least the chief, and that Paul was no
Bishop there (who is more likely to have been) or else that he was the
inferior, and that the Pope is Peter's successor and not Paul's; or else
succeeds them both, and has his infallibility but from one, unless the
successors of the rest of the Apostles are infallible too.

7. If Peter and Paul were Bishops at once of one Church in Rome, then it must
be known why they may not have two successors at once; and if there be two,
which of them is to be believed when they disagree. But if Peter and Paul were
Bishops of two particular Churches in Rome, the one of the Circumcision, the
other of the uncircumsion, then it must be known by what right their successors
made them one? or whether it were not by a failing or cessation of the Church
of the Circumcision, when all Jews were banished from Rome, and so the Church
of the uncircumcision only continuing, the Pope be not only Paul's successor.

8. And it must be known whether Peter were not Bishop of other Churches as
well as of Rome (yea of Antioch before Rome) and so whether the Bishop of
Antioch be not his successor as well as the Pope of Rome, yea and the chief
successor if it follow the right of primogeniture, either as to the Church o^
the Bishop; seeing Antioch was a Church before Rome, and Peter was supposed to
be Bishop there before he was of Rome. And then if the Bishop of Rome and
Antioch differ (as they do) how, shall we know whom to believe, and how shall
we know that the Bishop of Antioch is not infallible as well as the Pope of
Rome?

9. It must be known what it is that makes a Pope, what is necessary to his
being Peter's successor. I^ it enough that he step up into the chair and call
himself Pope? Or that his party call him so? Then if any Heathen or Arrian
conqueror, though a Lay man did so, he should be Pope. And he that conquers
Rome may make himself Saint Peter's infallible successor at any time. But if
there must be an ordination and Election, then it must be known whether every
Ecclesiastical Ordination or Consecration, and Election will serve or not. If
it will, then when there have been three Popes chosen and consecrated at once,
they were all Saint Peter's infallible successors, though one condemned the
other: If not, then it must be known, who it is that has the power of election
(which being the act that determines of the person, is the maine that must
resolve our doubts) and also of consecration or ordination. And ho^ shall the
people know this, when the Clergy have been so disagreed among themselves.

10. And here it must be known whether the Cardinals have the sole power to
elect? If they have, then how came they by it? And then, whether were all those
that were elected by the people in the first ages, and by the Emperors in after
ages, true Pope^, or not: If they were not, then Saint Peter has no
successors, because of the interruption of the succession so long; and the
Church had then no visible head. If they were, then the sufficient power is not
only in the Cardinals. And if it be not only in them, then whether are any of
those true Popes that have been chosen only by them of late ages?

11. And so it must be known how a possibility of uninterrupted succession can
be proved, when Popes have been chosen three several ways, sometime by the
people (or else there had not been so many slain at the election of Damasus,
nor had the ancient Canons made this necessary to all Bishops) and sometime by
the Presbyters of that Church, and sometime by the Emperors; and now by titular
Presbyters, who are Bishops of other Churches, and are incapable of being true
Presbyters of the Church of Rome. If all these several ways of Election may
make true Popes, then it seems any way may serve, and then the three Popes at
once will be all true: If not, then there has been an interruption of the
succession, and so according to their own Principles, there can be now no true
Pope.

12. And here it must needs be known too, whether there be any thing in the
person that is a qualification so materially necessary, that he can be no true
Pope without it. If not, then a Pagan or a Mohammedan may be Pope. If there be,
then it must be known what that is, which few private men at least do know.

13. Particularly it must be known whether they that are known Heretics, yea
judged so by Councils, or by their own successors, and those that were
notorious Whoremongers, Sodomites, Murderers, Poisoning their Predecessors to
get the Popedom, Simonists, buying the Popedom with money, etc. were capable
of being true Popes?

14. If they are not capable, then we must all know that all the Popes were
none such, when the Papists themselves confess they were such, before we can
know that they were the infallible successors of Saint Peter.

15. But if such may be Popes, then must we know why a Mahometane may not as
well be a Pope? or how an enemy of Christ and the Church should come to be a
Son of Promise, and the Vicar of Christ, and the head of the Church, and
whether such were infallible in their judging falsehood to be truth, as they did?

16. And we must know, that the Pope only is lawless, and under no power of
Canons, or Decrees of former Popes and Councils? Or else many such Canons will
proclaim their calling null: and so the succession still has been interrupted.
And if the Authority of the former Church oblige the Pope to believe, e. g. the
truth of Scripture and Traditions, then why must not the Authority of the
former Church in its Canons be as obligatory to him in point of duty and
penalty, and so null his calling?

17. Bellarmine says that it is agreed among all Catholics that the Pope as a
private Doctor may err, through ignorance, even in universal questions of
faith: Also that many Papists and Pope Adrian the sixth himself taught that the
Pope as Pope may be a Heretic, and reach Heresy, so it be without a General
Council: And that most of the rest do only hold, that whether the Pope be a
He^tick or not, yet he cannot define any thing here^al, as to be believed by
the whole Church: this ^th he, is the most common opinion: Bellarm. de ^m.
Pontif. li. 4 cap. 2.

Now this being so we must be resolved, if a Pope ^ a Heretic in heart, and
open profession, and (...) if a General Council be called, this Pope cannot ^e
his sentence in it according to his own belief, ^hether indeed we can prove
that God has promis^^ to cause a Heretic Pope to dissemble, and to ^eak
against his own judgment, which is to lie, ^ough the thing that he says be
true, or yet to tie (...) tongue that he shall not be able to speak that which
he believes, and speaks at other times?

18. And whether the promise which they allege this purpose (I have prayed for
thee that thy faith (...) not) be indeed fulfilled to a Heretical Pope. If ^t,
then its evident that this promise belongs not ^ all Popes. If yea, then the
faith of a Heretic ^th not fail; which Bellarmine himself confesses be false.
And here note what a naked shameful ^ft it is that Bellarmine makes about this
text? He ^th that [ There are two things promised there to Pe^^: The first is
that Peter should never lose the true ^ith, though tempted by the Devil; The
other privi^^ge is, that he as Pope should not be able ever to teach ^ly thing
contrary to the faith; or that in his seat no ^n should ever be found that
should teach against the ^th: of which privileges, the first perhaps was not
^rived to his successors, but the second undoubtedly ^as derived to them] So
says Bellarmine de Rom* ^nt. li. 4. cap. 3.

Now mark how contrary this is to the sense of the text. The promise that
Christ made to Peter, wa^ not to his tongue but to his heart: not that he
should not speak against the faith, for he did deny Christ, and curse and swear
that he knew not the man: b^ it was that his inward belief should not fail, and
^^ that he should not fall from Christ, and consequently indeed that his heart
should reduce the tong^^ it self. Now Bellarmine confesses that perhaps the
part of the promise that concerns faith it sel^* reaches not to Peter's
successors, but only the which concerns the tongue: which was directl^ none
at all; so that he gives up the true prom^ made to Peter, which was that his
faith should n^ fail, and not that his tongue should not fail, and b^ forgeth
another in its stead.

19. How can we be assured that this or any promise belongs to the Popes,
when the Papists themselves say that they were made to Peter before h^ was
Pope. For so Bellarmine is fain to answer, wh^ we say Peter himself erred in
denying Christ he says [ Saint Peter when he denied Christ, was ^ yet made
Pope: For its manifest that the Ecclesias^^cal supremacy was given him in the
last of John, wh^ Christ after the resurrection bid him Feed my sheep Bell. de
Pontif. li 4. cap. 8.

20. It is of necessity that all Christians who belie^ upon the Popes
authority, must know who it is the is the true Pope, and to be believed: And
wh^ there are many Popes at once pretending to that i^fallibility and
authority, how can all Christians resolved which is the true Pope when one
Count^^ owns one, and another owns another, whom s^ the vulgar own that are out
of reach and uncapab^^ of understanding the quarrel? And then, w^^ knows which
of them must be succeeded by the next? Nay can learned men tell? Nay can the
Cardinals ^ell that choose them? And are we sure that any of ^he pretenders are
true Popes? Shall we hear B^llar^ine in one particular case, that is in his
answer to ^he 37. instance of Heretical Popes, to wit, John ^3. who besides
open Adulteries, Murders and other horrid wickedness, of which no less then
fifty ^hree Articles were put in against him at the Council ^f Constance, all
confirmed, says Bellarmine, by ^ertain witnesses, he was moreover accused of
most ^ernicious Heresy, even of denying the Resurrecti^n of the body, and
everlasting life. And to this Bellarmine answers [Joannem 23. non fuisse
Ponti^cem omnino certum and indubitatum, proinde non nec^essario esse
defendendum, erant enim eo tempore tres, ^ni Pontifices haberi volebant,
Gregor. 12. Benedict. ^3. and Johan. 23. nec poterat facile judicari quis e^rum
verus ac legitimus esset Pontifex cum non deessent ^ngulis doctissimi patroni.]
that is [ I answer that ^ohn the 23. was not altogether the certain and
un^oubted Pope, and therefore he is not necessarily to be ^efended, for there
were at that time three that would ^e accounted Popes, Gregor. 12. Benedict.
13. and ^ohn 23. and it was no easy matter to judge which of them was the true
and lawful Pope, when there were ^ot wanting to each one of them most Learned
Patrons.] And yet the same Bellarmine says, de Council. li. 1. ^ap. 8. that its
almost the common opinion that this ^ohn, Alex 5. were true Popes.

You see then the case of the poor people according to the Romish Religion:
They cannot know the lord of God to be his word but on the authorita^ive
determination of the Pope: and who is the true Pope it is impossible for them
to know, when even most Learned men cannot know, and Bellarmine himself so long
after says, it could not easily be known.

21. Moreover, how can all Christians many hundred miles distant know whether
indeed the Cardinals chose and consecrated him that is in the seat, or whether
he forced in himself, or bribed them to pretend what was not done, and so
whether he have all the essentials of his call.

22. And if a Council must be the determiner either with the Popes, or alone,
How shall the Christian world know that Christ has promised infallibility to a
Council, when there is no such promise in the word: much less can Infidels know
this in order to their believing the word of God.

23. And how shall we all know what is a General Council, and when we have one?
whether it must be all the Christian Bishops in the world that must meet? or
the delegates at least of all? or whether some Countries, or part of all may
serve? and then what Countries or parts it must be? Bellarm. de Conc. l. 1. c.
17. Says, that once the Patriarchs must be present, but now its not necessary
because they are all Heretics or Schismatics. And how shall we know that ever
there was such a thing as a General Council? For my part I see no probability
that ever there were many, if any one such Council, was the Council of Trent
General when the greatest part of the Christian world was absent? When all the
Bishops of Aethiopia, Egypt, Palestins, Greece, with all the Turks dominions
were absent, besides the Protestants, and most of the Popish Bishops themselves.

24. How shall we be sure that all these, or the greater part of them are true
Bishops and lawfully called? If as Bellarmine says de Council. l. 2. c. 9. That
the contrary be not manifest, be enough, then man's error can make Gods promise
of Infallibility belong to those that it was never made to; or else God has
promised infallibility to all that may be Popes or Bishops for ought we know:
and then it belongs not to the Pope and Bishops, but to all that seem such.

25. Yea that all those Bishops or most descend by uninterrupted succession
from the Apostles, which is made necessary, If they plead only the Bishop of
Romes succession to warrant all the rest, before the forementioned particulars
be well answered, it will appear that Romes succession has been frequently
interrupted.

26. How shall men at a distance be sure that the Councils are indeed confirmed
by the Pope?

27. How shall we be sure when all is done that we have the right sense of the
Canons or Decrees of such Councils, when they speak as ambiguously as the
Scripture, and the Papists think they can have no certainty of the right sense
of that without a living judge: And if there be a living judge still of the
sense of Councils, either he is as infallible as they, or not: If not, then he
cannot make us infallibly certain by his Authoritative determination. If he be,
then what need of a Council, when he is infallible alone?

28. When several Popes and Councils contradict one another, how shall we know
which of them to believe? And this is no rare matter among them?

29. When the Pope and Council contradict each other, how shall the people know
which is infallible?

30. When both Pope and Council contradict the express Scripture, must we take
them for infallible, and believe that Scripture only on their words.

These or most of these must be known by all Christians, before they can
believe the Articles of their Creed, or that Scripture is Gods word, according
to the Romish grounds: When as it is impossible for any man to know them as
true; they being either false or not evident and demonstrable. So that its now
apparent that according to the Popish grounds, the People can have no certainty
of the truth of their Religion, and that they shake the foundation of
Christianity it self.

2. And lastly, not only so, but they build on a foundation certainly false,
that is, the Popes infallibility or a Councils: as I shall prove in the next
dispute where their fallibility will be further manifested.

Arg. 3. If the Papists are not agreed among themselves either Clergy or Laity
about the very fundamentals of their faith (or matters which they make of
necessity to salvation) then Popery is no safe way to salvation: But the
Antecedent is true: Therefore, etc.

We need to go no further for the proof of the Antecedent then to what is said
already. They commonly maintain that we must receive our faith and the
Scriptures upon the Authority of the infallible Church: and they are not yet
agreed among themselves, nor ever like to be what that infallible Church is.
And the difference is not with a few inconsiderable dissenters, but in their
main body. The Papists of France maintain that it is a General Council that is
infallible, and that the Pope is fallible: The Italians maintain that a General
Council is fallible, and the Pope is infallible. Some others think that both of
them are fallible separated, but both infallible when they concur. And some
think that they are both infallible though separated. If the Church be the
foundation, and all must be received upon its infallible authority, then no man
can be saved that knows not which this infallible Church is: either therefore
the French or Italians, one part or the other of them do err in their very
fundamentals, when one says, This is the subject of infallibility, and the
other say, This is it. And if a Pope or General Council differ, to whom must
the people hearken? One part of them says that the Pope is above the Council;
and others of them say the Council is above the Pope, and of this mind have
been General Councils themselves, as the Council of Basil and Constance, and of
this mind Bellarmine names, Cardinal Cameracensis, Cardinal Cusanus, Joh.
Gerson Iac. Almain, Card. Florentin. Panormitan, etc.

What a strange impudency then is it of these men, to make the silly deluded
people among us believe, that they are all of one mind, and its we that are
divided: when as they are never likely to agree in their very principles and
great fundamental, Who it is that is the infallible Judge? And till men know
Who it is, what the better are they know, that such a judge there is seeing
that the species existeth only in the individual, and no man can believe him,
or apply himself to him as the infallible judge, till he know that it is he
indeed that is such.

Seeing then according to their own principles, either the French Papists or
the Italian and Spanish Papists must be in the way to damnation, how shall we
know which it is and which to join our selves to with any safety? Were it not
for weakening the Popes interest, they would burn the French Papists as
Heretics as well as us.

Arg. 4. If Popery be a new devised way to heaven such as the Apostles never
knew nor the Church after them for many a hundred year (in the main parts of
Popery) then is it no safe way to salvation: But the Antecedent is true:
therefore so is the consequent.

The consequence they will not deny, that which the Apostles and the Primitive
Churches went in is only the safe way to heaven (for there are not many safe
ways) But that which the Papists as Papists go in, is not that which the
Apostles and Primitive Church went in: therefore it is not the safe way. And
that the Apostles and first Churches knew not Popery, but it is a new Religion,
or new corruption of Religion, appears by comparing the particular points
with Scripture and Antiquity: For Scripture which is the truest Antiquity, it
may give any indifferent man just cause of suspicion that the Papists do so
obstinately refuse to be tried by it; which plainly shows that they take it
not to be on their side. And for the Councils and Fathers, for the first three
hundred years or much more, they ordinarily scorn us for mentioning them to
this end, because they say they wrote not of the points now in controversy,
and therefore are unfit to determine them. But did not those ages take up their
faith on the same grounds as we should do now? And can they be all silent about
the only ground of faith? If the Pope of Romes infallible authority had been
the ground, would they not have told us so? How could they convert the
infidels, and confirm believers without acquainting them with the grounds of
their Faith? And what they took for the grounds their writings show. Nay he
that shall faithfully and impartially peruse the Writers of the first three-or
four or seven hundred years, is blind if he see not the novelty of Popery, and
in particular of the Popes infallibility, universal headship and Episcopacy,
and his pretended authoriry to be the Judge of controversies, with the rest of
his usurpations. Our Divines, Chamier, Jewel, Usher, Field, and many others
have manifested this so largely, that it would be superfluous for me to do it
after them, and somewhat will necessary fall in with the next dispute.

I do not deny but that many ceremonies, and many controverted doctrines were
very ancient: as the use of Chrisme, and a white garment, and milk and honey
to the newly baptized, exorcisme, confirmation by imposition of hands, the
Memories of the Martyrs, with prayers and praises at their graves, or places of
suffering; the often use of the sign of the Cross, the observation of Lent (as
well as Easter and Whitsontide) not to kneel on the Lords day, not to eat
things strangled or bloody, so the doctrines of the power of Free Will, and
predestination upon foreseen faith, and the misuse of the terms [Merit and
Justification] the denial of the perseverance of all Saints, etc. were too
early and commonly entertained. But these be not the things that we call
Popery, nor wherein the great difference between us, and the Romanists does
consist. But as for the great points in difference between the Papists and us,
it is so evident in all antiquity, that Popery is a novelty, and that they have
devised a new way to heaven which the Apostles and the Churches for many
hundred years did never know, that only gross ignorance of the Churches
records, or a willingness to be deceived, can keep men from the knowledge of it.

And here I might easily prove what is said of the novelty of Popery, even from
the confessions of their own most learned writers, that so they may not say, it
is concluded from our own misunderstanding of Antiquity; But that it would
swell this disputation beyond the intended bulk and bounds. I shall only give
a brief touch in a few points of moment, which may show you what to think of
their charging us with novelty, and of their general pretenses to Antiquity.

Of the humane Ordination of Papacy, and its late increase beyond its ancient
bounds, and the limitation of Ecclesiastical Power; I shall desire you to see
what in the following Disputation is cited out of their Cardinal Nicol.
Cusanus, a man so violent for the Eugenian faction, that Aenaenas Sylvius,
afterward Pope Pius the second lamenteth that so learned a man should be the
pillar of that Popes cause; and a man so close to Papal interest, and so
addicted himself to domineering, that he opposed his Prince Sigismund Duke of
Austria, and caused the same Pope Pius the second to take his part, and
excommunicate Sigismund and all his Counsailors, and his subjects, for taking
this Cardinal prisoner by force of Arms; of which see the story in Goldastus,
with Gregor. Hemburg's (one of the Princes excommunicated Counsailors) his
Defense against the Pope and Cardinal: Yet this man himself in his books de
concordia has confessed enough to destroy the Popes cause, and take down the
Roman tyranny, if they would stand to the principles of that confession.

Others also in the next disputation are mentioned as to that subject, which I
shall therefore now pretermit.

Polidore Virgil a Learned writer of theirs in his lib. 8. de Invent. R^^. cap.
5. page 475.476. Says [Item ut nullum conventum indici, nullumque a quibusvis
actum haberi ratum liceret sine Romani Pontificis authoritate, Marcellus primus
omnium sanxit, deinde Julius and Damasus and Gregorius illud idem statuere] [i.
e. [ Also that no Assembly (or Council) should be called, nor any act of
whomsoever be esteemed ratified without the Authority of the Pope of Rome, this
Marcellus was the first that did ordain, and afterward Julius and Damasus and
Gregory did ordain the same thing] And though this sufficiently proves the
novelty, yet Polidore is mistaken in taking this part of Papal Usurpation to be
so ancient. For he took it on the authority of the decretals, which are mere
fictions. Of which I refer the Reader to Blondellus de Decretal. Blondell. de
Decret. page 397.403.
The sum of whose censure on Marcellus Epistles is this [As the frequent
Barbarism show the Author, so the following often the version of Hiereme, the
excribing of diverse instances out of Innocent, Leo, Hilary, Gregory, Adrian 1.
and Acacius, show that he was many ages later then Marcellus] See also the full
evidence that he gives in his censures against the Epistle of S. Julius and
Damasus; and for Gregory, his Epistles to the contrary purpose are well known.
So that by Polidorus confession this Papal usurpation is a novelty: but indeed
many hundred years nearer then he imagined.

And what good this usurpation did, himself confesses in the following words
[Though it first broke the conventicles of Heretics -- Ita deinceps nihil
attulit commodi* cum per id jam pene desitum sit a concilis habendis, in quibus
cuncta ex aequo traictarentur Pontifice, Romano ejusmodi negotium non magnopere
curante] i. e. [ Afterward it did no good, when by reason of this, Councils
are almost ceased, in which all things should be equally handled, the Pope of
Rome not much rega^ding any such matter] Where he adds [ That therefore Pope
Martin the fifth in the Council of Constance decreed that a Council should be
called every tenth year, which hitherto has not been kept, and therefore
Religion grows daily worse] Where by the way we may see what power the Laws of
the Pope and General Councils have, and what a Religion Popery is, which
swears men to believe and obey the Decrees of such Councils, which no man
ever obeyed since they were made: For there has been never since a Decennial
Council: And the Pope himself by confirming that Council which decreed that a
Council is above the Pope, did show himself obliged to obey it, and so to have
called a Council accordingly. But all others must swear to that as Gods Word
and infallible, which themselves contemn. But to proceed.

The same Polidore Virgil. lib. 8. cap. 1. g. 456. shows that the beginning of
Indulgences was not till Gregory appointed his stations, and made them a
reward. And showing that thy were grounded on the Doctrine of Purgatory, he
brings in Bishop Fisher of Rochester to witness, 1. That Indulgences are
lately brought in. 2. Roffeus. Cont. Lutherum.
And that even of Purgatory Apud priscos nulla vel quam rarissima fiebat
mentio; sed and Grecis ad hunc usque diem non est creditum esse: quan diu enim
nulla fuerat de purgatorio cura, nemo quesivit indulgentias, nam ex illo pe^det
omnis indulgentiarum existimatio. Si tollas purgatorium, quorsum indulgentiarum
opus erit? Caeperunt igitur Indulgentiae, post quam ad purgatorii cruciatus
aliquandiu trepidatum est] i. e. [ With the ancients there was no mention of
Purgatory, or exceeding rare: And the Greeks believe not that it is to this
day: And as long as there was no care about Purgatory, no man sought for
indulgences; for all the estimation of indulgences depends upon that. See Mr.
Sing's Rejoinder in Defens. of Bishop Usher p. 78.79, 80, 81, etc.
If you take away Purgatory, what use is there of indulgences: indulgences
therefore did then begin, when men had trembled a while at the pains of
Purgatory] So far Bishop Fisher their Martyr.

Polidore Virgil reciting these words, next to them adds [Quae tu forte cum
tanti sint Momenti, ut magis certa ex ore Dei expectabas] [Perhaps you expected
to have had these things as more certain from the mouth of God, seeing they are
of such moment] A sufficient hint that he had more in his mind if he durst have
spoken out.

Yet note that the profit of indulgences is expressly sworn to in the new Trent
Creed as part of their Belief.

This passage of Fishers was alleged by Bishop Usher in his Answer to the
Jesuits challenge, and the like from Cajetans confessing that the beginning of
indulgences is not known: What the adversaries can say against these citations,
you may see confuted by Mr. Sing in his Rejoinder in Defense of Bishop Usher
against the Jesuit, page 81.82, 83.

That the use of the Sacrament in one kind is a new invention, is commonly
confessed by them. See Albaspinaeus a sober Bishop of theirs in his
observations, after his notes on Optatus, cap. 4. de Communione Laica, page
10.11. showing the novelty of the now Romish Communion. And Gregor. de Valentia
the Jesuit confesses that minime constat, it is not known when the custom of
receiving the Sacrament in one kind only began, but that it was not by any
Decree of a Bishop, but crept in by some custom of the people. Of which also
see Bishop Usher ibid. and his Defender Mr. Sing p 78.82, 83.

About the beginning of Monkery, see Polidore Virgils confess. lib. 7. cap 1.
page 414.415.416. And that [Monachi primo omnium introduxerunt in Ecclesiant
Dei vota sacra, and vestimenta profana simul religi^sa secerunt] [Monkes were
the first of all men that brought into the Church of God, sacred vows, and made
common (or profan^) garments become Religious.] page 424.

Of the beginning of forbidding Priests to marry, see the same Polid. Virgil.
li. 5. cap. 4. page 293, etc.

Of Peter's supremacy the sam^ Polidore says l. 4. c. 6. p. 240. [ Veruntamen
existunt etiam nunc, etc. There are some now that contend that Peter had power
over all the Apostles: of which it belongs not to us to determine, who are
only enquiring of the original of Priesthood: but some think the contrary,
because Paul seems to deny it, etc.] Where he adds more reasons.

Of the Original of Cardinals, and the changes of the Electors of Popes, see
him also l. 4. c. 9. where also he says page 252. [ Verum cum postea
Bonifacius 3. ab Imperatore Phoea impetrasset ut in omnes Episcopos
praerogativam haberet, omniumque caput perpetuo foret, jam tum Romanus Pontifex
multo quam antea unam cum suo urbano sacerdotum senatu cunctis sine
controversia prestare authoritate caepit, ac simul illi presbyteri quibus
Tituli dati, quibus Christianorum animas cutandi munus delatum fuerat, to
Cardinalium nomine velut supremae illius dignitatis proprio cum primis
honestari caepit.] Here you have a hint of the Original of the very new frame
of the Romish Church.

Many more points of the Romish way does he in that Book discover to be novel.
And in opposition to all their way if you will see how he describes the
Reformed Religion, peruse his narrative of the occasion of the Reformation,
page 410. cap. 4. li. 8. where he says [Ita licentia parta loquendi: secta
brevi tempore mirabiliter crevit quae Evangelica dicta est eo quod, haud ullam
asseveret recipiendam esse legem quae ad animarum salutem pertineat nisi quam
Christus aut Apostoli dedissent] i. e. [ Having once leave to speak, that sect
did marvailously increase; which is called Evangelical, because they affirm
that no Law is to be received which belongs to salvation but what is given by
Christ or the Apostles] Thus you see what the Protestant Religion is and whence
called Evangelical, and wherein it principally differs from Popery, from the
mouth of a Papist himself (an Agent of the Popes with the King of England H. 7.
An Archdeacon, and at last the Dean of Paul's in London, from whence he removed
because of the entrance of the English changes under H. 8)

And though he say that it then begun, meaning Luthers particular Reformation,
yet what is like to be the end of it in the next words he subjoynes his
Prognostic [Mansurum ut videtur quoad Christus ipse populum suum culpa
rectorum it a in duas sectas sejunctum, rursus coegerit, a quo istud optimus
quisque maxim petere precarique debet, ut ne major indidem fiat Religionis
labes] [Its like to remain till Christ himself shall again bring together his
people, who by their Rectors fault are thus divided into two Note that he calls
the Papists a Sect as well as the Reformed.
Sects; from whom every good man ought especially to beg and pray for it, lest
Religion as daily decay] more and more.

The novelty of their doctrine de efficacia Sacramenti ex opere operato is not
only by subtle Scotus but many more of their own confessed to be new. More of
their corruptions are by their own Writers confessed to be novelties; and
therefore it is great immodesty in the Papists to pretend the Antiquity of
Popery, though we easily grant them the Antiquity of their Christianity. In so
much as they agree with us they may prove their Religion to be ancient: but its
new in ^he points wherein we differ, and most new in the greatest differences.
Bishop Usher in his Answer to ^he Jesuits challenge, and in his book de Statu
and ^uccessione Ecclesiarum, has proved the novelty of ^he main body of their
corruptions, especially the points of whose antiquity themselves most boasted
of, and this distinctly and fully to their perpetual ^onfusion, beyond all
reply.

If therefore the Romanists would have us return ^o their communion (not to
their subjection; for that we never owed them) let them but cast off their
novelties and return to the ancient faith and practice of the Roman Church,
and we shall do it speedily and do it gladly: They shall see that we are so far
from affecting an unnecessary separation, that we ^ill embrace them in a lawful
communion with all our hearts. I cannot better express my hearty de^ires of
this, then in those hearty words of Hier. Zanchy Vol. 3. These. de Eccles.
Milit. These. 19. Col. ^40. [ Non enim ab Ecclesia Romana simpliciter and ^
omnibus defecimus: sed in illis duntaxat rebus in ^nibus ipsa defecit ab
Apostolica, atque adeo a seip^, veteri and pura Ecclesia: neque alio
discessimus zimo, quam ut si correcta, ad priorem Ecclesiae for^am redeat, nos
quoque ad illam revertamur, and ^mmunionem cum illa in suis porro caetibus
habeamus: Quod ut tandem fiat, toto animo Domino Jesum pre^mur, Quid enim pio
cuique optatius, quam ut ubi ^r baptismum renati sumus, ibi etiam in finem us^u
vivamus? modo in Domino? Ego Hier. Zanchius. Cum tota mea familia testatum hoc
volo toti Ecclesiae Christi in omnem eternitatem.

Arg. 5. If Popery do make a new Catholic Church, which was never known for
many hundred years after Christ, then is it no safe way to salvation. But
Popery does make a new Catholic Church that was never known of many hund^ed
years after Christ: therefore its no safe way to salvation.

The consequence of the Major will not be denied; for they confess that Christ's
Church is but one; He had not a Church of one sort for the first ages, and a
Church of another sort since: though its accidents may vary, yet so does not
its essence. The Minor I prove thus, That which the Papists make to be the
Catholic Church, is only all those Christians that acknowledge the Pope to be
the universal Bishop and head of the Catholic Church, having universal supreme
jurisdiction, and the Church of Rome to be the Mother and Mistress of all other
Churches, and its only a Catholic Church convertible with the Roman Church.
But such a Catholic Church as this was never known by the Apostles, or of many
hundred years after Christ: Therefore Popery makes a new Catholic Church,
which the first ages never knew.

Its true that when Rome being then the ruling City of the world did come to
own Christianity, that the Glory of the Empire occasioned the Bishop to be
called Primae sedis Episcopus, as one that was to take place of the rest of the
Patriarchs, who had their several orders or places ^ssigned them (as Alexandria
to be the second, Antioch the third, etc.) which Bellarmi^^ confesses might be
after lawfully changed: but as Alexandria had not the Government of Antioch by
that predecency, so neither had Rome any government, of the rest: And as
Constantinople was afterward set up above Alexandria and Antioch (and claimed
to be above Rome) so might it as lawfully have been set up above Rome But what
ever be said about their quarrels of precedence, which pride begun and
cherished, yet its most evident in all antiquity, that of many hundred years
after Christ, there was no such Catholic Church in being, or known, as was
centred in the Pope as the head or universal Bishop or Governor, or in Rome as
the Mistress of the rest. We have long ago challenged them to give us the least
proof of such a Church in all antiquity, and they give us nothing, but such
forced passages that are nothing to their purpose, that its hard for the most
charitable rational man to believe that they do indeed believe themselves, and
do not know that they hypocritically endeavor to cheat poor souls by their vain
cavils. All the Papists on earth will never be able to answer what our Divines
have said already to prove the novelty of their Papal headship: nor can all the
Popes servants in the world bring us one word of current antiquity for many
hundred years after Christ, to prove that ever such a Church was once dreamed
of, as they now call the Roman Catholic Church. Indeed Rome was called then,
a Catholic Church, and so was Alexandria, Antioch, and all that held the
Catholic faith, and were not heretical: but it was never known till Boniface
had usurped the Title of universal Bishop above 600. years after Christ (which
he procured by Phocas a Murderer that usurped the Empire when he had slain the
Emperor Mauritius) that the Roman Church and the Catholic Church was all one,
or that it was necessary to make any particular Church or person Catholic,
that they acknowledge the universal headship and jurisdiction of the Roman
Pope, much less his infallibility.

To heap up Records here would but stop the plain Reader in his course; and
somewhat shall be s^id of it in the next dispute: Only I now say, that if any
one question whether indeed the Roman Catholic Church as now constituted be a
mere novelty, I here offer my self to the fuller proof of it, and shall desire
no better recreation of such a sort then to entertain a dispute about it with
any Papists that will undertake their cause.

And here I must needs annex this observation; What a shameless cheat it is by
which the Papists do delude the ignorant, persuading them that theirs is the
old Religion, and the ancient Church which has continued from the Apostles
without interruption; and that we are men of a new Religion, and of a Church
that had never a visible being till the days of Luther, Costerous the Jesuit
in the Preface to his Enchiridion instructs his deluded novices how to deal
with the Protestants by urging them with three Questions (which we shall
resolve anon to his shame) and the last of them is a challenge to us [To name
one man before Luther that agreed with us in all things] But we challenge, and
most confidently challenge all the Papists on earth to name one man for three
hundred years after Christ (I might say six hundred years) that agreed with
them (not in all things but) in their very Articles of Faith, yea in their
Church fundamentals, yea in the very definition of the Catholic Church: We
challenge them to name us one man and (prove it) that ever knew or owned such a
Church as Catholic that is now so called and owned by them. We confidently
affirm (and challenge all the Papists in the world to dispute the point with
us) that their Church as Popish, is a new thing, unknown to our forefathers of
the first ages; that Popery is a fardel of new doctrines, unknown to the first
Churches We admire at the immodesty of these men to ask us where our Church
was before Luther, and to call it a new Religion which we profess, and to ask
us whether we think our selves wiser then all the world was heretofore in the
purest times? We do most confidently return on them their own demands? We would
know from any of them where their Church was for three hundred (yea for six
hundred) years after Christ's birth? And we wonder how they can think to be
saved in a way that was not known for so long time? Do they think themselves
wiser then Christ and his Apostles, and all the Christian world for so many
hundred years. Again we challenge them to show us the least proof that ever
there was such a thing for so long time, as a Catholic Church convertible with
the Roman, and headed by the Pope as the universal Bishop having a universal
jurisdiction over the rest, or an infallible Judgment in determining of
controversies in matters of faith. It is none of the least of our Reasons why
we dare not be of the Romish faction or opinions, called by them their Church
and their Religion, because it is so new, and we dare not venture our souls
upon new ways, nor dare we believe that Christ has two sorts of Churches
essentially different since his Resurrection; one sort before the Popes
universal headship, and the other since: nor dare we once imagine that Christ
had no true Church on earth till Pope Boniface would needs be the universal
Bishop, or till Rome was advanced to the dignity and titles which it does now
usurp. I desire no better issue then this of our difference: Let any Papists
living bring out their cause to the trial of antiquity, and let them that are
of the most Ancient Church and Religion, carry the cause. If we prove not
theirs new and ours the most ancient, or if they prove theirs more Ancient then
ours (as since Christ's Resurrection) then we are contented to be of their
Church and way.

Arg. 6. If the Papists be the greatest Schismatics upon earth, most
desperately rending the Church and separating themselves from the maine body of
the visible Church, then Popery is not a safe way to salvation. But the Papists
are the greatest Schismatics on earth, most desperately rending the Church,
and separating themselves from the main body thereof: Therefore Popery is no
safe way to salvation.

The consequences of the Major will be confessed by themselves. It is only the
Minor, therefore that is to be proved: which is too easily done, being a matter
of fact.

First, The Papists do actually rend themselves from the greatest part of
Christ's Church on earth, condemning all others to everlasting fire: 2. They do
lay the grounds of a continual schism, in making a new center of the unity of
the Church: of these two in order.

1. He that shall consider of all the Christians in the world at this day, who
subject not themselves to the Pope of Rome, and may truly be reputed to be of
the Catholic Church, will see that the Papists are but a small part of the
Church: But especially if we consider them as they were not many ages ago, much
more numerous then now they be. The Grecians, the Syrians called Melchites, the
Moscovites and Russians, the Georgians, all of the Greek Religion besides the
multitude of the same Religion dispersed throughout the Turks dominions; also
the Abassins, Egyptians, Armenians, Jacobites, who are near of a mind, and
differ from the Papists, and submit not to their authority: Besides all the
Reformed Churches in Germany, Sweden, Denmark, Hungary, Transylvania, Britain,
Ireland, France, Belgia, Helvetia, and other parts with those in the Indies; I
say consider of all these Christians together and it will appear that the
Papists are but a few to them, or not near so many as they. But if you further
consider of the state of the Christian world not many ages ago, when the Turks
had not yet subdued the Eastern parts, and when the Abassian Empire was much
more large, and Nubia and other Countries had not revolted, it will appear that
we may well say that it was but a small part of Christians comparatively that
did acknowledge the universal headship and jurisdiction of the Pope, or submit
themselves to him: besides many other points of Religion in which they differ
from him. I know that the Papists say, that these are all either Heretics or
Schismatics, and so no part of the Catholic Church. But the accusation of
Schism is the mere voice of Schism, and for Heresy, its true that all men
and Churches have their errors, which yet deserve not the name of Heresy: The
Jacobites and the rest that are near them, are afraid of acknowledging two
Natures in Christ, lest it lead them to make two persons with the Nestorians;
but yet they are not plain Eutichites: and both they and the Nestorians
acknowledge Christ to be perfect God and perfect man; only the Nestorians do
amiss have these two natures, two persons; and that the Euticheans in flying
too far from them are afraid to call them two Natures, though they confess the
Godhead and Manhood to be really distinct; yet they say that both are as it
were conjoined or coupled into one Nature: so that wise impartial men think
that the Eutichites (or at least these Christians that are so called amiss by
the Papists) do but misuse the term Nature for the term Person, and so deny two
Persons only in sense, and two Natures only in name, and that by the same
misuse of the terms the Nestorians do affirm two Natures only in sense, and
two Persons in words only. Of this I desire the Reader to consider What Luther
has said de Conciliis This I must needs say, that if I did not exercise the
same charity in judging of the Romanists, as I do in this excuse of the
Jacobites, and other Christians that are not of their Communion, I should be
forced to censure the former much deeper then the latter, and if by all their
errors I must hold the rest to be Heretics or Schismatics, I must by the same
measure judge the Romanists to be doubly Heretical, as I certainly know them to
be most notoriously Schismatical. For though I know that they are not so
barbarous and unlearned as most of these forementioned Christians, and also
that they are free from many of their mistakes, yet withal they have many more
in stead of them which the other are free from. And for the Protestants they
are Heretics only on this supposition, that the Pope be Judge.

By this time then it partly appears how great a part of the Church of Christ
the Papists do differ from.

But yet this is not all, nay the smaller part. For if you will but consider
the state of the Church of Christ for the first three hundred, yea five or six
hundred years, you will find that the Papists do differ from them all, even
from the whole Church. For then the Popes universal Episcopacy and jurisdiction
was not known in the world (as is said before.)

All these does the Roman party now separate themseves from: All these they do
pronounce to be no true Churches or true Christians, but Heretics and
Schismatics: All these do they condemn to the pit of Hell. They have now
concluded that only those are of the true Church, that acknowledge the
Mastership or universal Headship of the Pope, and the Mistrisship of the
particular Roman Church which none of all those forementioned did. They now
conclude that none can be saved but who are of this (new-framed) Church of
theirs.

Now I do appeal to any reasonable impartial man alive, whether there be any
more notorious Schismatics on earth, then these men; that dare unchurch the
far greatest part of Christ's Church on earth at present, and the far purest,
and renounce communion with them all, and proclaim them Heretics or
Schismatics, and sentence them all to the flames of Hell: Yea that dare do the
like by all ages of Christians that have gone before them; yea that dare
unchurch and damn to Hell the whole Church of Christ for many hundred years!
For what do they less when they unchurch and damn all that acknowledge not
their new made universal Bishop which the Primitive Church never did? And when
they make that to be essential to the Catholic Church which the first
Catholic Church did never know? I know there be some Enthusiasts and
Anabaptists and such giddy persons, that do as the Papists do, condemn all the
Churches of Christ except themselves. But yet the Schism that they have made
hereby is nothing to that which was made by the Papists, who have set the
Christian world into a flame of dissension, and make it their very business
daily to b^ow ^t up; and do nourish so many Colleges of Jesuits and other
orders to that end.

What notorious impudency is it then in these men to tell us that we are
schismatics, and separate from them and ask us, how we dare judge all our
forefathers to damnation, and why we will not be of our forefathers Religion?
and do not observe how they condemn themselves by all these questions. What
more evident then that the Papists have separated from all other Christians in
the world? How dare they condemn the far greatest part of Christians on earth
to eternal torment? yea and (by plain consequence, though they will not
acknowledge it) the whole Church of Christ for many hundred years? were it but
one soul that they should presume to censure, they might well bethink them of
an answer to Paul's Question. Who art thou that judge another man's servant? to
his own master does he stand or fall, When Paul wrote that to the Church at
Rome, he knew of none then that would justify the judging of all the world,
and say, They are my servants, or subjects, and therefore I must judge them. Do
the blind Papists think that any sober considerate impartial Christian can be
of their mind, and damn the most of Christ's Church on earth, merely because
they will not be subject to the Pope of Rome. If this Article be so necessary
to salvation, Why do not we find it in any ancient Creed? Why must we not say
[I believe in the Pope of Rome] as well as [I believe in God?] Or if indeed it
be the Pope and Romanists that is meant by [the holy Catholic Church] why
would not the composers of the Creed tell us so? And why did none of the
ancient Churches understand and expound it so? And why did no age add the word
[Romane] and call it [the holy Roman Catholic Church.]

2. And then withal, besides the present Schism which they have made, they
have laid the ground of a perpetual schism. For they have made a new
definition of the Catholic Church, and made it another thing then it was
before, and they have made a new head and center of its unity; so that all the
old sort of Christians to the end of the world, that cannot change their Church
and unite to the new head and center, must needs be of a different body from
the Romanists. And if these men say that it is the rest of the Christian world
that first withdraws from them. 1. Let them prove that the Greek, Abassins and
the rest of the Christian world that deny subjection to them, except these in
the West, were ever under them. 2. And as for the Reformed Churches if they
were drawn in heretofore (I mean their forefathers) to countenance the Romish
usurpation and tyranny, they withdraw only from that usurpation, and separate
from Rome only as it is a faction and not as from a Church. If we be drawn into
a schism and separation from all the Christian world, by the fraud of Rome, is
it unlawful for us to repent and return to the unity of the Catholic Church,
and to renounce the Schism that we were guilty of? This is our great sin? we
are schismatics because we will not continue schismatics? we are Schismatics
by casting off the Schism of Rome, because we will not be Schismatics by
continuing to separate from all the Churches else on earth.

3. But let us come to the trial with them who laid the first Schismatical
Principle? Was it not they that first defined the Catholic Church as
equipollent with the Roman? and first made the universal Headship of their
Pope to be the center? Did ever Peter or Paul or any Apostle do so? Did they
give us such a definition of the Catholic Church? Or did the Church do so for
many a hundred year after them? Prove this well, and take all; and we promise
to turn Papists without delay. The plain truth is this. The Catholic Church
for many hundred years after Christ was that Body of Christians who were united
or centred only in Christ the head, and held communion in the fundamentals or
great and necessary points of faith and worship: and had no mortal head or
Center: But the worldly greatness of the City of Rome, occasioneth the
inflation and proud usurpation of her Bishop, and he will needs make himself
the Center of union and universal head, when there was no Center or head, but
Christ before: And is not this the vilest Schism that men can tell how to be
guilty of? suppose that the King of Spain having his Dominions remote one part
from another, some in Europe; and some in the Indies, that for five or six
hundred years the Indies should acknowledge no other head but the King of
Spain, and the Governors of each Province should receive their several
Commissions immediately from him, and stand in no regimental subordination to
one another, but only be bound by the King to have communion and hold
correspondence for their mutual safety and the common good: If now after so
long time the Vice King of Mexico, shall by Degrees make himself the sovereign
of the rest, first claiming only the first place in their Assemblies, because
he is Governor of the greatest City; and then requiring them to do nothing
without him, or his consent, and at last proclaiming himself the head of the
Indies under the King of Spain, and that none are subjects to the King but
those that profess themselves also subjects to him, but all the rest are rebels
and traitors, and to be used accordingly; exhorting and commanding all to fall
upon them and use them as such: And all this upon pretense that Spain is so far
off, that the King there is invisible and inaccessible to them in the Indies,
and therefore the King has given him a Commission to be his substitute, as
being more visible and accessible. If now the rest of the Presidents,
Governors, and Provinces, shall refuse to acknowledge the Headship of this man,
and shall declare that they dare center to no head, but the King of Spain
without his express Commission manifested, and the Provinces of Mexico and the
adjacent parts only shall be otherwise minded and subject themselves to the
usurper, who is it that causes the Schism in the King of Spains dominions?
And which party is it that holds to the ancient terms of unity? and which
are the dividers? I need not stand to make a particular application: It is even
so, between us and the Pope with his Romanists. The Church of old was centred
only in Christ and headed only by him: At last the Pope pretending Christ's
distance and invisibility, and a Commission that he has from Christ to be his
Vicar General (written in letters that none can read but himself and his party)
will needs become the visible head and center: and whereas before those only
were the rebels that rejected Christ, now all must be rebels that are not
subject to the Popes.

And to aggravate the crime by the addition of hypocrisy, all this Schism and
separation must be carried on by a pretense of unity: They make the poor simple
people believe that the Pope being the Head and center, there is no unity to be
held but in him, and that we must all be guilty of Schism that unite not in
him, and that all our divisions are caused by our departing from this center of
unity: when it is himself that has divided from the rest of the Christian
world, and would drown the infamy of it by accusing others of the same sin that
he is so notoriously guilty of. By which we may well see, that accusing others
is none of the surest signs of innocence, but too common a trick to divert the
suspicion from themselves. When the Papists that are the greatest Schismatics
on earth, do make such an outcry against us as Schismatics, because we have
repented of our joining with them in their Schism, and will not confederate
with them in evil, against the Laws of Christ, and the necessary means of the
unity of his Church.

Arg. 7. If the faith of Papists as Papists, which is it that we call Popery,
be a merely uncertain, changeable thing, so that a man can never tell when he
has it all then is it no safe way to Salvation. But the faith of Papist^ (as
such) is such a merely uncertain changeable thing: Therefore it is no safe way
to Salvation.

The consequence of the Major, I suppose they will grant. For how can that be a
safe way, 1. which is uncertain, 2. and changeable; when the true way to
salvation is one and the same, and changes not since Christ had established
and sealed his Laws.

All the question therefore is of the Minor: which I prove, 1. From the Popish
principles, 2. From their Practices, both which do plainly show that their new
Religion is a mere Weathercock that must fit with the wind of the mutable
conceits of the Pope and his Clergy. Even like the Religion of the Enthusiasts
that wait still for new Revelations to be superadded to the Scripture.

And first for their principles, one is that [The Scripture is not the whole
word of God, or sufficient rule of faith or manners, but only a part of the
Word and Rule, and that unwritten Traditions are the other part: Yea Rushworths
Dialogues, Bellarmine, and the rest of them ordinarily, tell us that Scripture
was not chiefly given to be a Rule of faith at all: says Bellarm. de verbo dei
li. 4. cap. 12. [Finis Scripturae pracipuus non est, ut sit Regula fidei, sed
ut variis documentis, exemplis, adhortationibus, nunc terrendo, nunc
instruendo, nunc minando, nunc consolando adjuvet nos in hae peregrinatione.]
that is [The chief end of Scripture, is not to be a Rule of faith: but that by
diverse documents, examples, adhortations, sometime by affrighting, sometime by
instructing, sometime by threatening, sometime by comforting, it may help us in
this our peregrination.] It is then unwritten Traditions that are part of Gods
Word, and at least part of the Rule of faith: And where these Traditions are to
be found, and what they are, and how many, and by what notes they may all be
known, either they dare not tell us, for fear of bringing men's faith to a
certainty, from under the lock and key of the Pope, or else in telling us they
do but cloud the business with general terms, or else disagree among
themselves. That the Scripture it self is delivered to us infallibly, we doubt
not: and thereby we know the Canonical books: But this may be done without
another word of God: The act of Delivery from the Apostles is not a new
Revelation or Word of God, but the natural means of conveying the word to those
for whom it was intended: And the object of that Act of Delivery was not
another Word of God, but all and only these same Canonical Books: so that I
know which is the Canon (among other reasons) because I can prove (not by
another Word of God, but) by infallible humane Testimony (such as I have of the
Laws of this Land) that the Bible, and these particular books in it were
actually delivered by the holy Writers to the Churches. If God write the two
Tables of stone, and therein make known that they are his Laws, and then
Deliver these to Moses, this Delivering is not a new Word of God, but a
necessary act for the promulgation of the Word: So that if you ask an
Israelite how he knows, whether only the ten Commandments and all those ten
were contained in the Tables? He can prove it to you by the Tables Delivered,
and by proving the Act of Delivery, though he could bring no other word of God
which told you what was in those Tables. And indeed, if these must needs be
another Word of God, besides the Delivering Acts to prove the former to be the
Word of God, and tell us its parts, then there must also be another word to
discover that second Word to be the Word of God, and another to discover that,
and so in infinitum. Our acknowledged necessary Tradition, therefo^^ is not
another materia tradita, or Word of God, but only one of the actus tradendi,
and act of delivering the same matter or word.

But for the Papists that will have another part of the Rule of Divine faith,
they will never be able to tell us what it is, and where, and to let us
understand when we have all. Bellarmine de verbo dei non Scripto li. 4. cap. 9.
lays down five Rules by which we may know the true Traditions. The first is
[When the whole Church embraces any thing as a point of faith, which is not
found in the Scriptures of God, we must needs say, that this was had from the
tradition of the Apostles.] The second is [When the universal Church keeps
somewhat which none could constitute but God, and which is not found written,
we must needs say, that this was delivered from Christ and the Apostles.] The
third is [That which is kept in the universal Church, and through all times
past, is deservedly judged to have been instituted by the Apostles, though it
be such a thing as the Church might institute.] The fourth is [When all the
Doctors of the Church do with one consent teach that such a thing descended by
Apostolical Tradition, either Congregate in a General Council, or writing it
apart in books, this is to be believed to be an Apostolic Tradition.] The
fifth Rule is this [That is without doubt to be believed to descend from
Apostolical Tradition, which is held for such in those Churches where the
succession from the Apostles is entire and continued.] These are Bellarmines
five Rules.

But 1. What the particular Apostolical Traditions are which are Gods Word
according to these Rules, he had more wit, or less honesty then to let us
understand. Is it because the word of God is indeed yet unknown? or cannot be
known? or because it is not fit to make it known? or because the Pope must
pretend to the keeping of these hidden Laws, that so the world may receive them
at his mouth?

2. And I would fain know whether these Rules of Bellarmines to know the
unwritten word by, are themselves the Word of God, or not? If they be, are they
written or unwritten, and how known to be so? If not, then it seems we may have
Rules and means which are not the word of God, by which we may infallibly know
which is the true word of God? And then there needs no unwritten word to
deliver or prove the written word.

3. And why may not another Doctor by these Rules, know the unwritten word, as
well as the Pope, and another Church as well as the Roman?

4. And why may not the Christian people through the world procure from some
one charitable Pope, through so many hundred years, a Catalogue of those
unwritten verities, that the word of God may be once commonly known, and men
may know when they have all, without uncertain dependencies on the Pope, or
travailing in vain to Rome to know.

5. And for those few that Bellarmine has instanced in, viz. The perpetual
Virginity of the Virgin Mary, The Baptism of Infants, the validity of
Heretics Baptism, the fast of Lent, the inferior orders of the Clergy, the
veneration of Images. To the first, I say, It is no Article of Divine Faith,
but of humane Ecclesiastical: The second is proved fully out of Scripture: And
so is the third, if you take it of such Heretics (in a larger sense) as
expressly exclude nothing essential to baptism, but expressly include it all: But
for the rest, Bellarmine should remember how elsewhere he defends the Council
that required the rebaptizing of those that were baptized by the Paulinists,
because they were Anti-trinitarians. For Lent, I say, no more can be proved of
it, but only that it is an ancient Ecclesiastical constitution. And the
inferior orders are apparently novelties, introduced after the first age, if
not the second too, and not mentioned in any of the first writers, but the sum
of Church Officers enumerated without them. Much more novel is the unlawful use
of Images in Churches or as immediate instruments to excite devotion in prayer,
and for other lawful use, we deny it not.

6. But principally I would entreat Bellarmine and the Pope that hereafter they
would obtrude no unwritten word upon us, but what is proved to be such, at
least by his own Rules. Let us have some proof that it proceeds from the
universal Church, and not their naked word without evidences. And then we must
entreat them to be so honest, as not to unchurch the Greeks, Abassines,
Armenians, Protestants, and all the Christians in the world except Romanists,
that so they may be the whole Catholic Church, and then prove any thing to be
the word of God by their own Testimony alone. Nor yet to persuade us that such
a Council as theirs at Trent contained the whole Catholic Church real or
representative: nor yet to bring us two or three Fathers, and say that those
were all the Doctors of the Church.

More particularly I answer to his Rules in order. To the first I say. 1. That
prove if you can that ever the whole Church embraced any thing as a point of
Divine faith which is not contained in the Written Word. 2. If the whole Church
embrace it, then it is no secret, and therefore we all may know it, yea and
actually do know it as well as the Pope.

To the second Rule I say, You may prove a mistaken observance of rites by the
greater part of the Church, but prove that the whole Church kept any thing
unwritten, which none could constitute but God: But if they did, still it must
needs be known to all, and therefore not controvertible, or locked up in the
Popes closet. Prove also that the universal Church may not err in some lesser
matters about Christ's supposed constitutions.

To the third I say, If by [all times past] you include the Apostles, then we
grant your Rule: but mere Ecclesiastical Canons may be observed through all
times shortly after the Apostles, and yet not as Apostolical, but
Ecclesiastical: Yet when you come to try your Traditions by this Rule, I am not
out of doubt that you will but disgrace them, and fail your Readers just
expectations.

To the fourth I say, 1. I will believe you, if you speak of all the Doctors of
the Church next to the Apostles, or so near as that the danger of mistaking was
not great. 2. But I do not believe that you will find any of your Traditions
asserted to be Gods Word, by all the Doctors of the Church (not near all) in
any one age: unless you make your faction to be all.

The last Rule is but a mere trick of wit to get the key into the Popes hand
alone: To which I say, 1. A Church that has had an interrupted succession of
true Pastors from the Apostles, may fall into many errors in process of time,
which in Tertullians and Irenaeus days, when the memory of all the Apostles
practices were so fresh, they could not fall into so easily. 2. Those Churches
have received their unwritten verities, either by writings from their
predecessors or without: If by writings, why cannot others find it there as
well as they? If without, it must be an uncertain, and mutable means; or by a
means so public still that all as well as they may know of it. 3. And we
undertake to prove that the succession of true Pastors of the Romish See has
been long ago, and often interrupted. And therefore this Rule will not serve
your turns.

But though I have been long upon this principle of the Papists to prove the
uncertainty of their faith, yet the next is the chief that I intended, which
also proves the mutability of it.

2. The Papists ordinarily hold that as to us, that is Gods Word which the Pope
with his Clergy say is Gods Word; and that his determination or Declaration
that this or that is a point of faith, does make it to us a point of faith, and
necessary to be believed to salvation, which before was not so; So that
according to the Papists, the Churches faith must alter at the Popes pleasure
(at least with his Clergy) And by new declarations and determinations, he may
make them a new Article of their Creed, when he will: so that their faith is as
mutable and fallible as their Pope; and this they are themselves aware of: and
therefore feign him to be infallible that they may prove their faith
infallible: which if they could do (as they never can) yet still their faith is
mutable by their own confession, if not by revocations, yet by new additions as
to us: so that their Religion is in continual progress or flux, and grows in
quantity as every Pope does add his Determinations. Now I would know of any
Papist in the world, or of the Pope himself if he would condescend to such
considerations, whether they are sure that yet they have all that is made
necessary to be believed to salvation, upon supposal of their determination?
How can they tell but that their successors may make the Creed as long again as
it is, and make their Religion another thing? I know they will say, that as to
them no more is de fide then the Pope determines to be so.

But then, 1. If he would not determine it, no man should be bound to believe
in Christ, and so none be damned for unbelief.

2 If it be a benefit to have all points of faith determined, Why are they not
done, but one Pope must add one, and another add another to the end of the
world (if Christ should let them go on.)

3. Sure the preaching of any one Apostle or other Preacher of the Gospel in
the first age did leave the unbelievers without excuse; and not only the
Cathedral Determination of Saint Peter And why then does not any Preachers
Revelation of Gods will from his Word, oblige men now to believe as well as it
did then?

And 3. It is evident and undeniable that their practice is according to their
principles. The Popish Religion changes so fast by the new additions of
several Popes, that it is not the same thing now, as it was heretofore. Look
but into the Oath, or Trent Confession which I recited in the beginning, and
you may presently see how their Religion is swelled bigger then it was. All the
Popes Decretals, or at least all the Canons of Trent, and every General Council
(at least, confirmed by the Pope) do enlarge their faith, as they add any
thing to what went before. What a multitude of things are de fide now, that
were not so within a thousand years? What man can give up himself to such a
growing Religion, where we must wait on the Pope, as the Enthusiasts do on
God, for new Additional Revelations? And cannot know when we have all or half.
How can they tell but their Creed may fill more volumes yet before that all
their Popes have done with it?

Nay further note, that the Pope can make not only new ways to Heaven, but
several ways to Heaven at once. He could once dispense with the Bohemians for
receiving in both kinds, and yet make it necessary to the salvation of others,
to take it but in one, because he so decreed it to be given. So that there
shall be one Creed in one part of the world, and another in the rest.

It is a damnable Heresy in parts that are absolutely under his power, for the
vuglar to read the Scripture in their own Tongue. But in England, he can make
it Lawful, lest it hinder his designs, though his Doctors have long
determined that it is the Mother of all Heresies.

So that Popery is not the same thing in one Country as it is in another; nor
the same thing at Rome it self in one age as it is at another.

To give you a fresh example: How long have the Dominicans and Jesuits, the
Jansenists, and the Molinists been in contention about Predestination,
Freew^ll, Predetermination, Universal Redemption, etc. and one party condemned
the other, professing their opinions to be heretical, and destructive to the
Catholic faith? as is to be seen in the writings between Petavius, Ricardus,
and Vincentius, Lenis, alias Fremondus, with many more before them: But when
they speak to us about these matters they persuade us that it is only about
certain Shool points that they differ, and not about any points of faith: For
they are not points of faith to us till the Pope have determined them. And
while the eager contenders on either side endeavor to have the Pope determine
the controversy on their side, no Pope durst do it for fear of losing the
reputation of his infallibility with the adverse party; and so the unmerciful
Popes have long suffered their Doctors to live in contention, and to write
voluminously against one another, and their Roman Church to be broken into
parties, because they would not once open their mouths to decide the
difference. But now at last it pleased Pope Innocent the tenth (though he durst
not touch the principal points) to favor his Jesuits so far as to determine
five of the controverted points for the Molinists against the Jansenians (when
Pope Clement was once about determining all for the Dominicans as they thought)
Mark here the agreement of the Papists, and the stability of their faith.
Before the determination each party maintained their way as de fide, and
accused the other as Heretical: some boldly prognosticated (as our Thomas
Anglus alias White) that the Pope would never determine the controversy about
Predetermination. And now the Pope has tried the stomachs of his Dominicans
with the Determination of these five Articles. First, to see how they will
digest them before he went further: And he pronounces them to be Heretical,
and some of them temerarious, impious, and blasphemous too, condemning them
with Anathema: Now those become points of faith on one side, and Heresies on
the other which were none before. Till this Determination the Church of Rome
wanted five Articles of their Creed, or had five fewer then now they have: A
man might have been saved before, that had believed, that [Liberty from
necessity is not necessary to Merit] with the rest of them, but now all of that
belief must be damned. And was not the Pope unmerciful to the poor Dominicans,
to send them all to Hell, that cannot change their belief, knowing how hard it
is for a learned Tribe, especially so countenanced by Augustine, and Thomas, to
alter their minds unfeignedly at a word. And yet in the Trent Confession they
must all solemnly swear and vow that all things delivered, defined, and
declared, by the sacred Canons and Ecumenical Councils, especially that of
Trent, they do without doubting receive and profess: though no man had ever
heard the Popes Reasons, yet if he do but see the Determination of their
Church, he must presently not only believe the contrary to what he believed
before, but do it also without doubting; though they will confess millions are
saved that believe Christ to be the Son of God, though not without doubting.
Well: but see what unity is procured by the addition of these new Articles to
their Creed? The French Doctors ascribe to his holiness that the said Articles
may be taken in several senses: The one sense is Heretical, Lutheran or
Calvinian, but that is a sense, That the words lawfully used will not hear, but
only may malignantly be fastened to them (say they) The other sense (which is
genuine and proper) they Def^nd themselves, as true, and as pertaining to the
Belief of the Church, as the Doctrine of Augustine, and as defined by the
Council of Trent, and the contrary Opinion of Molina and the adversaries others
maintain to be Pelagian or Semipelagian. See here what the Papists themselves
now do implicitly charge upon the Pope; That he (by his express unlimited
condemnation) does malignantly fasten an Heretical sense on the words, which
properly they will not bear, or else that he contradicts Augustine and the
Council of Trent, and Anathematizeth the Christian faith, and maintains the
Semipelagian Heresy of Molina. And yet must we judge either their Pope to be
infallible; or their Church to be at such unity in faith as they would make the
ignorant vulgar believe? More of the like contention about his holiness
Determinations you may see in Tho. Whites Appendicula ad sonum Buccinae, and
Franscus Macedo his Lituus Lusitanus: In all which you may see that all the
comfort that the poor Dominicans have left them (even their hope of salvation
if they be Papists indeed) consists in this, that the Pope speaks one thing
and means another, and that (as White so merrily says, in so sad a matter) The
wise father of the Church was necessitated for the appeasing of contentions, to
grant the more turbulent party their words, and the more obedient party their
sense: so that when the Pope has done all that he can to determine their
controversies, they will still say, that he determines but the words (nay he
does but grant one party their words) and not the meaning: and so not only
sense, but bare terms must be made Articles of faith.

And here you may see the great force of the Papists arguing for a necessity of
a living Judge to determine of the sense of Scripture, because the Scripture is
so ambiguous that each one will else wrest it, his own way: And do we not see,
that the Pope cannot, after so many years deliberation, determine five short
Articles so expressly and plainly, even when he does it of purpose to decide the
controversy, as to make his learned Doctors understand him? but that each
party does take his words to be either for, or not against their opinions, and
hold their opinions as fast since his determination as before: And so they do
by Augustine, Thomas and the Council of Trent: each party confidently
persuading the world that they were of their side. And may not God have the
honor of speaking as plainly as the Pope or Thomas or the Council of Trent? and
cannot we well be without the Decision of such a Judge, as cannot speak so as
to be understood by his greatest Doctors himself.

So that the Principles and Practices of the Romanists do assure us that their
faith is unfixed, growing and mutable; they may be one year of one Religion,
and another year of another, as pleas^ the Pope: A Dominican might have been
saved at any time since the creation till May 31. 1653. when the Popes
Determination was dated: but now they must all be damned for heresy. There is
a new way to heaven made 1653. that never was before: and for ought they know
to the contrary before their Popes have done Determining, there may be five
hundred Articles more in their Creed. So that for my part I desire not either
to be shut out of heaven at the pleasure of every new Pope, nor to be of so
uncertain and changeable a Religion: And I cannot think therefore that Popery
is a safe way to salvation.

Arg. 8. That Doctrine which derogateth from the written Word of God, and
sets the Decrees of men above it, enabling them to contradict its most
express institutions, is no safe way to salvation: But such is the Doctrine of
Popery: therefore it is no safe way to salvation

The Major is unquestionably true among true Christians. For the proof of the
Minor I shall only give you three instances of the Popish Doctrine, because I
intend not to be too particular, left I be too large.

The first is, their affirming the Scripture both to be insufficient to
discover the whole doctrine of faith, as being but one part of Gods Word, and
Tradition the other part, and also to be no Word of God at all to us, till the
Pope and his Clergy do authoritatively determine it so to be; or that we cannot
know the Scripture to be Gods word, but upon the Authority of the Churches
determination. But of this I have spoken before, and shall do more in another
dispute.

The second instance that I give is, Their changing Christ's most express
institution, by withholding the Cup in the Lords Supper from the people, and
giving them but half the Sacrament. I am not now disputing about the efficacy
or inefficacy of one half, so delivered; but proving the intolerable Arrogance
of the Papists that dare set up the will of man above Gods Word, and give power
to the Pope to change Christ's Institutions; and not only to add but to
diminish, and expressly to contradict Christ, and forbid what he commands. I
know they pretend that it was but to the twelve Apostles that Christ gave the
Cup, and not to the Laity: True, nor the bread neither: but then if he intended
that none but the Clergy have the Cup, why may they not as well say so of the
Bread? But do not these deceivers know? 1. That Christ gives this reason of his
administering the Cup [Drink ye All of it: For this is my blood of the New
Testament which is shed for many for the Remission of sins?] So that if this
reason hold to others, if his blood be shed for the sins of others as well as
for the Clergy, then the command extends to others [Drink ye all of it.] And
do they not know that Luke further intimates this in his narration of the
words of Christ [ This Cup is the New Testament in my blood which is shed for
you?] So that those whom it is shed for (and we may discern to be Believers) it
may be applied to. 2. And do they not know that Paul delivers the doctrine
both of the Bread and Cup, as from the Lord, to the whole Church of Corinth, 1
Cor. 11. and not only to the Clergy? Is it not all that he expressly commands
to [Examine themselves, and so to eat of this Bread and Drink of this Cup?]
Alas, they know all this: they cannot but know it, and yet they will contradict
the express word of God: God says [Drink ye all of it] and [ Let a man examine
himself, and so drink:] The Pope says, Let none of the people drink of it, but
the Clergy only. What is this but to abrogate Gods Laws, and set up the Popes
above and against it? Yea unless it were to show the world their Power to
contradict Christ and destroy his word, who can imagine what should move them
to this attempt? If there were any temptation of profit or honor in the
business (as there is in the maintaing of the Popes supremacy, Purgatory,
Indulgences, Pardons, etc.) we should not wonder at it: But what profit, or
honor, or pleasure is it, thus to contradict Christ? and for them that add
such a multitude of their own Ceremonies, to affect so to cut off one half of
the Sacramental Rite and matter which Christ ordained.

Nay thirdly, Do not these men know that the Bread and Cup were both given to
the people by the Primitive Church? and that it so continued for many hundred
years? and that their alteration is a mere novelty. Yes, they know all this:
For the matter is so far past doubt that they cannot but know it. And yet these
deceivers would make the people believe that they are of the old Religion, and
our Region is new. These are they that cry out against our casting off
Apostolical Traditions, and the Churches constitutions and customs, and going
in new ways which our forefathers knew not: These are they that make it a mark
of an Apostolical Tradition, that the whole Church has received it, and that
as from the Apostles. And yet these men dare cast off, not only that which
they know the whole primitive Church received and practiced as from the
Apostles (as Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and all antiquity profess) but also is
expressly contained in the Scripture. With what face can these that exclaim
against novelty, introduce such a palpable novelty into the Church? with what
face can they that so cry up antiquity, gainsay all antiqiuty? and they that
cry up the whole Churches consent, so go against the consent of the whole
Church for so many Ages after the Apostles? They dare not deny but this part of
Popery is utterly New, against the constant practice and Canons of all Churches.

The third point which I shall instance in, is, Their performing Gods public
service in Latin, and forbidding the people to read the Scriptures in their
known vulgar Tongue; when as the Apostle Paul has written the greatest part of
a whole Chapter, 1 Cor. 14. expressly against this opinion and practice, and for
using of a known tongue that others may understand and be edified. The evasions
by which they would elude that part of Scripture; are so senceless that I think
it not necessary to recite them: but rather suppose that they need no other
confutation than the bare considerate reading of the Text; and therefore I
shall venture the Reader (if he have common capacity and impartiality, and be
but willing to know the truth) upon any thing that the Papists shall be able to
say, for their Latin Service, and locking up the Scriptures, so be it he will
but read that Chapter considerately. And are not these good Teachers in Christ's
School that will lock up the Grammar from their Scholars, when it is the very
office of the Presbyters to teach it the people? And to hide from them that
word of the living God, which he has given the world to be their Directory to
salvation? The Prophets, and Christ and the Apostles did speak and write this
word in a know^ tongue to the people to whom they did immediately direct it:
And must All hear and read it then, and only the Learned now? Are not these
the men that take away the Key of knowledge, and will neither enter in
themselves, nor suffer others to enter? They do expressly contradict the
Commands of God, and bid the people not read the Scripture, when God has
charged them to write it on the very posts of their houses, and on their doors,
and that it be as a frontlet between their eyes, and that they teach it their
children, speaking of it lying down and rising up, at home and abroad, Deuteronomy. 6
and 11. God makes it the mark of the Blessed man, Psalm. 1.2, 3. To meditate day
and night in his Law, as making it his delight: and the Papists commonly
maintain in their writings that to have the Scripture in the vulgar tongue is
the root of all heresies. God makes the study of his word the duty and mark of
all his Disciples, and the Papists make it the mark of a Heretic, and have
burned many a one for it here in Queen Mary's days and tormented and burnt
many by their bloody inquisition for it abroad. The very Pharisees thought that
their vulgar were cursed that knew not the Law, and the Papists will not let it
be made known to them lest it make them accursed. God says [ To the Law and to
the Testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is
no light in them, Isa. 8.20.] The Papists cry out precul -- hinc away: let it
alone, meddle not with it, it will make you Heretics: And indeed they have had
large experience that the way which they call heresy, and contradicts their
impieties, is most effectually promoted by the word of God: and therefore they
think they have some reason to speak against it. Saint John says [These things
are written that ye might believe, and that believing ye might have life
throagh his name] Joh. 20.31. The Papists say, Read not these holy writings,
lest they destroy your faith, and bring you to damnation. When the man Luke
10.26, asks Christ [ What shall I do to inherit eternal life?] Christ
answers him thus [ What is written in the Law? how read thou?] directing
to the course which the Papists do forbid. The Apostle says, that [Whatsoever
things were written aforetime, were written for our Learning, that we through
patience and comfort of the Scripture might have hope] Romans 15.4. But the
Papists will not have men learn that, which was written for their Learning,
Comfort and Hope. Joh^ wrote to fathers, young men, and children, 1 John 2.12,
13, 14. Gods anger against the Jews was that [He had written to them the great
or wonderful things of his Law, and they had accounted them as strange things]
Hos. 8.12. And the Papists will force people to be strange to these writings.
Yet how familiar (comparatively) they were to the vulgar Jews and their very
children ^s known and acknowledged. Is it not a high advancement of the Gospel
Church, above the legal Jewish Church, which the Papists do vouchsafe it? That
we may not have the same liberty or means of knowledge as the very children of
the Jews had? Their children must be taught the Scripture, lying down and
rising up, and our eldest people even to the lest breath must not read them,
unless they can learn the tongues which they were first written in. The Jews
had the Septuagints Translation (or that so called) when the Hebrew grew
strange to them, which the Apostles used in their ordinary citations; and they
heard the Gospel preached in the Syriack, which was then their vulgar tongue:
But we may not read the same in our Vulgar tongue by the Papists consent,
Moses, Joshua, Josiah, Nehemiah, Read the Scriptures to all the people, Exodus
24.7. Josh. 8.34, 35. 2 King. 23.1, 2, 3. Neh. 8.3.8.18. and 9, 3 and 13.1. And
it was their custom to read Moses and the Prophets to the people every Sabbath
day, Act. 13.27. and 15.21. 2 Cor. 3.15. Luk 4.16. And Christ uses to
reprehend their strangeness to Scripture passages, as if they had not read them
with such words as these [ Have ye not read, etc?] and [ Have ye never read,
etc?] Mat 12.3.5. and 19.4. and 21.26. and 22.21. Mark 12.10.26. Luk 6.3. Luke
10.26. And Moses commands Israel, the Priests, Levites and all the Elders
thus, Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12, 13. [ When all Israel is come to appear before the Lord
thy God in the place which he shall choose, thou shall read this Law before all
Israel in their hearing; Gather the people together, men and women and
children, and the stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and
that they may learn, and fear the Lord your God, and observe to do all the
words of this Law; and tha^ their children which have not known any thing may
hear and learn to fear the Lord your God, as long a^ ye live in the Land etc.]
It was therefore in a known tongue that it must be read; And when the people
understood not the old Hebrew tongue in which the Law was written, by reason of
the change of their speech in the captivity, Nehemiah caused them to understand
the Reading, Neh. 8.8. No doubt, by expressing it in the language which they
understood. And yet the Papists forb^d the unlearned, that have most need of
teachings, the use of the holy Scriptures in a known tongue, and make it the
mother of all Heresies. How impiously against God, and how cruelly against men,
is this committed? Must the God of heaven send down his Spirit to dictate an
illuminating Doctrine to his Prophets and Apostles for the world? must he give
them a perfect Law, by which Truth and Heresy must be discerned? Must he send
his own Son to preach the Gospel? and cause his instruments to write it, in a
language best known to those that they conversed with, or to the world that was
to be converted by it? And must this Doctrine now be made the mother of
Heresies, and kept from the eyes of the people that should learn it? What, must
the only rule that condemns Heresies, be made the cause of them? Must the
light which God has given the world, be blamed for all the Darkness of men's
errors? Or must men be kept from the light, for fear least it lead them into
Darkness? This is the Popish Piety and Charity: In stead of helping to
Illuminate the dark world, as all preachers of the Gospel should do ( Act.
26.17, 10.) they ^ust have all the unlearned to put out their eyes, ^d be led
by their guides, and trust their souls with them, for fear lest if they have
any eyes in their heads, and any light to walk by, they should stumble or err
through the imperfection of their sight.

And yet the Papists, who so much pretend to unity, are various and changeable
in this high point of their abomination, as well as in other things. For when
they once see that they cannot keep the Scriptures from the people, because the
Protestants Translations are among them, then they will permit them to read
their own Translations: And upon this account the Rhemists translated the New
Testament into English, when they saw they could not wholly suppress and hide
that light: And on this account it is that our Papists in England, and some
other parts where the Protestants abound among them, are permitted by their
Priests (with some warnings of the needlessness, and the danger of it) to read
the Scripture in their Country tongue: When as to a Papist in Spain or Italy
it is no less a crime then to merit the Rack or Strappado of the Inquisition,
and its strange if they be not burnt for it at a stake. So that I have met with
some seduced Papists in England, so ignorant of their course abroad, and so
gulled by the lies of their companions or Priests, that they would not believe
that they do any where forbid the vulgar to read the Scripture in their own
tongue; but were confidently persuaded that it was our slander of them: so that
these poor people believe that the Sun is not set in Spain at midnight,
because it shines at noon in England. Let them read but Joh. Arboreus Theosoph
l. 8. c. 9. Andradius Defens. Council. Trident. l. 4. Petrus Lizetus Dialog. de
sacris libris in vulg. Floq non evertendis. Hosius Dialog. de Communion. etc.
Petrus suitor de Translatione Bibliae: Bellarm. de verbo Dei l. 2. c. 15. and
16. Salmeron. in 1 Cor. Disp. 30. Bellarmine himself mentions the Index
librorum prohibit. of Pope Pius 4. Reg. 4. which forbids the reading of the
Scripture, in the vulgar tongue, except only to those that the ordinary shall
think will receive good and not harm by it, and so shall have a license from
him in writing, and they pronounce that the common permission of the Scriptures
thus does more harm then good: The same Index was after increased and approved
by Pope Sixtus 5. and Clemens 8. And how few they are that their Ordinaries
will grant Licenses to, for the reading of Scripture, is too well known by
common experience. The Kings of Spain forbid all Translations of the Bible
into the vulgar tongues; and Alphonsus a Castro commends them for it: and
many a one has been burnt to ashes for selling, keeping, or reading such
Bibles, in Spain, Italy, and Savoy. And Bellarmine mentions the Sess. 22.
cap. 8 and Can. 9. of the Council of Trent forbidding both the Common reading
of such Bibles, and also the public use of them in the Churches, in both which
we must have them only in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. Bellarm. ubi supr. If
these be not notorious enemies of the Light, who are? David faith, Psalm. 119.
That the word was a Lantern to his feet, and a Light to his Paths. Isaiah
sends us to the Law and to the testimony, saying that if they speak not
according to these it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20. And the
Phpists say (as Arboreus ubi supra) that the reading the Scriptures in the
vulgar tongue is the Rise or Root of all Heresies: And so the Sun must be taken
out of the firmament as being the fountain of all darkness, or at least the
cause of men's wanderings. Only where they cannot help it (or as Stapleton
says, where Heresies are most common) there they will permit or connive at it,
for their own ends. For Necessity has no Law.

I conclude therefore, and confidently conclude, that Popery is not a safe way
to heaven, because it does 1. both vilify Gods Scriptures as an insufficient
Rule, and but part of his word: And 2. presumes to alter its most express
institutions (as the Cup in the Lords Supper) And 3. expressly contradict it, in
forbidding the Prayers of the Church to be in a known tongue. 4. And forbid the
public reading of Scripture in a known tongue. 5 And forbid the translating of
Scripture, and the reading of such translations even by any private man, unless
he have the Ordinaries License, which he may get in those Countries where there
is no remedy. The Kingdom of the Devil is called in Scripture the Kingdom of
darkness; and Christ's Kingdom is called, a Kingdom of light: and when ever God
converteth a sinner, he translateth him from the Power of Darkness into his
mavelous light, even into the Kingdom of his dear Son, Act. 26.18. Col. 1.13.
1 Pet. 2.9. And God is the father of lights, Jam. 1.17. And Satan is the Prince
of the powers of darkness, Luk 22 53. Rev 16.10. And Christ has told us, that
he that walks in darkness stumbleth and knows not whither he goes, Joh.
12.35, 46. And that every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes
to the light lest his deeds should be reproved; but he that does tru^^ comes
to the light that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God,
Joh. 3.21. The Papists therefore give us reason to think they have not the
truth, were it but in this enmity which they bear unto the Light.

Arg. 9. That doctrine which teaches men to worship the creature with Divine
worship, is no safe way to salvation. But Popery teaches men to worship the
creature with Divine worship: Therefore it is no safe way to salvation.

The Major will not be denied by Papists: The Minor I prove by one instance
only (at this time:) and that is, their worshipping of the consecrated Host or
Bread in their Mass, and at other times. He that worshipeth the consecrated
Bread with Divine wor^hip, does worship the creature with Divine worship: But
the Papists worship the consecrated Bread with Divine worship therefore. They
deny the Major, and tell us, that it is no longer Bread but the Body of Christ:
But that they worship that thing which we call Bread, and they call Christ's
Body, with Divine worship, they do not deny. Only some would excuse them from
the guilt of Idolatry (which is a worshipping the creature instead of the
Creator) by this, because they think it is Christ that they worship, and so
interpretatively it is he in deed and the worship right. But if they will think
that to be Christ which is not Christ, and then worship it, that will not
excuse them from being some kind of Idolaters: What if they will think a Ranter
or Quaker to be Christ, who call themselves Christ? are they therefore
excusable if they worship them? Then why might not the old Pagan Idolaters be
justified, or thus excused, seeing they thought that the Sun and Moon had been
Gods. And when they worshipped an Image, they thought that some Deity had
affixed this special presence to that Image: What if an Egyptian thought that
an Ox was God, or that a Deity did dwell in him, were they therefore no
Idolaters? And then, how hainously God takes the sin of Idolatry, the
Scripture fully witnesses.

That which we have to do, therefore is only to enquire whether indeed it be
bread or Christ's body, a creature or the Creator which they worship? Concerning
which there is so much said by Doctor Featly against Fisher, and by Peter
Martyr against Smith, and elsewhere, and by Jewel, Fox, and abundance more,
that if people would read it, I should think it vain to say any more. I shall
only annex ^hese Reasons (very briefly) which come first to my thoughts to
prove that the Bread is not turned into the very body of Christ, but remains
Bread still.

1. If the Bread were Christ's real Body, then Christ had two real bodies: for
he had one sitting at the table, which delivered the Bread, and if the Bread
were another, he had two: or else the body that Christ sat and lived with, was
not a whole body, but a part: But Christ had but one body, and that was entire.

2. It would follow also that Christ had a living and a dead body, a sensible
and insensible body both at once.

3. It would follow that the Apostles did tear Christ true flesh, and draw out
his blood as well as the Jews did.

4. Yea and that they began to the Jews, and did it before them: And therefore
why should the Jews act, and theirs be so much differenced?

5. It will follow that either Christ had one body torn by the Jews, and
another by the Disciples, or else that one part of his body only was crucified
and not the whole: for the other part was eaten and drunk by the Disciples
before.

6. Also either Christ had one body that did Rise again and another that never
rose, or else it was but one part of Christ's body that rose from the dead; for
the other part was eaten and drunk before.

7. The like may be said of his ascension; Then it is not Christ's whole body
that ascended up into heaven: for part of it was eaten before by the Disciples,
and digested by them.

8. It will follow that Christ's glorified body is corruptible, and may be
digested by a man's stomach, and turned into dung: For so is that which is
eaten.

9. It will follow also that Christ's body may become an integral part of our
very natural bodies, and so his body is become sinful, as being a natural part
of a sinner: for the Bread and Wine do nourish us, and turn into our substance.

10. Yea it follows that Christ does thus turn into the substance of every
child of the Devil that eats the consecrated Bread, and drinks the Wine.
For they certainly nourish him and turn into his substance: A most horrid
consequent: For what communion has Christ with Belial?

11. Nay (which is in some respect more horrid and abominable to imagine) it
will follow, that the Glorified body of Christ may turn into the substance of a
mouse or a Dog: for if they eat it, the bread will certainly nourish them, and
become their substance.

12. It will follow that either Christ has an insensible body, or else men
hurt him by eating him in the Eucharist.

13. It follows that Christ has as many thousand bodies, as there be
consecrated hosts, or else that by continuation of parts it is every where, and
fills all the world (which the Papists disavow.)

14. It follows that Christ's body admits of augmentation, and either daily
or weekly receives new made parts, or else that he has new bodies made daily.

15. Also it follows that a creature (either the Baker or the Priest) may
make God, or make his Savior, at least instrumentally: which is a horrid
imagination.

16. It follows that either Christ's body has the accidents of color, taste,
dimension, etc. which are there sensible, or else that those Accidents have no
subject, which is a contradiction.

17. It follows also that Christ has not indeed a true humane body, if it be
such as is before employed.

18. And it follows that the body of Christ is (part of it) condemned, hated
of God, and tormented by the Devil. Because his body was turned into the bodies
of many millions of wicked men, which must be so condemned, hated and tormented.

19. Also it follows that the Scriptures are not true, which tell us that the
heavens must receive him (in that humane nature which ascended from earth) till
the times of the restitution of all things, Act. 3.21. and that he shall come
again to judge the world.

20. Lastly it will follow that a man must not trust his senses: that though my
eyes, my smell, my taste, my feeling, tell me that this is Bread and Wine, yet
they are all deceived: and not mine only but all the senses in the world, to
which they are objected. And if that be true, 1. What reason have I to trust
any Papist living? For all my good opinion of him must be ultimately resolved
into something that I see or hear of him: And it seems, I am uncertain whether
I see or hear him indeed or not. 2. And then how can I tell that I or any man
is sure of any thing? For if the senses of millions in perfect health may be
all deceived in this, why not in other things, for ought we know? 3. And then
how can any Papist tell that the Bread is turned into Christ's body? If he say,
because the Church or the Scripture says so; How knows he that, but by
hearing or seeing? and therefore for ought he knows his senses may be deceived
when he thinks he hears or reads such a thing, as well as when he
thinks that he sees, feels, smells, and tastes Bread and Wine.

And is there not need of very strangely cogent evidence now to impell them to
believe against the concurrent vote of Scripture, sense and reason? And what is
the ground of their contrary belief? Not the Ancient Church (unless they
wilfully or negligently deceive themselves) for the stream of antiquity is
full against them: so full that its hard to believe that any of them that's
verst in antiquity can truly think that antiquity is for them, if they have but
the common reason of men to understand what they read. What is it then that
brings them to this belief? Is it the Scriptures? That's not likely, because
they make so light of it, and swear to take it in the sense of the Church, or
ancient Doctors (in which last they are here and often most desperately forsworn)
It must be then upon the Authority of the present Church, that is, the Pope and
his Clergy, that they entertain this hard belief. That is, The Pope and his
Clergy believe it, because they say it themselves, and the rest believe it
because the Pope says it. And is it truly possible that any man should have
so good a conceit of himself, yea or any other think so well of him, as to
believe unfeignedly so great a thing upon so weak a ground? Can the Pope
therefore believe it because he does believe it? Or is it not too probable that
thousands of them are of that Belief which Melancthon sometime told them of
very smartly [ You Italians (says he) Believe Christ is in the Bread, before
you Believe that there is any Christ in heaven] while they pretend to a faith
above men (that is, to believe Impossibilities upon the Popes credit) I wish
they prove to have the common belief of Christians; and that in heart they do
not (as once one of their Popes did) account the Gospel but a commodious fable.
But let us suppose that indeed it is the word of God that is the ground of
their strange belief, and that [Hoc est Corpus meum, This is my body] is the
very word that does convince them, as some of them do pretend. I would here be
bold to ask them that say so, a Question or two. 1. What, if the Ancient
Church had intecpreted this Text as we do, against your Transubstantiation?
would you then have believed it upon the bare Authority of this Text? What need
I ask this? Your own Oaths and Profession says, No: It is not then any
evidence in this Text that compels your belief. And let me add, that if I
prove not (in a fair debate upon a just call) that the ancient Church for many
hundred years after Christ, was against Transubstantiation, I will give all the
Papists in England leave to spit in my face (for all the high expressions of
the Eucharist that some fathers have.) 2. What is there in those words [This is
my body] that can persuade any sober Christian to their strange belief? What is
it, because that they are properly and not figuratively to be understood? And
how is that proved? Is it because we must not force the Scripture, but take it
in the plainest, obvious sense? I easily grant it. But who knows not that both
in Scripture and in all our common speech, the figurative sense is often the most
plain and obvious, and the literal the most improbable? What three sentences do
we use to speak together without some figurative expression? I will appeal to
any unprejudiced man of reason, whether a Christian that should newly read
those words of Christ, and had never heard them or read them before, would not
sooner take them in our sense, then in the Papists? They may easily try this
upon a new convert, if they please: and I dare make their own consciences
judge, if they have any left to befriend a common truth. What is there more in
[This is my Body] being a Sacramental business, then for a man that is in a
room among many Images, to say [ This is Peter or Paul, or this is Augustine or
Hierom or Chrysostom?] And would not any unprejudiced stander by suppose that
the most obvious sense of those words is [ This is the picture of Peter, Paul,
etc.?] Or would a man easily believe that it was the meaning of the speaker,
that this Picture was the very real flesh and blood of Peter and Paul, and all
other Pictures that ever should be made after the same exemplar, should be so
transubstantiated? So what is the obvious signification of those words [This is
my body] but [ This is the Sacrament or Representation of my Body?] Especially
when his real body was distinctly there present, and he expressly bids them
[Do this in remembrance of me.] 3. I would desire any Papists living to tell
me, why the Text does not as much oblige him to believe that [The Cup is the
New Testament] substantially without a figure, as that [The Bread is his Body]
For the Text as expressly says one as the other, Luke 22.20. This Cup is the
new Testament in my Blood.] Yet I suppose they will be content to say that by
[The New Testament] is meant, the Sacrament or Seal of the New Testament. 4.
Why will not these blind wretches believe the Holy Ghost, who calls it Bread at
the eating after the consecration? 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28. three times together;
and tells us that the use of it is to remember and show the Lords death till he
come.

I might here add to this in the next place their worshipping o^ Saints,
especially of the Virgin Mary, with prayers to her as the Queen of Heaven, to
forgive their sins, and to command her Son to forgive them, with abundance more
of such impious, idolatrous or sacrilegious expressions, as might make the ears
of a sober Christian even to tingle. But these things have been so often told
them, and are so visible in their Offices and other writings that I shall pass
them over. As also their worshipping of Images, and public using them to that
end in their Churches: Though most of their Laity that I have met with, say
that they use them but for a remembrance of the Saints and do not worship them
(and that's bad enough in such cases) yet their learned Schoolmen and Doctors
tell us another tale, as is too visible in many of their writings.

Arg. 10. That Doctrine which teaches men to turn the most of Gods worship
into mere unreasonable ceremonies and vain formalities of man's dev;ising, is
not a safe way to salvation. But such is the doctrine of Popery: Therefore, etc

The Major is certain: For 1. God has taken down the ceremonial Law which he
himself had made, and therefore will not give leave to man to set up another in
its stead, and to burden his Church with unncessary things. 2. It is contrary
to the freedom and spiritual state of the Gospel Church. The Apostle bids us
stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free: And Christ says,
that God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and
Truth: for such worshipers the Father seeks: And he tells the formal
ceremonious Pharisees, that they worshipped God in vain, teaching for doctrines
the Commandments of men, Mat. 15.6, 7, 8, 9. Joh. 4.23, 24. Gal. 5.1.

As for the Minor, it were tedious to recite but half the Romish ceremonies and
formalities with which ^hey both delude and burden poor sinners. For the word
of God in a tongue which they understand, they must hear a sound of a strange
language which they understand not: Instead of singing praises with the heart
(as David) and with the understanding (as Paul requires) they sing over
prayers and Scriptures and other things in uncouth notes and in the Latin
tongue, which the people understand not: The Eucharist or Lords Supper is also
celebrated in Latin and the prayers and praises adjoined; and the Cup taken
from the people: and all turned into a mere show, by elevation of the host,
adoration of it, gaping while the Priest does pop the Bread into their mouths.
Prayers also are used in Latin, so that the substance of public worship is
thus made a very Picture, or unreasonable service: Yea, they teach them to pray
partly in Latin in private, and partly with vain repetitions, multiplying over
the name Jesu, nine times together, and rehearsing over their canting shreds,
and numbering their prayers on their beads to keep tale, and observing such and
such hours, and praying to Saints, to one Saint for this and another for that,
giving the elogies and prayers and praises to the Virgin Mary, that are due to
God alone: Sacraments they multiply: even Marriage which in the Clergy is a
deadly sin, and the avoiding it by the Laity is a work of supererogation, yet
must it be a Sacrament. The Rules of their several Monastical orders, were
tedious to recite: Touch not, taste not, handle not: such meats must not be
eaten on such a day: such orders must use such meats, and forbear such: other
Orders forbear other meats: some must be thus shorn, shaven, clothed; and some
thus: Much of their Devotion consists in being sprinkled with Holy Water,
anointed with Chrysme: creeping to the Altar; striking (...) the breast; making
and wearing the Cross; setting it up, and worshipping it in high ways and
Churchyards, worshipping Crucifixes; and bowing before the Images of God, the
Holy Ghost in the form of a Dove, and of the Saints; traveling to certain
Images and shrines in Pilgrimage, offering to them, especially to our Lady at
some famous places; compassing the Church so often; formal penances: observing
multitudes of Holy Days for the Saints; hearing so many Masses, saying such or
such words, carrying Palms, taking ashes, carrying banners, following the
Cross, and host in processions, and worshipping it, bearing candles: In
Baptism, salting, crossing, spathing, exorcizing, washing hands: Also
baptizing bells: Ceremonious consecrations; saying Dirges, and Masses for
departed souls: forswearing marriage: renouncing propriety: pardons and
indulgencies from the Pope; with abundance of the like delusory carnal
formalities in which much of the Popish devotion does consist. And how can any
unprejudiced man, that is but possessed with the Spirit of God, and truly
knows what it is to worship him, imagine that God is pleased with such
histrionical gandes, and childish things? I confess the reading of their very
books of devotion, their offices to our Lady, and others the like, which are
stuffed with such superstitious and unreasonable passages, seems enough to me
to turn the heart of a sober man against their way. For who can think that the
Holy and Blessed God will be delighted in their vain bablings and childish
cantings, and affected ropetitions of words, and saying, and hearing we know
not what? would any wise man regard such expressions of love or honor? If your
friend or your child should express his Love and respects to you by mimick
gestures, and gambals, and making strange faces, or repeating over your name
nine times in a breath, or ridiculous cantings, complements and actings like a
Stage Player, would you applaud, or delight in such expressions of love and
honor as these? Or would you not rather say as the Philistine King of David,
when he spit, and scraped on the Wall, Have I need of mad men? It is sure a
carnal unreasonable doctrine, that leads men to such carnal unreasonable
services, of that God who will be served reasonably in spirit and in truth.
They that have but an Image or shadow of Faith and Grace, and can expect no
more of Glory, are like enough to be well pleased with these Images and mere
shadows of Gods worship: But its like to be otherwise with him that has a
spirit of supplication and holiness within him, and has known by experience
what it is to walk with God, and offer him acceptable sacrifices, and to
receive the tokens of his acceptance and approbation.

Arg. 11. If Popery be maintained commonly by most wicked and abominable
means, and so by the Devil, then it is no safe way to Salvation. But the
Antecedent is too true: Therefore, etc.

I speak not here of the mere miscarriages of some of their party; but of the
Pillars by which the Popes Kingdom is supported; which that it is by
abominable wickedness, I shall give you but these few instances following.

1. The very business or prize which they so much contend for, is Pomp,
Greatness, Dominion, yea Tyranny in the world: so that it is evidently Pride,
Vainglory, and Covetousness that sets them on, and is the Spring of all their
contests. What Is the chief part of the quarrel, but whether the Pope and
Cardinals of one City, even Rome, shall be the Rulers and Masters of all the
Christian world, and all Princes and People obey them? What unprejudiced man
can be so blind, as not to see that this contest is Tyrannical, and that their
Dominion is their Religion, and their Pride is their faith, and that the
question is but that which one would think Christ had once sufficiently
determined, Who shall be the greatest? Did not Christ chide his Disciples for
this contest? and say, With you it shall not be so? But the Papists, having no
better way to prove the Scripture a nose of Wax, and as flexible and
multiform, as they accuse it to be, then by making it so to themselves by
abusive violence and perverting it, putting by the plainest words that Christ
can speak, and will take his Decision for no Decision, when it makes against
the Decisive Power of their Pope.

2. And this is yet further manifest, in that such a multitude of their Popes
have been Whoremongers, Murderers, Heretics, Simoniacall, buying the Popedom
with money, and poisoning one another to obtain the Popedom, and living in it
liker beasts then men? Of all which I only appeal to Platina and other of
their own Writers.

3. Another Pillar of Popery is most unconscionable impiety: They can dispense
with the vilest sins for the promoting of their Kingdom. They can dispense with
Oaths and with obligations of subjects to their sovereignes, with leagues of
Peace and amity among Princes, yea they can themselves actually promote and
execute the most abominable impieties, that will but help them to attain their
ends. I will now only instance in that which is fresh before our own eyes in
England. The Papists know that Anabaptists and Separatists are erroneous; they
know that Ranters and Quakers are abominable; and yet for their own ends, dare
they here in England, put on the vizard of Anabaptists and Quakers, and with
all possible subtilty and zeal, and unwearyedness, go up and down to seduce the
people to be Anabaptists and Quakers, as they did a while ago to be Seekers, if
not Infidels. This is sufficiently known and proved not only by the Popish
pretended Jew that turned Anabaptist at Hexham, and was taken at Newcastle, and
others of them taken, but by many other Testimonies, some upon oath of those
that have heard such confessions from their mouths; and many have known them
in the Quakers Assemblies, that have seen them before elsewhere: And all this is
done by them that they divide us and break us in pieces, and steal a credit to
their pretended unity and Church Government, and turn the hearts of the people
from our Ministry, and unsettle them, and make them more capable and receptive
of their own opinions, and that they may make others abroad believe that we are
all running mad. And can that doctrine be of God, which teaches men to do such
abominable things? Or is that like to be the cause of Christ that must be thus
upheld? Is that person guided by the Spirit of Christ, that dares draw others
to the vilest blasphemies and wickedness in a dissembling garb, that so he may
promote his own cause? certainly Christ needs not such hypocrisy, and
wickedness for the promoting of his Kingdom; but it seems the Pope does need it
for ^is.

4. Another of the Pillars of Popery is most gross and impudent lying. Did I
not know it to be true, I durst not accuse them of it. I will give you but
these three instances following.

1. They do raise and with greatest confidence propagate, most shameless lies
of those whom they take for their leading adversaries. We read them in the open
writings of Cochlaeus, Bolse, Staphilu^ Thyraeus, and many more. What
abominable stories have they of the Death of Luther, Oecolampadius, Bucer,
Calvin, and others; which it is very unlikely that they can be so blinded with
mali^e as to Believe themselves? What conference do we ever manage with them
which they do not misreport? Witness the late ridiculous passage after the
conference between Fisher and Doctor Featly and Doctor White, when they boasted
beyond Sea of the number of Converts, and in particular of two Earls, and this
to the Earl of Warwick himself (not knowing him) who was fained to be one of
them, and who had been a witness of their weakness. And how poorly does Weston
in his Pamphlet put this off.

2. The next instance I will give is their abominable lying legends, by which
they have befooled the people, and made themselves ridiculous to the world, and
occasioned others to question their reports in other things. I shall give you a
taste of some of them, as Doctor Featly has gathered them to my hand in his
Epistle to the foresaid conference, yet with the Authors that report them, that
you may try whether they be wronged. As that Saint Brigit laid her wimble, and
Saint Aldelme his chesible upon a Beam of the Sun which supported them (vit.
Sanct. Brigit. and vit. S. Aldelmi.) That Saint Nicolas while he lay in his
cradle fasted Wednesday and Friday; these days he would suck but once a day
(Festivale de Sancto Nicol) That Saint Patricke caused a stolen Sheep to bleat
in the belly of him that had eaten him (Legend. de St. Patricio) That the Corpse
of Saint Laurence at the coming of Saint Stephens ^ody smiled for joy, and
turned himself to the other side of the Sepulcher to make room for him (Legend.
de S. Steph.) That Clemens wrote a letter to Saint James seven years after he
was dead (Clem. Ep. ad Jac. in Ep. Pontif.) That Saint Denis carried his head
in his hand three miles, and rested at each place of the posts, that are set
between Paris and Saint Denis (Breu. and pictur. Dionys.) That Saint Dunstane
held the Devil fast by the nose with a pair of Tongues (Leg. de Dunst.) That
the chamber of our Lady was carried by Angels through the air from Palestine to
Loretto in Italy (Hist. de Nostre Dame de Lor^tto.) That our Lady helped Saint
Thomas Becket to mend or stich his haircloth (Annot. in Clemanges ex Caesario.)
That a Parrot crying out, Saint Thomas help me, was delivered from a Hawke
(Legend. de Thom Cant.) That Saint Lupus did shut up the Devil in a Tankard all
night (Legend. de Lupo.) That Saint Dominicke made the Devil hold him the
candle till he burnt his fingers (Legend. de Domin. vid. Melch. Can. loc.
Theol.) That Saint Francis swallowing a Spider in a Chalice, it came whole out
of his thigh (vid. Franscis.) That Friar Andrew to correct his appetite of
eating Birds at the Table by the sign of the Cross, commanded them to fly away
after they were roasted (Sedu^^ Francis.)

I will not trouble you with the recital of more, nor do I say that their
Councils have made these Articles of faith, but their Church does indulge and
make use of such lies for the beguiling of the vulgar.

3. The third instance that I give is, their abominable forgeries, and
depravations of ancient writings: Feigning Decretal Epistles of their Popes,
and many other writings under the names of ancient Fathers: and presuming to
expunge, alter, and falsify the true writings of the Fathers, and of the
better sort of their own, as is proved already against them by many, and I need
not here recite: (See Doctor Featlyes aforesaid Confer. Append.) Which has
done us so great a mischief, by making much if not most of the writings of the
Ancients uncertain to us, as is scarce easily expressable nor are they ever
able to repair (as the late King of England told the Marquess of Worcester in
the beginning of their conference.) See more in Doctor Willets Tetrastilon
Papismi.

5. Another of the principal props of Popery, has been most horrid inhumane
bloodshed and cruelty. How many thousands of the Waldenses and Albigenses they
cruelly murdered in Savoy and France, since the year One thousand one hundred
and sixty. How many in Bohemia! How many in other Countries, who can possibly
enumerate. Cesarius says, The Waldenses had infected a thousand Cities.
Parsons says, That they were so numerous that they had an Army of seventy
thousand men to fight for them, and that they were so spread even in Germany
that they could travail from Colen to Milan in Italy and every night lodge with
Hosts of their own profession. Yet did the Papists by fire and sword disperse
destroy them, from the year 1206. to 1228. they had so filled their prisons
with those that they had left, that the Archbishops stay it, because it was
impossible to defray the charge of their food, or to build prisons for them (as
they themselves speak) yet after this 1260. Morrel in his Memorials says, p.
^4. That there was above eight hundred thousand persons that made profession of
the faith of the Waldenses: (And some of their own Popish writers say, that it
was so ancient that they affirmed themselves to have thus continued
successively from the Apostles: And yet the Papists would make men believe that
Luther was the first founder of the Reformation) I desire the Reader that can
have it to read Mr. S. Clarks general Martyrology of the persecution of the
Waldenses and Albigenses, and also of the Spanish Inquisition, the Bohemian,
and French cruelties, and the Irish of late to spare me the labor of further
recital. The very perfidious French Massacre at once was thought in a few days
space and a little room to murder about thirty thousand persons, and this in a
pretense of peace and quietness. So many bloody bouts has that Nation had,
that it is not like to be still unavenged. The cruelty of the Inquisition in
Spain another parts, will hardly here be believed. The most horrid cruelty of
the Papists in Ireland lately were beyond all the rest. The number that they
murdered in time of peace by a sudden insurrection is almost incredible. In the
very Province of Vlster alone, about a hundred and fifty thousand were computed
to be murdered. But God has gone far in avenging their blood already. What
should we mention such lesser matters as the burning so many in Queen Mary's
days, the Powder Plot to have blown up King and Parliament; with many such
fruits of the Roman fury? In a word I conclude, that it is not like to be the
cause of Christ that has been so long upheld by such Devilish inhumane bloody
means; nor is it like to be true Doctrine which possesses men with such a
bloodthirsty spirit; nor is it a safe way to salvation to swim thither through
the blood of Saints: nor is it any better then a cruel scorning of Christ when
they have persecuted him, to murder Christians by thousands for seeking
Reformation, or not yielding to the Romish errors, and then to challenge us to
name or show our Reformed Church before Luther, or to accuse us of Schism for
separating from them: These Wolves will accuse, where they cannot devour.

Arg 12. If Popery do add to all these abominations impenitency and
uncurableness, then it is certainly no safe way to Salvation: But Popery does
add to all these abominations, impenitency and uncurableness: Therefore it is
no safe way to Salva^i^n.

I do not mean that the persons are simply uncurrable; but while they are
Papists, or go according to their fundamental principle, they are utterly
uncurable and impenitent. For their Principle is that their Pope or Church
cannot err, but is infallible: And so they are bound to stand to all their
Determinations right or wrong: For if they should repent of any, and we return
from any small or great, they should in so doing proclaim that they were
fallible, and so let go the principle of their profession. So that there is no
hope of repentance and amendment of any error once determined of, but only by
recanting the point of their Infallibility, to make way thereto. If therefore
repentance and amendment be of necessity to Salvation, what Will become of
these men that suppose themselves so infallible? and how can that be a safe way
to salvation that locks up the door against repentance and amendment? Popery
therefore is no safe way to salvation.

Arg. 13. That profession which plungeth men into certain perjury, and engages
them to impossibilities, and contradictories, is no safe way to salvation. But
such is the profession of Popery: as I shall prove even out of the Trent Oath
or Confession, which I recit^d in the beginning.

1. They vow and swear that [All other things delivered, defined, and declared
by the sacred Canons, and Ecumenical Councils, and especially the Holy Synod
of Trent, they do without doubting receive and profess] When as many of these
Canons and Councils are contrary each to other, one undoing what another did,
as shall hereafter be shown: and yet they swear to receive them all. 2. They
swear to receive them even [without doubting] when as they are thus
contradictory, and when they confess that a true faith even in the written word
of God, may have doubting mixed with it. 3. They vow and swear that [They will
never take and interpret the Holy Scriptures, but according to the unaniomous
consent of the Fathers.] When as 1. The Fathers do not unanimously consent
among themselves concerning the sense of the greatest part of Scripture* and so
they are sworn to take it in no sense, because the fathers are not unanimous.
2. He that knows not the unanimous sense of the Fathers, where they are
unanimous, is sworn hereby to take and interpret the Scripture in No sense. 3.
If by [The Church] whose sense they also swear to admit, be meant the present
Roman Church, then that Church and the Fathers do differ in the Interpretation
of many Scriptures: so that in one Article they must needs be forsworn. 4. Nay
there are diverse particulars of the Popish faith, yea which in this oath they
swear to, which are against (much more without) the unanimous consent of the
Fathers. The Fathers never consented to this very Article, that we must take
and interpret the Scripture only in the unanimous sense of the Fathers: They
never consented that the Bread and Wine are truly really and substantially the
whole Body and Blood of Christ by Transubstantiation? Nay the consent of the
Fathers is against these: And yet these wretches swear not to take and
interpret Scripture but in the unanimous sense of the Fathers, and withal swear
the contrary in particulars; even that they believe that which the Fathers
never consented to, but against. Never did the Fathers consent that [There are
seven truly and properly Sacraments Instituted by Christ.] Never did the
Fathers consent (who lived a thousand or fourteen hundred years before) that
the Council of Trent did not err, or could not err: Nor [That in the Mass is
offered a true proper propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and dead] Nor that
the Eucharist may be taken under one kind, and the Cup withheld: nor [That
there is a Purgatory, or the souls there helped by the suffrages of the
faithful] nor [that the Saints with Christ are to be prayed to] Nor that Images
were to be worshiped] nor the power of Popish indulgencies left by Christ in
the Church, and the use of them wholesome: Never did the Fathers consent that
the Roman Church is the Mistress of all Churches: or that the Pope is the Vicar
of Christ over them: nor that all Christians or Bishops or Pastors should swear
true obedience to the Pope as Christ's Vicar? Let these proud deceivers show us
if they can when the Fathers, or any one of the Ancients, did ever take any
such oath himself, or persuade others to it? Yea or that they have consented to
any one of these Articles of the Romish faith, and Trent oath? What more
evident to any man that has any acquaintance with the Fathers, then that these
wretches do here most palpably forswear themselves? Even as if they should
swear to believe nothing but according to the Ancient Creed, and withal swear
to believe that Christ never dyed, rose, or ascended, or that there is no
resurrection, or everlasting life. Certainly if the very faith of Papists be
contradiction, and the profession of it plain perjury, then Popery is not a
safe way to Salvation.

I would here have added as the fourteenth Argument: That Popery is a mixture
of old condemned errors, formerly called Heresies; which the ancient Church
has testified against; and therefore it is no safe way to Salvation: And here
I should have tried their particular errors not yet mentioned, or insisted on,
as their Doctrine of Merits and Justification thereby, Satisfactions, and many
Semipelagian errors, Image Worship, with many the like: But that this is beyond
my present intended scope, and purposed brevity, and is so fully performed
already by so many unanswerable Treatises of our Divines.

Let us next here what is said of most moment, to prove Popery to be a safe way
to Salvation.

Obj. 1. That Religion which has been delivered down from the Apostles to this
day without interruption, is a safe way to Salvation (For it is the same that
the Apostles and all the ancient Christians were saved in) But the Religion of
the Church of Rome is that which has been delivered down from the Apostles:
Therefore, etc.

Ans. 1. There is a change of the very subject of the question. It is [Popery]
that we are disputing of; and this argument instead of Popery speaks of [The
Religion of the Church of Rome.] The Religion of the Church of Rome has two
parts; First, the Christian Faith: Secondly, their own corruptions depraving
and contradicting this Faith: The first as it stands alone uncontradicted in
the Religion which ^e profess: The second is it that we call Popery, and ^ay,
It is no safe way to salvation. 2. And of this I deny the Minor, and say that
Popery is not the ancient Religion, the Apostles and Primitive Church never
knew it: There was no such creature as a Papist known in all the world till six
hundred years after the birth of Christ: It was about 606. when Pope Boniface
did first claim his universal Papacy and Headship: and after that it was not
till about one thousand years that the usurpation and Tyranny was consented to
any thing generally in the West: And even the multitudes, still dissented, and
some opposition was still made against it; and all the Esterne Churches and the
rest of the Christian world did dissent. Of these things there is enough said
to silence all the Papists on earth in Bishop Usher de contin. successione and
slatu Eccles. Occident. and his Answer to the Jesuits Challenge, and by Bishop
Jewel, and Doctor Field, and in many of the old Treatises against the Pope
published together by Goldastus, which show us that he settled not his Kingdom
without continnual opposition and contradiction. We affirm that Popery is a
mere novelty, and challenge all the Papists in the world to prove the Antiquity
of it. When they have once arrogated to themselves the name of the Catholic
Church, and taught the people to believe as the Church believes, that is, to
believe that all is true which the Pope and his Clergy will report of
themselves, it is then an easy matter for them to prove any thing to be true
which makes for their turn: then they may say, The Fathers are for them, and
that they have their Papal sovereignty from St Peter, when there is never a
true word in it. Then they may frame and forge new Decretals, and cut out of
the Ancient Writers the which is against them, and bring forth spurious
writings under their names; and tell the people that our Religion begun with
Luther: for its easy to prove any thing, where themselves are the Judges, and
no witnesses but their own must be heard: But if they dare leave that hold, and
come into the light, its easy to evince the novelty of Popery (though not of
every particular error they hold.)

Obj. 2. If the Church of Rome be a true Church; then Popery is a safe way to
salvation: But the Church of Rome is a true Church: Therefore, etc. The
Antecedent is granted by most Protestants: ^he consequence is good; for it is
the true Religion that makes a true Church and Popery is their Religion. If
their Religion be not true, their Church is not true: If their Religion be
true, then their Church is true: and if Church and Religion be true, then they
are in a safe way to salvation.

Answ. 1. The word [Church] does usually signify among Christians, a Christian
society, or a company of Christians associated for Gods worship and mutual
edification: sometime any company of Christians whether so associated or not:
sometime those are called [Christians] as distinct from Infidels, who profess
most of the substance of Christianity, but deny some part, or who profess the
whole substance or the fundamentals, though they contradict it again by plain
consequence in other superadded points: Though these as compared with the
Orthodox are wont to be called Heretics. We deny not but that the greatest
Papists are such Christians, and that as the word [Church] is applicable to
combinations or companies consisting of such materials, so far the Roma^^sts
are a true Church; supposing that we only speak of Metaphysical Truth. But as
the word [Christian] is taken for one that so holds the fundamentals of
Christian Faith, as not to subvert them by plain consequence after he has
professed them, so it is yet under dispute whether the Romanists be a true
Church, and therefore not to be taken as granted. However those Protestant
Divines that grant them to be a true Church, do say that it is but by a
Metaphysical verity, convertible with the essence; but that Morally it is a
false Church and not a true; as a thief is a True man, that is, truly a man,
but he is not a true man, that is, not an honest faithful man.

2. The thing called [The Church of Rome] consists not of Homogeneal parts:
or at least that word signifies several sorts of persons. There are some that
with the Pope and his Cardinals entertain the full body of Popery, and enslave
the rest: There are multitudes of the people, that silently live under them,
and let them alone, and are defiled by them in many things, but receive not the
great and most dangerous part of their corruption. These are not equally to be
called the Church, nor are they equally in danger of damnation.

3. I deny the consequence of the Major Proposition; For if the Church of Rome
be a true Church it is because they are true Christians, and not because they
are Papists: so that to argue [The Church of Rome is a true Church, therefore
Popery is a safe way to Salvation] is as unsound as to argue [ Gebezi the Leper
is a living man: Therefore the Leprosy is a thing safe or profitable to man's
life] Popery is the disease of their Church, and Christianity is it that makes
them a Church: You may well therefore conclude that Christianity is a safe way
to heaven; but not that Popery is so.

To the confirmation I answer, That the Religion of Papists has two parts: The
Christian Religion, as they are Christians, and that makes them a true Church
if they be one. And the Popish corruptions, which denominate them Papists, and
that makes them not a true Church, nor is a safe way to salvation.

Obj. 3. If Papists may be saved, then Popery is a safe way to salvation. But
Papists may be saved: Therefore, etc.

Ans. To the Antecedent or Minor I answer, that Papists be not all of a sort:
some may be saved, and some cannot, if they so live and dye. If you ask who
may and who may not? I answer, that all those of them that hold the substance
of the Christian faith, and that practically, notwithstanding their errors; or
that hold no errors but what consist with the Practical holding of the
Christian faith, these shall be saved: But all those that finally hold any
error which for matter or manner is inconsistent with the Practical holding of
the Christian faith, shall be condemned.

2. To the consequence of the Major I answer, by denying it; and that on the
aforesaid account. If a Papist be saved, it is not by Popery, but from Popery.
It is therefore no better reasoning than to say [If a Leper may live, then the
Leprosy is wholesome, or a safe to preserve life] I have already spoke more to
this. If such do live, it is with more trouble, and less ^omfort, and its fewer
that live long with it, then of other sounder men: Men should not cast
themselves into a course of great doubt and difficulty as to their salvation,
and when they have done encourage themselves in it, because other men of
moderate and charitable minds are afraid to conclude that they shall certainly
be damned? Is it not a great probability or danger of damnation very terrible,
though you were not certain to be damned.

Obj. 4. There is but one true Church, and consequently but one safe way to
Heaven: That one Church is the Roman Church: And therefore they and only
they, are in the safe way to Heaven.

Answ. If you speak of the Universal Church, which is Christ's body, there is
but one and that is all true Christians. But if you speak of particular
associations of Christians called particular Churches, there are many
thousands: And so we say that the Church of Rome is (at best) but one
particular Church, or one combination of some particular Churches under the
Bishop of that City: But that Rome, or the Roman party, are the whole of the
Catholic Church of Christ, we do with abhorrency deny.

2. If the Church of Rome be any part of that Universal Church, and so in a
state of Salvation, or way to it, it is not as Papists, but as Christians, as
was said before. And therefore though there be but one safe way to Heaven, yet
that one being not Popery, but Christianity, why may not other Christians be in
a safe way to He^ven, as well as the Papists? especially who are free from
those dangerous diseases wherewith the Papists Christianity is corrupted.

Obj. 5. That Church which has Unity, Universality, Antiquity, and
unintterupted succession of Pastors and Apostles, is the only true Church, and
consequently only in the safe way to Salvation. But such is the Church of
Rome: therefore.

Answ. 1. This concludes not the point in Question [That Popery is a safe way
to Salvation.]

2. We deny the Major, and blame them that they still thrust it on us without
proof. To the particulars, 1. If Mahometans have unity, or if Satan be not
divided against Satan, it does not follow that they have the true Church; men
may agree in evil. 2. where was your universality also, when there were scarce
seven Bishops left that were free from the plague of Arrianisme? Universality
absolute (so that all errors or other parties should be excluded) the Church
has never had the happiness to enjoy since the beginning of its flourishing in
the Apostles days. Universality comparatively, that is, the greater part the
Arrians had, at least of the Bishops. The doctrine of the M^llenaries, with
many such like may plead more antiquity than Popery can: And as for succession,
there is no doubt but a Bishop or Church in the line of succession may turn
Heretical, and have successors in their Heresy. Have none of the Greek
Churches, nor Alexandria, Antioch, etc. had a succession till it fell into the
hands of a Heretic? and it would have beeen no good plea for the first
Heretical Bishop or Church to plead such succession. If there be not a
succession in Apostolical doctrine, the succession of persons will be no proof
of the truth or soundness of the Church.

3. And for the Minor of your Argument, I answer. 1. The Ethiopian, Alexandrian
and other Churches can as truly boast of these qualifications as Rome. 2. The
Papists lay a higher claim to them then they can make good. As 1. I have showed
already how far they are from unity, who are not only of so many Religions or
ways of Discipline; and of so great distance in many doctrinals, as the
controversies among themselves do manifest, but also are so disagreed about the
very center of their union, their infallible sovereign Power, whether it be in
the Pope, or a General Council, or both? Besides their unity is but of their
own party, the Romanists: And so all other parties are at some unity among
themselves: or many at least. If John of Constantinople had prevented the Pope,
and got the Title of universal Bishop, or Pope, as he did (by composition) of
universal Patriarch; and had pretended that this would have united the
Churches, I think it would not have justified his cause.

2. How can the Papists for shame pretend to universality either as to the
present or former ages? Is it nothing that all the Ethiopian, Greek, and
Reformed Churches are not of their party, besides many a thousand more? Or will
they arrogantly condemn all the rest of the Christian world as heretical, and
then say that they are the whole Church? Did they not learn this of the
Donatists? But what is become of their modesty who pretend to an universality,
for the time past, when all the Christian world was against their present
belief, and there was not such a thing as a Papist known (and revealed to us)
in the world of six hundred years after the birth of Christ.

3. And for their succession, we undertake to prove it interrupted long ago,
and that there were no true Bishops at Rome of a long time: Though men have sat
there that were chosen by Cardinals, and call themselves Bishops or Popes, yet
if according to the Scripture and ancient Councils, they were matter utterly
incapable of that form, then its plain that they were but Statues, and had but
the name without the thing, i. e. the office or authority, and therefore are
unworthy also of the name it self. Let me name two or three of their own
Writers that bear witness of this. And first their great parasite Cardinal
Baronius says ( ad an. 912.. 8.) [ What then was the face of the holy Roman
Church? how exceeding filthy, when the most potent and yet most sordid Whores
did Rule at Rome? by whose pleasure Sees were changed, Bishops were given, and
which is a thing horrid to be heard, and not to be spoken, their sweet hearts
(or mates) were thrust into Peter's chair being false Popes, who are not to be
written in the Catalogue of the Roman Popes, but only for the marking out of
such times.] And after he well adds to show that the interruption was not like
to be only in the succession of true Bishops [And what kind of Cardinal
Priests and Deacons think you we must imagine that these monsters did choose?
when nothing is so rooted in nature as for every one to beget his like] See
more in Baron. ibid. Platina speaking of the evil of those times ( de Benedict.
4.) says that [ By ambition and bribery the holy chair of Peter was rather
seized on, then possessed.]

Genebrard ( in Chronolog. l. 4. secul. 10.) speaking of the great unhappiness
of that age, says, that [In this one thing it was unhappy that for near one
hundred and fifty years about fifty Popes did wholly fall away from the virtue
of their ancestors, being Apotactici, Apostaticive potius quam Apostolici,
Disorderly and Apostatical, rather then Apostolical.]

What shall we think of all those that murdered their predecessors to obtain
the place, were they capable of being true Bishops? What shall we say of Pope
Silvester the second who was a conjurer, and agreed with the Devil to help him
to be Pope, and by the deceit of the Devil was again deprived of it by sudden
death? Does the Devil make true Bishops of conjurers? I know the deceiving
Papists would make the simple people believe that all these things that we say
of their Popes are lies of our own forging: but men that have eyes in their
heads may see who are the liars Their own Writers do commonly affirm the same
that we affirm. A Cardinal of their own (Benno) in vita Hildebrandi, affirms
this of Pope Silvester: and he lived in the times next him, and therefore might
know. Platina another of their own affirms (in vita Silvest.) that [Gesbertus
impelled by ambition, and devilish desire of rule, did first by bribery ( or
Simony) get the Archbishoprike of Rhemes, then of Ravenna, and at last of Rome,
the Devil giving him more of his help, but on this condition, that after his
death he should be wholly his, by whose deceits he had obtained such dignity.]
The like has Lyra in Gloss ad cap. 14. Maccab. l. 2. and a multitude of their
Hystorians unanimously confirm it. Yea Aeneas Sylvius who was a Pope himself
(de gest is Council. Basil. l. 1.) says [ We are not ignorant that (Pope)
Marcellinus did at Cesars command offer incense to Idols, and that another,
which is a greater and more horrible thing, did come to be Pope of Rome by the
fraud of the Devil.] In a word if Murderers, Adulterers, Conjurers that come in
by the Devil, and Heretics, may be true Bishops of Rome, and yet a man that
believes not the Popes Univerversal Vicarship can be no true Catholic
Christian; then it seems, it is a greater sin not to Believe in the Pope then
not to Believe in Christ, or then it is to bargain with the Devil, or be a
Murderer or Adulterer? Certainly these men were as incapable of being true
Bishops when these things were once publicly known of them (at least) as a
Mahometane would be: And therefore there has been many an interruption in
their succession. And many a schism there has been wherein two or three Popes
have reigned at once, and he that had the greatest strength has carried it,
when his Right was not the greatest.

QUERY. Whether the Infallible Judgment of the Roman Pope, or his Clergy must
be the Ground of our Belief of the Christian Doctrine, or of our Receiving the
Holy Scriptures as the Word of God? N.
HAving already enquired whether the Romanists or the Reformed Churches are in
the safe way to Salvation; we shall now more particularly enquire whether their
faith or ours be built on the surer grounds. Our Belief is thus resolved: we
believe the Christian Doctrine to be True, because the True God is the Author
of it. We discern that God is the Author of it, both by his Intrinsicke and
Extrinsicke Seals or attestations of it: in that it bears his image and
superscription, and is confirmed by his undoubted uncontroled Miracles, and
other effects which lead us to the cause. The revealing containing signs or
characters are the the holy Scriptures. That these Books were written by the
Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists, and were confirmed by Miracles, and are
uncorrupted in the main, we are infallibly assured of, by the evident certainty
of the historical attestation and Tradition: For we depend not barely on the
credit of a deceivable or deceitful man (such as is the Pope of Rome) or of any
fallible society of men; but on such History as we can prove by plain reason to
be infallible, containing in it, besides the Testimony of the Pope and all his
party, the same Testimony also of all the rest of the Christians in the world,
yea and of the very Heretics who were enemies to much of the truth; and enough
also even from the mouths of Infidels to confirm us: so that by this infallible
history, and universal Tradition, we have a fuller discovery that these Books
are the same that were written by the Apostles, etc. then we have that the
Statutes of Parliaments in the Reign of King James or Queen Elizabeth, are the
same that they pretend to be: And to a man that hears not God himself or the
Lord Jesus or the Apostles, and has not their immediate inspirations, we know
not how the Laws of heaven should be more fitly delivered in an ordinary
rational way, nor what surer other means such as we can expect, who live at
such a distance from the first receivers of it: unless we would have God to
speak to every man as he did to Moses, or have Christ or Apostles still among
us, or unless God must make us all Prophets by his extraordinary inspirations.
And lastly, the true meaning of this word we understand as we do the meaning of
other Laws or writings having moreover the assistance of the spirit, which is
necessary because of the sublimity and spirituality of the matter, and the
necessity of the great effects upon our hearts: Our Teachers by Translation and
further instructions are our helpers (as they must be in other things that we
would learn) and by the help of them without and of the spirit within, we are
able to understand the meaning of the words (especially comparing text with
text) and so receive the sanctifying impress upon our hearts. And thus is the
Faith of the Reformed Catholic Resolved. He receives the Bible from the hands
or mouth of his Teachers (and perhaps first believes them fide humana, that it
is Gods Word:) He knows that this Book was written in Hebrew and Greek by
the Prophets and Apostles, by Infallible Hystory or Universal Tradition. He
knows that they did it by Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, by the Image of God
which he finds on it, and by the uncontroled Miracles by which they sealed
it. He believes it to be True, because it thus proceeded from the Holy Ghost,
and so is the Word of God who is most True.

Of the Resolution of our Faith according to the Protestant Doctrine. See L. du
Plessis of the Church. cap. 4. Translat. page 121.122, 123. and Conradus
Bergius Prax. Cathol. Can. p. 208.209, 210. Disp. 2.. 125, 126. To this same
sense. Vid. and Sibrand. Lubbert. Princip. Christ. Dogm. li. 1. page 20 etc.

What the Resolution of the Roman faith is, the Question which we are now to
discuss does intimate in part, for it cannot be laid down in one proposition,
because they are of so many minds themselves. Indeed we may see in this their
foundation that Popery is a very maze and dungeon; for the builders of this
Babel are all in confusion at the laying of their first stone. Yet this much
they seem to be mostly agreed in: Bellar. de Verbo Dei li. 1. cap. 2.
That the Scripture is the word of God, and part of the Rule of faith and duty,
Bellar. ibid. l. 4. cap. 3.
but not the whole Rule, nor the whole Word of God, but that unwritten
Traditions are the other part, Bellar. ib. l. 3. c. 10. Grets^r. de Agnosc.
Script. cap. 7. Col. 1908. Valent. Tom. 3. Disp. 1. qu. 1. punct. 7.. 23. But
say plainly that the judgment of the present Church is Gods word. vid. Melcb.
Ganum. li. 5. c. 5. q. 3. Turnebull. in Tetragonis. cap. 7. and 8.
and the judgment of the present Church is Gods Word after a sort (as they
speak) That the Scripture has its Authority in it self from God the prime
truth, but quoad nos, as to us, it has its Authority from the Church: That it
is the act of Tradition or the unwritten part of Gods word to tell us that the
Scriptures are the word of God, or a Divine Revelation. Vid. Malderum 22 aequ.
1. Art. 1. Sect. 6. Stanlet. princip. d^ct. li. 8. c. 21. and li. 9. c. 3.
respons. ad arg. 5. Et in controv. rel. Contr. 4. q. 3. are. 2. and Denfens.
author. Eccles. l. 3. c. 16.. 4. and Turnebull. Tetragonism. c. 6. 2.3. and ^
8.. 3. Bellarm. de Verbo Dei l. 4. c. 4. Gretser Defens. istius capi^is col.
1575, 1576, and Defens. c. 10. de Verbo Col. 1451. sed e contra nelius
scribentem leg. Peter. de Alliaco insent. 1. qu. 1. art. 3. litera E E. and
Lyranum Prolog. in Biblia.
And that it is the Office of the Church to judge both of this Tradition and
the Scripture; as also to decide all controversies in Religion, and to judge
which is the true sense of Scripture: and that this Church must be one only,
visible, infallible, authorized thus to judge by Christ; and this is only the
Roman Church.

Thus far the most of them seem to be agreed. But when these mysteries of
iniquity come to be opened, they fall all to pieces. For 1. Sometimes they say
that the judgment of the Church is Gods word after a sort: sometime that it is
some middle thing between a Testimony Divine and Humane. Vid Turnebull.
Totragen. c. 2. a 5. ad sinem. suarez. Disput. 3. de fide sect. 2. * 5 and
Disput. 2 sect. 4 5. and Disput. 3. sect. 12. 4. Bellarm. li 3. de Verbo Dei c.
10. ad arg ^3. and 15. Et Lib. de libero Arbitr. c. 3. At Catholici. Gretser^
in Defens. c. 10. li. 3. de Verbo col. 1437. estius in sent. 3. did. 23. 4.
Malde^. in 22 ae Thom. q. 1. a 1. sec. 3.
2. And what the formal object of faith is, they are not all of a mind: whether
it be only the Prime Truth, or whether the Revelation of the Material object be
any part of the formal: (But I confess this controversy is more verbal then
real.) 3. Lege Riveti nostri Isagog. sac. script. cap. 20. suarez Disp. de fide
5. sect. 7. ^1.
And what place here to assign to the Testimony of the Church, they are not
agreed neither. Vid. valent. Tom. 3. Disp. 1. qu. 1. punct. 7. 12. Bellarm. l.
2. de Sacram. in Genere cap. 25. suarez Disput. 5. de fide sect. 5.. 5. sed
contra Melius Waldenfis li. 2. Doctrine. fid. ant. c. 19. operum. Tom. 1. etc.
27. sic Alphons. a Cast. adu. haeres. li. 1. c. 2. Melch. Can lib. c. 3. and
li. 2. c. 1. ^etr. Trigos. in summam Bonaven. qu. 1. ar. 3. suarez (contra
scipsum) de fide. Disp. 5.. 3. Bellarm. (contra scipsum) generalia controv.
fine. vid. and Durand. in 3. sent. did. 24. qu. 1. and ^erson. de vita spirit.
an. lect. 2. Coroll. 7. and e contr F^ann. Driedon. li. 1. de Eccl. Script. and
dogmat. cap. 1. and Waldens. li. 2. doctr. fid. antiq. cap. 19. and 20. Melch.
Canum Loc. Theol. l. 2. c. 8. p. 26, 27. etc.
4. Especially they are divided in the main, viz. what this Church is which is
the infallible Judge, and into whose judgment their faith is resolved, whether
it be the present Church or the former Church? Whether it be the Pope only (at
least in case of difference between him and his Council) or whether it be a
General Council though the Pope agree not (as the French and Venetians say?)
Vid. Mel. Canum. ib. page 27. 28, etc. contra. Th. Waldensem.
Yea whether it be the Clergy only, or the Laity also that are this Church? Nay
some of them plead Universal Tradition (as Holden, White, Vane, and diverse
other Englishmen of late) as if that were the same with the Roman Tradition,
or as if it were the point in controversy between us and them. And ordinarily
they use to tell us of [All the Church] and [All the Christian world] and to
mouth it in such swelling words, that the simple hearer would little think that
by [All the Church] they meant but one man, or at the utmost, him and his
factious Clergy? So also they are disagreed among themselves whether Melc.
Canus Loc. com. l. 5. c. 5. fol. 162.163.
the Bishops in a General Council are Judges with the Pope or only the Popes
Counselors? Yea or what a General Council is? Though they all agree that it is
not necessary that it be out of all the Christian world, much less the Bishops
of all Churches, but only some of those that adhere to the Pope of Rome, yet
they agree not whether it must be freely elected by all the Bishops of the
Romish faction, or only so many and of such Countries as the Pope shall
choose? and whether the major part of the Council must concur with the Pope, or
the Pope and the Minor part may not serve turn Mel. Canus l. 5. c. 5. fol. 164.
5. So also they are exceedingly disagreed about the nature and extent or
pretended infallibility of the Church of the Pope in judging. Staplet. relect.
contr. 4. qu. 2. in ^xpl. art. ^otab. 2.3.4. Valen^a Tom. 3. Disput. 1. punct.
1.. 5.
Some say that the Church judges de mediis discursive, sed de conclusione per
doctrinam propheticam and Divinam: And so these men may affirm (agreeably to
this principle) that the Popes Definitions are part of the holy Canonical
Scripture, as Melchior Canus affirms he heard a most excellent Divine
confess, and cites Gratian and Innocent also as of the same mind. Canus l. 5.
c. 5. fol. 164, 165.
And thus all the most wicked Popes are made Prophets, and speak by inspiration
of the Holy Ghost. But others of them Mel. Canu^ ubi sup. and l. 2. c. 7. f 27.
Bellarm. de Council l. 2. c. 2. suarez T^sput 8. de fide sect. 5.. 4. Alphons. a
Castro adv haeres l. 1. c. 8 Waldensis doctr. fid. l. 2. c. 22. and 23. Becanus
Tra^^. ^^ fide c. 2. qu. 5.. 4.
do deny this: Though yet they know not how it is that the Pope is infallible,
without declaring themselves Enthusiasts. Also (though says Bellarm. l. 4. de
Pontif. c. 2. all yield that the Pope may personally err through Ignorance,
yet) they are disagreed among themselves whether he may be a Heretic. Some
Pighius li. 4. Hier. Eccles. c. 8. Bellarm. li. 4. de Pont. c. 6.
say he may not, and others that its most pious and probable to think he may
not: Others reject that as false Staplet. contr. 3. qu. 4. concl. 2. Canus li.
6. c. 8.
and say he may: And one would think it should have been out of question by
long experience before this time? And Bellarmine confesses that three General
Councils did believe that the Pope might be a Heretic ( ubi sup. c. 11.) some
say St^plet. Contr. 3. qu. 4 Concl. 2. Rhimensin Luc. 22.31. Heart. in Conf.
with Reignolds c. 7. sect. 3.
that when the Pope is consulted and gives his judgment in matters of faith,
he cannot err (though in matters of fact he may) and that he is Infallible in
his Courts and Councils, though not as a private Doctor. Others Bellarm. l. 4.
de Pontif c. 3. ^. suarez de fide Disp. 5. sect. 8. 4. Valent. Tom. 3. Disp. 1.
qu. 1. p 7. 40.
say that he cannot err when he intends to bind the whole Church to receive
his sentence, or when he teaches the whole Church. Turrecremat. li. 2. sum.
de Eccles. c. 12. and li. 4 part. 2. c. 16. Valent. ubi sup. c^l. 233
Others say that the Pope may err even defining in Council; but not in errors
manifest to the Church but only in new or not manifest points. Vid Alphon. a
Castro li. 1 adv. haeres. c. 4.
Others come yet nearer the matter, and tell us merrily, that the Pope cannot
so err in judgment about matter of Faith, because when he first erreth thus,
he cease to be Pope: but this is a hard conclusion in the eyes of their
brethren.

The like disagreements there are among them about the Infallibility of a
General Council: some will make it the proper seat of Infallibility, and say
that the Pope cannot err if he be guided by the Council; else he may: Others
Bellarm. de Council. li. 2. cap. 2. Valent. Tom. 3. Disp. 1. qu 1. p^^ct. 7. 45.
Col. 274 suarez. Tract. de fide Disp. 7. sect. 7.. 10. Bellarm. de Council. li.
2. cap. 1^.
say that a General Council may err, if it be not confirmed by the Pope, yea
though the Popes Legates did consent: or if they do not follow the Popes
instructions; But that they cannot err if they follow them, or be confirmed by
him. So Bellarmine, Canus and the late champions. And if the Pope and Council
differ (as they have shrewdly done, when Councils have deposed Popes for
heresy and wickedness) some Turrecrem. sum. li. 2. c. 64. Andrad. defens.
fid. Trident. li. 1. page 86.
say, that we may more safely follow the Council then the Pope. But others Vid.
Bellarm. de Pontif. li. 4. cap. 3. Staplet. Con. 6. qu. 3. art. 5. Valentia.
Tom. 3. Disp. 1. qu. 1. punct. 7.. 45. So Canus and others.
say the clean contrary, and place the Infallibility in the Pope only, and
make it his work to reclaim the Council.

Though they are thus all in pieces among themselves even about these their
fundamentals, yet is it the custom of their deceitful Writers, to make the
simple people believe that they are all agreed, and to tell them that they have
the [Consent of the Universal Church, and of all the Christian world, and they
have Universal Tradition] etc. that by the noise of these big words, they may
do that which they cannot do by argument. Thus Doctor Vane their late
proselite, and diverse others do in their writings overlooking all their own
disagreements, and passing on as confidently in their boasts of the [Universal
Consent] as if they were either such Novices as understand not their own
Religion, or such hardened seducers, as are not willing that others should
understand it.

Here are in this our Question contained three of the greatest controversies
between us and the Papists. 1. Whether it belong to the Pope or Roman Church,
to be the Judge of Faith and Scriptures to all the world? 2. Whether the Pope
or his Clergy be in^llible in judging of matters of Faith? 3. Whether our Faith
must be resolved into this infallible judgment of theirs? Our intent in this
present Dispute is to deal most with the second, yet so as it is connexed with
the other two; and therefore shall take them in on the by, but say less to them
distinctly; and the rather because there is so much said already by our
Divines, as all the Papists on earth will never be able solidly to answer: To
let pass all those beyond Sea that have effectually confounded them, we have
Brittans enough to hold them perpetual work: as Jewel, Reignolds, Whitaker,
White, Field, Usher, Camero, Baronius, Davenant, Chillingworth (to whom they
have lately lost their cause, by showing in a vain and frivolous Reply, how
little they have to say against him) with many more, who will either remain
unanswered, or the answers will be worse to the adversaries cause, then silence
it self; which we have sufficient ground already to foretell.

As to the first of these controversies (to dispatch it in short) as we
distinguish between Judicium Descretionis, Directionis, and Decisionis, a
Judgment of Discretion, of Direction, and of Decision, so we kn^w that it is
only the later that properly denominateth a Judge in the public and ordinary
sense. Take our doctrine in these few Propositions.

1. We say that every Christian has a judgment of Discretion, to know that
the Christian Faith is true, and Scripture is the word of God: Or else he were
no Christian, or faith were not an act of judgment, or Reason, but a brutish
thing. This therefore we confess the Pope either has or ought to have.

2. Every Pastor of the Church has a judgment of direction; that is, it
belongs to him by office to be a Director of the people, and to teach those
the Christian Faith, that yet receive it not, and to confirm those in it that
have received it: And they ought to have abilities for the work of this office.
If therefore the Pope were a true Pastor, Bishop, or Preacher, this power we
should confess to be in him, as in others.

3. It belongs to these Teachers also, to be specially careful to preserve
the sacred Scriptures from corruption, and to deliver them down to posterity in
the purity as they receive them, and to translate them into known tongues, that
the people may understand them. Though others also have a part in this work,
yet the Pastors of the Church have by Office the chiefest part.

4. It belongs to them also to be witnesses and informers of the people, how
themselves did receive the Faith and Scripture from their Ancestors, and to
show them how it came down to our hands by certain Infallible Tradition from
Age to Age.

5. The Church guides they are both Preservers of the Scripture, Witnesses of
the Tradition, and Te^chers of the truth, and have such a power of judging a^
belongs to all these three.

6. In these acts of their office they ought to be Believed, and that on a
threefold account. 1. Because of the evidence which they show to prove the
truth of their Assertions: Though strictly this is rather to be called
Learning, and so Knowing, then Believing: and is common to Teachers with any
others that show the same proofs; Yet it being supposed that ordinarily they
have much more Knowledge in the things which they teach then other men have,
therefore we may well say that it more belongs to them to convince, and more
efficacy is in their Teaching because of their proofs, and better entertainment
is due to their Teaching. 2. Such a Belief also is due to them as all men
should have in their own prosession, wherein they have long studied and laid
out their time and labor, and wherein they are commonly known to excel other
men. Every man that is less studied in Law, Physic, or any other Science or
Art is bound in reason to give some credit to Lawyers, Physicians and others
that Study and Practice those Arts. This is but a humane Faith. 3. Besides this
credit before mentioned which Infidells themselves may give to the Ministers of
the Gospel (according to their capacities) there is a further credit due to
them from professed believers, and that is, as they are officers authorized by
Christ, and have a promise of his assistance to the end of the world: which
though it make them not infallible in all matters of Faith, yet does it assure
them of a more than common help of Christ, if they are his servants indeed.

7. There is more of this kind of Belief due to many Pastors (caeteris paribus)
than to one, and to the whole Church than to any part.

8. The credit of the Church or any Pastors in witnessing to the faith,
depends on their competency for such a Testimony; which consists in their
sufficency or Ability, and their fidelity, which they are rationally to
manifest that it may gain credit with others.

9. In things which God has left undetermined in Scriptures and committed to
the Governors of the Church to determine of, they have a Decisive Power. 1. For
the Time or Place, or the like circumstances of Gods worship they are necessary
in General ( viz. there must be some Time, Place, etc.) but not in specie (such
a Time, such a Place is not necessary, unless it be some that God has already
made choice of) Here the Church guides must Authoritatively Determine,
whereupon the people are obliged to obey; unless in some extraordinary cases,
where the Determination is so perverse and contrary to the General Rules which
Scripture has given for it, that it would overthrow the substance of the duty
it self. 2. And in case of Church censures, when any man is accused to deserve
Excommunication; the Church Governors have a Judicial Decisive Power, as to
those ends, though not to make a man guilty that is Innocent, yet to oblige the
people to avoid Communion with the person whom they Excommunicate; except in
such palpable mal-administration and evident contradiction of the word of God,
which may nullify their sentence (for even here their Power is not unlimited.)

10. No man or company of men (much less the Pope) has a proper Decisive
Judicial Power in matter of Christian faith, or whether the Scripture, or any
part of it; be the word of God or not?

For the opening of this, understand what we mean by a Decisive Judicial Power:
to wit, such as a Judge has in a controverted cause, where the Plaintiff and
Defendant must stand to his Judgment, be it right or wrong: so that though the
sentence be not just, yet must it be Decisive and obligatory: so that he has
Power to Judge in utramque partem, on either side, and the judgment must be
valid. Such a Decisive power no creature has in these cases that we have now
in hand.

Where let it be still remembered, that it is not the name, but the Thing that
we contend about. If they will call that a Decisive Judicial Power, which is so
limited to one part, or side, that it shall not be valid or obligatory to the
subject if it err, or go on the other side, concerning which all men have a
judgment of Discerning granted them by God (so far as they are able to
Discern, they have leave and authority) then we easily grant, that every
Pastor of the Church is thus far the Judge of Faith and Scripture: That is, if
any man doubt whether the Scripture be the Word of God, and ask a Preacher or
Bishop, he has Power to say, Yea: but not to say No: But this is no Judicial
Power: but a Teaching and Witnessing act: For the people are bound to disobey
them, if they err, and therefore bound to ^ry whether they err or not; and
not to follow their judgment further then it is right and sound: therefore
they have no deciding Judicial Power: which I prove thus.

Arg. 1. If the Pope or any other had such a Judicial Decisive Power, then
might they oblige us to Believe that there is no God, that Christ is not the
Redeemer, that Scripture is not the word of God, and so they might cast Faith
and Scripture out of the Church: But this is false and abominable; therefore
the Pope has no such Power.

For the consequence, it is manifest, supposing that the Pope should give
judgment against God, Christ, or Scripture, then men must (by this Doctrine)
be bound to obey it, and forsake God, Christ, and Scripture for the Pope.

Whereunto add a second Argument from a further absurdity: Then either such as
renounce God, Christ, and Scripture may be saved, or else God binds men (by
the Pope) to renounce him and the faith to their own damnation. But both these
consequents are false and abominable: Therefore.

I know they will here reply, that we must not suppose that the Pope can err in
his judgment, and therefore being infallible, he will certainly make no such
false Decision. To which I say, 1. Why then should it be said that God has
given Authority to decide in utramque partem, on either side? Does God give a
man Authority to do that, which he has promised him and all others that he
shall never do: But he will keep him from? This is to make Gods Commissions to
be impious, and his Grace to the Pope only to hinder the execution of them in
an impious way. Who dare say openly that [God has given authority to the Pope
to judge decisively and obligatorily that there is no God, Christ or Scripture,
though he will graciously hinder him from so doing] If the Papists say that
they do not say so, I would know then what their judicial power in these
matters is? Is it only this, that the Pope has Power to judge, that there is
a God, a Christ, a word of God? etc. Why so have others as well he? If they
shall dare to say, that matters of faith are not such to us (that is, we be not
obliged to believe them) till the Pope have determined them: I answer, What! is
no Heathen or Infidel bound to Believe that there is a God, a Christ, a
Scripture, till the Pope tell him so? Shall all Infidels be excused in
judgment, that had the Gospel preached to them by any other Christians except
the Pope or others in his name? Is no man on earth bound to believe in Christ
that knows not the Popes mind in the matter? And must men believe in the Pope
before they believe in Christ? And must they believe in Christ only because
the Pope bids them, or because they first believe in the Pope? I do not think
that either the ears of Good Christians, or rational Infidels will relish such
doctrine. And what is this Believing in the Pope that must go first? Is it not
to take him to be Saint Peter's successor, and that Saint Peter was Christ's
Disciple, who had a promise of infallibility, which is now devolved to the
Pope: And must this be believed before men believe in Christ? We must believe
what he promised, and who were his servants, before we believe in himself? This
is a ground too like the Popish superstructure.

But perhaps, they may in time grow moderate, and tell us, that it is not in
all points of faith, but some only that the Pope is made Judge: He may not
judge about Christ himself* whether he be the Messiah, but about his Doctrines?

Answ. 1. By what warrant will they distinguish, and claim power in one, which
they have not in the other? 2. Is it all, or some of Christ's Doctrines that the
Pope is Judge of? If all, then it seems he must judge whether he that Believes
shall be saved, or not? Whether we should love God or hate him? Whether we
should seek first Gods Kingdom, or worldly vanities? And whether a man should
commit Murder, Adultery, Theft, etc. or not? May he decide these on either
part? or on one only, as others may do? May he judge that there is no
Judgment, Resurrection, or life Everlasting? I know they dare not say it: If
it be but some of Christ's Doctrines that the Pope is made Judge of, then let
them tell us which it is, and give us their proofs, and they shall hear more
from us. Let it be the smallest point they will imagine; Has God given power
to the Pope to contradict him and give him the Lie? If God says, It is so: May
the Pope say, It is not so? What if the Pope say that the Gospel of Matthew or
Luke or John is no part of Gods word? Must we believe him? What if he tell as
that the world was made in five days and not in six? Must we believe him? 2. If
they yet fly to his infallibility, I shall speak more to that anon (though the
former answer may well suffice them) But to another.

Arg. 3. The Scripture is Gods Law. The Pope is not the Judge of Gods Law:
therefore he is not the Judge of Scripture.

The Major I hope no Christian will deny. The Minor is evident from the nature
and use of Laws and Judgments: The Law is Norma judicis in judicando: the
Judges Rule: He is not to Judge the Law, but the cause of particular persons by
that Law. Indeed as to the right guidance of his own act of Decisive Judging
the cause of the person, he has a Judgment of discretion concerning the sense
of the Law; but, as if he Judge upon a false exposition of the Law, the party
may appeal from him, so (which concerns our present case) he has no power to
Judge the Law it self: As he cannot make a plain text to bear a false sense,
or oblige the subject to believe a false sense: so in a doubtful case it
belongs to the Lawgivers only to interpret their own Laws. Only a sentence
of a lawful Judge grounded upon a false exposition, may sometime be executed
among men where justice cannot be had: but no man is bound to Believe that it
is true and just: James tells men what it is to pretend to be a Judge of the
Law, in stead of doing it, and leaving that to the one Lawgiver, Jam. 4, 11,
12. And if the Pope be made Judge of every controverted difficulty in
Scripture, then why is he so unfaithful that he has not hitherto written us an
infallible Commentary on it? and why does he not determine all the
controversies about it, that among his own followers remain yet undetermined?
(of which more anon.)

Arg. 4. If the Pope be made the Deciding Judge of Faith and Scripture, then
either of the plain points, or only of the controverted difficulties, or of
both: But not of the plain points: For 1. That which is evident and not under
controversy, needs no Judge: To the ignorant there may be need of an
interpreter and teacher, but not of a Judge: 2. Such texts of Scripture do
oblige us whether the Pope Judge of them or not: Therefore there is no need of
his judgment that they may oblige us. Who dare think that a man is not bound
by the word of God, to love God above all, to believe the Resurrection of
Christ, and of us, to love Christ's disciples, etc. unless he know the judgment
of the Pope. Do not all Laws of the Land oblige the subject upon the bare
legislation and promulgation, before the Judge meddle with them? If they did
not first oblige us to duty, there were no place for the Judge to sentence us
to punishment for disobedience. It is the Legislator that oblige^h to duty by
his Law, proclaimed or any way published in his name* But judgment interveneth
to oblige men to punishment, and bring it to execution, and to help them to
that which by the Law is their right. If therefore it be evident in the very
nature of Laws and judgment, that we are obliged by Gods Laws to Believe and
obey them in the several particulars before any judgment of the Popes; it is
then but dotage to talk of a Judicial Decisive power in the Pope to oblige men
to Believe those same doctrines, and obey those same precepts of the word. And
for the dark and controverted texts. 1. Those are not of that moment, as that
men's salvation must lie upon the exposition of them. The points absolutely
necessary to salvation are plainly delivered. 2. Obscurity shows the need of a
Teacher, but not of a Judge. At least its plain, that when any Teacher shall
remove the obscurity, those texts oblige us as well as the plainest. 3. As I
said, If the Pope be Judge of all difficult controverted texts, he is an
unfaithful Judge that will not expound them to us, and decide so many
controversies as yet depend. What good will it be to the Church to have such a
Judge of difficult controverted texts of Scripture, as in the consciousness of
his ignorance dare not give us his judgment? but has left them undecided
these fifteen hundred years? This dumb Oracle that has eyes and sees not, and
a mouth but speaks not, is not a fit foundation for the Churches Faith. 5.
Where God calls men to Office and Power, he accomplisheth or fitteth them in
some measure for the performance of it: but God has not fitted all Popes, no
nor any, to Jugde Decisively of all controverted difficultyes in Scripture, and
Religion: Therefore he has not made them Judges of them. The Minor shall be
further proved anon: Many Popes have been ignorant, and unlearned; many
Heretics, unfit to decide all such controversies; and they have showed their
unfitness by their non performance or ill performance.

The great Objection of the Papists is this.

Obj. 1. What! Shall every one be the Judge of Scripture? and take it in what
sense he please? shall every unlearned man or woman expound it according to
their own fancies? then we shall have variety of expositions. Whether is it
fitter for the Church or every simple fellow to be Judge?

Answ. 1. Neither? Has God made subjects to be Judges of his Laws by which
they must live, and by which they must be judged? Neither they nor your Pope,
must be Judges of the Laws, in a proper sense, but obeyers of it.

2. We say not that the people should expound the Scriptures as Teachers of
others (unless in their own callings, as to the children servants, etc. when
they are able) This we reserve to the Officers of the Church.

3. Nor do we say that any people must expound Scripture according to their own
fancies or mis-guided conceits, but according to the true meaning of them. 4.
Nor should they in difficult cases which are past their understandings, presume
of their own wit to know the right meaning; but have recourse to the Teachers
that God has set over them, that so by their help they may learn the meaning
of that word which they understood not. 5. And if their Teachers be singular,
or give them just cause to suspect their skill or fidelity, they have more
reason to regard the Judgment of the Judicious, then of the ignorant, and of
the whole Church then of any one or few; so far as the credit or authority of
men, must support a learner while he is a learning. 6. But what! Is it indeed
such a monstrous heretical conceit in the eyes of a Papist, that every
Christian should have a Judicium discretionis, a Judgment of discerning to
perceive and discern which is truth and which is falsehood? Good Lord, whether
will the heat of contention carry men? Why if they must not have this
discerning judgment. 1. Then God does bind them all to be fools, and ignorant.
2. And then Religion and the Christian Faith, are the endowments of bruits that
know not what they hold or do, and not of Reasonable men. 3. Or else they that
will be Christians must have no Faith or Knowledge; which is a contradiction.
Is not Faith an act of discretion? Must not he that believes the Resurrection,
and Everlasting Life, believe them with his own understanding? And does he not
in believing them, Judge them to be True, and Judge the contrary doctrine to be
false? 4. Why will you read, or preach Scripture to the people, if you would
not have them receive it, by a judgment of discerning? would you not have their
judgment discern the Truth of what God has written, or the Priest shall preach
to them? 5. Doubtless you will allow them a judgment of Discretion, about the
Popes Decrees and Canons, and your own Determinations. How can they believe
you, if they do not by judgment discern the things you say to be true? And why
will you not allow them the like toward God and his Word? Will you say, It is
their duty to believe the Pope, and their sin to believe God? Or its their duty
to understand the Popes Laws, and their sin to understand Gods Laws? Why? what
do you say less when you yield them a judgment of discretion as to the Pope or
Church, and deny it in Respect to the Word of God? If you say that they will
misunderstand the Scripture* I ans. 1. So will the Pope and the best and wisest
man on earth in some part: because while we are here, we know but in part. 2.
Their error is their sin: But does it follow that they may not see at all, for
fear of missing their way? Must they put out their eyes, and be led by the
Pope, for fear of erring? Must they not know or labor to know, for fear of
mistaking? Will any Master take this well of his servant, to put out his eyes,
or do nothing, for fear of doing his work amiss? Or refuse to go his journey,
lest he miss the way? Then we must not judge of the Popes Laws neither, and
consequently, not judge them to be true, for fear of erring in our judgment.
When you prove that the Church of Rome is the true Church, would you not have
the people judge of your proof for fear of erring? This is even to make beasts
of Christians. 3. What are Teachers for, but to guide them, and help them to
understand. If you are afraid lest they should err, be the more diligent in
instructing them. But this is the difference between the work of a Popish
Teacher and ours. They make it their work to put out men's eyes that they may
have the loading of them, because they are troubled with an imperfection in
their sight, and therefore will err if those imperfect eyes be left in their
heads: we make it our work, by all means we can use, to cure their eye sight
that they may be able to see themselves, in the mean time advising them, while
their eyes are under cure, not wholly to trust to them, but to use the help of
others, to show them the way, and to tell them of dangers. The Protestant will
set his Child to School that he may learn to know, that which through
childishness he knows not: But according to the Popish way, we should forbid
them all books or learning, lest they misunderstand them; and let them never
know any thing lest they know amiss. The next step, is to send them to Bedlam.
The Apostle would have men have their senses exercised to discern Good and
Evil, Heb. 5.14. The Papists would not have the people to have a judgment of
Discerning: If they must not Discern, they must be ignorant: When God so much
requires and extolleth knowledge.

But I Will leave this Question, and pass to the next.

Qu. 2. Whether the Pope be Infallible, in this Decisive judgment which he
pretends to? Which we deny.

But before I come to give the reasons of our denial, I shall further declare
our judgment about the whole matter of the Churches Infallibility, that the
true state of the controversy may appear.

And 1. We easily grant that as there is an Objective certainty in all points
of the Christian Faith, and in the very truth, so the Pope is infallible while
he believes and declares nothing but the truth. He and every man else that
speaks according to Gods word, is so far infallible, because that word is
infallible. They need not thank us for this concession.

2. We grant that neither the Church of Rome (if a true Church) nor any other
particular true Church can err in fundamentals, or in points of absolute
necessity to salvation, in sensu composito; that is, while they remain a true
Church, they never deny the essentials of a true Church: For if they once deny
the essentials, they do eo nomine cease to be a true Church.

3. We grant that Christ's universal Church shall never deny any one point of
Faith essential to Christianity, or absolutely necessary to Salvation: For then
Christ should have no true Church on earth (when the whole should thus
Apostatize or turn Heretics) and all the then present world should be damned.

4. The Church as Reasonable sensible men are infallible in many matters of
fact, of which they may give us unerring reports: as that, This Bible was
delivered as the word of God by their Ancestors, as they might testify it was
delivered to them: and that this Creed or sum of Faith also was thus delivered
in the words now in use, etc.

5. There is an infallible certainty in the evidence which the former Church
has left, and the present Church possesset^ to prove that this same Scripture
was written by the Apostles and Evangelists, and was delivered to the first
Churches, and from them, down to us: and that multitudes of miracles were
wrought for the confirmation of the Doctrine contained in them.

6. An illiterate person may have an infallible certainty that all points
necessary to salvation are expressed in certain translations of Scripture, and
that so far, and much further, they are truly translated, and that such things
there are in that Book as the Readers affirm there to be, though himself cannot
read them. For all this is infallibly discovered by common consent, and
especially of adversaries: When all men that are certainly able to judge, and
are honest and impartial, affirm it without doubt, and those that would gladly
contradict it, as being by their interests carried thereto, yet cannot do it,
or at least not with any considerable pretense: This gives men as infallible a
proof, as the common testimony of men does, that there is such a City as Rome
or Paris which we never saw.

7. And we further grant, all that Teaching and Witnessing power to the Church
officers, which was expressed under the last Question; and all that dueness of
Belief and obedience to them, which was there asserted. So much for our
Concessions.

But we deny, 1. That either the Pope of Rome, or a General Council are
naturally or supernaturally privileged from all error in matters of Gods
revealed will, or that they are privileged from the danger or possibility of
teaching these their errors to others, even to the Church. 2. We deny that the
Pope or the Roman Clergy are secured from the danger of Apostasy or Heresy:
They may fall so far as to deny the Fundamentals or Essentials of Christianity:
though the Universal Church shall never so fall away.

We shall first speak of the Popes Infallibility, and afterward of a General
Council, that we may speak to the several parties among the divided Papists
herein.

And against the Popes Infallibility we thus argue.

Argu. 1, They that lay claim to this Infallibility, do give us no proof of
their claim: Therefore they cannot expect that we should believe them. The
proof lies on the pretenders, who give us no proof.

If they can prove it, it must be either by his natural perfection, or some
supernatural endowment, by which the Pope must be more Infallible then other
men: The former they pretend not to (and no wonder) The later they do pretend
to: But, if God supernaturally have ascertained all Popes of an Infallibility
in matters of Faith, then he has done this either by his written Word, or by
unwritten Tradition, or both: by which it must to us be proved: But he has
done it neither by his written Word, nor by unwritten Tradition. For Tradition
they must show it us, either in certain monuments of the Church which are in
stead of writing (but that they cannot do) or else in the minds of all the
members of the Church. For that which concerns all their Salvation, must be
delivered to all: But this they cannot show: Nay we show them the contrary:
that is, the greatest part of the present Church on earth denying any such
Tradition: and the most approved Writers of the former Ages, telling us the
contrary, and all taking the Pope as fallible, so that they cannot give us one
line of any one Father or Council for many hundred years after Christ, that
ever had such a conceit as theirs. And if they will pretend to a private
Tradition which none but themselves have received and are entrusted with, and
so make themselves the absolute Judges of their own cause, and give us no proof
but their own words, we will believe them as fast as we can, but we must desire
them not to be too hasty with us.

And for the written Word they cannot thence prove a grant of their
infallibility. 1. Because they tell us that we cannot know the Scripture to be
the Word of God, but by their infallible judgment: Therefore we must know
their judgment to be infallible first; and therefore it is first to be known
some other way, and not by Scripture. Indeed here they have long tired
themselves in their Circle, which some of them would hide by vain words if they
could, but Holden and others of them are forced to confess it, and that they
have no way out but by retiring to the universal testimony or tradition as an
infallible evidence, in stead of the Authoritative judgment, or infallibility,
or private Tradition of the Church of Rome. They tell us that we cannot know
the Scripture to be the Word of God, but by the infallible judgment of their
Church (And that is in the Issue of the Pope) And when we call for the proof of
that infallibility, they refer us to the Scripture. So that this is plainly to
say that neither Scripture nor Papal infallibility can be proved; and so to
forsake both Popery and Christianity: Then it seems, no man can know the Popes
infallibility but upon the authority of Gods word, which cannot it self be
known till that infallibility be known. It must be Gods Grant, written or
unwritten that must prove their infallibility: But that word or Grant, written
or unwritten, cannot be known to be of God, till we first know their Authority
to judge, and infallibility in judging: It evidently follows therefore
according to them, that neither one nor the other can be known, because no one
of them can be known till the other be first known.

But 2 If we could know the Scripture to be Gods Word, before we know their
infallibility in judging, yet we cannot know the true sense of that Scripture
(as they confidently tell us) first: Well then, I am one that doubt of the
Popes infallibility, and demand his proof: Bellarmine turns me to Luke 22. I
have prayed that thy faith fail not. I must know how I shall be sure that this
is the meaning of that Scripture (which is so little apparent to an ordinary
eye) He has nothing to tell me, but that the Church says so: And how shall I
know that the Church is in the right? Why because it cannot err. And how shall
I know that? Why by this Text. And so they are amazed in another Circle, past
recovery. For they expressly and frequently tell us, that the Scripture is no
good evidence but when it is rightly expounded: and that no exposition is right
but that which is given by the infallible judgment of the Church; and so the
Popes infallibility cannot be known till the true meaning of Texts be known
that prove it; and the true meaning of those Texts cannot be known, till their
infallible judgment be first known: What follows therefore, but that neither
of them can be known? The true product of Popery. This is the usual success of
false arguing for a good cause; to overthrow both the cause and argument: so do
the Papists as much as in them lies overthrow both Christ's Doctrine and their
own.

3. But let us examine the particular proofs from Scripture that they bring His
first proof ( lib. 4. de Pontif. cap. 3.) is from Luke 22. [Simon, Simon, Satan
has desired, etc. but I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not, and
when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.] Does this Text say that the
Pope of Rome is infallible? Yes, if you will take Bellarmines word. And first
he tells us that (among themselves) there are three several expositions given
of this Text; and it is but one of the three that will serve their turn: Good
still! And how shall we know that this one which Bellarmine hit on, is the
right? Let any impartial man peruse his reasons, and make his best of them: For
indeed there is no reason in them. But on the contrary I shall presume to tell
them, why I suppose that this Text does not talk of the Popes infallibility. 1.
Because here is never a word either of the Pope, or of Rome, or of
Infallibility. 2. Because the thing here promised is expressly restrained to one
individual person, Simon. 3. The thing here promised was about Peter's personal
Faith, and not about infallibility in judging. For 1. In that respect that
Satan desired to sift Peter, in that respect Christ promised the not failing of
his Faith. But it was in respect of his personal Faith, and not his Cathedral
judgment that Satan is here said to desire to sift him: Therefore, etc. 2. It
is expressly said to be [his Faith] that should not fail: But his Faith, is not
his tongue or Cathedral sentence: words be not Faith.

4. It is not all degree of infallibility or not failing that Christ prays
for to Simon: but he only prays that his Faith may not be overcome,
foreseeing that it would shake, and that he would deny him: So that this is no
promise of perfect Infallibility to Peter himself as appeared by the issue.

5. Peter himself was to be converted from some failing: Therefore he was not
exempted from it: And the case here in hand is such as that conversion had
respect to. Therefore it was not, that he should not fail in Cathedral
Determinations; for he was not converted from such. Bellarmine here most
immodestly would intimate that the text speaks not of Peter's conversion from
any sin, but of his turning to his brethren to speak to them; as if it were
[When thou turnest thee to speak to thy Brethren, strengthen them] Nothing but
the Popes infallibility, or the gross fallibility of common reason, could make
a learned man think that this is the sense of the Text.

6. The Papists pretend that here is somewhat promised to Peter which the rest
of the Apostles were not partakers of: But that is not so: For, if it were (as
it was) that he should not Apostatize: the same was given to them all (except
Judas) If it had been that he should be infallible in teaching the Church, so
were the rest too as well as he. The reason therefore of mentioning Peter in
particular, was because Christ foresaw the temptations and lamentable fall of
Peter in denying Christ with cursing and oaths: from which he had need of a
special conversion, that God might not forsake him and give him up to a total
failing of his Faith.

7. Two things, says Bellarmine, are here obtained for Peter: See Bannes in
2.2. q. 1. a. 10. p. 149. restraining the text to Peter alone.
The one is that he himself should never lose the faith, nor fall as to his
faith. The second is, that he as Pope should never teach any thing contrary to
faith, or that none should ever be found in his seat that should so do: Of
which privileges (says he) perhaps the first did not descend to his
successors, but doubtless the last did.

But note here what a pass this learned Cardinal has brought his great cause
to. 1. The text speaks but of one thing and not of two: Faith is one thing, and
Cathedral determination is another. Does Christ mean both, when he names but
one? Expressly it is only the first privilege that he promises Peter, and
says not a word of the later: It was his Heart, and not his tongue that was
the seat of faith, and that Christ establishes: which is also evident by the
issue: for sure his tongue failed by speaking against the faith, when he cursed
and swore that he knew not the man. 2. Bellarmine confesses that this
privilege [that his own faith should not fail] extends not perhaps to the
Popes: so that for all this their faith may fail: If so 1. Then the only
privilege mentioned in the Text extends not to them: For it speaks of no
more: The text promises them nothing to the Pope, but what it never promised
to Peter. 2. And if it did promise both privileges to Peter (that neither
Faith nor tongue should fail) how can Bellarmine prove that one part belongs
to the Pope, when he confesses the other does not? The Text speaks but to the
same person, and not in one half to one, and in the other half to others. I may
well argue therefore in this manner: To whomsoever Christ here promises that
his faith shall not fail, to him only does he speak in this text: But he
promises only to Peter here that his faith should not fail, therefore it is
only Peter and not the Popes that he speaks of. The Major is clear according
to the intelligible sense of the words (and Bellarmine has not yet proved a
mystical sense) The Minor is confessed by himself.

Lastly Bellarmine says ( de verbo dei li. 3. c. 3.) that [Onely out of the
litteral sense of Scripture, effectual arguments are to be fetched] But this
great argument of his for the Popes infallibility is not fetched out of the
literal sense of Scripture: therefore by his own confession it is uneffectual
and unjust.

The second Text which he cites to this use, is Mat. 16. [On this Rock I will
build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it] A double
argument he would fetch from hence. One from the Name Rock, the other from the
nature of a Foundation, which both imply firmeness. Ans. 1. Note that here is
in the Text not one word of the Pope, of the Church of Rome more then any
other, or of infallibility. 2. How does he prove, that by the Rock is not
meant Peter's Faith, or that Doctrine which he confessed but Peter himself? 3 If
he had proved it, are not all the Prophets and Apostles as well as Peter called
the foundation? Ephesians. 2.20. So that here is no more promised to him, then what
was elsewhere promised and given to the rest: Only his present confession,
occasioned the promise to be made expressly and particular at that time to him.
4. As the rest of the Apostles were the Foundation on which we are built, and
yet their successors are not so: So though Peter were the Foundation, it
follows not that all or any of his successors are so.

The third text which Bellarmine cites is Joh. last [Feed my Sheep.] Where
note again, 1. That here is not a word of the Pope, or Rome, or infallibility.
2. Did not Christ bid the rest of the Apostles Feed as well as Peter? Sure Mat.
28. He bid them all, Go teach all Nations, baptizing them, and teaching them to
observe all things whatever he commanded them. And what could Peter do more in
Feeding? Yea thirdly, Are not all Pastors, though inferior to Apostles bound to
Feed the Sheep of Christ? and yet it follows not thence that they are
infallible.

4. Bellarmine would next prove this from [The High Priests wearing the Urim
and Thummim, Exodus 28.] When he first confesses that it is not agreed among
Jews or Christians what these are: And yet it will serve him for a proof. 2.
The Priests were not infallible for all their Urim and Thummim: therefore no
more is the Pope. They judged Christ not to be the Messiah, and therefore
crucified him. They lived and died Infidels, and hardened the people in the
same Infidelity, for which they were broken off and unchurched.

3. And whereas he argues that the High Priest was infallible because the
people were to go to him for resolution of difficulties, and obey them, Deuteronomy.
17. I must say that Bellarmine had some fault in his eyes that caused him to
overlook the Judge, and name only the High Priest. God sends them to the
Judge, who was the chief Magistrate in those days, as well as to the High
Priest; as any man that will read the text may see. If therefore the one of
them be infallible, because of this, why is not the other so too? But perhaps
they will make the Pope to be the successor both of the Magistrate and Priest,
and so to be the universal Emperor as well as the universal Bishop; and use
both his swords, that so this promise may belong only to him: For he will
hardly grant every King or Judge to be infallible.

4. By this rule the rest of the Priests also should be infallible: For the
people were also to receive the Law at their mouths.

5. When was there ever one Priest in any age so impudent at Bellarmine and his
faction are, to plead for or pretend an infallibility in themselves? Let them
name one Priest or person if they can, that ever had such a conceit of
themselves, except it were Gods Prophets in the matters of their Prophecy.

6. What if the Jews High Priest had been infallible? What Is that to the Pope of
Rome any more then to another man? Has he indeed yet proved himself successor
of the Jews High Priest? Except as a corrupter of the Law, and a persecutor of
the Church of Christ.

Well! you have heard all the Scripture arguments that Bellarmine had to bring
(for he brings no more) to prove the pretended infallibility of the Pope. May I
not well say that it is no marvel that they are such ill friends to
Scripture, who have no more Scripture (that is, none at all) to befriend the
very foundation of their cause? And may I not justly recite again Bellarmines
own conclusion lib. 3. de verbo Dei c. 3. and from thence show them that their
cause is built upon confessed fraud and vanity [ It is agreed b^tween us (says
Bellarmine) that only out of the literal sense of Scripture effectual
Arguments are fetched:] But Bellarmine brings no one Argument for the Popes
infallibility out of the literal sense of Scripture: therefore he brings no
one effectual Argument from Scripture.

But yet one other Argument he has, though not from Scripture, and no more:
and that is from a double pretended experience: And his first experience is [
That in all the other Patriarchal seats there have been Heretics, but not in
that of Rome.] But here 1. Bellarmine must be judge, or the Pope who is a
party, before all the Patriarchs can be thus condemned. 2. And what if that
were true? Can he say the like of all the Bishops, as well as Patriarchs? If
not, they may as well hence prove themselves infallible, as the Pope can do. 3.
Whether ever there were in the chair at Rome either Pope Liberius an Arrian,
Pope Honorius a Monothel^te, Pope John denying the immortality of the soul,
with abundance more such like, we shall have fitter opportunity to open anon,
to the shame of this experinemt of Bellarmines.

His second experiment is that [The Pope without a Council has condemned many
Heresies, which upon that very account have been taken for true Heresies by the
whole Church of Christ] Ans. But you must first unchurch the greatest part of
the Catholic Church, and damn most of the Christians on earth, the Greeks,
Armenians, Abassines, etc. and make your own faction, to be the whole Church of
Christ, before you will ever give us the least proof of this. All the Church
does not do that which your flatterers do. Nor did the ancient Church do any
such thing. As other Bishops condemned Heresies as well as the Pope, so many a
Heresy was judged such by the faithful, without any more interposition of the
Pope then another Bishop.

Having seen thus how little their great Champion has to say for the Popes
infallibility, I could willingly have looked about me into some of the rest of
them, to see if they can say any more; but that its known that most of them
tread the same path Only I may not over pass the new way that some of them have
taken up of late, to prove their infallibility, and to avoid their common
Circle. And this you may see in the Jesuits late superficial answer to
Chilling worth. Forsooth, they tell us, that when they prove the infallibility
of their Church from Scripture, it is but for our sakes because we confess the
Authority of Scripture, but not of their Church. But when they go according to
the true nature and order of the matter, then they set the Church before the
Scripture, and independantly of it.] The reason of this Jesuit (supposed to be
Knot) is this [Because the Church is before the Scripture, and because the
Miracles wrought by the Apostles did first prove their own infallibility, and
from thence secondarily the infallibility of their Doctrine. And when we are in
high expectations of the proofs of the Roman infallibility by his Arguments
which are Independent of Scripture, and before the belief of it, he tells ^s
that it is by the like Aaguments as the Apostles proved their infallibility,
which he thus enumerateth So the Church of God by the like still continued
Arguments and Notes, of many great and manifest Miracles, Sanctity, Sufferings
Victory over all sorts of enemies, conversion of Infidels, all which Notes are
daily more and more, conspicuous and convincing, and shall be increasing the
longer the world shall last] And withal he tells us, that [ These Miracles,
etc. prove them to be infallible in All things, and not only in some, or else
we cannot know which those some be, and what to believe and what not.]

Thus you have the sum of the new Fundamentals of the Romish faith, and of the
famous confutation of Chillingworth. But all these Knots are easily losed
without cutting; yea shake them only, and they fall loose like Juglers Knots.

1. We easily grant that Christ the head of the Church was before the Doctrine
by himself delivered in the flesh, as it contains many things superadded to
the old Testament and the doctrine of John, Baptist.

2. Its evident that Christ himself gathered his first Gospel Church by
preaching his Doctrine, that is, he drew them to be his Disciples, by
convincing them that he was the Messiah, the Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world; so that this his Doctrine was before this his Church.

3. We grant that the Apostles were Apostles before themselves did preach the
Gospel as Apostles: But it was the Gospel, and preached by Christ, before they
preached it.

4. We easily grant that both Apostles and Gospel were long before the writing
of this Gospel, which we call the holy Scriptures.

5. We grant that the Apostles Miraculous works did sufficiently prove, not
some only, but all the Doctrine which they delivered to the Church or any part
of it, in the name of Christ and as his: For though they confirmed only those
Doctrines which were delivered in execution of their Commission, yet seeing God
would not have set to this seal, if they had gone beyond and against their
Commission, therefore it also assures us that they kept close to it. But this
proved them not infallible before they received that Commission, nor afterward
in any point which they should deliver as their private opinion, which they
fathered, not on the Inspiration of the Spirit. The Apostles were not
infallible about Christ's Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, when they
understood them not: The Disciples were not infallible about the Acceptableness
of Infants to Christ, when they forbad them to be brought. Thomas was not
infallible about Christ's Resurrection when he believed it not. Peter was not
infallible when he gave Christ that Satanical council, for which he was ^antum
non (almost) excommunicated, Mat 16.22, 23. Even presently after the great
promise to him; Nor when he denied that he knew Christ, with curses and oaths;
nor when he dissembled and Barnabas with him, Gal. 2.

6. We maintain that the Apostles Doctrine thus sealed by Miracles, and
Delivered in Writing to the Churches, does carry with it an Attestation from
God of its infallibility, if there be never more Miracle wrought in the world.
For the proof of this I refer the Reader to my Determination in a Book
Entitled, The Unreasonableness of Infidelity.

7. It is this sealed Doctrine contained in Scripture, and preached by
Ministers, which converteth men to Christ, and makes them Christians, and
therefore it is in order before the present Church and the cause of it.

8. We deny and confidently deny that God has Commissioned the Pope to do the
work which he Commissioned the Apostles to do, and gave them the power of
Miracles to confirm, that is, to Attest the Works, Sufferings, Resurrection,
and words of Christ as eye or ear witnesses of them from himself: and to be the
first promulgators of some of his Laws to the universal Church, and to deliver
down an infallible sealed Scripture, to all succeeding Ages, and by the
ordinary working of Miracles to convince the unbelieving world. Let him show
his Commission for this Apostleship if he would be believed.

9. We as confidently deny that the Pope is a Prophet, or is inspired by the
Holy Ghost, as the Prophets and Apostles were, that so they might infallibly
deliver us Christ's doctrine.

10. And they cannot expect that we should believe till we have some proof of
it, that the Pope, or the Church of Rome has the Power of working Miracles, or
are endowed with a spirit of Miracles, or that they can convince those that
deny the Scriptures by their own Miracles that they are the true Church, or
that ever they confirmed those points by Miracles, which is, now called Popery.

Thus much to let the Jesuit know where we differ from him: And now to the
point. We call for his proofs, which he here mentions to us in general names
Non esse and non apparere; are to us all one. Give us sufficient proof of your
sealing the Doctrine of Popery by Miracles, or the Popes Infallibility by
Miracles, as the Apostles did the Scriptures, and their preaching, and then you
shall carry the cause, and we profess that we will rejoycingly pass into your
Tents, and proclaim you Prophets or Apostles of Christ: But when we live among
you, and so did our Fathers before us, and hear you prate and boast of
Miracles, when we cannot see that ever you did so much as make a dead flea
alive again, nor cannot see the least Miracle from you, if we would ride or go
as far as our horse or legs can carry us, to see it, what can we take you for
but the most shameless sort of cheaters?

If you could accuse us of negligence, as if we might see your Miracles if we
would but travail for it, or of unbelief, as if we denied that which we have
evidence of, we might bear the blame: but there is no such thing. I profess as
weak as I am, I would go many a hundred miles to see such Miracles as you boast
of, if I had sufficient ground of expectation that I might not lose my labor.
And I would read over any Volumes that I were able to find suciffient Testimony
of them. But where is this testimony? Knot refers us to Brierly, and others to
such like reciters of their Fables. And when all is done, there are three sorts
of Miracles that they speak of. 1. The Miracles of the Apostles and first
Churches mention in Scripture, and these are against Popery; so that we may
well say that the doctrine which contradicts Popery is confirmed by Miracles
in that the Scripture is so confirmed. 2. The Miracles of the following
Churches till six hundred. These were comparatively few, and less certain, and
fabulous mixtures in many of the reports of them. But whatever they were, they
were no confirmation of the Popes Infallibility, or universal Episcopacy or
Jurisdiction, which neither the Instruments of those Miracles, nor any man else
on earth, as far as can be proved did then believe. And whereas there were some
Ceremonious fopperies that were then used, which the Papists do yet use, and
would persuade us that these Miracles were confirmations of them, we deny it,
and profess the nullity of their pretended proofs. They say, [If they be not
infallible in all things, how can we believe them in any thing?] I answ.
Because that 1. Their Miracles are expressed Attestations to some thing, that
is, to Christianity, but not to all things that they may think! Nor could they
ever work a Miracle to confirm such private opinions. 2. And the substance of
Christianity which their Miracles do attest, were more unquestionable before
attested by Scripture and former Miracles; whereas the errors which they
introduced are contradicted by Scripture and the Miracles that attested it.

And whereas they would make the Apostles case to be like that of the Fathers:
It is very much different. For though the Apostles Miracles were attestations
to all their doctrine, as well as to some part; that was because they were
Officers Commissioned by Christ to that work, to deliver his doctrine first to
the world, as inspired infallible men, and to seal it to posterity for future
certainty: But the Fathers had no such work in Commission; but only to preach
the doctrine thus sealed and delivered them by the Apostles, and therefore
their Miracles were to another more private, and restrained use, according to
their Commissions and work; that is, to convert those persons to the faith that
knew of them, by a subservient attestation, so that it could oblige none to
believe them in other things, much less in their mistakes.

3. The third sort of Miracles are those of later times contained in their
Legends. And seriously, would the Jesuits persuade us that these are of equal
authority with the Miracles mentioned in Scripture? or any whit like them? I
have given you a taste of some of them in the former Disputation: more you may
see of their ridiculous vanity in Doctor Franc. Whites Defense of his Brother,
page 147.148. [ We must believe Baron. an. 1028. c. 5.
Baronius that Saint Fulbeck sucked our Ladies breasts: And Antonine Antonin.
sum. hist. p. 3. tit. 23. c. 4. 6. etc. 7. 8. etc. 1. 4. Math. Paris hist.
Angl. in Henric. 2. pa. 92.
that Saint Dominick walked in the rain and was not wet; and his Books lying
all night in the river, were taken out dry and without hurt: That the same
Friar spyed the Devil sitting in the Church like a Sparrow, and calling him to
him, deplumed him, and so put him to a great reproach: And that he made the
Devil hold him the candle in his bare fingers till they were burnt: that a
leacherous Priest by kissing his hand, was cured of incontinency. That Saint
Bernard by blessing their Ale, and giving it some lewd persons to drink, caused
Gods Grace to enter into them; That he made an old Grandame of above fourscore
years old to give suck to the Infant, when the mother was dead: That he killed
Flies by Excommunication: and excommunicated the Devil, and thereby disabled
him from lying with women: Vita Bern. prafixa cj^^ qaribu^* Surius and Bonavent
and Antonin. and Legend baec recitant
That Saint Francis turned a Capon into a Fish, and water into wine: made the
Rock send forth water, and Anchors to swim; Preaches to Birds and Beasts, to
praise God, till they were so attentive to his doctrine, that they would let
him touch them, and would not depart till he gave them leave, and had blessed
them with the sign of the Cross: converted a cade Lamb by preaching to him, so
that he would frequent the Church of his own accord, and kneel before the Altar
of our Lady at the Elevation of the Host: By which example, Surius calls on
the Heretics to learn to worship the Blessed Virgin, and to adore the
Sacrament. Also, that he caused Swallows, Grasshoppers and a wild Falcon to join
with him in the Praises of God.] Abundance more of the like, more foppish, and
too many to be here meddled with, their Legends are full of; And these are
their proofs of their true Church and infallibility by which they may be known
by them that believe not the Scripture, I think indeed that these proofs are
well said to be Independent of Scripture; for the less a man believes the
Scripture, the more he is like to believe these

But by what certain or probable Testimony shall we know that ever such things
were done? What! must we needs believe every doting Friar that gives us but his
bare word, and that many a year (if not age) after these Miracles are supposed
to be wrought: Must we believe them that so shamefully contradict one another?
Math. Paris Hist. Ang Henr 3 p. 329
says that Saint Francis was branded with his five wounds fifteen days before
he dyed: But Bonaventure, Vincentius and Surius say he had them two years
before he dyed.

Nay must we belive as the very foundation of our Faith, that which the Papists
themselves believe not? How commonly do they among themselves deride these
stories, as pious frauds, and some of them soundly chide the Authors, I will
at this time cite but the words of one, and that is no Babe, even Melch. Canus,
whom Bellarmine refers us to so often.

[ Lib. 11. cap. 6. page (mihi) 33.34. Quidam enim little aut veritatis amore
inducti, aut ingenu^ pudoris, etc. That is, Some of them (the Heathen
Historians) either induced with the love of Truth, or in ingenuous modesty, did
so far abhor a lie, that perhaps we should be now ashamed, that some heathen
Historians were truer then ours. I speak rather with grief then in reproach;
the Lives of the Philosophers are much more severely (that is, truly) written
by Laertius, than the Lives of the Saints are by Christians: and Suetonius did
far more incorruptly and more entirely set forth the affairs of the (Roman)
Caesar's, then Catholics have set forth, I say not the affairs of Emperors, but
of Martyrs, Virgins and confessors. For they -- But ours do for the most part
either follow their own affections, or else of set purpose forge so many
things, that indeed I am not only ashamed of them, but also aweary of them.
For I know that these have brought to the Church of Christ small profit, but
much disprofit: I spare (men's) names because -- It is certain that they who
write Church History feignedly and deceitfully, cannot be good and sincere men;
and that their whole Narration is invented, either for lucre, or for error,
whereof one is filthy, and the other pernicious. The complaint of Ludovicus is
most just of some feigned Histories in the Church. He does indeed prudently and
gravely reprove them that take it to be a matter of piety to forge lies for
Religion. A thing that is very pernicious and no whit necessary. For we are
wont not to believe a Liar, even when he tells truth. They therefore who by
false and lying writings would stir up the minds of mortal men to worship the
Saints, these seem to me to have done nothing else, then to make men deny
belief to truths, because of falsehoods -- To what purpose is it to pretend the
name of History to fictions and fables? As if the holy men of God did need our
Lies -- But while some do too much indulge their own affections, and write
those things which the writers mind, and not the Truth does dictate* they make
us such Saints, sometime, as the Saints themselves would not be, if they could:
Can any man believe that Saint Francis was used to take the Lice on him again
which he had shook off him? The Writer thought this was part of the man's
holiness, but so do not I, who know that the holy man was pleased with poverty,
but not with filthyness. And how ridiculous is this, that the Devil raging on a
time against our father Dominicke was constrained by this Saint to hold the
candle so long in his hands, till it did not only trouble him, but incredibly
pain him. Such examples cannot be numbered: but in these few most of the rest
may be understood, which have darkened the histories of the most famous Saints
-- They do therefore exceedingly wrong the Church of Christ, who think they do
not well set forth the excellent deeds of the Saints, unless they adorn them
with feigned Revelations and Miracles Wherein the impudency of men has neither
spared the Holy Virgin, nor the Lord Christ -- Of late years when I was at the
Council of Trent, I heard by some that Aloysius Lippomannus was healing this
disease, by writing a history of the Lives of the Saints in a constant and
grave speech: But I could never yet see this, nor any other which I could
allow, of all those that have come into my hands.
So far for Melch. Canus.

And do their own most Learned and Judicious Writers cry out of Lies, and
Histories so much more false then the Heathens, and impudent forgeries, and say
that, they never saw any of these Histories which they could allow of; and yet
must we needs make these the Foundation of our Faith, instead of the sealed
Word of God? What a Religion have the Papists that is built on such a
foundation!

Yea of the reports of some of the late Writers that were next before Popery, I
will add a few more words of Canus, ib. li. 11. page 337. [ Cicero thought
Demosthenes nodded sometime; and Horace thought so of Homer himself. For though
they were excellent, yet but men: And the same perhaps may I say justly and
truly of Beda and Gregory. One of them in his History of the English, the other
in his Dialogues, do write certain Miracles, talked of and believed by the
vulgar, which the critics of this age will judge to be uncertain. I should
have more approved those Histories, if their authors had according to the
aforesaid rule, to severity of judgment, joined more care in their choice -- ]
And how he lets fly at the lies of Antonius and Valvacen: The next page shows:
And page 338.339. how he censures Eusebius himself. But I must forbear more
such citations lest I weary the Reader.

It is now long since Doctor John White told them of their Opuscul. de ^oncep.
Virg. c. 1.
Cajetans words, who says [It cannot be known infallibly that the Miracles
upon which the Church groundeth the Canonization of Saints, are true] And their
^art. 1. t^t. 8 c. c.
Antoninus Florent says of the visions of Bernard and Brigit about the Virgin
Mary's conception [They are fantastic visions and men's dreams] And their
Claudius Espeucaeus 2 Timothy 4 Digr. 21.
says [No stable is so full of dung, as the Legends are full of fables -- Yea
very fictions are in their portesses] And Gerson Part. 1.
[All these the Church receives, and permiteth them to be read, not as
certainly true, but more attending to what might be in pious recogitation, then
to what indeed was done] And Doctor White then made a challenge to them, that
we will admit of all those Miracles, which are reported by such men, as some of
their own Writers do openly Note for Liars. Whites Works fol. page 158.
Which challenge the Popish Replyer had no mind it seems to take up.

But though it belong to the Romanists to prove their Miracles (which prove
their Infallibility without Scripture) and not to us to prove the Negative, yet
I shall try to shame their confidence by a few pertinent Questions, when it
shall appear how little they have to say in answer to them.

Q. 1. And first I desire to know of them whether the Miracles that prove their
infallibility without Scripture are wrought by the Present Church, or by the
Church of former ages only? If by the present, why cannot we see them? Why are
we still sent to Saint Brigit, or Saint Francis, or Saint Somebody that is long
ago dead and gone? We thought once we had had one near us here, I mean, the Boy
of Bilson, who did wondrous things in favor of the Papists; but in the Issue,
by the industry of Bishop Morton he was proved to be a counterfeit, and
confessed himself trained up by the Papists for the cheat. But if it only the
Generations that are dead and gone that wrought Miracles, then I would further
ask. 1. Does it not seem then that your Church is Apostate, in that it has
lost the gift of Miracles, which you suppose so necessary? And how will the
Gifts of your predecessors prove your present infallibility, any more then the
Gifts of the predecessors of the Greek Bishops will prove their infallibility
that now are? 2. If past Miracles may serve without present, then what need any
more than the old Miracles of the Apostles? And then why are not all the
Apostles successors infallible as well as the Pope? Seeing all the Apostles had
the gift of Miracles (and many thousand more) Therefore those past Miracles
should prove all Bishops infallible that succeeded them.

2. Quest. I desire also to know whether it be your Pope himself that Works
these Miracles, or some other persons? And if others, whether it be only some
of your Church, or all? If it be the Pope himself, why then have we more
murders then Miracles charged on your Popes by your own historians? and why
will not his holiness do some Miracles in charity to poor Heretics? Why do you
boast no more of you Popes Miracles? One I confess we read of in the Golden
Legend, that Pope Leo the first by the means of a woman kissing his hand was so
vehemently tempted with lust, that he was fain to cut his hand off: but the
Virgin Mary having compassion on him, joined his hand to his body again. But
this is no foundation of our faith.

But its plain that it is Saint Becket, and Saint Brigit and Saint Katharine
that you send us to for Miracles, and not to the Pope: And then I would further
know whether one man's Miracles will prove another man infallible unless they
were wrought in confirmation of the assertion of that other man's infallibility?
It should rather prove Saint Brigit and Saint Katharine infallible that are
said to have the Revelations and Miracles, then the Pope, that had none. Would
it prove the Patriarch of Constantinople infallible, if any one that is under
his Government should work a Miracle?? Or are you sure that there is no Miracle
wrought among the Grecians, Abassines or Armenians?

Moreover, if you are All Miracle Workers, why can we never see one, nor have
certain proof of one? But if it be but some very few of you (as good as none)
how will that prove the infallibility of your whole Church? When the Apostles
wrought Miracles, that proved their own infallibility: but that proved not the
infallibility of all in the Church nor of every teacher in it, nor of the
greater number of them

3. Quest. If your Pope and Church be proved infallible, by such Miracles as
the Apostles were does it not follow then that all your Popes are inspired
persons or Prophets as the Apostles were by which the gift of infallibility was
conveyed to them?

4. Quest. Yea will it not follow that all your Church are inspired Prophets,
if all your Church be thus infallible: But you cannot expect that we should too
easily believe these. If you have Apostolic infallibility grounded on the like
Miracles, then must you not be each one dis-junctly infallible, as the Apostles
were; and not only altogether?

5. Quest. And is it not plain then that all your dictates are Gods word, if
you have the same seal and inspiration as the Apostles had? And so your Pope,
at least, if not each one of you must make us new Revelations, or new
Scripture: And is not this heinous arrogance, thus to equal your selves with
Prophets and Apostles, when you are none? They could but be infallible, and so
you say is the Pope, They could but seal their doctrine by Miracles, and so you
say does your Church.

6. Quest. Will you grant that we are all infallible here in England, if we can
prove any Miracles done among us and by us?

7. Quest. Is it not absolutely necessary to the validity of the Testimony of a
Miracle, that it be not controled by some greater Miracle or evidence?
Otherwise the Magicians in Egypt, and ^imon Magus might have gone away with
better reputation. But your pretended Miracles are con^rolled by far greater
and surer, and therefore of no force: For yours are to confirm a doctrine
contrary to the Scripture, which was confirmed by many surer Miracles. This we
are still ready to prove, though here we take it for certain: but you use to
decline that t^yal.

8. Quest Is not every Priest infallible, and every Church that has the
Eucharist, according to your doctrine? For sure Transubstantiation is a
Miracle: I do not think you will deny it. And a Priest, even in deadly sin, may
be an instrument of this Miracle, if your Church be infallible. Is, there then
no Eucharist among the Abassines, Greeks, or any that subject not to you? Or
are they all infallible? And if Miracles be as common as Transubstantiation,
the privilege proved by them must be as common. So much to Master Knots first
proof of his Infallibility without Scripture.

His second Independent proof, is [Sanctity] But Sir 1. Are all Saints
infallible? Sure you dare not say so?

2. Will the Sanctity of one man, as Saint Francis or Saint Dominicke, prove
the infallibility of the Pope that has no Sanctity? By what means? Rather if
Saints be infallible, a Murdering, Simoniacal, Drunken, Fornicating Pope (as
yours confess many of them were) are not like to be infallible; especially
Saint Brigit cannot make the Pope infallible by that Sanctity, that would not
make or prove her self infallible.

3. Who must be judge of your Sanctity and ours? Your selves no doubt. For my
part, if my salvation lay wholly upon the passing of a righteous censure
between us in this point, I must needs profess, that even in England, where the
Papists should be of their best sort, because it is not the common way of the
Nation, but a discountenanc't way, and where they are but few, yet I have known
so few of them that have not been common Swearers, Cursers, Drunkards,
Whoremongers, or the like, and yet fewer that ever manifested any serious
minding of God and the life to come, or any experience of the work of
Sanctification on their hearts; and who showed any more holiness than what say
in certain ceremonies, words, gestures or other formalities; and on the
contrary I know so many Protestants of heavenly hearts (as far as I can judge)
and obedient lives; that there is no comparison, in my most impartial judgment
between Papists and Protestants in matter of holiness. If this therefore be the
proof of infallibility, sure God will excuse me, if I take England to be as
infallible as Rome, because he requires me not to put out my eyes, nor to say
the Swan is black, and the Crow white, because the Pope shall say so before me.
And yet we still disclaim all pretenses to such infallibility.

The third mark that Knot brings, is their [Sufferings.]

But 1. Sure the Pope suffers but little (in this life: but in the next, let
him look to himself) How then do other men's sufferings prove him infallible?

2. Do not the poor Greek Churches and other Christians under the Turks, suffer
more then the Romanists?

3. Do they not make us suffer incomparably more then they? Is it not impudence
almost inhumane after the murder of so many thousands of the Albigenses,
Waldenses, Bohemians, after the Massacres in France, Savoy, Ireland, the
burnings in England, the Powder Plot, after their bloody inquisition of so long
continuance, and the rest of this kind, to tell the remnant of their surviving
neighbors, that their sufferings prove them infallible, while our sufferings
prove us Heretical?

4. Is it not ambition and desire of Rule that is the very cause which they
contend for? What Is the unreconcileable quarrel so much as that all the world
will not be subject to them? And yet the sufferings of these men prove them
infallible? If one Butcher Henry the third of France, and another Henry the
fourth, and others would blow up the English Parliament with Gunpowder, is the
Pope infallible if some of these be hanged? Or what if some of them have
suffered from infidels? Are not others as ready so to suffer as they? and have
suffered as much as they?

The next mark that he lays down is [Victory over all sorts of enemies] But is
it over their minds, or over their bodies that they mean? If the first, who
must be judge of their victories, but themselves? I never heard any of them
plead their cause but in my judgment they had the worst. There i^ no party but
may turn diverse others to their opinions. Mahomet has got far more followers
in the world then Christ; and Heathenism than either. If Papists can turn all
these, why do they suffer themselves still to be confined to so small a part of
the world? And if it be victory over men's bodies that they mean, I say the
like. Have not the Turks a larger Dominion than the Pope? Have they conquered
the Great Turk, the Great Mogol, the Grand Cham of Tartary, etc? Are we not as
infallible as they on this account, when we conquer them? It seems then, when
Papists are so industrious to enlarge their Dominions, to destroy their enemies
by Poisoning or stabbing Kings, or other means, it is that they may have a
further Testimony of their infallibility.

The last mark which the Jesuit mentions, is [the conversion of Infidels.]

But 1 If that be a sure Mark, we are infallible as well as they: For we have
been means of converting Infidels. And so have the Greek Churches, and others
that disown the Popes infallibility.

2. If that Argument be good, then it was not only the Apostles, but all that
converted Infidels at the first (or after) preaching of the Gospel, that were
infallible: which sure they never pretended to.

3. If it will prove any body infallible, its liker to prove them so that did
convert any Infidels, then the Pope that only gives them leave or order to do
it.

4. Let them not boast too much of their conversions, till we have a better
character of their new made Christians, and a better report of their means of
conversion, then Acosta and other of their own Jesuits give us, who have been
eye witnesses of the case. To cut men off by thousands or millions, and force
the rest to Baptism, as cattle to watering, when they have nothing of a
Christian but the name and that sign, and some forget the name it self; this is
not a conversion much to be boasted of. Nor must they think that all are
Christians that the King of Spain conquereth for love of their Gold and Silver
Mines. The Apostles did not convert Infidels by an Army, but by the word and
miracles; but it is the King of Spaines soldiers that have been the effectual
preachers to work the conversions that you have most to glory in. If the Jesuit
had put his proofs into well formed Arguments, what stuff should we have had?

So much for the Answer to Chilling worth, and the new Fundamentals of the
Romish faith, by which they can prove their Pope infallible without being
beholden to Scripture for its help (And I marvel not at their contempt of
Scripture-Testimony to them, unless there were more, or more appearance for
them then there is.)

Having considered the Papists proof of their infallibility, I shall next
(though it be more then the cause obliges me to) say somewhat to prove the
Negative, and so proceed to my second Argument against them.

Argu. 2. If the common senses of sound men (or their sensible apprehensions)
be infallible, then the Pope with his pretended General Council is fallible:
But the common senses of sound men are infallible: Therefore, etc.

I know not how we should come nearer hand with a Papist, nor to plainer
dealing, then to argue from common sense. And as to the Antecedent, Either
sense is infallible, or it is not: If it be, I have that I seek. If not, then
mark what follows.

1. Then no man can be sure that the Christian Religion is true: For the proofs
of it all vanish, if sense be not infallible. If you plead the Miracles of
Christ and his Disciples, no man was sure that he saw them. If you plead the
death and Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, no man was sure he saw them,
and therefore could give no assurance of it to another. All the Disciples
senses, and the worlds senses were (or might be, for ought we know) deceived.
Nor are you sure that any writings or traditions came down to us from the
Apostles: For the eyes of the Readers and the ears of the hearers might be
deceived. 2. And then most certainly the Pope himself and all his Clergy are
fallible: For they cannot be sure of that which the Apostles and following
Church were not sure of: Nor can they be sure that in reading and hearing,
their eyes deceive them not. And I take it for granted that the Pope and his
Clergy do use their senses, and by them receive these matters into their
intellect. Nay if sense be fallible, no man in the Church of Rome can tell
whether there be any such place as Rome, or any such person as the Pope at all,
or ever was. Nay what else can any man be sure of?

I suppose you will marvail why I bestow so many words on such a point: But you
see what men we have to deal with: When all the quarrel between us must be
issued by this point, whether common sense be infallible? For if it be, we
infallibly carry the cause: Yea whether it be or be not, as shall appear.

I come next therefore to prove the consequence* and that I do thus.

The judgment of the Pope and his pretended General Council is directly
contradictory to the apprehension or judgment of common sense: therefore if
common sense be infallible, the Pope and his Council are fallible.

The consequent is unquestionable; the Antecedent I prove by this known
Instance.

Common sense takes it to be bread and Wine that remains after the words of
consecration: The Pope and his Council say, it is not Bread nor Wine that
remains after the words of consecration: therefore the judgment of the Pope
and his Council is directly contradictory to the apprehension of common sense.

For the first, I appeal to the senses of all men that ever received the
Eucharist. Whether seeing, feeling, smelling, and tasting, do not as plainly
take it to be Bread and Wine, as they do any other Bread or Wine at their own
tables? and whether they can see or taste, or smell, or feel, any difference to
give them the least cause of doubting? I am sure I have the judgment of
thousands and millions on my side, which in a matter of sense among sound men,
is certainly enough. And if the Papists are so mad as to tell me, that it is
otherwise with their senses; and will seriously profess that their eyes, and
taste, etc. do not take these for Bread and Wine, but perceive that they are
not, I will take them for shameless liars, or madmen; and I suppose no man in
his senses will blame me for so doing. Well I its pa^^ doubt that all our
senses tell us its Bread and Wine, as confidently as they tell us any thing is
such. And it is certain that the Pope and his Council tell us it is not Bread
and Wine: If our eyes be infallible that read it, and our ears that hear it
from their own mouths; then this is sure enough and too sure; I know they will
not deny it: I would they would, we should then be somewhat nearer a
reconciliation. What now can be said to avoid the conclusion, is past my
understanding; save only that it is possible that some of them may come in
with some alluding distinction to see if they can blind men's sense and reason;
and so perhaps they will tell them that 1. sense is infallible, on supposition of
the right constitution of the medium, but else not: or 2. that sense judges
but of accidents, and not of substances, and the accidents of Bread and Wine
are here; or 3. that sense is infallible in common cases, where substances and
accidents are not separated, as here they be. To which (if such stuff deserve
an answer) I reply, 1. What medium is here questionable or questioned by you,
but the accidents themselves, which you say are the objects. Sure the air is
clear and perspicuous: the distance is not too near or too far off; our eyes
and taste are sound. 2. I think senses judge of substances with their
accidents: The eye sees substantiam coloratam, and the hand feels the
substantiam qualem and quantam, and not only qualitatem and quantitatem
substantiae. But let that controversy go how it will, I am sure the substance
is objectum s^nsus per accidens, though not per se, or that the intellect
infallibly judges of substance, by the help of the senses apprehension.
Otherwise all the forementioned absurdities will follow, and still the Pope and
Church will be fallible: For then the Apostles and others that saw Christ's
Miracles could be sure only of the accidents, and not of the substance. Then
no man is certain whether it was Christ himself that lived on earth that was
crucified, and rose again, or only the accidents of Christ: And then no man
knows whether there be a Pope at Rome, or only the accidents of a Pope: and so
of the rest. 3. And to the third part of the answer I reply, That if sense be
infallible when substances and accidents are inseparable, then it is always
infallible: For the accident separated from the subject does perish. Moreover
how shall we know whether substances and accidents are separated or not? If we
be sure of that by sense, then sense is still infallible so far: if not, then
sense is fallible, because it knows not when it apprehends any more then
naked accidents. But indeed its a contradiction to talk of accidents that are
not subjecti alicujus accidentia.

Obj. Sense is infallible (suppose the right temper of the Organs, object,
Medium) till God tell us the contrary, but then it is fallible: But in the
point of Transubstantiation God has told us the contrary to what common sense
apprehends: Therefore here sense is deceived.

Answ. 1. Sense must in order be first known to be infallible, before you can
tell any thing that God has said or wrote, of its fallibility or
infallibility: or else you cannot tell but your eyes in reading, or your ears
in hearing those words of his, did deceive you. 2. Sense and Reason are the
judging faculties which God has given to mankind for the discerning of their
objects. It is not therefore to be imagined that God does turn the great
Deceiver of the world, and by supernatural light contradict the Light of
Nature, even the apprehensions of the sound and general sense of the world:
Gods supernatural Revalations presupposes his Natural ones, and are additions
thereto, but do not contradict them: for then God should contradict himself
when both are his Revelations. God cannot lie, says the Apostle: And what were
it for God to lie or say truth, but only to make a deceitful or not deceitful
discovery of his mind and will or the effects to us? Indeed, there may through
our imperfection be a deceit of the senses, when the Organs are distempered,
and the medium, or object are not conveniently disposed: and every such
distance, impediment, or other ill disposure, is not as Gods voice to tell us
the thing as what to our imperfect sense it seems: But if the common senses of
men, that are sound and not hindered by any such impediments shall yet be all
deceived merely by a contradicting ordinance of God, then it would seem that
God gave man contradictory lights and guides. And their objection seems to be
as bad, as if they should say so of Gods word [That it is always true, except
where God tells us the contrary] but if it might be false at any time, how can
you tell that that very word is true which you pretend does tell you of the
falsehood of another word: so say I here. If sense be not always infallible
(where it has its requisite assistance) then how can you tell that your senses
are infallible when you are reading [Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body]
which you think contradicts the infallibility of sense? For 2. Is the
infallibility of sense a thing that is known by nature, or by supernatural
Light? Not by supernatural Light (unless consequentially) where does Scripture
or your Tradition say, that sense is sometime infallibe, and sometime fallible
(supposit is requisitis)? And nature tells you no more of the infallibility of
any other acts of sense (or Receptions) then of those same which you pronounce
to be fallible.

3. We challenge you and all the world, to prove that ever God has revealed in
Scripture, that the common senses of men, are deceived about their proper
objects, the requisites in Nature supposed; Or that ever he made any ordinances
for the deluding or contradicting the senses of his Church? Or ever said any
such thing; Cannot Christ say [Hoc est corpus meum: This is my Body] but he
must needs proclaim a delusion of the senses of all men that take it to be
Bread? Then when God says [Hoc est faedus meum: This is my Covenant] Genesis
17.10. He must proclaim all men's senses deceived; because sense faith it was
but Circumcision, and Bellarmine will confess it was but the sign of a
Covenant. Then when Paul says [This Rock was Christ] it must proclaim that all
the Israelites senses were deceived, that thought it to be a true Rock: when a
Papist will confess that the meaning is [This Rock represented or signified
Christ] As if among many Images, you should say, This is Peter, and this John,
and this Paul, this were plainly to say, This signifies Peter or represents
him, etc. and does not proclaim that deceit of sense. Bellarmine cannot deny
but that it is called in 1 Cor. 10. and 11. Bread and the Cup six times over,
as after the consecration; and here his shifting answer is, that things are
said to be in Scripture what they seem to be, as the brazen Serpent is called a
Serpent, and so here he pleads a Trope. Good still! The Scripture calls it
[Bread] six times near together, after the consecration, and it calls it
[Christs Body] once (when his living body sat by) Now the Question is which of
these speeches are Tropical. And we must believe Bellarmine that the text which
calls it six times Bread, must needs be Tropical, and that which calls it once
[Christs Body] must needs be understood without a Trope. And this is all the
evidence they can bring that God has proclaimed men's senses to be fallible.
Nay all that we need for our cause is but to take [est] for [significat] which
is so common that one would think there should not such unnatural absurdities
be admitted to avoid it, as overthrow our humanity.

When we plead that Christ had a true body, and that a true body may be seen
and felt, because Christ bids them, Luke 24. See and feel, for a spirit has
not flesh and bones, etc. Bellarmine answers that Sense is infallible in
positives, and therefore thence we may say [ This is a body because I see it
self, but not in Negatives; and therefore we cannot say [This is not a body
because I see it not.] And what need we more then that which is here granted?
By his own confession then we may conclude that [This is Bread and Wine,
because we see, feel, smell, taste it.] Yet no doubt, we may also argue that it
is not a natural body, because it is not visible or sensible.

So much for this second Argument, which I may thus with full advantage
enforce: If sense be either fallible or infallible, the Pope is fallible: But
sense is either fallible or infallible: Therefore.

If sense be fallible the Pope is fallible, and all his Church for their
senses, and the Apostles and their followers were fallible.
If sense be infallible, the Pope and his Council are fallible; because the
common senses of all sound men take that for Bread and Wine which they expressly
say (as de fide to be believed) is not either Bread or Wine.

Argu. 3. If the Pope and his pretended General Councils have erred already,
then are they not infallible: But the Pope and his pretended General Councils
have erred already: Therefore they are not infallible.

As the first Argument was taken from the no proof of his infallibility, and
the second from the common senses of mankind, so the third is taken from
certain experience; which is a medium so evident that their vain words and
subtle evasions, have the less force to elude or obscure it. Of the validity of
the consequence there is no question can be made. He that has erred, is not
infallible. All the doubt therefore is of the Antecedent, which has by
unquestionable evidence of History been put out of doubt by our Writers long
ago. I shall produce some few instances of many.

Bellarm. de Pontif. li. 4. cap. 8.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
There are no less than forty Popes whom Bellarmine himself takes notice of as
charged with error or heresy, for whom he frames such poor excuses, that I
should think any impartial Reader might receive satisfaction enough from
Bellarmine that the Pope is too fallible. Yea that even judicially and in
fundamentals he may err.

Did not Pope Liberius Vid. Binnium Tom. 1. Conc. part. 1. p. 478 notis in 7.
Epist. Liberii and p. 480. and p. 422. Item Baron. ^^^o 357. 9.344. 3.4.5. and
359. 4 10 and Bellar. de Pontif. l. 4 c. 9.
err judicially when he subscribed to the Arrians confession in the Council of
Sirmium [Libenti animo suscepi in nullo contradicens] which the Fathers condemn
of Heresy? and to the Councils condemnation of Athanasius, as Athanasius
himself and many more witness. Did not Pope Vigilius err judicially when he
condemned the Decree of the General Council (for condemning dead Heretics)?
And when Pope Pelagius and Gregory the first, and Adrian the first did all
approve of the same? Sure one party of these Popes erred, unless
contradictoryes may be true? Yea when Pope Vigilius did afterward revoke his
own constitution Vid. Binnium net in Council. 5. Occumenis.
sure he erred either in making or revoking it? And so did Pope Paschalis when
they gave God thanks in open Council that they heard the Pope with his own
mouth revok those grants which (said they) contained Heresy, which he himself
had before made to the Emperor Kraulzius Saxon li. 5. cap. 38.
. Though Cajetans excuse be true that it was no Heresy, yet either the making
or revoking was an error. What will they invent at last to hide the nakedness
of Pope Honorius who in two several General Councils was condemned for a
Monothelite Heretic? which he judicially persuaded Sergius to, when he sought
his judgment. Stapleton and many more of them confess the full certainty of
the Councils condemning him of Heresy; but forsooth they say the Council did
mistake the case Vid. Bin^^m Tom. 3. part. 1 p. 143. and Staplet. Cons. 3. qu.
4. ad arg. 7.
. It seems then either a Pope may be a Heretic, or a General Council err.

Moreover will any Papists deny that Pope Stephen six, and Sergius erred when
Vid. Sigebert in Chron p. 74. Anno. 902. and Martin. Polon. supput. p 158.
they judicially decreed that those should be ordained again that were ordained
by Pope Form^sus? And of Pope Celestines error Alphonsus a Castro faith
Alphons. ^dv. Hereses li. 1. c. 4.
that he himself saw it in the ancient Decretals as his Definition, and
therefore that it cannot be said that he erred as a private man, and not as
Pope. What can they say of Pope John twenty two who denied the immortality of
the soul, and was admonished of his heresy by the Doctors of Paris, as not
only Pope Adrian the sixth, Joh. Gerson, Alphons. a Castro, and others
witness, but Bellarmine himself confesses also. But he excuses him, because
that opinion was not there defined against, and therefore was no heresy: See
here 1. Whether the Papists do not make themselves a new Faith and Religion
when they please, and that is a point of Faith with them one year that was none
the year before: so that the novelty and the mutability of their Religion is
thus by themselves confessed. 2. See here that a point declared in Scripture,
and held by the former Church is no point of Faith with them, unless it be
declared by a Pope or General Council. 3. See here what men Bellarmine would
make all the former Popes to have been, that had determined, whether the soul
were immortal or not. 4. Chamier truly notes that Bellarmine himself,
forgetfully contradicts himself, and tells us elsewhere that Innocent the
third (the ninteeneth Pope before John twenty two) had taught the contrary in
express words.

I shall forbear to reckon up any more, because the Reader may find it done so
fully already in so many, and the excuses of Bellarmine by Chamier and many
others so fully answered: and because it is a thing so far out of question,
Vid. J^well Defens. part 1. c. 8. Divis. 1. and part. 2. c. 3. divis. 2 and
part. 4. c. 18. Divis. 1.
that nothing but gross ignorance or impudency can deny it. It is so common a
thing for Popes to contradict and repeal one another Decrees, that their
Platina in vita Stephani says [Following Popes do always either infringe or
wholly abrogate the Decrees of the former Popes] Erasmus Annot. in 1 Cor. 7.
See Doctor John Whites way. Dig^ess. 28. p. 104.
says [ Pope John the 22. and Pope Nicolas are contrary one to another in
their whole degrees, and that in things that seem to belong to the business of
Faith] Lyra (in Mat. 16.) says that Some Popes have Apostatized. Occham shows
that many things in the Docretals do savor of Heresy. One Pope teaches
Emanuel King of Portugal to marry two sisters. Os^r. de gestis Emanuel l. 2.
Another teaches our King Henry 8 to marry his brothers wife: And even Pope
Paul 4. with his Council of Trent decree, that it should be lawful for him to
allow those degrees to marry together, which God in Leviticus had forbidden and
to forbid those which God had allowed: which was a judicial error of the Pope
and his Council, as many more in that Council were.

But I will add another Argument like the last* which is as follows.

Argu. 4. If the Pope be infallible, then all the writings of all Popes are of
infallible verity: But all the writings of all Popes are not of infallible
verity: Therefore the Pope is not infallible.

The consequence of the Major Proposition will be denied by Bellarmine, unless
it be limited to such writings by which the Pope does teach the Church in
matters of faith: Though indeed they will never prove him infallible in
Teaching the Church while they confess him fallible in his own judgment, yet
let us for disputation sake grant them this: But then (for the proof also of
the Minor) I proceed thus: All the Theological writings of Leo, Gregory,
Gelasius, Nicolus 1. Adrian 6. and other Popes are not infallible: But all
these writings were to teach the Church in matters of faith: Therefore all the
Popes writings which are to teach the Church in matter of Faith, are not
infallible. I think no ^ober Papist will maintain that all these writings are
infallible. And that they are written about matters necessary to be believed or
done for our salvation, is evident to any man that reads them. And if they
were not written to teach the Church to what end were they written? Do Popes
publish writings about matters of Religion, and not to teach the Church by
them? If they say, it is but to teach part of the Church: I answer. 1. What
part is it? and where is the limitation expressed: for example, of Gregory's
Dialogues, Morals, de officio Pastoris, etc. 2. The Pope in a Provincial
Council may teach but part of the Church, and yet Bellarmine says that he is
there infallible.

Moreover if all the Popes writings be infallible, from his gift of
infallibility, then they are equal to the Scriptures; nay what are they but
Gods word, and all Popes are Apostles or Prophets, that is, inspired men (of
which more anon:) but that's false: Therefore.

Obj. These writings come not from the Pope as Pope, but as a private Doctor,
and so he may err.

Answ. Can the Pope lay by his relation when he is teaching the Church, and do
it as a mere private Doctor, when he is not a mere private Doctor? It is a hard
strait that the Papists are in to tell us, and themselves, when the Pope
teaches as a private Doctor, and when as Pope? They are never likely to be
agreed about this among them. And all that we have for it, is but the private
word of Bellarmine and some such disputers; but we have no Scripture, Canon, or
Decretal, to tell us how we shall know one from the other. If therefore we have
no infallible means to know when the Pope teaches as a Pope, and when as
private Doctor, then we have no infallible means to know when he teaches
infallibly: But the former is most certain, therefore so is the later: And so
if the Pope were infallible, it would do us no good. If they draw forth
rational probabilities, and make every private man judge of them, they may as
well warrant men by such means, to judge of the sense of Scripture, which they
so much abhor.

Argu. 5. If General Councils be infallible, or to be credited, then the Pope
is fallible: But according to one party of the Papists, a General Council is
infallible: therefore the Pope is fallible.

The consequence of the Major is easily proved 1. Because General Councils have
differed from the Pope. 2. Yea they have deposed diverse Popes, and that for
heresy: charging diverse Articles against them, as also for wickedness of life.
The Council at Pisa deposed two Popes at once, Gregory the 12. and Benedict the
13. and in the tenor of their deprivation call them [Notorious schismatics,
heretics departed from the faith, scandalizing the whole Church, cut off from
the Church, unworthy the Papacy] Theodor. Nicen. de schismate. l. 3. c. 44. p.
91. Antonin. sum hist. part. 3. tit. 22. c. 5.. 3.
The Council of Constance Antonin. ibid c. 6. 2. council. constable. sess. 37.
deposed the same Pope Benedict again, commanding all men to esteem him as an
heretic and schismatic. The same Council deposed also John 23. accused for
holding Bim. p. 1584. Conc. Constable.
and defending as his judgment that there is no eternal life, nor immortality
of the soul, nor resurrection of the dead, and so was a stark infidel.
Concerning this Pope I would desire the impartial Reader to observe what a
miserable answer Bellarmine is put to give? and whether it do not plainly give
up their whole cause? His words are these ( de Pontif. li. 4. c. 14.) [
Responde^ Johannem 23. non fuisse Pontificem omnino certum and indubitatum,
proinde non necessario esse defendendum: erant enim eo tempore tres qui
Pontifices haberi volebant: Gregorius 12. Benedictus 13. and Johannes 23. nec
poterat facile judicari quis little verus ac legitimus esset Pontifex cum non
deessent singulis doctissimi patroni.] That is [I answer that John the 23. was
not a Pope altogether certain and undoubted: and therefore it is not necessary
that he be defended: for at that time there were three that would be taken for
Popes, Gregory the 12. Benedict. the 13. and John 23. and it could not easily
be judged which of them was true and lawful Pope, seeing there were not wanting
to each of them most learned Patrons] So far Bellarmine.

Where observe 1. That even learned men, yea General Councils, and the Church
may be uncertain which is the true Pope. Its worth the enquiring then, whether
they be not uncertain that the Roman succession is interrupted; and uncertain
at that time whether God had any word? or what was the sense of it? and whether
it was certain to them that the Church failed not, when they had no certainty
of the head? and whether their head and so their Church were then visible or
invisible, when they could so hardly be known? And note, that Bellarmine does
disclaim the Com-popes with this John 23. and says elsewhere, that it was most
likely that this was the true Pope. They have brought their glorious head,
Church and infallibility to a fair pass!

Besides this, the General Council at Basil did shortly after depose Pope
Eugenius the forth, declaring him to be [A rebel against the holy Canons, a
notorious disturber and scandalizer of the peace and unity of the Church, a
Simonist, and a perjured wretch, incorrigible, a schismatic and an obstinate
heretick] Vid. Aenaeu Sylvi. gest. Council. Basil. li. 2. And note that this
Eugenius by force kept the Popedom after a General Council had deposed him for
these crimes: How then can the succeing Popes have a just title, and Rome
pretend to an interrupted succession, or any other Bishops or Presbyters from
them?
To this Bellarmine has not a word to say, but only that the Council did him
wrong, and at Lansanna undid their acts. And thus he is content to grant that
1. A General Council may err (which he maintains) 2. And that a Pope may be
a heretic and to be deposed in the judgment of a General Council? And are the
Papists forced to yield us thus much? I would fain know then from Bellarmine or
any Papists surviving him, whether that General Councils do err in faith, and
be Heretics or not, for that their judgment? If they do so err, then where is
the visibility of their Church with the rest of its privileges which they so
boast of, when its Representative body, a General Council are Heretics, as
thinking the Pope to be fallible? But if they erred not de fide, or were no
heretics. 1. Then its seems the Popes infallibility is no fundamental. 2. Then
it seems we are no heretics neither, for denying that which General Councils
of Papists (pretended by them to be General) have denied. 3 Nay why should they
be angry with men for erring such an error (as they account it) which their own
general Councils may one after another err.

Argu. 6. From the Papists own open known confession: If the Papists themselves
do confess both Pope and Council to be fallible, they have little reason to
blame us for affirming the samewhich they confess: But the Papists themselves
do confess both Pope and General Council to be fallible: Therefore, etc.

I do not mean that all the Papists confess it of both, but one part of them
confess it of one and the other of the other of them. Bellarmine and his fellow
Jesuits with the Italian party do confess that a General Council may err in
matters of Faith: The French and Venetian Papists, with all the Doctors of
their party affirm that the Pope may err and be a heretic, and teach heresy:
so that by the confession of one half of them a Council may err and by the
confession of the other half the Pope may err.

If any imagine that though both may err dis-junctly, yet not conjunctly, I
shall only now say, that the concession that each of them dis-junctly may err,
destroys the force of all those Arguments which are brought for their
infallibility; and therefore will prove it of them also conjunctly. But we have
yet further proof.

Argu. 7. If the very substance of Popery be nothing but a fardell of errors
brought in by the Pope and his Council to corrupt the Christian Religion among
them, then certainly the Pope and his Council may err: But the Antecedent is
true: Therefore so is the consequent.

All the Question being of the Antecedent, and it being proved before in the
former disputation, and fully by our writers against them, I shall thither for
brevity refer you. What impudency is it to introduce such abundance of
corruptions contrary to the express word of God and after all this to say, they
cannot err when they have so plagued the Church with their errors? They teach
men to serve God in an unknown tongue, and speak and hear they know not what,
to worship the Bread with divine Worship, to receive only the bread, when
Christ ordained that they should have the cup, and so do abolish one half of
the Sacrament, they adore the Virgin Mary and other Saints, they plead for
justification by the merit of their own works, as having a condignity of the
reward; they make the Church a new thing by making a new head and center of
unity and a new and daily mutable Religion, in a word they poison both Church
policy, Worship and Doctrine by their errors; and when they have done they
stand to it that they cannot err. Like a Leper that should maintain he cannot
possibly be Leprous, when he is covered with it already: or like a swearing or
drunken beast, that should swear that he never did swear nor was drunk, nor
ever can be, when he lies drunk in the dirt, and breaths out his oaths. What
need any impartial diseerning man any other proof that the Pope and the Church
of Rome is not infallible, then actually to observe the swarm of their errors
that have troubled the Church?

Argu. 8. If the Popes themselves are to be believed, or if they are not to be
believed, they are not infallible. But either they are to be believed or not:
Therefore.

If they be not to be believed, what need there any more proof? If they are,
what need there also any more proof, when they themselves confess themselves
fallible? Not a Pope for above six hundred years after Christ did ever pretend
to infallibility as can be proved: Pope Adrian the sixth, one of the most
Learned and best that ever they had this many hundred years, has written his
judgment that the Pope may err. And I think he is liker to know himself, as
to his infirmities, than any of his flatterers are. His words are these De
Sacram. Confirm. art. 4. ad fin. [Dico, quod si per Ecclesiam Romanam
intelligatur caput ejus, puta Pontifex, certum est quod possit errare, etiam in
iis quae tangunt fidem; haere sin per suam determinationem aut decretalem
asserendo: plures enim fue^unt Pontifices Romani haeretici] That is [I say,
that if by the Church of Rome be meant the Head of it, to wit, the Pope, it is
certain that he may err, even in those things that touch the faith by
asserting heresy by his Determination or Decretal: for there have many Popes
of Rome been heretics.] Thus you hear what a Pope says of himself.

Argu. 9. If the Pope be infallible, then either it is his mind in believing,
or his tongue in speaking, or his pen in writing, that is infallible. But it is
neither his Mind, nor Tongue, nor Pen: Therefore he is not infallible.

1. That his mind is not infallible, in point of belief, is confessed by the
Papists themselves. One part of them saying he may err, and the other
maintaining that he may be a heretic, and that many have been so.

That his tongue and pen is not infallible when his understanding erreth is
plain.

1. In that otherwise he should be infallible in dissembling, and God is
feigned to promise a man to keep his tongue from error when he speaks against
his own heart; which cannot be proved, nor soundly imagined.

2. The infallible dictates of the Pope while he erreth in mind should be all
either unreasonable acts* as being the words of one that knows not what he
says, or interpretatively lies. For when a man speaks contrary to his
judgment, if his words be true in themselves yet they are interpretatively
lys, because he so takes them, and intends them as falsehoods to deceive
others. For instance, If Pope John the 23. that was deposed by a General
Council upon Articles exhibited against him for denying the Resurrection, and
the Life to come, should with his tongue have taught the Resurrection and the
Life to come; this had been as lying to him, though the thing it self be most
true. And we must have a promise that the Pope of Rome and his Clergy, among
all the Liars in the whole world, shall be the only infallible Liars. A happy
generation of Liars sure? But where is that promise?

3. It was for the error of the tongue as well as of the mind, that the Clergy
desposed Liberius and Felix, and that the Councils of Pisa, Constance, and
Basil deposed the other Popes above mentioned. For 1. they could not know their
minds but by their words. 2. They charged them with the errors of their tongues
as well as minds.

Argu. 10. If Popes be infallible in the matters which they understand not,
then it must be by Enthusiasm or prophetical inspiration. But all Popes are
ignorant of many Divine Truths, and some more notoriously ignorant, and yet
neither All nor Any of them (for ought is ever proved) were Prophets, or
divinely inspired: therefore they are not infallible.

For the Major its plain, that as no erring man must speak against his own
mind, if he be infallible, so an ignorant man (in those points) must 1. either
have his ignorance cured suddenly by prophetical inspiration: or else 2. must
speak as in an ecstasy, without or beside his own mind: there being no other
way imaginable.

And as for the Minor I prove both parts of it. 1. That Popes are ignorant of
many Divine truths, I prove thus. 1. They that are ignorant of many truths
revealed in the Scriptures, are ignorant of many Divine truths: For Scripture
being Gods word, all that is therein revealed is Divine truth. But Popes have
been ignorant of many things revealed in Scripture: therefore I need not sure
stand to prove the Minor, for they confess it themselves. And if the Pope
understood all the Scripture, he were sure the most damnable sinner in the
world, for not revealing his knowledge to others. 2. Yea some of them have been
so notoriously ignorant and unlearned that their own Alphonsus a Castro says (
advers. hares. li. 1. c. 4.) that [It is certain some Popes be so unlearned,
that they do not understand the Grammar.] And sure if they that understand not
any Hebrew or Greek (which are the languages in which the Scripture is written)
no nor the Latin Grammar should understand all the Bible and err in nothing,
it must needs be by a Miracle, and by Prophetical inspiration.

2. But that all Popes be not inspired Prophets, nor illuminated by Miracles, I
will leave to be judged by the Papists themselves. Read Platina, Stella, yea or
Baronius himself, or if they have any other that is a more notorious Parasite
to them, and let them be judges.

Argu. 11. If the Pope and his Council be infallible, then it is either in All
things that God has revealed in the Scripture or are necessary to be known, or
but in some: If he be infallible in all things necessary to be known, believed,
or decided, then will it follow,

1. That the Pope is the most cruelly wicked man on earth, and the greatest
enemy to the truth and Church that will suffer the Church to lie in so much
ignorance and contention, and will not reveal the truth to reconcile and
enlighten them. Why does he not write an infallible commentary on all the Bible
to perfect our knowledge and end all our quarrels? And why does he not write an
infallible summary of all his superadded traditions? Has not Christ told him
that no man lights a candle to put it under a Bushel, but where it may be
seen of all?

2. Why does not one Pope reveal that which they think fit to reveal; but leave
it to successors one after another to do it by degrees? Dare they say that
there is any point of faith revealed in Scripture, and necessary to this age to
know, which was not meet to be revealed by the Pope to the last or former age?

3. Why do so many of themselves, yea their General Councils so much contradict
their Popes in many things, if he be infallible in all things? And all of them
confess that either a Pope, or a Council may err?

But if it be but some things that the Pope is infallible in, then how shall we
be sure which be those some? Can we know before he discloseth them, or only
after? I suppose they will say [It is in all those things which he determines
or declareth] But if that be the rule to know the extent of his infallibility
by; then I Every Pope begins to be infallible, when he begins to
Determine or declare, and not before. 2. And then every Pope increases in his
infallibility, as he increases his Decretals or Canons. 3. And then one Pope
is much more infallible then others, who have made more decrees then others. 4.
And then some Popes were never infallible, who never made any decrees or
determinations or expositions at all, so that their cause is lost, if their
actual discoveries be the Rule of the extent of their infallibility. And yet I
cannot imagine what else they can say that may have any appearance of
consisting with their interest.

For it is either a Positive or a Negative infallibility which they mean and
ascribe to their Church. If a Positive, then 1. All the foresaid absurdities
unavoidably follow; whether they say that they can infallibly teach us all
things (and will not) or but some? But if it be a Negative infallibility which
they maintain ( viz. that the Church shall never teach any false doctrine; Or
the Pope shall never deceive us by obtruding any error, though withal he may
possibly teach us but part of the truth, yea the necessary truth, yea perhaps
teach us none at all) I say, if this be their meaning, then every infant or
bird or beast has as glorious a privilege as the Pope of Rome: For every
infant and bruit is so infallible; that we are certain they will not deceive
the Church by teaching any error.

Perhaps they will say that the Pope is positively infallible as a sufficient
Teacher of the Church, in all things de fide at that time, or necessary to
salvation; and negatively infallible in all the rest, which are not de fide or
necessary: To which I answer: 1. Either such points are de fide and necessary
before the Pope dedeclare them so, and he therefore declares them so because
they are so: or else he declares them de fide and necessary before they are so,
that by declaring them so, he may make them so. If the first, 1. then the
Papists have lost their cause; for that's it which they deny, at least quoad
nos, though not in se, as they use to distinguish. 2. And then its plain that
no Pope has been positively infallible in necessariis, or all points de fide:
for no one has declared all, nor are they yet all (say they) declared by them,
but every Pope may still add more, and who knows when we shall have all. But if
they take the later way, then 1. They suppose that Gods word how express soever
does not make a point to be de fide and necessary, till the Pope declare it so
(at least quoad nos: and how it can be de fide and necessary, any other way
then quoad nos, they should do well to declare: For that which is credendum,
est ab aliquo credendum (that which is to be believed, must be believed by some
body) and that which is necessary is necessary to some one.) So that the Gospel
shall be no Gospel with them, nor the Law of God any Law, though we read it and
hear it a thousand times, till the Pope tell us by parcels the meaning of its
particular words and sentences. 2. They make the Popes acts to go before their
objects, which is against the nature of actions: while they make him to declare
a point to be de fide that it may become de fide. For to declare that it is so,
supposes that it is so, and not only that it will or shall be so de futuro.
3. And so they make all the Popes infallible Declarations, Expositions, and
Determinations de fide, to be Lies: for if he Declare a thing to be necessary
before it is necessary, or declare this or that to be the sense of Scripture,
before it is the sense of Scripture, or to be de fide before it be so, what is
this but plain lying? But if they say that he declares it to be de fide and
necessary only for the future, and not to have been so before this
Declaration, then the forementioned Absurdities fall upon them. And also 1. The
Pope is then a Gospel-maker, and the Law giver of the Church, and that in
spirituals and internals; and consequently it is he that is the King of the
Church (who has the Legislative power, and without whom nothing that Christ
has said shall bind us) 2. Then the Churches faith is mutable and in a
continual change by new additions: For the Decrees or Expositions of every Pope
do make more Articles of faith then were before. 3. Then the present Papists
are not of the same Religion as their forefathers (or their forefathers not
of the same with them) nor do they go to Heaven by the same way: For according
to their own doctrine, if the present age of the Church did not believe as de
fide many things more then the former ages were bound to believe, they cannot
be saved. 4. And then it is evident unmercifulness in the Popes of Rome to make
more Expositions, Decrees or Determinations! and so to make us of this Age, so
much work to do before we can get to heaven and escape damnation, which our
forefathers never had to do.

I know Answer to the Lord Falkland.
one of them replyeth to this, that these Additions are no cruelty, because
they make not salvation more difficult, but facilitate that which was necessary
before (or to that sense) But 1. It seems then that somewhat was necessary and
de fide before the Pope defined, determined or declared them so: By that time
we are plainly told which those points be, the Papist that undertakes and
performs it, will find himself at a sad loss. 2. But is this man serious?
Does he think indeed that it is not easier to believe the Apostles Creed, than
to believe all that is in the Councils of Trent, Basil, Constance, Laterane,
with all the rest, and all the Decretals (both the Popes and Isidore Meccator's
alias Peccator.) For instance, before the Pope determined the other day for the
Molinists against some part of the Dominican, Jansenian doctrine, both parties
might have gone to heaven: But now the poor Dominicans, must change part of
their doctrine, or go to hell fire. I demand now whether the Popes
determination have not made salvation harder to many then before? I appeal to
all the Thomists* Dominicans, Jansenians, whether the Pope has facilitated
their salvation by this determination? I appeal to Tho. Whites friendly combat
with Francisc. Macedo; and to the late Animadversions of the French Doctors on
the Popes determinations.

Further I add that if all the Popes infallibility Positive be only in points
of absolute necessity to salvation, then many a private Doctor, nay every
Christian man or woman, is at present, as infallible as the Pope: for it
implies a contradiction to be a true Christian, and not to believe all that is
essential to Christianity, or absolutely necessary to salvation. And if it be
not de praesenti and in sensu composito, but de futuro and in sensu diviso that
they mean it, that is, that another man may fall from the faith, but the Pope
cannot, 1. Clean contrary, we maintain, and the Papists confess, that no elect
person shall fall quite from the faith. 2. But a reprobate Pope may: witness
John 23. and many another. So much for that Argument.

Argu. 12. If every Pope be infallible (Positively in all matters of faith, or
in expounding all Scripture) then all Popes are of equal understanding and
fidelity in matters of faith, and Scriptures. For the most learned, wise and
pious can go no higher, but to be able infallibly to interpret all Scripture,
and declare all Gods will concerning our faith and duty. But sure all Popes are
not equal. None of those children or dunces that Alphonsus a Castro says
understood not the Grammar, are equal to Pius 2. or Adrian the 6.

Argu. 13. If every Pope be infallible, then study, learning, consultations,
yea and Councils are needless: for the most unlearned Pope is as infallible as
the most learned; and after all the study in the world, consultation and advice
of General Councils, he can he but infallible; and so, say they he was before.
If they say still, that, before he was but negatively infallible; I say again,
so is a block, an infant or an idiot. But that studies, learning, consultations
and Councils are not needless, I suppose all Papists will grant: therefore they
must grant that all Popes are not infallible.

Argu. 14. Notorious ungodly men that live in murder, fornication, incest,
Sodomy, blasphemy, etc. have no promise from God, nor any other assurance of
infallibility: but such were many Popes, Therefore, etc.

The Major I prove from many Scriptures, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. Because they
received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, and for this cause
God shall send them strong delusion that they should believe a lie.] They that
receive not the love of the truth that they may be saved, are threatened to be
given up to delusions; and therefore have no certainty of being infallible.
They that choose their own ways, God will choose their delusions, Isa. 64.4.
There is no communion between light and darkness, Christ and Belial: therefore
no infallibility with the children of Belial. Of all men naturally till Christ
illuminate them by special grace, it is said in Scripture that they are blind,
deceived, liars, of no understanding, receiving not the things of the spirit of
God, for they are foolishness to him, neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned. 1 Cor. 2.14. Prove. 28.5. Rom 3.11. Prove. 6.32. and
9.4.10. and 15.21. and 7.7. and 12.11. 2 Pet. 1.9. 2 Timothy 3.13. Tit. 3.3. It is
only the elect that cannot be deceived even in the foundation, Mat. 24.24.
None of the wicked shall understand but the wise shall understand, Dan. 12.10.
They are threatened to be given over to blindness, that they may not understand,
Isa. 6.9.10. Act. 28.26, 27 Mar. 4.12. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom, Psalm. 111.10. God promises to teach the humble Psalm. 25. but the proud
he still resist, when he gives to the humble his grace, 1 Pet. 5.5. Jam. 4.6.

And not only the minds of the wicked, but their tongues are deceitful, even
when they know the truth, so that a wicked Pope may lie and deceive. Psalm.
36.3. Prove. 12.5. Mar. 7.22. Romans 3.13. I confess that a wicked man may have
some kind of superficial knowledge of all those doctrines (dis-junctly at
least) which are known to true Believers; but as he has no solid knowledge of
them, so he has no promise or assurance of infallibility in that which he is
capable of knowing: Nor is it so like that a blind deceitful man should be
universally orthodox.

And for the Minor, that many Popes have been notoriously wicked, I need not
prove it, while their own Historians and disputers too, do so commonly confess
it. Its well known what wickedness the Councils that deposed them charged upon
some, and what poisoning, and other murders, Simony, conjuration, incest,
common adulteries and other wickedness, is by the writers of their lives and
other Historians charged on so many more, that I should but trouble the weary
Reader to no purpose to cite them. Read the lives of Pope Sylvester (the Witch)
the 2. Alexander the 3. and the 6. John 13. and the 22. and the 23. Gregory the
7. Vrbane the 7. etc. in Platina, Luitprandus, Fasciculus temporum, Martinus
Polonus, etc. Ticinus hist. li. 6. of Vid. Naucler. an. 956. figon. reg. Ita.
l. 7. anno. 963. Anton. Chron. pa 2 tit. 16. c. 1. 16. Bar. an. 964. n. 17
John 13. shows that his sins were proved in Council that he ravished and
committed filthiness with maids, widows and wives at the Apostolic doors;
committed many murders; drunk to the Devil; and at Dice ask't help of Jupiter
and Venus: and at last was slain in the act of adultery. See of Sylvester 2.
Fascic. temp. an. 1004. Martin. Polonus Anno. 1007. Platin. in ejus vita. Of
Boniface the 7. See Baronius himself anno 985. n. 1. Of Alexander the 6. see
Guicciardine hist. li. 1. and Onuphrius vit. Alex. 6. But I will name no more.

Argu. 15. Other Bishops and Churches who have as good a pretense to plead for
their infallibility as the Bishop and Church of Rome, are yet generally
acknowledged fallible, even by themselves and by the papists: Therefore the
Pope and Church of Rome also are fallible.

All that's doubtful is whether any other Churches or Bishops have as fair a
plea for infallibility as the Roman? which I prove thus.

1. The Plea of the Romanists is that their Bishop is the successor of an
Apostle who was infallible, and so the Promises belonging to him, do belong
also to his successors. And the successors of the rest of the Apostles may have
the same plea: For all the Apostles, after the Holy Ghost fell on them, were
infallible, as well as Peter: And therefore their successors have as fair a
plea as Peter's successors.

Obj. But there was not the like promise made to the rest for their successors
stability as was to Peter. Answ. 1. There can no greater a promise to Peter's
successors be showed, then was made Mat. 28.29. to them all [Lo I am with you
always even to the end of the world] 2. The Papists (according to their new
fundamentals) must not plead Scripture promises for their infallibility; for
they say, their infallibility is in order first known, evidenced and to be
proved, before it be known that Scripture is Gods word.

2. The plea of the Romanists for their Popes infallibility is, that he is the
successor of Peter. But the Bishop of Antioch might as well pretend to be the
successor of Peter, and yet he pretends not to infallibility: Therefore, etc.
That History which tells us that Peter was Bishop of Rome, does tell us that
he was Bishop of Antioch also; yea and that he was Bishop of Antioch before he
was Bishop of Rome, so that Antioch is undoubtedly the ancienter Church. What
reason then can the Papists give why the Bishop of Antioch might not as well
plead that he is Peter's successor, as the Bishop of Rome? Unless they could
prove that Peter did by his last Will and Testament bequeath the honor of
succession, and the privileges of infallibility to Rome only; which they have
not yet (that I can find) been so bold as to go about to prove. Otherwise, if
one must needs be preferred, why should not the eldest, unless they be
disinherited, and the younger has the blessing, which must be proved. Whence
is it but from the honor of their Antiquity that Antioch, Jerusalem,
Alexandria, and Rome should be preferred as Patriarchates before all other
Churches? And if Antiquity be a good reason for that, then why should not
Jerusalem and Antioch on the same account be preferred before Rome, seeing its
beyond all doubt that they were both the more ancient Churches, and Antioch the
more ancient seat of Peter, in the judgment of them that make him Bishop of
either. So that its clear that other Churches have as much or more to say for
infallibility then Rome, who yet make no prentence to it.

Argu. 16. The Apostles themselves were not infallible till the holy Ghost fell
on them, nor by any other help without the extraordinary inspiration of the
Holy Ghost (for before, they understood not that Christ must dye, rise and
ascend, till it was done: but Peter Mat. 16.20. disswadeth him from suffering)
therefore the Pope if he might plead succession from Peter, cannot expect more
then Peter himself had; and therefore cannot expect his infallibility without
his spirit and inspiration: And therefore those Popes that have not the Holy
Ghost, and that inspiration as Peter had, cannot pretend to be infallible, as
his successors: For they must succeed him in the cause, if they will succeed
him in the effects.

Argu. 17. If the Catholic Church be infallible, then the Pope and the Church
of Rome are not infallible: But the Papists say the Catholic Church is
infallible; therefore according to their own doctrine it must follow that the
Pope and Church of Rome are not infallible.

The argument being ad hominem and the Antecedent their own, all the doubt is
of the consequence: which I prove thus, either it is the real or representative
body which they must call the Catholic Church: But both these are against the
Popes infallibility: Therefore.

1. For the real, no man can possibly know all their minds, nor ever expect
that they should in this life be all of a mind: therefore it is the Major part
that we must have respect to, as its usual in all such Bodies, or Assemblies.
Now the greater part of the Catholic Church on earth, is and has been against
the Popes infallibility. That it is so now, is well known, seeing all the
Greeks, Abassin, Armenian, Reformed and other Churches are far more then the
Papists. 2. And that it has been so formerly the Papists themselves confess. I
will note at this time but one of the most learned and sober of them, Melch.
Canus Loc. Theol. li. 6. cap. 7. fol. (mihi) 201. [Pugnatum est siquidem
vehementer, non a Graecis solum, sed ab aliis plerisque totius orbis apiscopis
ut Roman^ Ecclesiae privilegium labefactaretur. Atque habebant pro se illi
quidem, and Imperatorum arma, and Majorem Ecclesiarum numerum: nunquam tamen
efficere potuerunt, ut unius Romani Pontificis potestatem abrogarent -- ] That
is [Not only the Greeks,
but almost all the rest of the Bishops of the whole world, have vehemently
fought to destroy the privilege of the Church of Rome: And indeed they had on
their side both the Arms of Emperors and the Greater number of Churches: and
yet they could never prevail to abrogate the Power of one Pope of Rome] Mark
here that it is only success that he pleads, but confesses that most of the
Bishops of the whole world, and the greater number of Churches, besides the
Arms of Emperors, were against the Roman privileges, as they call them, and
the Popes power. So that by this you may see the conscience and modesty of
these men, that not only call themselves the whole Church, as if all other
besides them were some inconsiderable parcels, but also would make the simple
people believe that before Luthers time, there were scarce any that denied
their pretended power: we may see from themselves then where our Chruch was
before Luther, so far as Christians opposing the Romish usurpations, are our
Church, even most of the Churches and Bishops of the whole world by the Papists
own confession. And therefore this may stop their mouths that use to call out
to us for a catalogue of their names? would they have the names of Most of the
Bishops and Churches in the whole world?

2. And then for the Representative Church if there be such a thing it must be
a General Council. And I have showed before, that many such as themselves call
General Councils have contradicted the Pope, deposed, and condemned him. This
Bellarmine, Canus and the rest of them do confess, and therefore I need not say
more to prove it.

Argu. 18. That General Councils may err, is proved fully, Vid. Baron. tom. 9.
anne 794. n. 1. Bellarm. Append. de Imagine. c. 3.
both by the errors that they have committed, and by their contradicting one
another. Its too well known that the Arrians had as General Councils as most
ever the Orthodoxe have had, Bellarmine and Canus give more instances of erring
Councils then can be answered by the contrary minded. Vid. Bellar. li. 2. de
Council. c. 17.
Pope Adrian and the second Council of Nice by him confirmed, decree for
adoration of Images: And the Council of Frankford determined the contrary,
against the said Council of Nice, though the Popes Legates contradicted them.
So did the Council of Paris anno 825. Leg. Jewel. Defens. Apol. part 6. c. 17
Divis. 1. and part. 1. c. ^. Divis. 1. and part. 2. c. 3. div. 2. and part. 4.
c. 1^. Divis. 1.
who examined, judged and reprehended the Council of Nice, and and Pope Adrians
confirmation and defense of it; and therefore Bellarmine says [They judged the
judge of the whole world] Their words are recited by Bellarmine Append. de
Imag. c. 3. Baronius anno 825. n. 5. Its commonly known, how Nazianzene
complained that [He never yet saw a Council have a good end, but things were
made worse by it and not better.] And Hierom (in Epist. ad Galat.) says [That
is the doctrine of the Holy Ghost which is delivered in the Canonical
Scriptures, against which if Councils determine any thing I account it wicked]
Instances of the errors of Councils we have too many. Leg. Joban. Raynoldi
these. 2. page 60.61. ad 68. Lutheru^ de Co^cil^is page 87 88, 89, 90, etc.
The Council of Neocesarea, confirmed by Leo the fourth and by the first of
Nice (as says the Council of Florence sess. 7.) condemned second marriages,
contrary to Scripture, 1 Cor. 7. Though Bellarmine vainly excuses them by
plain forcing their words.

The fourth Council at Carthage, forbad Bishops to read the Gentiles Books,
which yet the Apostle makes use of, and the Church has ever since allowed.

The Council of Toletane. 1. Ordain that he wh^ instead of a wife has a
Concubine, shall not be kept from the Communion: which Bellarmine also falsely
excuses.

The sixth General Council at Constantinople has many errors, which Bellarmine
confesses, and lays the cause on this that they had not the Popes authority:
Whereas Pope Adrian approved them D^st. 16. c sextam synodum etc. babeo liborum.
, and the seventh Council judged them genuine: Adrian says [Se sextam synodum
cum omnibus canonibus recipere; he receives the sixth Synod with all its Canons
and confesses it to be Divine] The Council at Constance decreed that a General
Council is above the Pope: and the Council at the Laterane under Julius 2. and
Leo 10. decree that the Pope is above a General Council Sess. 11. The Council
of Calcedone abrogated the Acts of the second Council of Ephesus, and decreed
the contrary. The Council of Trent, is notoriously erroneous, and contradicts
the Council of Laodicea and Carthag. 3. about the Canon of Scripture. The
number of their contradictions and errors is too great for me here to recite.
Many of our writers against the Papists give you large Catalogues and full
proof of them. See Doctor Sutline. li. 2. de Council. cap. 1. What Gregor.
Nazianz. And ^ierome say of them, I touched before: Hilary li. de Synodis
exclaimeth against the errors and blasphemies of the Councils of Syrmium and
Ancyra: Augustine says li. 3 cont. Maximni. c. 14. [Nec ego Nicenum, nec tu
debes. Ariminense, ta^quam praejudicaturus profere concilium, nec ego hujus
authoritate, nec tu illius, detinenis] He says also lib. 2. de Baptis.
[Concilia plenaria priora, a posterioribus emendari] That is [Former Councils
that were full have been mended by later] Bellarmines deceitful shifting
answers to these testimonies, are not worth the repeating. Isidore says G.
Domino. Arist. 50. ^ex Andradius Confessions of this ^o^t. ^bemni^. lib. 1.
Quotiescunque in gestis Conciliorum discors st^tentia invenitur, illius
concilii sententia magis tenentur, cujus antiquior and p^tior est authoritas]
That is [As often as we find in the acts of Councils disagreeing judgments, let
us hold the judgment of that Council which has the more Ancient and the
greater authority.] But the confession of the adversaries here may spare us
more labor, who acknowledge that a General Council though rightly Congregated,
and though the Popes Legates concur, may yet err in the faith, if so be that
the Pope does not approve or confirm their Decrees. So that when they say that
[All the Church cannot err] and therefore a General Council cannot err; their
own meaning is, that one man cannot err; but All the Church ( viz. a General
Council) without him may err.

Argu. 19. The infallibility of the Pope or Roman Church, was never
acknowledged by the Ancient Churches, or Fathers, for six hundred years after
Christ: Therefore it is not now to be received.

The Antecedent is so fully proved by our Writers, and so easily discernable by
those that read the writtings of those times, that there needs not any more to
be said. That which I shall produce to this pupose, shall be anon to prove the
following point and this together. In the mean time I refer them to Bishop
Jewel, Cham^er, Bishop Usher, Doctor White, who with many more have fully
proved this.

Argu. 20. If the Pope be not the Authorized judge of Scripture, nor our faith
to be resolved into his judgment (or the judgment of his Church) then is he
not the Infallible judge of Scripture, and of controversies about matters of
faith. For he that is no judge can be no infallible judge: nor does he need
infallibility to qualify him for a work which he was never called to, nor does
at all belong to him. It is not the Pope as a private Doctor, or as the Bishop
of a particular Church, which is made by them the subject of infallibility, but
the Pope as the supposed head of the Catholic Church authorized to interpret
Scripture, and to judge of all controversies of faith, into whose judgment (at
least with his Clergy) our faith, they think must be resolved. If therefore we
can prove the nullity of the subject we do thereby prove the nullity of the
Adjunct. And this leads us up to the third Question, which we have now to deal
with.

Quest. 3. Whether our faith must be resolved into the infallibility of the
Roman (pretended) Authoritative judgment? Or whether the Popes Authority and
infallibility be the thing first to be known, and thence the truth of Scripture
or Christian Religion to be received as upon his judgment?

But because this is not the principal point intended in this dispute, and
because there is enough said to it in the beginning on the by, and because I
have said yet more for explication of the whole matter in the Preface to the
later Editions of The Saints Rest, I shall therefore say but little to it now,
reserving a fuller handling it (if necessary) to a fitter season. Only I shall
here add a few more Reasons to prove that the Pope or Roman Church have no
such Authority to be judge of Scripture or controversies to all the rest of the
Churches on earth* and then I shall add a few words to prove that we must
believe in Christ and receive his doctrine before we believe in the Pope and
receive his pretended authority and judgment, that is, without it.

Arg. 1. If the Pope (or his consistory) must be the universal Governor and
Judge to all the Chrian world, then must the greatest part of the Christistian
world be ungoverned and have no recourse to their Judge. But the consequent
will be denied by themselves: therefore we have reason to deny the Antecedent.

The proof of the consequence is most obvious and certain from the Popes
natural incapacity and insufficiency for such a work (and so of his consistory)
It is naturally impossible that the Pope should perform the works of this
Government to all the Christian world: therefore the consequence is good. He
cannot make known his determinations to all: If all men through the Christian
world that have such doubts to be resolved as his Holiness supposes belong to
him properly to resolve, should have recourse to him for resolution, O how much
would the ways to Rome be beaten and frequented? What a concurse would be
about his Holiness doors? What time would he have to resolve those millions of
men: If any differences or difficulties arise in Aethiopia, or at the
Antipodes, before they go or send to Rome for Resolution, and receive an
answer, the persons are like to be in another world where they will have a more
infallible resolution. And if they live to see the return of their messengers,
they must take it on the trust of their words, that this is indeed his
Holinesses resolution. Hence it is that de facto there is so few people on
earth, even of the Papists themselves that are really goverened or resolved by
the Pope himself, nor know what he is, or what is his mind: but all is done by
his Missionaryes or Delegates; And if the Pope can delegate his power to
others, and make so many others also infallible, then infallibility is not
proper to himself: and then why may not the rest of the Bishops of the Church
be as infallible, who are sent by Christ, as these are that are sent by him.

Argu. 2. If the Pope be such an universal Governor and Judge, then all Popes
must needs be damned for utter neglect of the works of their office. For sure
when the welfare of the whole Church does so much depend on the office of the
head, it cannot but be damnable in him to be a neglecter of the works of that
office to the far greatest part of the Church on earth. But he must unavoidably
neglect (I mean omit) that work which it i^ impossible for him to perform*
Therefore.

What I have further to say against the resolving of our faith into his
judgment shall be contained in these few Questions following.

Quest. 1. Does he not contradict the very definition of a Pope, that tells us
that we must first believe him to be an infallible Pope, before we can believe
the Doctrine of Christ? For a Roman Pope is supposed to be the Vicar of
Christ, the successor of Saint Peter, the head of the Church: And can he be
thus known by a man that knows not or believes not that there is a Christ,
who is the Savior and principal head, and who is supposed to send him.

Quest. 2. And does it not contradict the definition of a Church, to say that
we must believe the Church before we can believe the doctrine of Christ? For
what is a Church but a society of Christians, that is, men professing the
Christian Faith? And how can they know that such men are Christians, or profess
that faith, before they know what that faith is? And how can they know that
they are to be credited as Christians, before they believe that Christianity it
self is of credit?

Q 3. Is there any man breathing that can bring sufficient Arguments to prove.
1. That there is a Church of Christ. 2. And that this Church is infallible. 3.
And that the Pope and Papists are this Church, before their hearers have
received or believed the word of God? If they can, why have they not fallen
closer to work in this necessary point, when they know how much it would do to
the determination of the whole? If they pretend such Antecedent proof by
miracles, as the Apostles proved the Doctrine by, I have showed the vanity of
this pretense (against Knot) before: and we must still desire them, if it be
miracles that is their first witness, to let us see, or have certain proof of
those Miracles. We protest to all the world that we are heartily willing to see
them and know of them if they be true, but though we have lived in the midst of
Papists all our lives, yet could we never to this day see any such matter from
them, nor hear so much as of any probable proofs of any. And would they have us
in a matter of salvation to believe every pr^ting boaster that will tell us of
Miracles and show us no such thing, nor any proof of them?

Quest. 4. Whether those that do not go this most absurd way (of proving their
Church infallible to an infidel that yet believes not Gods word, and so by
means antecedent to the belief of Scripture) must not unavoidably confess that
Gods word must be first believed before the Popes or Churches infallibility or
authority (and consequently our faith depends not in them, nor is resolved
into them) or else they are inextricably ensnared in the Popish circle, and
contradictingly do make two primo credenda, the Church or Pope, the first to be
believed, and yet the word of God is first to be believed? And do not Holden,
Vane, Knot, and others of them see this, who therefore shun the circle, and use
not the old shifts of Becanus and others to blind the eyes of those that see
them in it?

Whether I wrong them H. Holden himself (an Englishman, and Doctor of Paris,
shall be judge, who thus commends his own new devised Foundation or
resolution of the faith in his Divini fid. analys. li. 1. c. 9 page 180. [ Ex
quibus patet ha^^ Christianae fidei analysim haud in^idore in labyrinthum
vulgarem and circulare perfugium, quo solent Theologi passim involvi, qui fidei
Resolutionem juxta communem and parum attente examinatam opini^^^^ conferuunt
as effingunt. Quarenti namque und^ noverint scripturam esse revelatum Dei
verbum? Respondent; ex universae consentientis Ecclesiae assertione. Quibus si
iterum fiet interrogatis, unde sciverint unanimeus hanc Ecclesiae Catholicae
assertionem esse ab errore liberam seu infallibilem? Respondent, ex revelat^
Dei verbo. Adeo ut non audentes fidem Divinam in certitudine and evidentia
naturali fundare, in circulum hunc inevitabiliter illabuntur, and in orbem
turpissime saltantes, fidem, quam ipsa prima ratio format and efficit, rationis
experem reddunt; voluntque homines rationales, mentis ac judicii partioipes, in
fidei assensu certiores esse, quam vel ratio postulat, vel approbat, Hasitant
quippe Theologi quidam asseverare and agnoscere quod omnia argumenta, etiam
firmissima, omnesque rations, item evidentissimae, quibus universam fidei
Divinae and Catholicae traditionem solidam erroris immunem and infallibilem
esse demonstramus, adeo veritatem hanc evincant, ut nulla prorsue subsit
aberrationis facultas? Ideoque ^pinantu^ Christianorum a^imos adhuc ita
vacillantes and fluctuantes derelictos esse, ut privatum aliquem and singularem
instinctum pernecessarium autument quo omni fidei Christianae assensui
certitudo and infallibilitas divina (at ajunt) attribuatur. Nos antem levibu^
hisce and voluntariis opinationibus fidei divinae and Religionis Christianae
certitudinem and soliditatem, inniti aut fundari, nequaquam judicamus.

That is in English [From hence its evident that this resolution of the
Christian faith, does not fall into the common Labyrinth and circular shift in
which Divines are commonly wont to be involved, who do frame and fashion the
resolution of faith according to the common and unheedfully examined opinion.
For when they are asked, how they know then Scripture to be the revealed word
of God? they answer, By the assertion of the universal consenting Church? And
if they be again asked, how they know that this unanimous assertion of the
Catholic Church is free from error or infallible? They answer, By the revealed
word of God, so that not daring to found divine faith in natural certaintainty
and evidence, they unavidably slide into this circle, most filthily dancing in
a ring (or round) the faith, which the first reason forms and effects, they
make void of Reason, and would have reasonable men who have understanding and
judgment, to be more certain in the assent of faith, then reason does either
require or allow. For some Divines, etc. -- ] Here you see a Learned Papist
confessing that the Papists are commonly entangled in this circle, and filthily
dance in a round, and would make our faith an unreasonable thing. Let Knot note
this that would make Chillingworth a Socinian and an Infidel for making faith a
reasanable act. And let the common sort of Papists note this that deny faith to
have any evidence. And let it be considered according to this man's judgment,
on what foundation the generality of Papists do build their faith, and what a
faith it is that has such a foundation. Yea and let it be considered whether
the wiser sort of Papists begin not to change the very foundation of their
Faith? And how near they begin to draw to the Reformed Churches in the
Resolution of their Faith? For this same Doctor does well disprove the
infallibility of the Pope, page 179. Saying [ Own quidem Episcopi Apostolorum
successores sunt, Apostolos vere ade^ confirmatos in gratia fuisse, ut
infallibiles omnino, seu in doctrina Christiana tradenda ab omni erroris
periculo immunes fuerint, agnoscit universa Ecclesia. Nunquid ergo omnes
Episcopi ab errore liberi? Omnibus quidem Apostolis revelata fuisse secreta
Caelestia, iissque, ut nec decipi nec hallucinari possent; divina and
extraordinaria via donatum esse certissime tenemus. Nun^ quid ergo vel summo
Pontifici vel caeteris Episcopis haec sunt divinitus concessa privilegia?] That
is [All Bishops are the Apostles successors: And that the Apostles were so
confirmed in grace, that they were altogether infallible, or free from all
danger of error in delivering the Christian doctrine, this the universal Church
acknowledges. But are all Bishops therefore free from error? We certainly hold
that to all the Apostles the heavenly secrets were revealed, and that by a
Divine and extraordinary way it was given to them, that they could not be
deceived or err. But are these privileges therefore granted to the Pope, or
to other Bishops?]

And what is the infallibility that this Doctor resolves his Faith into? Let
it be observed whether it be nearer the Miracles of Knot, or to the universal
Tradition of Chillingworth. Page 174, 175. He has these words [ Statuendum 20.
juxta superius stabilita principia, Ecclesia soliditatem in fide, seu in fidei
divinae and Catholicae in haerendi certitudinem and infallibilitatem, non in
privilegio aliquo aut sedi Romanae, Deo authore, concesso, aut S. Petri
successori Pontifici Romano divinitus impartilo, etc. Sed universae and
Catholicae traditioni Ecclesia speciali Dei providentia, and Christi Domini
promissis fulcitae, praecipue tribuendam esse] and postea [Deinde Catholicae
and universae traditionis rationem omnibus ommino fidei divinae dogmatibus
pernecessariam esse. Traditioniis vero medium seu testimonium ade^ publicum,
universale, and apartum esse debere, ut sensibus ipsis externis fidelibus
omnibus Christianis oporteat constare.] That is, The Churches infallibility and
certainty of faith [Is not in any privilege either granted by God as the Author
to the Sea of of Rome, or bestowed from God on the Pope of Rome as Saint Peter's
successor; but its chiefly to be attributed to the tradition of the universal
and Catholic Church upheld by the special providence of God, and the promises
of Christ -- And the account of this Catholic and universal Tradition is most
necessary to all points of divine faith. And the means or Testimony of this
Tradition must be so public, universal and open, that it must be manifest to
all Christians to their very outward senses.

I confess this Doctor allows us pretty fair quarter in comparison of many
others of his party. If they will but give us such Open public universal
certain Tradition, which must be known to the very outward senses of every
Christian, we shall be very ready to comply with them in receiving such a
Testimony. But if all the Romish Traditions had been such, they would be known
to all Christians as well as to the Pope, and not locked up in his Cabinet, and
our selves should sure have known them before now, if we be Christians.

Quest. 5. To proceed, I am very desirous to know whether it be upon the credit
of the present Church (Pope or Council) or of those former that are dead and
gone, that we must receive our faith and the Scriptures? Or upon both? If it be
on the credit of any former Church, then would I know of which age? whether of
the nearest, or the middle, or of the first and remotest age, that is, from the
Apostles and the Church in their days? If from the last age, then 1. How know
we their Testimony? If it be by their writings, Canons or Decrees, why cannot
other men who are much wiser and better, understand these as well as the Pope?
And why do they not refer us to those writings, but to their own
determinations? If it be by the Fathers telling the children what has formerly
been believed, then, why cannot I tell what my Father told me, without the
Pope, and better then the Pope that never knew him? 2. And then it must be
known upon whose credit the former ages did receive that faith and Scripture
which they deliver down to us? Doubtless they will say, from their
predecessors; and they again from their predecessors, and so up to the
Apostles. And why then may not we take it immediately on the credit of the
Apostles as well as the first ages did? supposing that we have the mediation of
a sure hand to deliver to us their writings, without meditation of the like
inspired prophetical persons, or of any privileged infallible judge of the
faith; And if it be on this Testimony of former ages that we must receive the
Scripture as the word of God, I shall then proceed further to demand.

Quest. 6. Why may not the Greeks, Abassines, Protestants, etc. that
acknowledge not the Popes authority or infallibility, receive the Scripture as
the word of God, as well as the Papists? Do they think that none else in the
world but they can tell what was the judgment of the former Church? What
records or Tradition have they which all the rest of the world is ignorant of?
Or dare they say (if they have the face of Christians) that none of all the
Christians on earth, but Papists only, have any sufficient evidence that the
Scripture was written by the Apostles, and delivered from them, and that this
is it which is now in the Church? Can no man indeed but a Papists know the
Scripture to be the word of God, upon justifiable grounds?

But if it be on the credit of the present Church (or both) that we must take
the Scripture to be Gods word, then I shall further desire to be informed.

Quest. 7. What is it which they call the present Church: Is it 1. The whole
number of the faithful. 2. Or a major vote, or part. 3. Or the Bishops, or
Presbyters in whole or part. 4. Or a Council chosen from among them, 5. Or the
Pope? If the first,

Quest. 8 Do they not then make all Christians infallible as well as the Pope.
And so they are in sensu composito in the essentials of Christianity and the
whole Church shall never deny those essentials, but 1. whole particular
Churches may, and 2. the whole Church may err some smaller errors against the
revealed will of God; the Apostle tells us that we know but in part; and as
in many things we offend all, so in many things we err all. And moreover if
this be their sense.

Quest. 9. Will it not then follow, that the Pope cannot be proved infallible,
because it is most certain that All the Church does not take him to be
infallible: no nor the greatest part of Christians in the world. Yea if they
will take none for Christians but Papists, yet it will hence follow that there
is no certainty that either Pope or Council are infallible. For the French take
a Pope to be fallible, and the Italians and others take a General Council to be
fallible: and therefore the whole Popish Church being not agreed of it, we
cannot be sure that either of them is infallible. And moreover on this ground I
demand,

Quest. 10. How shall we know (in very many cases at least) either which is the
judgment of the whole Church or of the major part? What opportunity have we to
take the account? Or can no poor Christian believe the word of God, that cannot
take an account of this through the world?

The same Question also I would put, if they take all or most of the Pastors
for this Church.

Quest. 11. But if they take a General Council for the Church, I would first
know, How we shall be sure that ever there has, at least, these thousand
years, been ever a true General Council in the world? The Popish Doctors (as
Doctor Holden de Resolut. fid. li. 1. cap. 9. page 156.) say that [It must
arise to that degree of universality that there may not be any suspicion of
conspiracies and combined factions, that so every prudent man may be able
heartily to say that the Assemblies are truly General.] And is it so, when
there are none but the sworn obliged vassals of the Pope of Rome, and the
Greeks, Ethiopians, Protestants, etc. and most of the Church are absent? and
when it is a known combination to promote their own espoused cause?

Quest. 12. And then is the whole foundation of Divine faith extinct and lost,
when there is no General Council? It may be we may have no General Council of a
hundred or six hundred, or a thousand years together? Have we no Church then?
Or no certainty of Scripture or of the faith? If they say that we are certain
by the determinations of former Councils, then they speak of the Church that is
past and gone, of which I moved the doubts before: And the Canons of these we
can read and understand as well as the Pope: But when we appeal to former
Councils and Ages, they would hold us to the present Church, and that must be
their own: and so be sure to be judges in their own cause.

Q. 13 I would know also whether it were by the judgment of a General Council
that the first Churches believed the Scripture to be Gods word? Did not the
Church of Rome believe the Epistle to the Romans, and the Church of Corinth
believe the Epistle to the Corinthians, and so the rest, to be the word of God,
as soon as they received them by an undoubted messenger from Paul? Or did they
stay till they had the judgment of a General Council or of all the Churches?
Indeed they made use of the intervening humane (but certain) testimony, of him
that was the messenger or bearer of the Epistle, to know that it was the
writing of Paul indeed: and so we still maintain the necessity of a credible
humane Testimony that these writings came from the Apostles hands: But
Tychicus, or Trophimus, or Timothy, or Ones^mus, were not a General Council,
nor the whole Church And doubtless those Epistles that were written to each
particular Church were received by all the rest of the Churches upon the credit
of that particular Church as having received it from an Apostle: and not that
the particular received it from the universal. How did the universal Church
know that those Epistles were written by Paul to Titus, Timothy, Philemon, to
the Ephesians, etc. but on the report of the persons and Church to whom they
were written? or else of those particular persons or Churches to whom the
Apostle did communicate a copy of them.

Quest. 14. And how did all the Church know the Scripture to be Gods word
before the Council of Nice, when there had been no General Council to ^etermine
the business?

Quest. 15. Dare a Papist undertake to justify at Gods judgment all that part
of the unbelieving world, for not taking the Scripture for the word of God, who
have seen or heard it, and had all other ^estimonies of it, but never knew of
the Testimony of the Pope or a General Council? Shall none of ^hese perish for
this unbelief?

Quest. 16. And if it be the Pope that they call ^he Church, and take it to be
this infallible judge, ^ then demand, How knows the Pope that the Scripture is
Gods word, or that the Christian Faith is ^rue? The like also I ask of a
Council: How does that Council know it themselves from whom we must know it?
Either the Pope and Council must believe it because they first believe
themselves, and so take it on their own words, or else on the words of some
others. ^f the former, then they Believe it because they Believe ^t: then they
are the original of their own belief, and believe themselves first, and then
would have all the world to believe them. And this is not only to be ^o
arrogant as to be the God of themselves, and the Church, but also so impudent
and unreasonable as to believe themselves without reason, and to expect that
all others should do so too. But if it be not from themselves that the Pope and
Council believe the Scriptures, from whom then is it? not from any others of
the present Church doubtless, therefore it must be from the former Church: And
if so 1. Have not we the same means to know that the former Church believed the
Scriptures as the Pope has, and therefore may believe it without recourse to
him, and as infallibly as he? 2. And then it seems that acccording to their
doctrine the Pope and his Council receive not their faith or the Scriptures on
the same ground as all the rest of the Church must do: so that the Church must
have a twofold foundation of her faith, whereof one is necessary only to one
part, and not to the other that is, All the rest of the Church must believe the
Scripture to be Gods word, because the present Pope or Council says so (having
first believed the infallibility) but the Pope and Council themselves need not
any such ground of their faith? And this distinction is not made between the
Laity and the Clergy in general: But even the Clergy themselves out of Council,
or who never were of the Council (which sure is more then a hundred for one)
must thu^ differ from the Pope and Council in the foundation of their Faith.
This is another taste of the famous Roman unity: Paul says there is One
Faith: b^^ if two divided Foundations, or Reasons of Belie^ do make two
Beliefs, surely the Church of Rome hat^ two.

Quest 17. Do you believe that the Lord Jes^ Christ understood the doctrine of
your Papal Authority and infallibility, when he so chid his Apostles for
striving who should be greatest: and tells them so expressly, that the Kings
of the Gentiles exercise Authority over them, and are called, Gracious Lords:
but with you it shall not be so: And when he sets before them a little child,
and tells them that he that will be greatest among them, must be as that
child: that is, that humility is the thing that they must strive to be great or
excel in, and so to serve one another in love. Also when he commands them to
call no man on earth Father or Master, that is, of their Faith. Did ever Christ
direct the world to go to the Church of Rome to know whether he be the Christ,
or whether the Scripture be his word or not?

Quest. 18. Where is the Faith of the Church when the Pope is dead, and when
there are three or four at a time, and when there is an interruption by Schism
thirty years together, as it is known there has been: Has not the Church then
lost her faith by losing the foundation of it? Or whether then must poor Pagans
have recourse to know that Scripture is the Word of God? If Infallibility
survive in other Pastors, then it seems it is not the Pope only that is
infallible, but others as well as he.

And was not the Churches Faith resolved into the Infallibility of a Woman in
Pope Joanes days? I know the shifts of Bellarmine and Onuphrius to make the
world believe that the Story of Pope Joane is but a Fable: Florimondus Remondus
is common on this subject.

But the case is out of question thus far, that we have near fifty of their
own Writers, especially old Historians that give us the History of this Pope
Joane; as Platina in vit. Joh. 8. Sabellicus Enead. l. 1. Antoninus Archbishop
of Florence part. 2. li. 16. Chalcondyla li. 6. Marianus Scotus, Martinus
Polonus, Fasciculus Temporum, Nauclerus, Volaterane, Textor. Caryon, Sigebertus
Gemblacensis, Mat. Palmerius, Massaeus, etc.

And I marvel why the Papists should be so industrious in refelling it, as if
their cause lay more on this then other things. If a Conjurer, a common
Whoremonger, a Murderer, a Simonist, a Heretic, may be the infallible judge of
the faith, why may not a woman? Has Christ laid more on the Sex then on all
these? specially if she had but kept her self honest, I should have thought
Joane had been better then John the 22. or 23. and many another that yet was of
the more worthy gender.

Quest. 19. And further I would know, If the City of Rome were consumed with
fire, or the Pope-dome removed from that Sea (which Bellarmine confesses, it
is not impossile to be done) where then were the infallible head of the Church,
and what were become of the Romish faith? If they say that this can never be,
and that Christ's promise implies the preservation of the City of Rome. I
answer, 1. It will be long before they will give us any proof of that. 2. Their
own writers confess the contrary. 3. Let the end determine it. But if they say
that infallibility is not tied to the place, but to the Person, who shall be
Peter's successor, I answer, we thought hitherto that to be Peter's successor,
and to be the Bishop of Rome, had been all one with them. If another man that
is no Bishop of Rome may be Peter's successor, then how shall we know who have
succeeded him all this while? Why not the Bishop of Alexandria, Jerusalem,
Ephesus, or other place as well as the Pope? specially why not the Patriarch of
Antioch, who is said to be the eldest son of Saint Peter, as inheriting his
first chair I doubt, if Rome were extinct, and the Bishop of Mentz, or Cullen,
or Vienna, or Rhemes, or Paris or any other should pretend to be the infallible
head of the Church, not only the old Patriarchs but their neighbor Bishops
would much contradict it; and the world would be at a great loss to find the
Popish faith or infallible head.

Quest. 20. Lastly I will appeal to the conscience of any Papist that has any
conscience left, and has read the Fathers or History of the first Ages of the
Church whether the rest of the Bishops and Curches in those times did believe
the Scripture upon the credit of the infallibility of the Pope or the Roman
Church? Did the rest of the Apostles receive the Gospel on the credit of Peter,
or were they sent by him? or did they receive their authority from him? Do they
find that ever the Apostles, or any following Bishops of the Church did take
such a course to bring men to the faith, as first to teach them that the Roman
Pope or Clergy were infallible, and therefore to persuade them to believe the
Scriptures or Christian faith, because they say its true. Is it possible that
any learned Papists can seriously believe that this was the ancient way of
believing? Do they think in good sadness that the world was converted to
Christianity by this means? Sure it is scarce possible that they should be so
far distracted by their prejudice and faction? Do they read in Clemens Romans or
Alexandrin, in Ignatius, Justin, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, or any
other of those times, that the preachers that went abroad the world to persuade
men to Christianity, did ever use this Popish Medium, or go this way to work?
Did they first preach the Pope and Roman Church before they preached Christ or
Scripture? Did they first preach men into a belief of the Roman infallibility,
and then bring them to Christ or to believe the Scripture upon the credit of
that? O that these men would but show us in what history we may find the
reports of this way of preaching? Or tell us what parts of the world were
converted by this argument?

How many and large Orations, Apologies and other discourses do we find in the
Fathers writings for the Christian Faith, to convince the unbelieving world? in
Clem Alexand. Tertullian, Origin, Athenagoras, Tatianus, Minutius Faelix,
Arnobius, Lactantius Greg Nazianz. Nissen, Athanasius, Basil, Eusebius, Cyril
Alexandr. Augustine, and many others? And can any man of brains imagine that if
the infallibility, ^ea or but the authority of the Roman Pope or Church must
needs be known before we can believe the Scripture or the Christian faith, and
that it must be received upon the credit of that Church, that all these Fathers
and others defenders and propagators of the Faith, would have quite forgotten
and left out this great and necessary point? What! Would all the preachers and
defenders of the faith, overlook and omit the very foundation into which all
men's faith must be resolved? Undoubtedly, if this had been then thought to be
true which the Papists now teach, we should have had the first part, and a
great if not the greatest part of all those Apologies and discourses, laid out
in the proof of the Roman infallibility. What man will go to evince a whole
systeme of doctrines to be true, and quite forget that medium, by which only
it is first to be proved? Would not this have found one place at least if not
the chief among Eusebius his Preparations or Demonstrations? Where was there
ever in all Antiquity found such an Argument as this to convince an unbeliever?
[ Whatsoever the Pope and Church of Rome determines is true: But they do
determine that Scripture is the word of God, or that Christianity is the right
Religion: therefore this is true.]

Nay further consider: If this kind of arguing had been then used, may not any
man see that has not renounced his wits, that the Heathens would have sorely
stuck at the Major proposition? and that it would have met with so many
objections and contradictions from them, that surely we should have found some
of them remembered to posterity. Did Julian never stick at this very principle
of the faith, the Roman infallibility? who stuck at so many things in the
faith it self? Or have Cyril Alexandr. and others quite forgot to mention these
among the rest of his contradictions? Did it never come into the mind of
Celsus, Porphyry, or any other unbeliever that we read of to doubt of and
object against this fundamental infallibility? O what an incredible thing is
this?

Yea and yet the more incredible will it appear, if you consider, that all the
whole cause between the Christians and the Infidels, according to the Popish
conceit, must depend upon this one point of their infallibility. For what man
will be so mad as to contradict the Church if he once believe that the Church
is infallible. Can they think that all the learned Heathens were such fools? It
must needs be therefore that their first stop must be at the Major proposition,
even at this principle of the Churches infallibility* and therefore certainly
their most objections would have been against it, and the most of the Christian
Doctors labor would have been in the defending of it: But that its certain they
then believed no such thing, and the Church was at that time utterly
unacquainted with the foundation of the present Romish faith.

Moreover, if this Popish foundation had been then known, do you think that the
Fathers would not have appealed to Rome, for a decision of all their perplexing
controversies? What readier way to have silenced all gainsayers, and ended all
strifes, and to have saved the labor of so many volumes, then to have bestowed
their pains with all dissenters upon this one point alone [ That Rome is
infallible] and then have sent them thither for satisfaction in all the rest.
Common reason must needs have told men of such principles, that this was the
way? But do we find that this way was taken? How come we then to have so many
volumes of the Fathers controversal writings, and not one Book, or Chapter, or
leaf or line, to prove the Roman infallibility?

And because the order of our discourse has brought us up to the judgment of
the Fathers, I shall here give you a brief taste of their judgment in this
point, and so conclude this argumentation.

In the contention about Easter day between the Eastern and Western Churches,
Bellarm. de Verbo Dei li. 3. c. 6. Baron. an. 198.
Policrates with the Asian Bishops resisted the Popes judicial determination,
anno 198. And therefore doubtless they believed not his infallibility nor
universal jurisdiction.

In the Council of Nice, the first that subscribed, was Eustathius Patriarch of
Antioch before the Legates of the Bishop of Rome: Theodor. li. 1. c. 7. So did
Hosius Bishop of Corduba in Spain, as Athanas. Apolog. 2.

In the Council of Africa the Popes Legates had the last place, Conc. Afric.
Baron. anno 258. ^.15, 16. spondan. Epit. Baron. 5. and 9.
Can. 100. In the Council of Calcedon there was 157. subscribed before Philip
the Popes Legate. In the fifth Council of Constantinople, Menna their Bishop
was President: Evangri. l. 4. c. 38.

And if the Pope had not then so much as the Presidency, how much less an
universal jurisdiction with infallibility?

When Stephen the Bishop of Rome determined judicially against rebaptizing
Heretics, and excommunicated Firmilianus for not assenting, and wrote to
Cyprian about it, what did they do? Did they either submit to the judgment of
the Pope as infallible, or obey him as their universal Ruler? No, but Cyprian,
Firmilian, with the rest of the Bishops, did unanimously join against the Popes
decree.

I would fain know by what spectacles the Papists can read these words of
Cyprian. Edit. Pamel and Goulart. page 229.
Cyprians, to find out their infallibility in them? In his Epist. 74. ad
Pempeium, he says thus [I have sent a Copy of our Brother Stephens letters
which when you read you will see his error more and more, who endeavors to
maintain the cause of Heretics against the Christians, and against the Church
of God. For among things which he writes either proudly or nothing to the
purpose, or contrary to himself and ignorantly and unadvisedly, he adds,
etc.] Here mentioning Pope Stephens pleading of Tradition, he says [Whence is
that tradition? Is it from the Authority of the Lord and the Gospel? Comes it
from the commands and Epistles of the Apostle? For that we must do those things
that are written, God testifies and propounds to Joshua saying, Let not this
Book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, etc. If therefore it be contained in
the Gospel, Epistles or in the Acts, then let this Divine and holy Tradition be
observed. -- What obstinacy is this? And what presumption, to prefer Humane
Tradition before Divine appointment? and not to consider that God is angry and
offended as often as humane Tradition does lose or pass by the commands of God.
As Isaiah says, This people honors me with their lips, but their hearts are
far from me: in vain do they worship me, teaching the doctrines and
commendements of men: and as the Lord in the Gospel reproves them, Ye reject
the commandments of God to establish your Tradition. So Paul 1 Timothy 6.3. If any
teach otherwise, and rest not in the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and of his doctrine he is proud (or lifted up with stupidity) knowing nothing,
from such we must depart. -- The custom which has crept in with some, ought
not to hinder the truth from prevailing and overcoming. For custom without
Truth, is but antiquity of error, therefore leaving error, let us follow truth.
-- It is through a study of presumption and contumacy that a man will rather
defend his own wicked and false opinions, than consent to another that are
right and true: Paul therefore says that a Bishop must be no quarreller, but
mild and teachable; for a Bishop must not only teach, but be taught. -- And
there is a speedy way for Religious and simple minds to lay down error, and to
find and disclose the Truth. For if we return to That is, the Scriptures.
the Head and Original of Gods tradition, humane error cease, and whatsoever
was in cloudy darkness, it opened in the light of truth -- If the water Pipes
be stopped, do we not run to the fountain to see what is the matter. -- So now
must the Priests of God that keep his commandment, that if in any point Truth
have changed or wavered, we may return to the original, even the Tradition by
the Lord, by the Gospel and by the Apostles: and the Reason of our action may
rise from thence from whence both order and beginning did arise.] So far
Cyprian.

If the Papists can make their followers now believe that Cyprian believed the
Popes infallibility, or that the Church of Rome was the only keeper of
Tradition, or that Traditions were not to be tried by the Scriptures, then you
may see to what purpose it is that they must needs be the judges of
Controversy and the sense of Scripture, and why they call it a Nose of wax;
even that it may be at their service, and so flexible as to yield to what sense
they will put upon it, when they will needs exercise the same Authority on the
Fathers themselves who in their familiar Epistles speak as plain as they can.

Firmilianus, a famous Bishop writes a confutation of Pope Stephens Epistle
and therefore took him not to be infallible; Cyprian page 236.237.
and he parallell's him with the Ancient Heretics, Marcion, Apelles,
Valentinus, Basilides, as bringing in error under pretense of Tradition as they
did. And says [And for them that are at Rome, they do not in all things
observe those things which were delivered from the beginning, and do in vain
pretend the Authority of the Apostles; as may be seen in that about Easter and
about many other Divine mysteries, there are some diversities with them, and
they do not equally observe all things as at Jerusalem they are observed. As
also in many other Provinces many things are varyed according to the diversity
of places and names, and yet no breach of the Churches unity and peace for
this. Which now Stephen has dared to do, breaking the peace with us, which his
ancestors kept in love and honor: and moreover defaming Peter and Paul, as if
he had this Tradition from them. -- And in this I have just indignation at the
open and manifest foolishness of Stephen, that he that thus boasts of the
place of his Bishopric, and contendeth that he holds the succession of
Peter, upon whom the foundations of the Church are laid, does bring in many
other Rocks and makes new buildings of many Churches while by his authority he
defends that there is Baptism* -- And as to the confutation of Custom,
which they seem to oppose to truth, who is so vain as to prefer custom before
truth? Or that seeing the light will not forsake the darkness? Except that when
Christ, that is the truth, was come, the most ancient custom would have in any
thing helped the Jews, that leaving the new way of truth, they remained in
Antiquity, Which you Africans may say against Stephen, that having knowledge of
the truth you have forsaken the error of custom. But we do both join custom
to truth, and to the custom of the Romans, we oppose custom but of the
truth, from the beginning holding that which from Christ and his Apostles was
delivered to us. Nor can we remember any beginning of this -- Yea thou art
worse then all the heretics -- See then how ignorantly thou dare to
reprehend them, who strive for the truth against a lie. For who should more
justly be angry with the other? he that defends Gods enemies or he that
consents? But that it is manifest that the ignorant are haughty and angry,
while for want of judgment and speech they easily turn to indignation; so that
of no man more then of thee does Gods Scripture say, An haughty man breeds
strife, and an angry man heapeth up sins ( Prove. 29.22.) For what strifes and
dissenssions have thou made through the Churches of the whole world? And how
great a sin have thou heaped on thy self, when thou have cut off thy self from
so many flocks? For thou have cut off thy self: deceive not thy self: For he is
truly the schismatic, who makes himself an apostate from the communion of
Ecclesiastical unity. For while thou think to suspend all from thy
communion, thou do only suspend thy self from the communion of all. Can
there be one Body and one spirit with such a a man whose soul perhaps is not
one, so slippery and mutable and uncertain is it -- And yet is not Stephen
ashamed to patronize such against the Church, and for the defense of heretics
to divide the brother hood; and also to call Cyprian a false Christ, and false
Apostle and a deceitful worker; who being conscious that all these were in
himself, did by prevention, object all that to another by a lie, which himself
deservedly ought to hear] So far Firmilianus.

The question is not whether Stephen of Rome, or the Eastern Bishops were in
the right, but whether these passages do not sufficiently declare, that they
had then no conceits of the Popes infallibility? and that when he
excommunicated other Churches, they took it but as an excommunicating of
himself, and therefore plainly called him a Schismatic.

In the Council of Carthage, 87. Bishops decreed expressly against the sentence
of the Bishop of Rome. And Cyprian in Council speaks thus [Let every man speak
his judgment, judging no man, nor removing any man from the right of
communion, that thinks otherwise: For none of us takes himself to be a Bishop
of Bishops; or by a tyrannical fear does compel his Colleagues to obey: seeing
every Bishop has by license free choice of his own liberty and power, and can
neither be judged of another, nor can judge another: But let us all expect the
judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, who only and solely has power to set us
over his Church in Government, and to judge of our actions.

If this be not as plain as need be spoken against the Papal usurpation, I know
not what can be accounted plain.

Yea Cyprian and the Council say the like to the Pope himself [These things
dear brother we speak to thy conscience for the common honor and for simple
love -- But we know that some men will not lay down that which they have once
drunk in, Cyprian. Epist. 72. Edit. Goularti.
nor easily change their purpose, but saving the bond of Peace and concord
among Colleagues will retain some things of their own, which are once grown into
use among them. Wherein we do neither use violence, nor give Laws to any;
seeing that every Ruler (or Bishop) has the free arbitration of his own will
in the administration of the Church, as one that must give account of his
doings to the Lord.]

If this be not plain still against Papal, and all Archiepiscopal government of
Bishops, I know not how a man should speak plain.

The Council of Carthage (says Gratian Did. 99) says [Even the Pope of Rome
must not be called the universal Bishop.]

Gregory called the great Bishop of Rome, but a few years before Boniface
claimed the universal Episcopacy, wrote thus against John of Constantinople who
would have had some such title [None of my predecessors would use this profane
word ( viz. Universal Bishop) because if one will call himself universal
Patriarch, Greg. Epist. 80.
the name of Patriarch is stolen from others: But far be it from a Christian
soul that any should falsely ascribe to himself that whereby he diminishes any
thing from the honor of his Brethren To consent to that unjust speech is no
other thing then to fall from the faith. One thing we owe to the unity of the
faith, and another to suppress pride. And I say boldly that he who calls
himself universal Pastor or desires so to be called surpasses the Antichrist
in pride -- ]

So Epist. 188. l. 6. He says [I have said that he cannot have place with us,
if he corrected not the vanity of that supersticious and ambitious word which
has been invented by the first Apostate. And to speak nothing of the injury
done to your honor, if a Bishop be called universal, that universal once
falling the universal Church must also fall.] Here it is especially to be noted
that this very reason by which Gregory condemns universal Episcopacy, is now
used by the learned Papists to prove the Popes infallibity: For they argue that
the Pope cannot err de fide in Cathedra, because else the universal Church
should fail with him if he fail.

The same Gregory in Epist. 78. says [It is a thing too hard to endure that
our Brother and fellow Bishop, should be alone called Bishop in contempt of all
the rest: And what other thing does this arrogance portend, but that the time
of Antichrist approaches already, in so far as he imitated him who disdaining
the company of Angels assayed to ascend to the top of singularity?]

A man would think that all this should be plain enough to resolve us beyond
all further doubting, that the Popes Universal Episcopacy is new. But to t^^
the Papis^ have no thing to say, but a foolish pretense that John of
Constantinople would have been the sole Bishop on earth, and have had no Bishop
else but himself alone, which the Pope never arrogated. Ans. A silly shift,
which supposes all the world to be so unreasonable as to be satisfied with any
thing, or else would make them so: A shift that has not a word of proof to
support it, but contradicts the full course of History, and the words of
Gregory themselves, which all show that it was but an universal Episcopacy to
which all other should be subject, which John of Constantinople did challenge;
if so much. And all their show of proof of the contrary is, because Gregory
here says that [He would be alone called Bishop] But that's not as if directly
in terms, but only by consequence, he is supposed to lay such a claim, in that
he claimed the title of universal Bishop. Vid. Platin. in vita Gregorii. 1.
But I now see that the Papists will make a nose of wax of their own Popes
Writings as well as of the Scriptures; and that the Pope has no more the gift
of speaking intelligibly than Peter, Paul or Christ himself is by them supposed
to have. And therefore what should they talk any more of a living judge, when
that living judge himself cannot speak so as to be understood?

Platina says that [Bonifacius tertius a Ph^ca Imperatore obtinuit, magna
tamen contentione, etc. That Boniface the third obtained of Pho^as the Emperor,
but not without great contention, that the seat of the blessed Apostle Peter
which is the Head of all Churches, Platina in vit. Bonif. 3.
should be so called and accounted of all; which place indeed the Church of
Constantinople did seek to challenge to it self -- ]

So that it was the same place or name which the Bishop of Constantinople would
have had, which Boniface after got, and not as Bellarmine feigneth, a quite
different thing. Nay I cannot perceive any probable evidence that Boniface
himself had any thought of that Universal Jurisdiction, which now is arrogated,
but only to be the Greatest and Highest of all Bishops, and in that sense
called the Head or the universal Bishop.

If they knew the Pope to be the supreme infallible head of all the Church, why
did the Council of Calcedon (the fifth general Council) examine Leo's Epistle,
Vid. Binnium Tom. 2. Conc. part 1. art. 4. Conc. Calced. p. 218. and part. 2.
Art. Conc. gene. 5. Collat. 6. p. 101. and Collat. 8. p. 113. Vid. Constitut.
Vigil. in Binnium Tom. 2. part. 2. p. 25, 26. and Baron. anno. 553.
and profess to recive it only on its agreement with former doctrine? Yea why
did this Council condemn Pope Vigilius his judicious sentence de 3 capitulis?
Yea and anathematize all that condemned not Theodorus, of whom Vigilius was
one? and this in a Doctrinal Point, Whether Heretics may be condemned after
death? Yea they pronounce the Pope and his adherents defenders of impiety, and
such as cared not for Gods decrees, or the Apostles pronunciations, or the
Fathers Traditions. If these 165. Bishops had believed the Popes infallibility,
they would rather have craved his Definitive sentence. And why did the Council
of Calcedon also Decree without the Popes consent, that the Bishop of
Constantinople was equal with him; and the 5-sixth general Council confirm it?

Any man of understanding that reads over the Decretals of the several Popes
shall find besides all other errors, so many false expositions of Scripture,
even common reason, and the Papists themselves being judges, that there needs
no other proof that they are too fallible.

Augustine in l. 2. August. li. 2. Contr. Donatist c. 3. de Bapt. page Edit.
Paris. 40.
Contr. Donatist. says [ Ipsa concila qua per singulas regiones, etc. That is,
Who knows not that the very Councils themselves which are held in several
Regions or Provinces, do without more ado yield to the authority of fuller
Councils which are made out of the whole Christian world? And that the full
Councils themselves which were before are often Or Corrected.
mended by the later, when by some experiment of matters that is opened which
before was shut up, and that is known which lay hid, and this without any smoke
of sacrilegious pride, without any inflation of arrogance* without any
contention of livid envy, with holy humility, with Catholic peace, with
Christian charity.]

This he brings as a majore to show the Donatists the invalidity of Cyprians
authority, telling them that it is the holy Scriptures that are undoubted and
of unquestionable credit, but not the writings of any Bishops since, no nor of
Councils themselves.

This place of Austin does confirm the French Papists as well as the Italian,
that they have nothing to say against it, that without mere impudency can be
thought to be of any weight. What is vainly said by them, you may see answered
in A.B. Laud's Book against Fisher and A.C. Page 240, 241, 242.

In Austines Book against Petilianus the Donatist the very question debated,
is, How they may know where the true Church is? And is it not a wonder that
Austin never remembered to direct them to Rome, or to the Popes infallibility,
if that had been the approved way? Here then what way Austin went Cap. 2.
August. Cont. Petil. Don. c. 2. and 3.
page (mihi Edict. Paris) 141. Quaestio c^^te inter nos versatur, ubi sit
Ecclesia? utrum apud nos, an apud illos? -- Quid ergo facturi sumus? in verbis
nostris eam quaesituri, an in verbis capiris sui Domini nostri Jesu Christi:
and puto quod in illius, etc, that is, The question handled between us is where
is the Church? with us or with them? What must we do then? must we seek it in
our words, or in the words of our Lord Jesus Christ our head? I think in his
who is truth it self, and best knows his own body, 1 Timothy 3. The Lord knows
who are his -- ] Cap. 3. p. 142. Sed ut dicere caeperam, non audiamus, haec
dico, haec dicis, sed audiamus, haec dicit dominus, etc. That is, But as I
began to say, Let us not hear, I say this, and you say that, but let us hear,
Thus says the Lord. There are certainly the Lords Books, to whose authority we
both consent, we both believe them, we both obey them; there let us seek the
Church, there let us discuse our cause. -- Auferantur, ergo illa de medio, etc.
Away with those things from among us, which we bring against one another, not
out of the Divine Canonical Books, but from elsewhere -- Quia nolo humanis
documentis, etc. Because I will not have the holy Church to be demonstrated by
humane documents, but by Gods Oracles. For if the holy Scriptures have placed
the Church in Africa alone, and in a few places of Rome, etc. then whatsoever
may be brought out of other papers, the Church is only with the Donatists. Si
autem, etc But if the Church of Christ is placed by the Divine and most certain
testimonies of the Canonical Scriptures in all Natitions; then what ever they
bring, and whence ever they recite it, who say, Lo here is Christ, or lo there;
let us rather, if we be his sheep hear the voice of our Shepherd, saying,
Believe them not. For those parcels are not found in many Nations, where that
(Church) is: but it, which is every where, is found even where they are;
therefore let us seek it in the holy Canonical Scriptures.]

And thus he goes on and proves at large by the Scriptures the true Church;
fitting all as meet to the present schism of the Papists, almost as if he had
seen and named it.

Cap. 18. Begins thus [Because therefore the holy Church is manifestly known in
the Scriptures, etc.] Remotis ergo omnibus, etc. Laying aside therefore all
such matters, let them demonstrate their Church if they can; not in the
speeches and rumors of the Africans, not in the Councils of their Bishops, not
in the writings of any disputers, not in signs and fallacious Miracles,
because we are prepared and cautioned against such things by the word of God:
Cap. 18.
but in the writings of the Law, in the predictions of the prophets, in the
Psalms, in the words of our Pastor himself, in the preachings and labors of the
Evangelists, that is, in all the Canonical authorityes of the sacred Books.]

Next he shows that it must not be out of Parables, Allegories or such
Scriptures that make no more for one side then the other (what then? does he
tell them that it is all such, and send them to Rome to know the sense? no) but
it is the plain Scripture of which he produces abundance that must tell us
which is the true Church. And he thus begins the 19 Chap.

Omissis ergo, etc. Letting pass therefore the snares of delays let him show
their Church, Cap. 19. page 154.
etc. and so show it, as not to say, Its true, because I say it, or because my
colleague said it, or these colleagues of mine, or those Bishops, or Clerks, or
our Layity, or therefore its true How fit is this wedge for Master Knot if he
will but apply it, it may easily cleave his new foundation of the faith.
because these or those wonders were done by Donatus or Pontius, or any other,
or because men pray and are heard at the Memories (or shrines) of ours that are
dead, or because such or such things happen there, or because that brother of
ours, or that sister of ours saw such a sight waking, or had such a dreaming
vision sleeping. Away with these either fictions of lying men, or wonders of
deceiving spirits: For either the things that are said, are not true, or if any
wonders are done by heretics, we must the more beware, seeing the Lord when he
told us there would come deceivers, who by doing certain signs would deceive if
it were possible, even the elect, adds, Lo I have foretold you, -- And if any
be heard praying at the Memories of heretics, it is not for the desert of the
place, but the desert of his desire that he receives good or evil. -- No man
can have Christ for his head, that is not in his Body, which is the Church:
which (Church) we must know as we do Christ himself in the sacred Canonical
Scriptures, and not to inquire into the various rumors of men and their
opinions, and deeds, and sayings, and sights. -- But let them show me whether
they have the Church, no way but by the Canonical books of the divine
Scriptuers: Because neither do we therefore say, that they ought to believe us
that we are in the Church of Christ, because that (Church) which we hold is
commended by Optatus Melevitanus, or by Ambrose of Millan, or innumerable other
Was the Pope of Rome none of those innumerable Bishops of the Church?
Bishops of our communion, or because it is predicated (or praised) by the
Councils of our Colleagues, or because through the whole world in the holy
places which are frequented by our communion, so great marvailes of hearings,
or healings are done (here some are named.) What ever things of this sort are
done in the Catholic Church,
are therefore to be approved, because they are done in the Catholic Church,
but it is not therefore manifested to be the Catholic Church, because these
things are done in it. -- This he testifies is written in the Law and the
Prophets and Psalms; this we have commended by his own mouth. These are the
documents of our cause, these are its foundations, these its upholders (or
confirmers.) We read in the Acts of the Apostles of some Believers, that they
daily searched the Scriptures whether those things were so: What Scriptures?
but the Canonical of the Law and prophets? Hereto are added the Gospels, the
Epistles of the Apostles, the Acts of the Apostles and the Revelation of John.
Search all these, and produce somewhat manifest which will demonstrate that the
Church either Or Rome.
remains in Afric alone, or is to be from Africa, so that it may be
fulfilled which the Lord says, This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in
all the world, etc. But bring somewhat that needs nor an interpreter, that
you may not be convinced that it speaks of another matter, and that you strive
to turn it to your own sense Like the Papists, Pasc^ oves meas: etc. t^ es
P^trus, etc.
-- ] Chap. 25. [The question is not dark in which they may deceive you -- You
see the Church is every where diffused, and increases to the harvest.]

This whole Book of Austin is written, as if it had been purposed as a
confutation of the Papists that will have the Church to contain only the
Roman faction, and exclude all the rest of the world, and will try the
Scripture by the Church, and not the Church by the Scripture, but fly to I know
not what visions and pretended miracles to prove their Church which Austin
professes are not a proof no not of the true Church, though there be much more
then there to boast of: so that the Papists cannot here say that Austin thus
deals with the Donatists because they denied the Church of Rome and believed
the Scripture: he expressly enough preventeth all such expositions of his words.

August. Cont. Crescon li. 2. c 33.
August. con. Cresconium li. 2. cap. 33. p. 177. Says [ Ego hujus Epistolae,
etc. I am not bound by the authority of this Epistle (of Cyprians ad Jubai:)
because I take not Ciprians Epistles be Canonical, but by the Canonical I
consider them, and that in them which agrees to the authority of the Divine
Scriptures, I accept with his praise, but that which disagreeth I refuse with
his peace. And so if thou had recited those things which he wrote to Jubajan
out of some Canonical book of the Apostles or Prophets, I should have had
nothing at all to gainsay: But now, seeing what thou recitest is not
Canonical, by that liberty to which the Lord has called us, I refuse it, etc.]
And he compares it to Peter's compelling the Gentiles to Judaize Gal. 2.
showing that even Peter should have been so refused in error.

The words of Austin in Epist. 19. ad Hieron. are commonly cited [I have
learned to give only to those writings which are now called Canonical, August.
ad Hieron. Ep. 19.
this reverence and honor, as that I dare say, that none of them erred in
writing: but others I so read, that how holy and learned soever they be, I do
not therefore think it true, because they so judged, but because they persuade
me either by those Canonical books or by probable reason that they say true.]

As commonly cited is that li. 3. Cont. Maximin. Arrian. c. 14. page (mihi)
306. August. cont. Maximin. l. 2. c. 14. Vid eti^m August. in Psalm. 21.
expos^t. 2.
[ Sed nunc nec ego, etc. But now neither ought I as fore-judging (or for
prejudice) to bring forth the Nicene Council, nor thou the Council of Ariminum;
I am not bound by the authority of this no^ thou of that. Let matter contend
with matter, caus^ with cause, reason with reason, by the authority of the
Scriptures, which are witnesses, not proper to either of us, but common to
both.]

It were too long to recite the fourtieth part which Augustine has to this
purpose. He that would se^ more, let him read his Epist. 112. and de Morib.
Eccles^ Cathol. c. 7. and Epist. 111. and Contr. Faustum li. 11. c. 5 and de
Trintat. li. 3. etc.

The words of Optatus lib. 5. advers. Parmen. ar^ frequently cited by our
writers: which are thu^ [ Quaerendi sunt judices, etc. We must seek judges.
Optatus li. 5. advers. Parmen.
I^ Christians, they cannot be admitted on either side, because by siding the
truth is hindered. We must seek a judge abroad (or without.) If a Pagan, he
cannot know the Christians secrets. If a Jew, he is an enemy to the Christian
Baptism. On earth there can no judgment of this matter be found. We must seek a
Judge from heaven. But wherefore should we go knock at heaven, when we have it
here in the Gospel? A Testament (I say, because here we may well compare
earthly things to heavenly) is such, as that a man that has many sons, does
command them all himself as long as the father is present: Vid. A.B. La^d
against Fisher. and A.C. page 194. vindicating this.
there is then no need of a Testament. So Christ, as long as he was present on
earth (though yet he be not wanting or absent) commanded the Apostles whatever
was needful, for the time. But as a father when he feels himself near to
death, fearing lest after his death, the Btethren should unpeaceably quarrel,
does before witness put his Will out of his dying breast into writings which may
endure. And if there shall rise any contention among the Brethren, they go not
to the Grave, but seek the Testament; and he that rests in the Grave does
silently speak by the writings. The Living (Lord) whose the Testament is, is in
heaven. Let his will therefore be sought in the Gospel, as in a Testament.]

The Author of the imperfect work on Mat. commonly imputed to Chrysostom
Homil. 49. says [At this time, since heresy has possessed these Churches,
Opus imperfect. in Math. Hom. 29.
there can be no proof of true Christianity, nor any other refuge of
Christians, that would know the truth of Belief, but the Divine Scriptures. For
before it was declared by many means, which was the Church of Christ, and which
was Gentilism. But now it is by no way known to them that would know, which is
the true Church of Christ, but only by the Scriptures. -- How therefore should
he that would know which is the true Church of Christ, come to know it, but
only by the Scriptures?]

One would think this were plain enough, if the Papists were not the Judges of
the meaning of all writings, as well as the holy Scriptures, which condemn
their cause?

Junilius ad Primasium ^ part. divin. legis li. 2. Junilius ad Primal. li. 2.
qu. 29.
qu. 29 Says. [ Vnde probamus libros, etc. How do we prove that the Books of
our Religion are written by Divine inspiration? Many ways, of which the first
is the truth Scripture it self, then the order of things; the agreement o^
precepts, the manner of speech without affectation (or compasses) and the
purity of words; Ther^ is added also, the quality of the writers and preachers;
that mere men could not have delivered such Divine things, and vile men such
high things and uneloquent men such subtle things, unless they were filled
with the Holy Ghost. And the force o^ the preaching of it, which it had when it
was preached, though by a few contemned men. Hereto is added the witness of the
contrary party, as the Sybils or Philosophers: the expulsion of adversaries;
the utility of the consequents, the event which by acceptations and figures and
predictions were foretold: and lastly the Miracles which were continually
wrought till the Scripture it self was received by the Nations: of which this
suffices for the next Miracle that it is known to be received by all.]

Says Chamier citing this passage, Here are arguments enough to prove the
authority of Scripture, Vil. Scot. in ^^nt. Prolog. qu 2.
internal and external; but no mention of the Churches antecedent judgment to
determine it. The same may be said of Eusebius, Anstia and the rest that prove
the Scripture and Christian Religion.

Hieromes words are frequently cited on Math. 23. [ Hoc quia de Scripturis,
Hierom. in. Math. 23.
etc. This is as easily contemned as proved, because it has not authority from
the Scriptures.] And on Isaiah 8. He says [ Side aliquo dubitatis, etc.
Hierom. in Isa. 8. fol. (mihi) 18.
If you doubt of any thing know what is written -- If you would know the things
that are doubtful, rather give up your selves to the law and to the testimonies
of the Scriptures.] And on the 86. Psalm, He says [ Quamvis sanctus aliquis,
etc. Idem in Psalm. 86. Idem Epist. ad Rusticum, Idem ad Evagr.
Though there be some Saint after the Apostles never so eloquent, yet he has
not authority.] And Epist. ad Rustic. [Since covetousness entered into the
Church as into the Empire, the Law is perished from the Priests, and the vision
from the Prophets.]

And the same Hierome Epist. ad Evagr. ( fol. 150. Edit, Basil. per Froben,
1516. Tomo. 3. and page 329. Edict. Basil. 1536. Tomo. 2.) Says thus [ Quid
^uim facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus, quod presbyter non faciat? Nec altera
Romana urbis Ecclesia, altera totius orbis existimanda est: Et Gallia, and
Britannia, and Africa, Erasmus in his first Annotations says that [hac oli^^
sort^sse vera* nunc magna ex part commutata sunt, viz. Quod aequat Eugubiensem
Epi copum cum Romano, nec putat ullum Episco^um alio majorem esse nisi qu^tenus
superat humilitate, and non pu^at. Episc^pum quovis sacerdote prestantiorem
esse, nisi quod jus habet ordi^andi.] But in his latter Annotations he merrily
refers all the equality in their respect to the Deacons, that he might (...)
to abate the offense.
and Persis, and Oriens, and Judia omnes Barbarae nationes, unum Christum
ad^rant, unam observant regulam veritatis. Si Authorit^^ quaritur, Orbis major
est Vrbe. Vbicunque fuerit Episcopus, sive Romae, sive Fugubii, sive
Constantinopoli, sive Rhegii, sive Alexandriae sive Tanis, ejusdem meriti,
ejusdem est and sacerdotii. Potentia divitiarum, and paupertatis humilitas, vel
sublimiorem vel inferiorem Episcopum non facit. Caeteram omnes Apostolorum
successores sunt. Sed dicis, Quomodo Romae ad testimonium Diaconi presbyter
ordinatur? Quid mihi profers unius urbis consuttudinem? Quid paucitatem, de qua
ortum est supercilium in leges Eccesiae vindicas?] That is [For what does a
Bishop except ordination which a Presbyter may not do? Nor is the Church of the
Roman City to be esteemed one and the Church of the whole world another: Both
France, and Britain, and Africa, and Persia, and the East, and Jndia, and all
the Barbarous Nations do worship one Christ, and observe one Rule of truth. If
you seek for Authority, the worlds is greater than the Cities (of Rome)
Wherever there is a Bishop, whether at Rome, or at Eugubium, or at
Constantinople, or at Rhegium, at Alexandria or at Tanis, of the same Merit, he
is also of the same Priesthood. The Power of riches, and the lowness of
poverty, make not a Bishop high-eror lower: But they are all the Apostles
successors. But you say, Baronim ad Tom. 402. page (mihi) 160 To. 5. and ita
Tom. 1. Does in vain seek to ^void the force of this passage, as if the
equality were only quoad sacros ordines. It seems the Popes juri^diction is no
part of his office, nor belongs to him by ^^^ted orders.
How is it that at Rome a Presbyter is ordained on the testimony of a Deacon?
What tell you me of the custom of one City? why do you defend a few (of which
superciliousness is arisen) against the Laws of the Church?]

It may be the Papists by their supereminent power of interpreting all Church
writers, can put such a sense on these words of Hierom, as shall consist with
that which he purposly does oppose: But I think an impartial man can hardly
believe that when he wrote these words, he was acquainted with Romes claim of
universal jurisdiction and infallibility.

Nay when it is the scope of much of the former part of this Epistle to prove
the equality of Bishops and Presbyters, in the beginning, and that at that time
they differed in no power but that of ordaining (when yet he says the
Presbyters of Alexandria did long make their own Bishops) how then could
Hierome believe the Popes universal jurisdiction? Could he think that the
Bishop of Rome had that power over the Church which he thought not any Bishop
to have over the Presbyters of any one Church?

Greg. Nazianzene says of Councils [If I must write the truth, Nazianzene
Bellar. li. 2. de council. e. 7. page (mihi) 121.
I am of this mind, that I will fly or avoid all Councils of Bishops: for I
never saw a glad or happy end of any Councils, or which did not rather bring an
addition or increase of evils, then a removal of them.] To this of Nazianzene
Bellarmine answers that [ Gregory meant that in his time no Council could be
wholly lawful: for he lived between the first and second general Council, where
he had seen many Councils which because of the great number of Heretics had a
bad end.] And he names five of them.

Answ. 1. But by what Authority does Bellarmine confine Gregory's words to some
Councils, which he speaks in general of all that he had seen or might do
resolving to avoid all hereafter. 2. Here note that Bellarmine confesses that
Councils may err; and then where is the French Religion? 3. I would fain know
where was the Churches infallibility, and power of judging of matters of faith
in Nazianzens days? If there were no lawful General Councils, nor could be,
then it was not in them; therefore it must be either in the people (and how
shall we gather the world together to consult with them) or else as Bellarmine
will say, in the Pope alone, or in the Roman Clergy with him. Why did Nazianz.
never remember, when Councils all failed, and the Pope was the only living
fallible judge, to have pleaded this with the Heretics, and to have sent them
all to Rome instead of the Councils.
I hear not yet that they are very forward to prove that the Roman Clergy in
particular are Infallible (though Bellarmine has given us his bold conjectures
of that) It must needs be therefore that at that time all the Churches
infallible judicial power, and so the foundation of our faith must be resolved
into the Pope alone; and so the faith of all the world must then be resolved
into the credit of the word of a single and silly man. I know the Italian
faction will not abhor this at any time; but then they should for shame speak
out and deal plainly with the world, and not talk of the whole Church and all
the Church, when they mean but one man. 4. And I would fain know of any friend
of Bellarmines, how far the universal Church was visible at that time, when all
Councils were bad, and none could be lawful? The visibility was not in a
Council to represent the whole: and the ^aity are not much noted when Councils
go wrong, ^o that the Church was visible only in one man, or ^ few particular
persons, according to the Papists common reckoning, who judge by the Pastors
visi^ility: Yea the Church of Rome it self was invisible ^hen and diverse times
when their Bishop was a Here^ick. If therefore they will say either that the
Church was visible in one man, or in the Laity of many parts oppressed by the
Clergy and Magistracy and they have nothing more to say) then we will ^ay as
much of the visibility of our Church before Luther, and more too. 5. Its
confessed here also that ^ot only a Council, but the greater number (by ^ery
many) of the Bishops of the Church may be ^eretickes or err in faith. 6. And
then the Church may lie in the smaller oppressed part: and why then may not the
most err now? Stapleton de princip. doctrine. li. 2. cap. 18. Hieron. Dialog.
advers. Lucifer.
Stapleton himself confesses that Luther was not much out of the way, when he
said, ^here were scarce five Bishops ^o be found that turned not Arrians. And
Hierome ^aith Dialog. advers. Lucifer.) [The whole world ^^aned, and wondered
that it was turned Arrian.] ^. And did the authority of the Scripture at that
time ^ll quoad nos, when the judge was turned heretic? ^ven Liberius and the
Councils?

And if the high Elogies of the Roman Church would prove its Authority, then
see what Nazian^ene, says of the Church of Caesarea. In his 22. Epistle ad
Caesarienses patris nomine scripta (found among his own works, Edit Paris. Tom.
1. Greg. Naziazen. Epist. 22. To. 1. p. 85.
page 785. and also in Basils works translated by Musculus Edit. Basil. 1565.
Tom. 2. page 17. [Seeing every Church as being Christ's body is to be watched
over (or looked to) with greates^ care and diligence, then specially yours,
which anciently was, and now is and is esteemed, almost (o^ nigh) the mother of
all Churches, on which the whole Christian Commonwealth does cast their eyes
even as the encompassing circle does on the center, not only for the soundness
of doctrine long divulged to all, but also for that conspicuou^ grace of
Concord which God has given them.] What would the Papists say, but that this
were for their supremacy, if they found but this much in him for the Church of
Rome.

And I think there is no doubt but that in thos^ ancient times the Church was
acquainted with the true way of Government as well as Rome is now and therefore
I would know further. 8. Whether the truest Government may not stand with great
desolations, divisions of the Church and multitudes of errors? Greg. Nazianzene
says ( Orat. 20 page mih^ 345. Nazianz. Orat 20. p. 345.
) That when Basil se^ upon the great work of healing the Church [The holy
Nation, the Kingly Priesthood was so far amiss that it was distracted into six
hundred opinions and errors; And spoiled and wasted by the Devil.] If the Popes
Monarchical Government was then a foot, then it seem^ that Government will no
more prevent sects and errors then the worst: If it were not, then 1. They are
now usurpers, 1. And they cannot prove ou^ way of Government to be wrong by the
multitude of errors that are in the Church.

Basil was far from resolving his faith into the Popes infallibility when he
wrote his Ascetica (or at least Eustathius Sebastienus, if they be his) when (
page 195. Basil, Mag. To. 2. Ascet. p. 197.
Tom. 2. translat. Musculi, Basil) he says [It is a manifest lapse of faith,
and apparent vice of pride, either to refuse any thing which the Scripture
contains, or to bring in any thing which is not written: seeing Christ says,
My sheep hear my voice, and premiseth, But another they will not follow, but
fly from him, because they know not a strangers voice.] And page 193. he
says, that sometimes he had used unwritten sayings against heretics [But
never aliene from the Scripture sense, etc.] and that now he was resolved [To
make use of what he had learned from Scripture, and but sparingly, to use the
very names and words which are not literally conform to the divine Scripture,
though they do retain the Scripture sense.] The same Basil Epist. 80. To. 2. p.
mihi. 74. Basil To. 2. Epist. 80. ad Eusta^hium Medi^um.
renouncing the argument from custom, says [Let us stand therefore to the
arbitration of the Scriptures inspired from God: and with whomsoever is found
the opinions which are agreeable to the Divine oracles, to him let the sense
(or sentence) of truth be wholly adjudged.] This is Basils judgment of the
judge of controversies.

Hilarious Pictav. in his Hilarious Pictav. Edit. Paris. 1531. page 318, etc.
Idem de Trinit. li. 2. p. 16. Idem ^^ Mat. p. 498.
Epistle de Synodis adversus Arrianos page (mihi) 318* 319. and fully shows
his thoughts that Council^ have erred, and that even those of the Orthodox are
to be tried by the Apostolical doctrine. And lib. 2. de Trinitate page 16. col.
2. he says [ Commendat autem fidei hujus integritatem, etc. The integrity of
this faith is commended by the Authority of the Gospel and Apostolical doctrine
-- For this foundation stands strong and unmoved, etc.] And he makes it a
remedy against all Heresies.

And in his Commentary on Mat. Canon. 8. page 498. he says [Igitur secundum
haec Ecclesiae intra quas verbum Dei non vigilaverit, naufragae sunt, etc. i.
e. The Churches in which the word of God does not watch, are shipwrackt.]

And most fully lib. 4. de Trinitate page 31. col. 2. Nemini autem dubium esse
oportet, etc. that is, No man ought to doubt but that we must use Gods doctrine
for the knowing of divine things. For humane weakness cannot of it self attain
the knowledge of heavenly things. -- It is God himself that we must believe
concerning himself, and those things which he offers to our knowledge, of
himself, must we obey. For either we must deny him as the Gentiles do, if we
disallow his testimonies; or if he be believed to be God, as he is, nothing of
God can be understood, but as he has witnessed of himself; Let men's own
opinions therefore cease (or be laid by) and let not men's judgments extend
themselves beyond Gods constitutions -- For the understanding of sayings, must
be fetched from the causes of the speech, because the thing is not subject to
the words, but the words to the matter]

And li. 4. de Trinitate, page 29. col. 1. when he shows that the heretics
use to plead Scripture misunderstood, he does not send them to Rome for a
judgment of the sense* but still concludes [ Respondendum esse existimo
haereticorum perversitati, and omnes little stultas ac mortiferas institutiones
Evangelicis atque Apostolicis Testimoniis coarguendas: That is, I judge that we
must answer heretics perverseness, and all their foolish and deadly
institutions, by the testimonies of the Gospel and of the Apostles.]

And the same Hilary does largly persuade to a close adhering to the Gospel,
Hilary ad Constant. Imper. page 307. etc.
and the sum of Faith called the Apostles Creed, without adding or altering,
under any pretense of amending, and shows the divisions and depravations that
have followed since the Council of Nice would make one emendation, and on their
example other Councils had made and mended, done and undone so often, that they
had marred all by it: and he persuades the Emperor It is a great doubt whether
this Book were written in Constantins his life time or since his death: of
which see Hieronim. de Scrip. Ecclesiast. Erasm. Baronius tom. 3. Annal. page
714, 715. Bellarmin de Scriptor. Eccles. page (mihi) 25. But its plain by the
Epistle it self, that it was written as to Constantius alive, though its
possible, as Bellarmine conjectureth, that he might be dead, and Hilary in
France not know it; For its clear that was written a little before or after his
death, even the same year that he dyed.
to hearken to the ancient Gospel faith and not to Synods. His words are in
Epist. vel Lib. ad Constant. August. page (Edit. Paris.) 307.308. where having
showed how he had erred in looking after Councils, he says [ Recognosce fidem
quam, etc. that is, Reacknowledge that Belief which thou desire to hear from
the Bishops but hear not. For they of whom it is required do write their own
things, and do not preach the things of God; they have drawn about an endless
and perpetual circle. For the modesty of humane infirmity should have contained
all mysteries of divine knowledge in those bounds of conscience only, which he
believed in, and not after a Belief confessed and sworn in Baptism, in the name
of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, to doubt or innovate any thing else. --
Under the improbable occasion of this necessity Of keeping the right sense.
the custom is come up of writing and renewing the Belief. Which after that it
began rather to frame new things, then to retain what was received, it neither
defended the old, nor confirmed the new, and Belief is now become rather (a
belief) of the times than of the Gospels: while it is written according to the
years, and not held according to the Confession of Baptism. It is a most
perilous and miserable thing, that we have as many Beliefs as Wills; and as
many Doctrines as manners; and that as many causes of blasphemy spring up, as
there are vices. And when according to one God and one Lord, and one Baptism,
there is one Belief, we are fallen from that Belief which is but one, and while
many are made, they therefore begin to be, that there may be none. For we are
on both sides conscious, that since the meeting of the Council of Nice, we have
wrote nothing but Beliefes. While there is quarrel about the words and
questions about the newness, and occasion about the ambiguityes, and complaints
about the Authors, and strife about the parties, and difficulty in consents,
and while every one begins to be an Anathema to another, almost no one now is
Christ's. For we are carried about by an uncertain wind of Doctrine, and either
while we teach we trouble, or while we are taught we err. And what is the
change that is in the last years belief? The first decrees that the word
homousion shall be silenced: The next decrees and preaches the homousion: The
third does by indulgence excuse the word usia which was simply before used by
our fathers. The fourth and last does not excuse it, but condemn it. and at
last its come to this, that there is nothing remains established and
inviolable with us, nor i. e. That was so with us, etc.
with any before us. And as for the likeness' of God the Son to God the Father,
it is the Belief of our miserable time, that he is not like in whole, or but in
part. We are excellent That is, the Councils of those times.
judges (or Arbitrators) sure, the seekers of the heavenly mysteries who do
calumniate in our professions of the faith of God, we decree yearly and
monthly Beliefs of God; we repent of our decrees, we defend them, we
Anathematize those that were defended, we damn other men's matter in ours, or
they damn ours in theirs, and biting one another, we are consumed one of
aouther. A Belief is again sought for, as if there were no belief. A belief
must be written, as if it were not in our hearts. Being already regenerated by
faith, we are now taught to believe: As though the Regeneration were without
Belief. We lear^ Christ after Baptism; as if Baptism could be anything Or there
could be any Baptism.
without the faith o^ Christ -- p. 309. Amon^ these shipwracks of faith the
heritage of our heavenly patrimony being no^ almost profligate, it is the
safest way for us to retain that first and only Evangelical Belief confessed
in Baptism and understood, and not to chang^ that good Belief which only I
have received and heard. Not as if those things which are contained in the
Council of our Fathers, The Council of Nice,
are to be damned as irreligiously and impiously written; but because through
men's rashness they are used to contradiction, that for this the Gospel might
safely be denied under the name of novelty, as if it were innovated that it
might be mended. That which is mended always effects this, that while every
amendment does displease, every amendment may be condemned by a following
amendment; as if now, whatever it be, it were no amendment of an amendment, but
began to be a condemnation of it. In this much, O Emperor Constantius, I admire
thee as of a blessed and Religious will, desiring a Belief only according to
what is written;
and indeed justly hastening to those very words of the only begotten God,
that the breast capable of impartial solicitude, may also be full of the
knowledge of the words of God. He that refuses this is an Antichrist: and he
that counterfeiteth it, is Anathema. But this one thing I entreat of thee, --
that the Council being present which now quarrels about the Belief, thou will
vouchsafe to hear me a few words, of the Holy Scriptures, and I may speak with
thee of the words of my Lord Jesus Christ, whose banished man, or Priest I am.
-- O Emperor do thou seek a Belief! Hear it, not out of newpapers, but out of
the Books of God. -- Remember, that it is not a question of Philosophy, but in
the doctrine of the Gospel. I desire not audience so much for my self as for
thee, and the Churches of God. For I have my Belief with my self, and need none
from without. That which I have received, I hold, and I change not that which
is of God. But yet remember that there is no heretic but does falsely pretend
that he speaks that in which he blasphemeth, according to the Scripture. --
(Here he names Marcellus, Photinus, Sabellius, Montaneus, Manichaeus, Marcion.)
They all speak Scripture without its meaning; they pretend faith without faith.
For the Scriptures lie not in reading, but in understanding, nor in
prevarication, but in charity. Hear, I pray thee, what is written of Christ,
lest under them those things that are not written be preached. Submit thy ears
to those things which from (these) Books I shall speak; lift up thy faith to
God: Hear that which profits to Belief, to Unity, to Eternity. I will speak
to thee with the honor of thy Kingdom and thy faith, all things profitable to
the peace of East and West: under the public knowledge, under a disagreeing
Council, under a famous contention. -- I will defend nothing to scandal, nor
that is without (or besides) the Gospel.] Here he recites a short creed in
Scripture words, especially about Christ.

I confess I fear I am too tedious in these long citations; but I do it, that
the Papists may not say that we take particular words or shreds of sentences,
without the full sense. Here I desire that it may be noted, 1. That Councils
may err and differ. 2. That they are so far from being the authorized judges
of our belief, that in Hilaryes judgment, their determinations have occasioned
the ruin and dangerous divisions of the Church. 3. And that this is not only
true of the Arrian Councils, but of the Council of Nice it self though its
Belief were sound, even by the novelty of terms, and example for further
innovating. 4. That Hilary never calls the Emperor to consult with the Pope or
Church of Rome as the authorized infallible judge, even when he professes to
tell him all that was necessary to the peace of the whole Church East and West.
If it be said, that this is because Heretics believed not Romes authority or
infallibility; I answer, It had then most nearly concerned Hilary to teach it
them, when he taught them all that was necessary to peace; especially if that
be the foundation into which the rest of our faith must be resolved. 5. Lastly
note, that it is only the word of God, and the ancient Baptismal Creed which
Hilary here calls them to for Peace and healing of all the worlds division.


O sad case that this advice was never taken to this day! O happy Church when
ever it shall be taken, and never till then.

And here because I am afraid of wearying the Reader, and making these
testimonies unproportionable to the brevity of the disputation, I shall forbear
adding those that I thought to have added, yet assuring any Papist that reads
it, that it is not for want of more sufficient Testimonies of the Fathers on
our side. For I had ready to transcribe in those few books which stand at my
elbow, sufficient Testimonies (shorter or longer) in all these following
Authors in their own writings, viz. Clemens Romanus, Ignatius, Justin Martyr,
Irenaeus the supposed Dionisius Areop, Tertullian, Origin, Clemens Alexandr,
Athenagoras, Fatianus, Arnobius, Athanasius, Lactantius, Macarius, Cyril.
Alexand. Cyril. Hierosol. Synesius, Epiphanius, Eusebius Caesariensis,
Chrysostom, Gregorius Thaumat. Neocaesar. Greg. Nyssen, Basilius Seleuciae,
Ambrose, Theodoret, Damascene, Isidore Hispal. Gaudentius Brixianus, Vincentius
Lirinensis, Salvianus Massil. Caesarius Arelatens. Alcuinus vel Albinus, Beda,
Vigilius, Joannes Maxen^ius, Alcimus Avitus, Prosper, Fulgentius, Oecumenius,
Theophylact. Bernard, with many others, besides all before named: of whom, some
speak fully to the point, and all the rest call us to the word of God in
Scriptures, for the resolution or ground of our faith, and not to the authority
or infallibility of the Pope of Rome. I shall only stay so long as to add two
or three of the eldest (though briefest) and two or three Canons of some
Councils, because there will seem more weight in their testimonies. And for any
Reader Papist or Protestant that would have more Testimonies to this end (to
see whether it be Romes authority or infallibility, or rather the Scriptures,
that is the Testimony which must support our faith, and is first to be known) I
desire them to read them already collected in Chamier, in Doctor Sutlive, in
Sibrandus Lubbertus de princip. Christ. Dogmat. in Chemuitius, and Bellarmine
himself who recites them out of Chemnitius, and pretends (and vainly
pretends) to answer them, to whom Lubbertus, and many more of ours have
therein replied: But specially read that excellent Treatise of Philip Mornay
Lord du Plessis of the Church.

Clemens Romans ad Corinth.
Clemens Romanus in his Epistle to the Corinthians uses not once to them any
argument from his authority and infallibility, which sure he would have done
for the healing of so great a schism, if it had been true. Nay when he does
earnestly press them to submit to and obey their own Presbyters, he never
requires any obedience to himself or to the Roman Church. Nay so far is he
from taking any notice of any universal Monarchy or infallibility in himself
that he does not so much as take notice of any Bishop distinct from a Presbyter
in their own Church, nor once call them to be determined by any single or
supereminent Bishop at all; but only to obey their Bishops or Presbyters.

Ignatius ad Romans
Ignatius writing to the Romans calls them only the Church [(...)] [Quae
and praesidet in loco regionis Romanorum] or as Bishop Vshers ancient Version
has it [Quae and praesidet in loco chori Romanorum] which is not a presidency
over the whole Church. And toward the end, he says [(...)] i.e. [Memores
estote in precibus vestris Ecclesiae quae est in Syria, quae prome, jam Christo
Pastore utitur.] as Hier. Vairlenius Sylvius interprets it in his Edit. page
69. I know that the old vulgar Latin Edition, which is in Joachimus Perionius
his Edition, page 494. and in Bishop Vshers page 89. translateth it Mementote in
orationibus vesiris illius qui pro me recturus est ecelesiam quae est in Syria]
as if it were his successor that he would have them pray for: But as
Vairlenius, so Vedelius also better translateth it [Ecclesiae quae est in
Syria, quae pro me jam Domino pastore utitur.] ( Edit. Vedel. page 250.) And
Bishop Vshers old Latin Translation, is [Ecclesiae quae pro me pastore Dei
utitur.] And the next words are [(...)] i. e. [and solus ^am visitahit and sit
vestra in eo dilectio] as the vulgar Latin Version, or Solus ipsam curabit
visitabitque] As Vairlenius and Vedelius: or rather as Bishop Vshers old Latin
version [Solus ipse (Jesus Christus) vice Episcopi sit] From whence I gather
that the Bishop of Rome was not the Bishop universal of that Syrian Church, or
else Ignatius 1. Would have sure commended it to his care. 2. Or at least not
have expressly said that Christ only was their Bishop when he was gone.

Moreover, is it a probable thing that Ignatius would have so frequently and
importunately have pressed the Church, that he wrote to in all his Epistles, to
be subject to and obey their Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, and yet would
never have given them one word of advice to be subject to, and obey the Bishop
of Rome, if the peace and unity of the whole Church, and the very faith and
salvation of the particular members, had so much depended on this as the
Papists would persuade us? Certainly a Negative Argument from the silence of
the writers of those times, is a sufficient confutation of the Romish
usurpation.

Policarpus Epist. ad Phil.
Policarp in his Epistle to the Philippians, persuades that Church [to be
subject to the Presbyters and Deacons as to God and Christ] not mentioning any
other superior Bishop, much less an universal Bishop to whom also they must be
subject. And whereas Valens one of their Presbyters was fallen (with his wife)
into some sin which Policarpe professes his sorrow for, he does not direct
them to seek remedy at any higher power, but persuades them to reduce him
themselves as a straying member. And having before mentioned diverse heresies of
those times, be adds as the Remedy, not an advice of appeal to Rome, or to
seek for their determination, or to hold to their infallibility, but [(...)]
i. e. [Wherefore leaving the vanity of many, and false doctrines, let us return
to that Word which from the beginning was delivered to us.] It is to the first
word, and not to Rome that this blessed Disciple of John does send the
Philippians for stability against errors.

Irenaeus Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. li. 5. c. 26.
Irenaeus is said by Eusebius ( Eccles. Hist. li. 5. cap. 26.) to have sharply
reproved Victor for breaking the Churches peace, by excommunicating the Asian
Churches about Easter day, The Asian Churches.
and tells him that [The like was never heard of] and that [his predecessors
did otherwise] therefore he took not Victor to be infallible.

And it is apparent that all the Asian Churches ^ho stood against Victor and
were excommunicated by ^im, did little dream that he was the universal Bishop
or infallible. Nay their Bishops [sharply reprehend him and their words are yet
extant] says Eusebius.

Moreover in the same Chapter of Eusebius it is expressed by Irenaeus to
Vict^^, Policarp. ibid.
that Policarp the Disciple of John differed from Anicetus, and neither of them
could be persuaded to alter his opinion. Therefore Policarp never dreamed,
either that the Roman Bishop was infallible, or was his Governor, whom he
should obey.

And its worth the reading in the 24. and 25. Chapters of Eusebius, how
confidently Policrates opposes Victor, alleging a General custom from the
Apostles, and resolves never to change his custom: And the Bishops and
Churches here in England, did follow the same custom, and differ from Rome.

And in the 28 Chapter Eusebius mentions an ancient writer, that opposed the
heresy of Artemon, and whereas they alleged that all the Bishops of Rome till
Zephyrinus were of their mind, and preached it, even Victor himself (that is,
against the Godhead of Christ) he answers them thus [This peradventure might
seem to have some likelihood of truth, if it were not oppugned, first of all by
the holy Scriptures, next by the books of sundry men long before the time of
Victor] As Justin, Miltiades, Tatianus, Clemens, and Irenaeus. So that this old
writer supposed it no impossible thing for a Bishop of Rome to have taught
heresy.

And in the very conclusion of the Chapter and Book Eusebius recites many more
of the words of that old writer among the which there are these against the
heretics of those times for presuming to correct and so deprave the
Scriptures, which methinks, should touch the Romanists to the quick: [Belike
they are altogether ignorant what presumption is practiced in this wicked deed
of theirs. For either they persuade themselves that the holy Scriptures were
not indicted by the instinct of the Holy Ghost, and so are they Infidels, or
else they think themselves wiser then the Holy Ghost; and what other thing do
they in that than show themselves possessed of the Devil?]

So that if we must go to the Arbitration of the Pope to know whether the
Scriptures were indicted by the Holy Ghost. We must go to him to know whether we
must be Infidels or not? For they that deny this are Infidels. But I hope all
the world will not remain Infidels, till they know the Arbitrament of the Pope,
or till his Authority move them to be Christians. For its an impossibility and
contradiction, that any man should believe in Christ's pretended Vicar, as his
Vicar, and believe an authority and infallibility which he or his Church of
Rome has received from Christ, before they believe in Christ himself.

How Tertullian lib. de Pudicitia c. 21. takes up the Pope, if he pretend to
his pardoning power from Do tibi claves, or supra hanc Petram, I shall for
brevity refer you to the place in him.

And Origin upon Math. on the words, is large and full against them, I refer
you to the words themselves in him.

I conclude this rank of testimonies in the words of Tertullian [Credunt sine
Scripturis ut credant contra Scripturas] They believe without the Scripture,
Tertull. de praescript.
that they may believe against the Scriptures. Had Scripture been for the Pope
and Papists, then the Pope and they would have been for Scriptures; and then we
might have spared all this ado. But because it is against them, no wonder if
they be against it.

I shall next give a touch more of some passages of Councils concerning this
controversy. And first it is known that the first Councils did commonly decree
that appeals should be from a Bishop to a Synod, or the Metropolitan, and that
if the Synod of Comprovincials disagreed, that the Metropolitan should call
some of the next Province to assist them, and that was the highest, unless
there were a more general Council, as Council. Antiochen. Can. 14. and diverse
more, beyond doubt, declare: So that here was no appeal to the Pope. Yea in the
6. Canon of that Council of Antioch, it is decreed that till an offending
Priest, Deacon, or Layman, be reconciled to his own Bishop, or else have given
satisfaction to a Synod, that no other Bishop shall receive him: so that Rome
it self may not receive him: much less absolve him.

Also in the 22. Canon of the same Council (and in many other Councils) it is
decreed that no Bishop shall come into the City of another Bishop, not subject
to him about ordination, and if they there ordain any, it shall be void, and
they shall be questioned by a Synod. And Chrysostom hereupon complains of
Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria, for exercising authority at Constantinople,
out of his o^n juris^iction, contrary to the Canons; as may ^e s^en in his
first Epipse to Pope Innocent. I know they pretend that by that Epistle he yet
acknowledged Innocents superiority and jurisdiction: As if a man might not make
his moan, or seek all possible relie^ from any that are capable of helping
them, without respect to superiority or jurisdiction; It was R^mes greatness
and interest in the Emperor and others, and not a universal jurisdiction, that
made Innocent seem capable of affording some help to Which yet he was not able
to do.
Chrysostom. But thus Baronius the Popes Annalist, where ever he finds but a
letter written to the Bishop of Rome, or his advice or help in any thing
desired, does presently conclude that they acknowledged in the Pope universale
regimen, an universal Government. And by the like reason many another should be
universal Governor as well as he.

Moreover, in the third Council of Carthage Can. 26. it is decreed [Vt primae
sedis Episcopus non app^^^tur princeps sacerdotum, aut summus sacerdos, aut
^liquid hu^^ modi, sed tantum primae sedis Episcopus] that i^ [That the Bishop
of the first seat shall not be called the chief of the Priests, or the chief
Priest, or any such thing, but only the Bishop of the first ^^at.]

One would think that this were as express against Romes usurpation, as can be
spoken. But they that must be the interprets of Scripture because it speaks ^^t
plain enough, must be judge of Councils too, which it seems can speak no
plainer then Scripture, (...) taught them to speak anew.

Or if plainer may be (of the power as well as the name) let us hear the
Council of Milevis (of which says Prosper, Aurelius was the Captain, and
Augustine the ingenium: And Baronius says that Augustine was magna pars a
great part of the Council, and by reason of his great abilities and interest)
Whether there were two Milevitane Councils, as Baronius not improbably thinks,
or but one, it much matters not: The Canons are now usually commixt as if they
were one, and undoubtedly the true Canons, and so that which is now the 22.
Canon runs thus [Item placuit ut Presbyteri, Diaconi, vel caeteriis inferiores
clerici in causis quas habuerint, si de judiciis Episcoporum suorum quaesti
fuerint, vicini Episcopi eos audiant, and inter eos quicquid est finiant
adhibiti ab eis ex consensu Episcoporum suorum. Quod si and ab eis provocandum
putaverint, non provocent nisi ad Africana concilia, vel ad Primates
provinciarum suarum. Ad transmarina autem qui putaverit appellandum, a nullo
intra African in communionem suscipiatur.] That is [It seems good that
Presbyters, Deacons, and the other inferior Clergy, if in their causes they
complain of the judgments of their Bishops, neighbor Bishops shall hear them,
and being used by them with their Bishops consent, shall end whatever is
between them. But if they think good to appeal from them, they may not appeal
but to the Africane Councils, or to the Primates of their Provinces. But if any
think to appeal to those beyond Sea, That is, to Rome or any other.
let none in Africa receive him into communion.] Then it was a matter of
excommunication to appeal to Rome, and consequently to acknowledge their
universal Government: and now it is become essential to a Church, and to a
Christian to believe it.

Council Nis. Can. 6.
The General Council of Nice before this (according to such Canons as are now
extant) C. 6. does give the Patriarchs of Alexandria power over Egypt, Libia
and Pentapolis, quoniam quidem and Episcopo Romano parilis mos est, Because the
Bishop of Rome has the like custom, so that the Bishop of Rome is equalized
with them, and his power restrained to his own Patriarchate, or the Ecclesiae
suburbicariae (of the extent whereof read Salmasius his learned Treatise
against Sirmondus de Ecclesiis subuarbicariis) which was so plain to Cusanus a
Cardinal of Rome, that it made him say, hereupon [Videmus quantum Romanus
Pontifex ultra sacras observationes, ex usu and consuetudine subjectionalis
obedientiae hodie ^cquisivit] That is [We see how much the Pope of Rome has at
this day gotten beyond the sacred observations by use and custom of
subjectional obedience. C^sanus li. 2. de concord. cap. 12.
] And Barth. Caranza having mentioned this Canon in his sum. Council. p. 48.
had no other evasion but this, that among all the Greek and Latin Copies which
he searched, Cardinal Marcellus a Legate at the Trent Council, showed him one
Latin Copy that had [Metropolitane] instead of [ Roman?] But is this much to
the purpose? Or if it were, is one Latin Copy in a Cardinals hand more credible
then all the rest in the world, that have c^^e to light?

In the 6. Council of Carthage, Au^elius heard it and Augustine was there, and
there they again determined that the Bishop of Rome should not receive the
Priests or excommunicate persons that appeased to him. And they give this as
the Reason [ Quia hoc nulla patrum, etc.] That is [Because this was never
derogated from the Asricke Church by any definition of our Fathers, and the
Nicene Decree do commit both the inferior Clergy, and and the Bishops
themselves to their Metropolitans. For they most prudently and justly provided
that all businesses should be finished in the places where they were begun: and
the grace of the holy Ghost will not be wanting to each province: Let this
equity be constantly and prudently observed by Christ's Priests: especially
seeing every man has leave, if he be offended with the judgment of the known,
to appeal to a Council to his Province, or to a General Council. Unless there
be any man that can think that God can inspire a Justice of Trial into any one
person, and deny it to innumerable that are congregated in Council.]

And whereas the Bishop of Rome would have sent his Legates into those parts,
to take cognizance of their affairs, they answered [Vt aliqui tanquam atuae
sanctitatis latere ad nos mittantur, nulla invenimus Patrum Synodo constitutum]
That is [That any should be sent against as Legates from your sanctity, to us,
is a thing which we find not constituted by any Synod of the Fathers] But here
Gratian has falsified the Canon, by the addition of a [Save to the Sea of
Rome] where the Milevit^n Canon is repeated: In which manner they have used too
much of the Churches records.

Can we think that Augustine and the rest of the Bishops in these Councils did
not understand what they did, and purposly restrain the Roman ambition?

The case also which is related in Augustine between the Catholics and the
Donatists shows how far they were in those days from dreaming of the Roman
decisive judgment. The great controversy was, who had the true Church the
Donatists, or the Catholics? And the Donatists great Arguments were, that
Caecilian had been ordained by Traditors, and therefore his party and those
that communicated with them were not the Church nor to be communicated with.
Mark now how the Catholics plead this cause. 1. They procure it heard by the
Emperors Cognitor, Marcellinus; and not by the Pope. 2. They never once fetch
their proof that the Catholic Church was theirs from their agreement with
Rome, or subjection to the Pope, nor once in all their mention of the Catholic
Church do give the Popish description of it, or fetch it from the Roman Bishop
as the head; but over and over again they prove that their Church is the
Catholic Church because it is [That which beginning at Jerusalem, is tranfused
over all the world.] and frequently they give this same description of it, and
hence prove it out of Scripture, as is apparent in Austins writings at large.
They never say, the Catholic Church is the Roman or that which submits to
the Pope. 3. Note (which is the chief thing that here I do intend) that it was
publicly proved in the conference that first Melchiades Bishop of Rome, with
other Bishops were appointed to hear the business between Donatus a nigris
Casis, and Caecilianus, and that they absolved Caecilianus, and condemned
Donatus And then that the Donatists rested not here but appealed to the
Emperor, and the Emperor caused a certain number of Bishops to meet at Arles to
hear over all the cause again, and these Bishops not agreeing (though they were
most of them against Donatus) the Emperor Constantine was fain to determine the
matter himself, who absolved Faelix and Caecilianus, and condemned the
Donatists, yet giving them liberum arbitrium, as it was called then, or Liberty
of conscience, as it is called now. So that the Bishop of Rome acts but as
appointed with others; and his judgment is not that highest from which there
is no appeal; for the Bishops at Arles must judge of all again, and the Emperor
after them. Of all this see Augustine in Brevicul. Collation cum Donat.
throughout, specially page 288. (Edit. Paris.) and lib. ad Donatist. post.
Collation. cap. 33. page 245.

I shall only add to these Testimonies foregoing, the witness of some of
their own party. I have before showed that one part of their Church denies the
Popes infallibility, and the other a Councils: and that they are not agreed
about the ultimate resolution of their faith. Their Cardinal Nic. Cusanus li.
de Concord. Cathol. c. 13. and 34. maintains that [All Bishops are equal as
to the jurisdiction, though not as to the execution, because the executive
exercise is restrained by certain positive bounds, and that for the better, to
bring men to God, which when it cease, the positive rights cease] And he
says that in time of necessity a simple Priest may absolve even one that is
excommunicated by the Pope; And concludes that the Papacy is but of Positive
right; and that both it, and all Majority among Bishops is constituted by
subjectional consent* that the power of binding and losing is immediately from
Christ, and therefore that Priests are equal, and that the distinction of
Diocese, and that a Bishop should be over the Presbyters, are of positive
right: And that Christ gave no more to Peter then to the rest of the Apostles,
nor said more to him then to them, Yea and he adds, that if the Bishop of
Trevers were by the congregate Church chosen to be their President and head, he
should properly be more the successor of Peter then the Bishop of Rome.] This
is plain dealing for a Cardinal.

Occham and Almaine in 3. sent D. 24. Conc. 6. dub. 6. There are many heretical
Docretals Alph. a ^ astro adv. har. l. 1. c. 4. Waldens. Doct. fid. l 2. ar 2.
c. 19. 1. 38. N. 4. Leg. Card. de Alliaco de reform. Eccles. Picus in quest.
ves. per.

Adco ut jam borrendam quorundam proverbium est al cum statum devenisse
Ecclesiam, ut non fit digna regi nisi per reprobos inquit Card. de Alliaco.


That the like passages are frequent in Gerson is so well known that I need not
mention them. And in Cardinal de Aliaco, and many other Cardinals, Bishops, and
Schoolmen of their own, the like passages are well known, and so often cited
already, that I shall forbear to recite them.

I have often times observed how they have alleged Durandus, as pleading that
the last resolution of our faith is into this primo creditum, that the Church
is guided by the holy Ghost, and that therefore we believe the Scripture to be
Gods word e. g. the Gospel of Matthew rather then that of Nicodemus, because
the Church approves it, who is guided by the spirit. But I find that even
there Durandus destroys the Roman cause. For he immediately adds, that
[Hoc quod dictum est de approbatione Scripturae per Ecclesiam intelligitur
solum de Ecclesia quae fuit tempore Apostolorum, qui fuerunt repleti spiritu
sancto, and nihilominus viderunt Miracula Christi and audierunt ejus doctrinam,
and ob hoc fuerunt convenientes testes omnium quae Christus fecit aut do^uit ut
per eorum testimonium scriptura continens facta and dicta Christi approbaretur]
That is, Durandus in sem. li. 3. Did. 24. q. 1. page mihi 576.
[This which is said of the approbation of the Scripture by the Church is only
meant of the Church which was in the times of the Apostles, who were filled
with the Holy Ghost, and also saw the Miracles of Christ, and heard his
doctrine, and therefore were fit witnesses of all that Christ did or taught
that by their testimony the Scripture containing the deeds and words of Christ,
Vid. Zabarell. Cardin. Florent. in li. Schism. and Conc. That future Councils
may abrogate that which was unjustly done in former, and that they may err.
might be approved]

This he proves from Scripture, and concludes, that the Gospels which that
Church approved cannot now be rejected, because there is not the like cause,
and that [Immo tenens contrarium haereticus est, cujuscunque status aut
conditionis existat] [Yea he that holds the contrary is a heretic, of what
state or condition soever he be] Not excepting the Pope himself. Is this liker
the doctrine of Papists or of Protestants?

Yea one word to Master Knot and those of his that will resolve their faith
into the Miracles of the present Rome Church. If those Miracles which they
glory in be indeed regardable, then the Church of Rome is not infallible; for
the author of those Miracles do witness them to be fallible. The old Saint
Austin and the rest of his time and before, whose testimonies about Miracles
they bring in, as I have sufficiently proved are against their usurped
jurisdiction and infallibility. Their Saint Maud says, that the Roman Church
shall ere long Apostatize from the faith totally and openly, which did
obscurely Apostatize of a long time before. Their Saint Elizabeth says, That
Christ the head of the Church cries out but his members are dead: Abbas
Joachim in Jerem.
that the Apostolic seat is possessed with pride, and the flocks go astray.
The supposed Prophet Abbat Joachim says There is yet another figtree withered
by the curse of prevarication; the Latin Church, or the Ship of Peter, whose
temporal leaves are made covers to excuse sin, with which both Adam the Pope,
and Eve the subjects of the Church do cover the dishonesty of their lives, See
many of the Papists cited against themselves by Doctor Sutlive de Eccles. c.
11. page 55.56, 57.
and miserably hide themselves in the wood of Ecclesiastical Glory.]

But I will trouble my self and the Reader with no more of this work, fearing
that I have trespassed in doing more than needs in so plain a case, already. I
will therefore shut up all that I have to say from humane Testimony, with the
words of Chrysostom (or whoever else is the author of the imperfect work on
Math.) and his own certain expressions elsewhere.

In the Imperfect Comment. ( Edit. Commel. an. 1617.) in Math. 20. Hom. 35.
Opus Imperf. in Math. Hom. 35. page 900.901.
page 900.901. it is said as follows [Fructum humilitatis terrestris posuit
primatum caelestem, and primatus terrestris fructum, posuit confusionem
caelestem. Quicunque ergo defiderat primatum caelestem, sequatur humilitatem
terrestrem; quicunque autem desiderat, primatum in terra, inveniet confusionem
in caelo: ut jam inter servos Christi ^on sit de primatu certamen] That is [He
has made the Celestial primacy to be the fruit of terrestrial humility: and
the fruit of earthly Primacy, he has appointed to be Celestial confusion That
is, confusion from heaven.
. Whosoever therefore desires Celestial primacy let him follow terrestrial
humility: but whosoever desires Primacy on earth, shall find confusion in
heaven: That so a mong the servants of Christ there may be no strife for
Primacy.]

And afterward he adds [Primatum autem Ecclesiasticum concupiscere, neque
ratio est neque causa: quia neque justum est, neque utile: Quis enim sapiens
ultro se subjicere festinar servituti, labori, dolori, and quod majus est,
periculo tali, ut det rationem pro omni Ecclesia apud justum judicem, nisi
forte qui nec credit judicium Dei, nec times, uti abutens primatu suo
Ecclesiastico seculariter, convertat eum in secularem.] That is [But to desire
an Ecclesiastical Primacy, there is neither reason nor cause, because it is
neither just nor profitable: For what wise man will voluntarily hasten to
subject himself to servitude, labor, grief, and which is more to such a danger,
as to be accountable to the righteous judge for all the Church? unless it be
one that perhaps does neither believe the judgment of God, nor fears it,
that abusing secularly his Ecclesiastical primacy, he may turn it into a
secular.] One would think this should be plain enough against the Papal
usurpation! If they tell me that this is none of Chrysostomes works, but some
heretics; I answer, When they have use for it, they can magnify it. Let their
Sixtus Senensis words be weighed which are printed before this book, especially
what he says of some ancient Copies, which have the errors only in the
Margin, written by some Arrian hand, and withal that it is very observable,
that the errors are so intermixed, that yet you may take them out, and not maim
any of the sense, but leave the rest entire, yea they seem as parenthentical or
superfluous, and then conjecture whether yet it may not be Crysostomes: But
whose so ever it is, it is ancient, and commonly much commended. But let that
go which way it will, as long as in the undoubted works of Crysostome there is
over and over again the like. In his Homil. 66. alias 67. in Mat. 20. page 577.
Chrysostom. on Math. 20. Hom 67. Grec. 66. juxta Edit. Comm. page 577.
he says [They that seek Primacy, are a disgrace to themselves not knowing
that by this means they shall thrust themselves into the lowest] state. The
like he has in Homil. on Math. 18.

I shall now leave it to the consideration of the impartial, by this small taste
of the judgment of former tmes, whether the Roman infallibility and universal
government were a thing known to the Church of Christ of old, or yielded as
soon as ambitiously sought? And whether this be a sit ground for us to build
our faith upon, or resolve it into? And if any would see more of the resistancy
of their usurpations, even when it was at the highest, he may read in Mich.
Goldastus a multitude of Volumes, that will give him further information: or in
Bishop Usher de Success. and stat. Eccles. he may find enough in narrower room.

The last part of this disputation should consist of an answer to the Popish
Arguments for their cause: but I can find so little in any of their writings
that's worthy to be taken notice of, more then what is answered before, that I
shall not need to stand long upon this.

They tell us that, if our Church be not infallible* then people have small
reason to hear us or regard us? or to trust their salvation on the doctrine
which we deliver to them,; seeing for ought we know, or they know, we may but
deceive them, as being first our selves deceived; so that this makes way to
infidelity or uncertainty of the faith, if the Church be not infallible.

This is their all, the first and last, for ought I can find (that's worth the
repeating) and of how little value this arguing is, me thinks should be very
easy to apprehend.

1. Look back to the stating of the Question, and remember how far we say the
Church is fallible, and how far infallible, and it may suffice to confute all
this.

2. Its not all one to be absolutely infallible, and to be actually
Not-mistaken. Nor to be certain of some things, and to be certain of all things
that ought to be known or believed: Nor to be certain by such external evidence
of verity and internal grace, as is ordinary to the faithful, and to be certain
by a pretended privilege above all the rest of the world; even knowing the
conclusion as such without knowing the medium. We are certain that Scripture is
Gods word: and certain that we are certain; and therefore pro tempore
infallibly certain: And if we should say that we are certain that no true
Believer shall ever fall from this certainty, we should speak more agreeably to
the Protestant doctrine then to yours, who say that they may fall away. And we
maintain that there is still an Objective certainly or Infallibility (if I may
use the word actively) in the word of God and every sentence of it, which can
never fail, if our faith should fail. And we can manifest to our hearers such
grounds of their belief, as are infallible, and will never deceive those that
trust in them

Your argument therefore most vainly supposes, that men's says must be
grounded on the word and credit of their Teachers, and that therefore they can
have no stronger a faith, then is answerable to our credit with them. But its
no such matter: It is Gods Veracity and not ours that is the formal object of
the hearers faith: We do not desire (as it seems the Papists do) that they
should take their faith on trust from us, and believe all on our words. We do
but reveal to them that word of God, which is the ground of faith; and we prove
it to be the word of God, and show them that in it which will prove it self to
be so: so that as long as our Reasons, Proofs, Evidences are infallible, what
necessity is there that the speaker must be infallible, and that in every thing
that ought to be believed? Are all the Preachers of the Romish faction
infallible? You will say, no, your selves. Must they not therefore be heard? Or
may not the doctrine which they preach beget a certain belief in the hearer?
You will, I know, with one voice, say, that I may and does. How then do
fallible men among you, by preaching bring men to an infallible faith (in
tant^m) and why may it not be so with us? Will you say that you preach in the
name of the Pope who is infallible? Why but, how do your hearers know that;
Must they take it on the preachers word, who proclaims himself fallible? Why
then, may they not as well take it on our words that Christ and Scripture is
infallible! When we say, we preach in Christ's name, as confidently as you say
that you preach in the Popes name? and so your doctrine and ours should be both
uncertain, if both rested on the fallible preachers word. But if you will not
bid your hearers take your word, but will undertake to demonstrate to thtm by
cogent evidence, that you are sent by the Pope, and that he is infallible, and
that you speak nothing but what he infallibly warranteth you to speak (all
which will be incumbent on you to prove) then will we much more easily and
truly prove, that God is true and that Scripture is his word (which is all that
is incumbent on us to prove; seeing an infallible word, of an infallible God,
must be heard, how fallible soever we may be) so that you might easily see, if
you would that your task is incomparably harder then ours (even as much as to
prove a falsehood is harder then to prove a truth.)

How will you approve of such reasoning as your own in other cases! What if ten
men that have been at a fight, come home and tell you, which side had the
better? though they are all fallible, may they not possibly give you such
infallible proof of what they say, as may make it certain? What if all the
Lawyers in the Land are fallible men, yea and all other men in the Land; and do
not know all things, nor all that should be known about the Laws? Does it
follow that these fallible men, may not infallibly know themselves and
infallibly prove to others, even by certain humane testimony, incapable of
deceit, that this or that is indeed a statute Law of the Land made by King and
Parliament? Do all men hold their lands and lives by Law, and so many dye at
the Gallows by Law, and yet is it uncertain whether they be the Laws indeed or
not, and all because the men that say so, are not infallible (and all are dead
that saw them made!) Why but a man may be certain of many a thing that yet is
not infallible in all things, nor in all that he ought to know. Your argument
therefore is strong against your selves, who resolve men's says into humane
credit, but its nothing against us, who resolve it into Gods veracity, and
teach not men to take all upon trust from our bare words. It is sufficient that
God is infallible when we persuade them to believe, and that we can infallibly
prove to them that the Scripture is Gods word, and what it contains in the
points of necessity to salvation. We can without infallibility in all other
matters, infallibly prove to them what God requires them to Believe and Do as
Necessary to Salvation. It is the infallibility of our proofs* and not of our
bare words, that is necessary to men's belief. But the Papists expect their
misled flock should take their bare word, and so make the faith of their
followers, a humane faith; and to blind the business they pretend to a certain
infallibility as if their sayings were Divine.

Men will make use of Phisicians for their bodies though they be not
infallible: Much more might they do it with encouragement, if they could
infallibly tell them the true cure of every mortal disease, though there were
an hundred smaller diseases that they could not cure, or a hundred questions in
Anatomy and about the nature of diseases which they could not resolve. Why then
should men conceit that the Ministry is vain that is not infallible, and
knows not all things. Has Gods Church been without infallible ordinary
guides from the creation to this day, and we must now begin to feign a
Necessity of their infallibility? Let it be sufficient that God, and the
extraordinarily inspired Prophets and Apostles are infallible, and that we have
Teachers that can infallibly prove to us what he requires of us in his words
in points of Necessity to our everlasting happiness.

And for themselves, pretending to infallibility makes them not, nor procures
them infallible, whereas their voluminous errors, and the wicked practices
grounded thereupon, and their frequent self-contradictions and mutations, do
proclaim aloud to the world that they are both deceivable, deceived and
deceivers: while the holy Scriptures whose sufficiency they deny is by
themselves confessed to be of infallible verity.

We are resolved therefore by the grace of God, in a business of such moment as
the everlasting saving or losing of our souls to venture and bottom all our
Hopes on that word of God whose infallibility they confess, then on the word^
of men who pretend to infallibility, and notoriously declare the vainty of
those pretenses.

Some more of the Sense of Antiquity in the main Controversy between us and
the Papists, to declare further who it is that is of the New Religion.
CYrill. Hierosol. Cateches 4. Sect. de spiritu sancto, page ( Edit. Paris.
1631.) 30.

(...), etc. i. e. For concerning Divine things, and the holy mysteries of
faith, nothing, no not the smallest thing ought to be delivered without the
Divine Scriptures; nor to be brought forth by simple probability, If the Tongue
of man can speak plain this is plain.
nor by a train of words. Nay do not simply believe me my self when I speak of
these things to thee, unless thou receive a demonstration of the things which I
speak from the Divine Scriptures For the very safety of our faith, rests not
on the elegancy of speech, but on the proof of Divine Scriptures.]

And page 36. Sect de Sacra Script. he tells you what Scriptures he means
earnestly dissuading from the Apocryphal books, and numbering the same only
which we own as Canonical, save that he says [(...)] and omitteth the Epist.
to Hebrews and the Apocalypse.

And Cateches. 17. page 192. he says [And we now also ingeniously confess that
we will not use humane reasonings; but will only commemorate those things which
are in the holy Scriptures: for this is most safe as Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 2.4.

And Cateches. 18. page 220, 221, 222. See how he describes the Catholic
Church without the least intimation of the Roman description.

August. Cont. literas Petiliani li. 3. cap. 6. page Edit. Paris. 127.) col. 1.

[ Proinde sive de Christo, sive de ejus Ecclesia, sive de quacunque alia re
quae pertinet ad fidem utramque nostram; Note here, 1. That it is, Ecclesia vel
quacunque re alia, that Austin speaks, 2. That its cum omnibus, and therefore
not an Argument only for such as deny the Church and right grounds. 3. So do
we procure the flames of Popish hatred.
non dicam nos, nequaquam comparandi ei qui dixit, Licet si nos, sed omnino
quod secutus adjecit, Si Angelus de caelo vobis annunciaverit preterquam quod
in Scripturis legalibus and Evangelicis accepistis, anathema sit. 4. So may w^
say [As if we had bid the Apostles put nothing in the Bible to prove the Roman
Catholic Church.
Hac vobiscum and cum omnibus quos Christo lucrati cupimus actitantes, atque
inter caetera sanctam Ecclesiam quam in Dei lieris promissam legimus and sicut
promissa est in omnibus g^ntibus reddi cernimus, praedicantes, ab iis quos ad
ejus pacificum gremium attrahi cupimus, pro action gratiarum flammas meruinnus
odiorum.] That is [Moreover, whether it be of Christ, or of his Church, or of
any other thing which pertains to our faith and life, I say not [if we] who
are not to be compared to him who said [Though we] but that which he next added
[If an Angel from heaven shall preach to you any other thing then that which
you have received in the Scriptures of the Law and the Gospel, let him be
accursed. While we deal thus with you and with all men whom we desire to win to
Christ, and among other things, do preach the holy Church, which we find
promised in Gods Scriptures, and which we see to be placed in all Nations as
was promised, we have deserved (or procured) the flames of hatred from those
whom we desire to draw into its pacifike bosom in stead of thanks.] And he
proceeds [as if it were we that so long before had bid the Prophets and
Apostles that they should not put in their books any Testimonies, by which the
faction (or party) of Donatus is proved to be the Church of Christ.]

The Epistle ad Demetriadem commonly reckoned the 142. among Augustines cap. 9.
says [ Scito itaque in Scripturis divinis (per quas solas potes plenam Dei
intelligere voluntatem) etc.] By the Divine Scriptures alone thou may
understand the full will of God.] I know the Lovaine Doctors put this Epistle
in the Appendix and conjecture it to be of Pelagius: but 1. it shows the
doctrine of that age: 2. Never did Austin contradict it, but often say the like.

August. de peccat. Merit. and Remiss. li. 2. cap. 36. page (mihi) 304. says
[Talis populus ut praedixi, eruditus in Regno caelorum per duo testamenta vetus
and novum, non declinans in dextram superba presumtione justitiae, neque in
sinistram secuva delectatione peccati, in terram illius promissionis intrabit:]
and postea [Vbi enim de re obscurissima disputatur, non adjuvantibus Divinarum
Scripturarum certis clarisque documentis, cohibere se deb^t humana presumptio
nihil faciens in partem alteram declinando] So that in Austius judgment the
old and new Testament teach us enough to salvation; and in the difficult points
we must not so much as incline to either side, without the Scriptures, it being
presumption to speak when they are silent.

And in his 49. Tract. on John he says [Evangelista testatur multa Dominum
Christum and dixisse and fecisse quae non scripta sunt, electa sunt autem quae
scriberentur, quae saluti credentium sufficere videbantur.] i. e. [The
Evangelist testifies that the Lord Christ spoke and did many things that are
not written: but those were chosen to be written, which seemed sufficient for
the salvation of Believers.]

And li. de Not. Great c. 26. he says to the Pelagians [Solis Canonicis debeo
sine ^ulla recusatione consensum] That is [I owe a consent without any refusal
to the Canonical Scriptures alone] An hundred more such sayings might be cited
out of Augustine.

Hierom on the first Chapter of Hag. ( fol mihi. 102.) speaking of the use of
Heretics, says [ Sed and alia quae absque authoritate and testimoniis
Scripturarum quasi traditione Apostolica sponte reperiunt atque confingunt
percutit gladius Dei. Andradius Defen. l. 2. Vainly replyeth that this is
spoken only to those Heretics that plead only Tradition and reject
Scriptures. 1. That's plainly false: for Tatianus did not so 2. He speaks of all
such traditions therefore of the Popish.
] i. e. [But other things which without the Authority and Testimonies of
Scripture they do of their own accord find out and feign as of Apostolical
tradition the sword of God will cut down.] And he instanceth in the fastings
and other austerities of the Tatiani, which he says they suffer causlesly.

The same Hierom against Helvidius says [Vt haec quae scripta sunt non
negamus, ita ea quae non sunt scripta renuimus. Natum Deum esse de virgin
credimus quia legimus: Mariam nupsisse post partum non credimus, quia non
legimus] So then the Church in Hieromes time would believe no more by Divine
Faith, but what was written.

Chrysostom says on the 95. Psalm. [when any thing is spoken that is not
written, the very thoughts of the hearers are lame] And again on the 2 Thessalonians.
3. [All things are clear and sincere that are in the Divine Scriptures, every
thing that is necessary is therein plain] The words are spoken against those
that would not go to the Congregation because there was no Sermon; And though
Chrysostom was almost daily in preaching, yet to show them that the word read
was worth their hearing, he adds this answer: And he proceeds to answer
their other objections taken from the supposed obscurity of Scripture, telling
them they are spoken in their own tongue and plainly. Orat. 3. page (mihi) 1503.

And on 2 Cor. Hom. 3. he calls the Scripture the balance, the square and
rule of all things; which words Bellarmine de verbo Dei l. 4. c. 11.
endeavoreth to pervert in vain.

Theodoret Dialog. 1. inter Orthodox. and Eranist. in the beginning ( page 1.)
says [I would not have thee by humane reasons to enquire after the truth, but
seek the steps of the Apostles and Prophets and their followers] And in the
second Dialogue [I am not so rash as to assert any thing wherein the holy
Scripture is silent.]

Cyril of Alexandria in his seventh book against Julian ( page mihi 159.) says
[The Divine Scripture is sufficient to make them that are exercised in it, wise
and most honest, and to have sufficient understanding.] The like he has twice
or thrice over in that same Section, which I will not stand to repeat lest I be
tedious.

Ambrose having mentioned the diversity of Heresies agreeing in una perfidia,
gives us this direction for cure: Itaque tanquam boni gubernatores quo tutius
praetermeare possimus fidei vela tendamus Scriptuarumque relegamus ordinem.
Amb. de fide li. 1. cap. 4. page 56. And many more express passages he has: as
[ Quae in Scripturis sanctis non reperimus, ea quemadmodum usurpare possemus?]
This citation I take on trust from others that have before produced it, having
before mentioned more.

Athanasius in his Orat. against the Gentiles in the beginning says [The holy
and Divinely inspired Scriptures are sufficient for all instruction of verity]
And afterward he adds that the writings of the Fathers and our Teachers do
help us to interpret and understand Scripture.

Hippolytus ( in Bibliothec. Patrum Tom. 3. Edit. col. p. 20.21.) says [Vnus
Deus est, quem non aliunde agnoscimus, quam ex sacris scripturis. Quemadmodum
enim siquis vellet sapientiam hujus seculi exercere, non aliter hoc consequi
poterit, nisi dogmata Philosophorum leg at: sic quicunque volumus pietatem in
Deum exercere non aliunde discimus quam in scripturis Divinis] i e. [There is
one God, whom we no other way know, That is [Savingly.]
but by the holy Scriptures: For as he that will exercise the wisdom of this
world, cannot otherwise attain it, but by reading the opinions of the
Philosophers i^ so those of us that will exercise piety toward God, do no
other way learn it but in the Divine Scriptures.

Clemens Alexandrinus Stromat. li. 6. says [Without the Scripture we say
nothing.]

In the Life of Antony the Author says [The Scriptures are sufficient for our
instruction.]

Theodoret li. 1. histor. c. 7 reports the words of Constantine the Great
spoken to the Fathers in the Nicene Council, after Eustathius Oration to him,
thus [He showed them how grievous a thing it was and how bitter, Constantinus
Magnus.
when the enemies were profligate, and there was none left that durst oppose
them, that they should strive against one another, and should make mirth for
their enemies, and become their laughing stock: specially seeing they dispute
about Divine things, and have the doctrine of the Holy Ghost laid down in the
Scripture monuments: For, says he, the Books of the Evangelists and Apostles,
and also the Oracles of the ancient Prophets do evidently teach us what we are
to hold concerning God. Laying aside therefore all seditious contention, let us
resolve the matters that are brought into question, by the Testimonies of the
writings of Gods inspiration] And Theodoret adds, that [While he spoke these
and the like things to bring them to a consent in the Apostolical doctrine, all
the Synod except a few Arrians obeyed and stablished concord on these terms.

Yet does Andradius think to disable Constantines testimony by saying that the
Arrians were pleased with these words of Constantine, See Andrad. T^ef. l. 2.
fol. 110, etc Where are the rest of his cavils.
and Bellarmine vainly endeavoreth to lessen their esteem, because Constantine
was no Doctor of the Church.

Salvianus Massil. de Provid li. 3. page (mihi) 62.
Salvian says [Si scire vis quid tenendum sit habes literas, sacras perfecta
ratis est hoc tenere quod legeris] i. e. [You see Scripture is the only Rule of
Faith with him.

But I will once more stop this work of citations, it being so fully done
already. Only desiring the Reader to lay those before produced together with
these last, and to compare with them, 1. the Protestants judgment, and then
the Papists, I shall lay them here by him, that seeing them together he may the
better judge.

And for the judgment of the Reformed Churches, I shall say no more then what
I before mentioned out of their own Polidore Virgil [That they are called
Evangelical, because they maintain that no Law is to be received in matters of
salvation, but what is delivered by Christ or his Apostles] And this is in the
Scripture fully contained and safely delivered to us (which kind of Tradition
of the books of the old and new Testament as Canonical, says Molinaeus we
readily receive, which is so far from being an addition to Scripture, that it
tells us that nothing is to be added thereto) Compare this with the Fathers
judgment before laid down.

As for the Papists judgment you shall have it in their own words, lest we
seem to wrong them.

Vasquez Tom. 2. Disp. 216. N. 60. says [Licet concederemus ho^ fuisse
Apostolorum praeceptum, nihil^minus Ecclesia and summus Pontifex potuerunt
illud justis de causis abrogare: Neque enim maj^r fuit potestas Apostolorum,
quam Ecclesiae and Pontificis inferendis praeceptis] That is [Though we should
grant that this was a precept of the Apostles, nevertheless the Church and the
Pope might upon just causes abrogate it: For the power of the Apostles was not
greater then that of the Church, and Pope in making precepts.]

The Council of Trent say, Sess. 21. c. 1.2. that [This power was always in the
Church, that in dispensing the Sacraments, saving the substance of them, it
might ordain or change things as it should judge most expedient to the profit
of the receiver.] (So that they may change any thing that God appoints about
Sacraments, except the substance: And it were well if they would have left that
unchanged.)

The Council of Constance took the cup from the Laity [Licet in primitiva
Ecclesia hujusmodi sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus sub utraque specie.]
Though in the primitive Church this Sacrament was received of the faithful
under both kinds.] So that they confess they contradict the Primitive Church.

Bellarmine plainly says li. 4. de Pontif. c. 5. [Si Papa erraret in
praecipiendo vitia, vel prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia
esse bona and virtutes malas, nisi vellet contra conscientiam peccare.] That is
[If the Pope should err in commanding vices, and forbidding virtues, the
Church were bound to believe that vices are good, and virtues bad, unless they
would sin against conscience.] And against Barelay cap. 31. he says [In bono
sensu dedit Christus Petro Potestatem faciendi de peccato non peccatum, and de
non peccato, peccatum] That is [In a good sense Christ has given power to
Peter to make sin no sin, and no sin to be sin.] (compare this doctrine with
the Fathers.)

The Glass in Can. Lector Did. 34. says, [Papa dispensat contra Apostolum]
The Pope dispenses against the Apostle.]

Innocent. 3. Decret. de conces. prebend. tit. 8. c. proposuit, says [Secundum
plenitudinem potestatis de jure supra jus possumus dispensare] According to the
fullness of our power we can dispense with the Law above Law.] And the Gloss
adds [For the Pope dispenses against the Apostle, and against the old
Testament, as also in vows and oaths] And another Gloss says [The Pope
dispenses with the Gospel, in interpreting it.] More such Glosses you may
find, if not yet more gross and impious; which I Will not stand to recite.

Gregory de Valentia Tom. 4. disp. 6. qu. 8. p. 5. 10. says [Et certe quaedam
posterioribus temp^ribus rectius constituta esse in Ecclesia quam initio se
haberent] That is [And certainly some things are more rightly constituted in
the Church in the latter times then they were in the beginning.]

Andradius Defens. Council. Trident. lib. 2. page (mihi) 236. says [Vnde etiam
liquet minime eos errasse qui dicunt Romanos Pontifices posse nonnunquam in
legibus dispensare a Paulo, primisque quatuor Conciliis ad Ecclesiam
exornandam, moresque componendos pro temporum necessitate edictis, qualis est
illa quae interdicit, ut digamos creari ne liceat Episcopos.] i. e. [Whence it
appears that they did not err who say that the Pope of Rome may sometime
dispense with Laws made by Paul and the four first Councils for the necessity
of the times to the adoring of the Church and the composing of manners; such as
is that, which forbids, those to be made Bishops who are the husbands of two
wives.]

Cardinal Perron against King James li. 2. Obser. 3. ^. 3. p. 674. has a
Chapter purposely [Of the Authority of the Church to alter matters contained in
the Scriptures] And page 1109. and 1115. he says, that [When in the form of
the Sacraments some great inconvenicies are met withal, the Church may therein
dispense and alter.] And that the Lords words [Drink ye all of it] were a
precept not immutable nor in dispensable] for [the Church has judged that
there may be a dispensation for ^t.]

B^ovius Observe. on C. 24. constit. Apost. says [Ecclesia Romana quae
Apostolica utens potestate, singula pro condition temporum in melius mutat]
i.e. [The Church of Rome, using Apostolical power, does according to the
condition of times change all things for the better.]

Cardinal Tolet says [Cum certum sit non omnia q^ae Apostoli instituerunt jure
Divino esse instituta] i. e. [It is certain that all things which the Apostles
instituted were not instituted by Divine right.]

And the Council of Trent has showed its usurpation of power above Scripture,
in dispensing with the degrees of Marriage in Lev. 18. and 20. adding to what
God has prohibited, and relaxing what God has restrained, and that [To Great
Princes and for a public cause] When they make it sin to other men.

These and many more of their gross sayings and usurpations against Scripture
and above it: they have been long ago told of by Jewel, Reignolds, Whittakers,
Molinaeus, and others; and how slight their evasions are, the considerate and
impartial may discern.

I have therefore recited thus much of their words here, that you may compare
them with the Ancients, and then see who are the Changlings and Novelists, and
who they be that keep to the old Church and Religion.

And among other ancient Writers I would desire you (besides all the forecited)
to compare the Popish frame with the Directions of Vicentius Lirinensis, The
sum of Vincentius Lirinensis adv Here Is.
which he gives us for the discovery of Truth and avoiding heresy, in his
book Contr. Haeres. Which I the rather mention, because I admire that the
Papists should be so immodest as to boast so much of him as if he were on their
side. The sum of his advice to avoid heresy, is this. 10 Fidem munire Divinae
legis authoritate. 20 Ecclesiae Catholicae traditione: To fortify our faith.
1. By the Authority of Gods Law. 2. By the Tradition of the Catholic Church.
This way he says he was himself directed to by all the holy Learned men that
he enquired of: Saepa magno studio and summa attentioae perquirens a
quamplurimis sanctitate and doctrina praestantibus viris quonam modo possem
certa quadam and quasi generali ac regulari via Catholicae fidei veritatem ab
haereticae pravitatis falsitate discernere, hujusmodi semper responsum ab
omnibus fere retuli] cap. 1. ( Edit. Colon. a. 1613, and page 617. Edit.
Perionii. Lugd. 1572.) So that we are given to understand by this passage.

1. That this was no private opinion of Vincentius, but the common way that was
then taken by Holy learned men to discern Truth from Heresy.

2. And note well that he does not once in all the book direct us to the
Determination, much less to the In^allible determination of the Pope or the
Roman Church as the way to discern Truth from Heresy. And can any man of
common reason that is willing to know the truth, imagine that there is the
least probability that Vincentius should silence this Romish decision, in a
Treatise written purposely and only on that subject, and wherein he
undertaketh to give us the full and certain direction to avoid Heresies, if the
Church had then been of the Romanists opinion? O intolerably forgetful,
negligent, delusory man, that would not give us one word of that which is now
the foundation of all, and into which our faith must be ultimately resolved!
What never a word to tell us that whatsoever the Pope or Clergy of Rome are for
or against may be known accordingly to be true or false, because he is the
infallible Head of the Church and decider of controversies!

3. Observe also that Vincentius does fully and purposely acknowledge the
Scripture sufficiency, and never once mention any Traditions as necessary to
supply the defects of Scripture, or as part of Gods word when Scripture is but
the other part. Not a word of such Traditions. But only of Tradition
subordinate to Scripture finaliter for the true expounding of them. Hear
himself [ Cap. 2. Hic forsit an requirat aliquis: cum sit perfectus
scripturarum Canon, sihique ad Omnia satis superque sufficiat, quid opus est ut
ei Ecclesiasticae intelligentiae jungatur authoritas? Quia videlicet scripturam
sacram pro ipsa sua altitudine non uno eodemque sensu universi accipinut.] And
in his recapitulation Cap. 41. [ Diximu^ in superioribus hanc fuisset semper
est esse hodie Catholicorum consuetudinem, ut fidem veram duobus his modis
approbent. Primum divini Canonis authoritate: deinde Ecclesiae Catholicae
Traditione: Non quia Canon solus non sibi ad universa sufficiat; sed quia verba
Divina pro suo plerique arbitratu interpretantes varias opiniones errores que
concipiant.]

So that Scripture is sufficient ad omnia, ad universa, only the Churches
tradition, that is, interpretation is the safe way to avoid heresy, for the
understanding of it.

4 Note also that the Catholic Church which Vincentius mentions is not the
Roman Church any more then any other: but the Tradition that he refers us
to is, that which has been taught or held ubique, semper, and ab omnibus:
every where, always, and by all.

5 Note also that it is not any authoritative Determination, of any person or
persons whomsoever: but universal consent that he refers unto.

6. And it is not in lesser, probable, or controverted points: but in those
great necessary points, which the Church has wholly, every where, in all ages
agreeed in.

7. Note diligently, that one of the cases he puts is this, cap, 4. [ Quid
si novella aliqua contagio non jam portiunculam tantum, sed totam pari^er
Ecclesiam commaculare conetur?] i. e. [But what if any novel contagion, shall
not only stain a small part of the Church, but also the whole Church?] A
presumptuous Question in the Papists sense! But what says he to it? does he
say, it is impossible? no but [ Tunc item providebit, ut Antiquitati inhaeteat:
quae prorsus jam non potest ab ulla novitatis fraud seduci] i. e Then let him
see that he stick to antiquity, which cannot at all now be seduced by any fraud
of novelty.] Here 1. he supposes that the present Church may all err; 2. He
makes the remedy to be an appeal to the ancient Church, and not as the Papists,
to appeal in all cases to the present Church or Pope. ( Costerus seeks by a
citation out of Tertullian in his Annot. to detort both.)

8. Lastly note diligently, that it is not in all cases that Vincentius leads
us to the exposition of the Church and Fathers, but only (as in the weighty
use beforesaid so) in case of [the newness of errors, when they first arise:
before they falsify the Rules of the ancient faith That is, before they
corrupt ancient Writers or grow so old as to pretend to antiquity themselves.
, let them be forbidden by the straights of time; and before by the large
spreading of the poison they endeavor to vitiate the volumes of our Ancestors:
But dilated and inveterate heresies are to be set upon this way, because by the
long tract of time, they have had a long occasion of stealing truth (that is,
Antiquity and other signs of truth) And therefore as for all those Ancient
prophanesses of schisms or heresies, we must by no means convince them, but by
the only authority of Scripture, if there be need, or avoid them as certainly
already of old convicted and condemned by the General Councils of Catholic
Priests.] They are his own words translated, page 677. Edit. Perionii, and page
87, 88. Edit. Colon. 1613.

So that you see Vincentius supposes error may infect all the Church, and may
grow old and so seem to be the Truth, and in such cases only Scripture must be
pleaded against it, unless also we can produce some ancient Council that has
condemned it. This is the very case between us and the Papists: Their heresies
are old, and far spread, though not universal nor of utmost antiquity:
therefore between us and them the Scripture only must be pleaded. Where there
is no need of a judge by reason of its plainness we need not go to the Ancient
Church; where there is need of an Expositor, we are content to deal with them
on Vincentius grounds, and to admit of that which ubique, semper and ab omnibus
has been held in point of faith, if they will do the like; And indeed this is
our very Religion. Will the Papists but dispute their cause with us on these
terms, we shall readily join issue with them, and doubt not of a good success.
Of this see more in our Conradus Bergius Prax. Cathol. divin. Canonis.

THe Dispute which we have hitherto managed being only against Popery in the
gross, and two or three branches of it only in particular, I had thought to
have annexed a Brief enumeration of the particular errors of the Papists, that
the vulgar might observe and avoid them; and therein I thought to have
endeavored the true stating of the differences between us, both for the
avoiding of error on the other extreme, and also that we may take out of the
Papists hands the greatest of all their advantages against us, which is the
false-opposed opinions and unsound Arguments of such as thus err on the other
side: But perceiving how it would lengthen this work beyond the intended
limits, and how certainly all those that so run into extremes would fall a
quarrelling with me for not stating the controversies according to their
fancies, I have thought best for answering all my ends at cheaper rates to give
you the chief of the Popish errors in the words of Doctor Field, and to that
end to tran^^ribe his seventh Chapter of the third Book; that so the simple
Reader may have some help to in^orm him without a commixed means to pervert
him. And for those that desire to see the Protestant Doctrine solidly defended,
and cannot have time to read many books, I know not of any one that they may
more profitably and safely read to that end then the said Book of Doctor Field
on the Church; and especially the Appendix to the third part, which is but the
Defense of this very Chapter, proving it in particulars, that the Western
Church was Protestant and not Popish even in the worst times before Luthers
Reformation; and that the Papists were but a seducing tyrannical party in the
Church, endeavoring to obtrude their errors against the mind of the generality
of good men: In which he has quite broken down those pretenses of Universality
and [All the Church] which the Papists do so fondly boast in.

Dr. Field of the Church, li. 3. Cap 7.
Of the several points of difference between us and our adversaries, wherein
some in the Church erred, but not the whole Church.

FOr neither did that Church, wherein our Fathers lived and dyed ^ hold that
Canon of Scripture, which the Romanists now urge; nor that in sufficiency they
now charge it with; nor corruption of the Originals, nor necessity of following
the vulgar Translation; nor the Heresies touching man's creation brought into
the Church by certain barbarous Schoolmen, as that there are three different
estates of men; the first of pure nature, without addition of Grace, or sin;
and two other, the one of Grace, the other of Sin: That all those evils that
are found in the nature of man, since his fall, as Ignorance, Concupiscence,
Contrariety between the better and meaner faculties of the Soul, difficulty to
do well, and proneness to do evil, were all natural, the conditions of pure
nature, that is, of nature, as considered in it self, it would come forth from
God: That these evils are not sinful, nor had their beginnings from sin, that
they were the consequents of nature in the state of creation, but restrained by
addition of supernatural Grace, without which the integrity of nature was full
and perfect: That men in the state of pure nature, that is, as they might have
been created of God in the integrity of Nature, without addition of Grace, and
in the estate of Original sin, differ no otherwise, but as they that never had,
and they that have lost rich and precious clothing; so that Original sin is
but the loss of that, without which natures integrity may stand: That no evils
are brought in by the fall, but nature left to her self to feel that which was
before, but not felt, nor discerned while the addition of Grace bettered
nature: None of these errors, touching the estate of man's creation, were the
Doctrines of the Church, but the private fancies and conceits of men.

So likewise touching Original Sin, there were that taught, that it is not
inherent in each particular man born of Adam, but that Adams personal sin is
imputed only: That the propagation of sin is not general, Mary being conceived
without Original sin: That the punishment of it is not any sensible smart, or
positive evil, but privative only; and that therefore there is a third place,
neither Hell, nor Heaven, named, Limbus Puerorum; which is a place, whereas
some think, they who are cond^mned thither, though they be excluded from the
Kingdom of Heaven, and all possibility of ever coming thither, yet are in a
state of natural happiness, and do enjoy the sweet content of Eternal Life.
These Pelagian Heresies were taught in the Church of God, but they were not the
Doctrines of the Church, being condemned, rejected and refuted, as contrary to
the Christian Verity, by many worthy members and guides of the Church: who as
they never received these parts of false Doctrine: So likewise the Church
wherein they lived, neither know, nor approved that distinction and difference
of venial and mortal sins, which the Romanists now Teach, nor power of nature
to do the works of the Law according to the substance of the things commanded,
though not according to the intention of the Lawgiver to love God above all,
and to do acti^^s morally good, or not sinful, without concurrence of special
Grace, nor election and reprobation depending on the foresight of something in
us positive or privative; nor merit of congruence and condignity; nor works of
supererogation; nor counsels of perfection, as they now teach; nor
justification by perfection of inherent qualities; nor uncertainty of Grace;
nor seven Sacraments properly so named, nor local presence; nor
Transubstantiation; nor ^rall manducation of the body of Christ, nor real
sacrificing of it for the quick and the dead: nor remission of sins after this
Life; nor tormenting of the souls of men dying in the state of Salvation in a
part of Hell, hundreds of years, by Devils in corporal fire (out of which,
prayer should deliver them) nor that the Saints hear our Prayers, ^ow or are
acquainted with our particular wants: nor the gross idolatry in those times
committed, and intolerable abuses found in the number, fashion, and worship of
their images: nor their absolution, as now they define it: nor treasure of the
Church growing out of the superstuity of Saints merits, not rewardable in
themselves, to be disposed by the Pope for the supply of other men's wants to
release them out of Purgatory by way of indulgence: nor the infallibility of
the Popes judgment, and plenitude of his power such and so great that he may
dep^s^ Princes, and dispose of their Crowns, and digr^^ie^ and that whatsoever
he does he may not be brough^ into order, or deposed by authority of the whole
world in a general Council.

Those are the errors which we condemn and our adversaries maintain and
defend: these we are all assured were not the Doctrines of that Church wherein
our Fathers lived and dyed, though we do not deny, but they were taught by some
in that Church. All these we offer to prove to be error in matter of our
Christian faith, and that seeing we could have peace no longer with our
adversaries, but by approving these impieties, we had just cause to divide our
selves from them, or (to speak more properly) to suffer our selves to be
accursed, anathematized, and rejected by them, rather then to subscribe to so
many errors, and heresies, contrary to the Christian, and Catholic verity.

WHereas the Papists have little else to say to us, but only to call still for
a Catalogue of Professors to prove the successive visibility of our Church; we
require of them first an answer to those Writings that have been extant so long
on this subject: especially Bishop Usher de successione and Statu Eccles. and
his answer to the Jesuits challenge (Defended by Master Sing and Master
Puttock) Doctor Fields Treat. of the Church, especially the Appendix to the
third part: Simon Birkbecks Protestants evidence: Doctor Whites Way to the true
Church. Abbot against* Hill. Illiricus his Catalogues testium veritatis.
Mornays two Treatises of the Church, and the Mystery of iniquity (to say
nothing of that of the Mass) Johan. Lidii Waldens. Nicol. Vignier Ecclesiast.
Histor. And the confessions of your own Writers: Your after Pope Aenaeas
Sylvius Histor. Bohem. and that commonly cited passage of your inquisitor
Rainnerius, which I will adjoyn.

Rainerius contr. Waldens. cap 4. Inter omnes sectas que adhuc sunt and
fuerunt, non est perniciosior Ecclesiae quam ea Leonistarum, idque tribus de
causis. 1. Quia est diuturnior: aliqui enim dicunt quod duravit a tempore
Silvestri: alii a tempore Apostolorum. 2. Quia est generalior: fere enim nulla
terra est in qua haec secta non sit. 3. Quia cum omnes aliae sectae immanitate
Blasphemiarum in Deum audientibus horrorem inducant; haec scilicet Leonistarum
magna habet speciem pietatis, eo quod coram omnibus just vivant, and been
omnia de Deo credant, and omnes articules qui in symbolo continentur: solummodo
Romanam Ecclesiam blasphemant et Clerum.

That is [Among all the Sects that yet are and have been there is not a more
pernicious to the Church then that of the Lyonists, and that for three causes.
1. Because it is the more (...) (or of longer continuance) for some (...) it
has endured from the time of Silvester; other from the time of the Apostles.
2. Because it is more general, for there is scarce any land in which this ^ect
^s not. 3. Because, when all other sects do by the immanity of their blasphemy
bring horror into the hearers; this of the Lyonists has a great show of
godliness; in that they live righteously before all men, and they believe all
things well concerning God, and all the articles that are contained in the
Creed: only they blasphem the Roman Church, and the Clergy.

To this add what I cited out of Canus and others before.

Lastly, Give us some tolerable answer to all that voluminous evidence of your
oppositions, by Princes, Prelates, Divines and Lawyers, which Mich. Goldastus
has collected and published, on his volumes de Monarche and constitut.
Imperial.

APPENDIX. A Translation of Bishop Downames Catalogue of Popish Errors. lib. 3.
de Antichristo cap. 7.
To satisfy the earnest desires of some of the unlearned, who would fain know
wherein the Papists differ from us, that they may be the better furnished
against them, and may the better understand those that under other Titles carry
about their doctrines.

BEcause I find many ignorant persons both unacquainted with the Errors of the
Papists, Because many of these Errors are delivered only by particular
Doctors, and all be not of a mind as to the sense, and some of the words may
admit a tolerable and Orthodox meaning, I thought meet to add these
Animadversions, to acquaint you in what sense we reject them. What I pass by
without Animadversion, I leave upon them as it is here charged; and also
suppose the difference to lie plain.
and yet very desirous to know them, I have adventured to translate a larger
Catalogue of them, gathered by Bishop George Downame in his Book written to
prove the Pope Antichrist lib. 3. cap. 7. page 189. etc. though it cannot be
expected that in such brief expressions, the true point of the difference,
should in all lie plain, before them that are unacquainted with the
controversies, yet because I was resolved not to give you any such Catalogue of
my own gathering, and knew not where to find one so large as to the number of
errors, and brief as to the expressions, I give you this as I find it.

Bishop G.D. Chap. 7. A Catalogue of the Errors of the Church of Rome.
THe Errors of the Papists are either about the Principles of Divinity or the
parts of it. The principles of Theology are the Holy Scriptures: Here the
Papists have many errors.

1. They deny the Holy Scripture which is of Divine inspiration to be the only
Rule, and Foundation 1. That is, as the Authenticke sign of Gods will: For we
all confess that Christ and his Apostles are the foundation of faith, as the
Authorized chief revealers; and God himself only as the principal efficient,
and Christ the Mediator as the first corner stone of the matter revealed; and
the Catholic Church, as the keeper or subject in quo of true Belief: for the
Law is written (...) the hearts of its members, and it is the Pillar and ground
or foundation of truth.
of Faith.

2. They take certain Apocryphal Books into the Canon of the old Testament,
which neither the Jewish Synagogue (to which the Oracles of God were committed)
nor yet the purer Christian Church did receive.

3. This erorr is one of the fundamentals of the Romish Fabrike.
3. They make two parts of Gods word, that is, the Scriptures, and (their own)
Traditions.

4. They contend that the Customs and unwritten Opinions of the Church of
Rome, are most certain Apostolical Traditions.

5. These Traditions, or (as they call them) unwritten veritys, they make equal
with the Holy Scriture, and receive and reverence them with equal pious
affection and reverence.

6. They number the Popes Decretal Epistles with the holy Scriptures. 6. When
yet it is most clearly proved by many, especially Blondel in a just volume,
that abundance of them are forgeries; and Dalaeus proves it particularly of the
Clementines.


7. At least quoad nos, So that they never know when their faith is at its full
stature.
7. They say its heresy for any to say, that it is not altogether in the Power
of the Church or Pope to appoint A^ticles of faith.

8. By this you may conjecture from whence the Quake^s have their doctrine of
the light within us.
8. They prefer the faith and judgment of the Church of Rome, which they say is
the internal Scripture written by the hand of God in heart of the Church,
before the Holy Scripture.

9. It is the voice of the Law giver and the Law is the Rule of life and of
judgment.
9. That the Scripture in which God himself speaks is not the voice of a
Judge, but the matter of strife.

10. 10. We confess (as Peter says of Paul's Epistles) that there are
somethings in them hard to be understood, which the ignorant pervert as they do
the other Scriptures, to their own destruction: But we maintain that they have
so much light as suffices to their ends* that is, to be the Rule of our faith
and life.
They accuse the Scripture (which is the light to our feet, and gives
understanding to children) of too much obscurity.

11. 11. This is one of their greatest errors.
They condemn it also of imperfection and insufficiency.

12. They say that even in matters of faith, and the worship of God, we cannot
argue Negatively from Scripture (as thus: It is not in the Scripture: therefore
it is not necessary or lawful)

13. That the Scripture is not sufficient for the refuting of all heresies (as
if there were any heresy but what is against Scripture.)

14. That heresy is not so much to be defined by the Scripture authority as by
the Churches determination.

15. 15. The last clause (that the Popes authority is greater then the
Churches) the French do not hold. And so they are divided in their foundation.
That the authority of the Catholic Church (that is, the Roman) is greater
^en of the Scriptures: and the Popes authority greater then the Church.

16. 16. They yield that the Doctrine is elder then the Church, and we yield
that the Church is elder then ^^^ings. But we affirm that the doctrine as
fetched from these writings is now before the present Church in order of nature,
as the cause of it, at least as to the generality of members.
That the Church is ancienter than the Scripture (that is, then the word of God
which is now written because it is ancienter then the writing of it. As if it
were not the same word of God, which was first delivered by voice, That is now
then in writing.

17. The Negative is their master error: but the Affirmative Proposition is not
denied of us as to every kind of dependence, but of some special sorts, of
which I have spoken in the Pref. to the Saints Rest Part. 2. Edit. 2. etc.
17. That the Scripture depends on the Catholic Church (that is the Roman)
and not the Church on the Scripture.

18. The height of Romish arrogance
18. Also that the sense of the Scripture is to be sought from the Sea of Rome,
and that the Scripture is not the word of God, but as it is expounded according
to the sense of the Church of Rome.

19. They make seven Principles of the Christian doctrine, which are all
grounded in the authority of the Sea and Pope of Rome.

20. And yet I would that vulgar Translation might but be allowed to be the
deciding ^^le: for there is e^^ugh in it against them.
20. They take the vulg^ Translation only for authentical preferring it before
the originals (though it is so manifestly corrupt that the Copies* lately
published by the Popes themselves, Sixtus the fifth and Clement the eighth do
in many places differ.

21. 21. This error is an accusation of the Wisdom of God, and contrary to
express Scripture, and destructive to the progress of knowledge and godliness,
and such as the experience of gracious souls should provoke them to detest; and
had they but this ^ne, they could never expect that the Catholic Church should
unite upon their principles.
That either the holy Scriptures ought not to be Translated into vulgar
tongues; or if it be, yet it must neither be publicly read in a known tongue,
nor permitted to be privately read by the common people.

2. Of the Belief.
The Parts of Theology are 1. Of faith, or things to be believed. 2. Of
Charity, or things to be done.


Matters of faith are 1. Of God and his works. 2. Of the Church.


The works of God are specially 1. Of Creation and Government of the world. 2.
Of Redemption of mankind.


1. 1. As concupiscence is taken improperly for the corrupted sensitive
appetite; so it was of God: But as it signifies the appetite distempered or
corrupted, or the corruption of the will, inclining it to evil, it is not of
God.
ABout the Creation the Papists err in saying that concupiscence was then
natural to man (though John says that it is not of God, 1 Jo. 2.16. and
themselves sometime confess it to be evil and contrary to nature.

2. See Rada's first controversy.
2. In the denying that original righteousness was natural to man before the
fall (created after Gods Image in Righteousness and holiness.

3. A posse mori, and a posse non mori were not then Natural: But a non posse
mori, or an actual non mori were to be the reward of obedience; and is now
given by Christ. And a non posse non mori, or an actual death, are the fruits
of sin.
3. In affirming that mortality was natural to man before the fall (which yet is
not from God the author of nature.)

4, 5. I would they would prove this Tradition to be Apostolical
4. In placing Paradise where the waters of the flood did not reach it (which
yet covered all the earth, and were fifteen cubits higher then the highest
mountains.)

5. Forsooth they would have that Paradise (or Eden) yet untouched, that it may
be a pleasant habitatian to Hen^ch and Elias, yet living in mortal bodies
(where they place them as behind the stage, that they may be ready to act their
parts in the fable o^ Antichrist)

To the Article of creation is annexed the Article of providence.

1. In this the Papists err, 1. In this they no more agree among themselves
then with us.
in making man's actions not to depend on Gods Providence, but on man's Freewill,
which they make the absolute Lord of its own actions.

2. 2. Says Davenant, the point of Predetermination is a controversy between
the Dominicans and Jesuits, which Protestants have no mind to trouble
themselves with: But they that do are not of a mind in it, no more then they.
And that they are not determined of God (according to whose determinate
Council things come to pass Act. 2.30. and 4.28.) but that God rather (who
works all according to the Council of his will) does follow the determination
of the will of man.

3. And that he foreknows them from eternity only in man's will.

4. 4. God does not cause sin even when it is a punishment; but only
permits it; But by such a permission as proceeds from a punishing
intention. And so he justly withholdeth his grace, and gives men over to the
power of the devil and their own lusts
Also in that they interpret the action of God as judge, punishing sin with
sin, hardening men, giving them over to their lusts, and to the temptations of
Satan, to be naked permission (as if the judge or Magistrate might not deliver
a malefactor to the hangman, as executioner of his judgment to be punished;
but should not only permit him to be punished, that is, not hinder it.

3. Of Redemption.
IN the Doctrine of Redemption and Salvation we must consider.

1. Whence we are redeemed, to wit from sin, and a state of obstinacy

2. By whom, to wit, by Christ, who is the author and foundation of our
Salvation.

3. By what means the benefit of Redemption and Salvation is applied to us:
where, of the Covenant of God, the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments.

4. The effects of Gods Grace in Christ, or the degrees of Salvation, which are
fruits of the Merits of Christ applied to us.

In all these the Papists do filthily err; for as to sin (which intercedeth
between the works of Creation and Redemption, as a medium) they teach.

1. That the blessed Virgin was free from all sin original and actual, as being
conceived without Original sin, and having lived without actual sin.

2. 2. The body is not to be mortified by self-murder; but the corrupt
inclinations and actions of the sensitive appetite are to be mortifyed; and all
its motions subjected to holy Reason: And this is called in Scripture the
mortifying of the flesh, and our corruption would never be called in Scripture
so often [The flesh and the body] if it were not that the fleshly appetite is
much of the seat of it, and the pleasing of that appetite and imagination, much
of the end (that I say not the whole.)
Under the name of the flesh which lusts against the Spirit, and is to be
mortified among other things, they mean the body of man.

3. That all sin is not a transgression of the Law ( John defines it, 1. Jo.
3.4. Gal. 3.10.) nor all transgression of the Law is sin.

4. 4. Sins are called voluntary, either because they are in the Will, or from
the will. In the first sense the vicious habits of the will are voluntary in
the second, the ellicite and imperate acts. Also they are voluntary, directly,
and formally, as are the wills own acts and habits; or participative, as are
the acts and habites of all the imperate faculties. And there is nothing sin
but what is voluntary in one of these senses: nor any further then voluntary.
That there is no sin but what is voluntary (which is not only false of
concupiscence, habitual and actual which goes before the wills consent, but of
other sins also which are done of ignorance or infirmity, for though the
actions are voluntary by which they are committed, yet the sin is not.)

Sin is original or actual: The Papists marvailously ^xtenuate original sin,
and amplify and set forth the strength of nature.

5. 5. Neither they nor we are agreed about the quiddity of original sin.
For some of them would have original sin to be only the guilt of Adams
transgression: most will have it to be only the want of Original
righteousness: And so that the state of man after Adams fall, and in pure
naturals, does differ only as a stripped man, and a naked man.

6. Others would have it to be a very small sin, and less then any venial sin;
and therefore needs no repentance; nor is punished with pain of sense, but
only with pain of loss.

7. Others deny original sin to be properly sin, or that any thing is found in
infants that properly has the nature of sin.

8. Metaphors are not usually the fittest terms to state controversies in. We
have vicious habits and the abscence of Rectifying habits: call this what you
will. Free will is either Physical (and that all men have as they are men) or
moral; which is 1. To be free from a legal restraint from good (and this all
have) or to be free from vicious Habits: and this only the sanctified have;
and that but in part.
8. That we are not by nature dead in sin but sick: nor do they acknowledge in
us an impotency to spiritual good, but a difficulty: nor that Freewill to
spiritual good is wholly taken from us, but hindered and tied.

9. It is the most noble controversy among the Schoolmen: and Thomists, and
the greatest part seem rather to err on the other extreme and the Scotists
that hold this to rectify them, do gi^ such explications of their doctrine, as
are well worth our study, as you may see in Rada's first controversy.
9. That men are naturally inclined to love God above all.

10. Man's will is the Ruler of it self under God: and its fully free from that
necessity which is contrary to its natural essential Liberty.
10. They attribute to man a will that is the Ruler and Lord of it self: such as
belongs to no creature: Yea they say that the will of man is as free from
Necessity as the Will of God.

11. 11 It is a willful servant only.
They deny the will of the unregenerate to be a servant.

12. 12. The matter of their works is often good: but because their end and
manner is always wrong, therefore they sin in all: for bonum est ex causis
integris.
They deny also that all the works of the unregerate are sins: or that the
unregenerate sin when they do the works that are commanded.

13. 13. The will is free and not free in several senses. 1. It is not free
from Gods Government. 2. Nor from its natural inclination to good in general;
and therefore cannot will evil as evil. For these were but slavery. 3. Nor is
it free from the moral force of a dark and erring judgment. 4. Nor from
temptations. 5. Nor from its own vicious disposition, till grace free it. But
its free, 1. From any natural determination to evil, or to unknown good in
particular. 2. And free from coaction or violence. 3. And from a physical
efficient immediate exterior Determiner, in ordinary natural, or sinful
actions. 4. And its free from sinful habites in that measure as it is
sanctified.
They say that before all grace a man has freewill not only to works natural
and moral, but also to works of piety, and supernatural.

14. 14. No question but the will is potentia activa naturalis, or has such an
active power: which is employed in spirituals when it is inclined by a habit
thereto; but till then will not act spiritually: not because the natural
faculty is absent, but because the inclination without which it will not act,
is absent.
That there is in man's free will, not only a possibility or passive power, but
also an active power to spiritural works.

15. No doubt but under the common grace of Christ, an unregenerate man may do
that which he shall be more disposed to conversion by then also he would have
been: as our practical Divines* all teach, and we are fain daily to preach it
to our people: or else we shall make but ill work with them.
15. That the unregenerate can prepare and dispose themselves to justification.

16. Many by congruous merit do mean no more then the foresaid aptitude
comparative to others.
16. That a wicked man by doing his best may congruously merit the grace of
justification.

17. This also some Protestants hold: But no wicked man ever did his best.
17. God necessarily gives grace to him that does his best.

18. There is a common grace whose efficacy is laid on the will, as Adams was;
And a special which shall infallibly bow and change the will.
18. That the efficacy of preventing grace depends on the freedom of the will.

19. A self-contradiction: to deserve pardon.
19. That every transgresgression of the Law (which yet pronounces every man
accursed that continues not in all things commanded in the Law to do them)
deserves not death: But that there are many sins of themselves, and of their
own nature venial, and deserving pardon.

20. 20. Some sin is but consequentially against love; and other sin directly,
but all is against Gods Laws.
That charity is not violated by venial sins, and that they are not aginst Gods
precepts, but besides them.

21. 21. Who ever denies that sin may be done away without Christ's blood does
know little of sin or Christ.
That the blood of Christ is not necessary to wash them away, but that they may
be done away by Holy Water, knocking the breast, Episcopal benediction, and
other ridiculous means.

22. 22. Mortal sin, 1. As to merit, is all sin: 2. As to signification,
symptomatically, it is all sin inconsistent with regeneration. 3. Effectually
it is all that eventually kills: which is in several degrees and sorts.
That sin is called mortal because it brings death upon the soul, that is,
depriveth it of Gods grace.

23. And they teach that by every mortal sin, grace is lost and charity
expectorated.

24. That this mortal sin is any that shall obtain the wills consent, though
the act be not performed.

25. That the sins of the regenerate are in the same sense mortal, even those
committed of ignorance and infimity.

26. 26. O unmerciful men! that will dig so many pits then to entrap poor souls
in mortal sin.
And that it is such a mortal sin to neglect or not observe any Ecclesiastical
law, or tradition of the Roman Church.

27, 28. Many of the ancients also were of this mind: of which see my Treat.
against infidelity Part. 3.
27. That the sin against the Holy Ghost is not unpardonable.

28. Nor that its impossible for him that commits that sin to be renewed by
Repentance.

4. Of Christ.
IN Christ are considerable, 1. His Person, 2. His Office. About his Person he
erreth who thinks not rightly of his Godhead, or of his Manhood.

1. About Christ's Godhead those Papists err that deny Christ to be (...) God
of himself, for that's as much as to deny him to be Jehovah.

About the Humane Nature, both Soul and Body they err.

2. Of this see the writings between Dr. Hammond and Mr. Jeanes: many Schoolmen
say otherwise.
2. For they deny that the soul of Christ did increase in wisdom and grace
(which Luke expressly affirms) Luke 2.52.

3. Or that he was ignorant of the day and hour of the last judgment (which
yet himself confesses, Mat. 13.32.)

4. They seem to give him a fantastic body that neither consists of
dimensions, nor occupies a place, which when he was born did not open the
womb of his mother, and when he rose did penetrate the stone of the sepulcher,
and when he instituted his Supper, lay hid under the Species of Bread and Wine.

5. Yea that they may stablish that monstrous opinion of Transubstantiation,
they feign him to have a body that can neither be seen, nor felt, nor
circumscribed, that is in innumerable places at once: which is not made of the
substance of the blessed Virgin, but of bread (as wine of that water, Joh.
2.9.) and which sustaineth the accidents of bread (as their subject) For they
can devise no other subject after the transubstantiation of the bread: Whence
it follows, that they are no more accidents of bread but of Christ's body.

6. 6, 7. Saints on earth must intercede under Christ for others, especially
Pastors whose office it is. And we may pray them to pray for us: But not the
Saints departed.
And as to Christ's Office, they teach that Christ is Mediator only according
to his humane nature.

7. They deny Christ to be the only Mediator of intercession but join with him
Angels and Saints.

8. They teach that we must pray to Saints to intercede for us.

9. That we are heard by the Saints suffrages and Merits.

10. 10. All Pastors of the Church do hold their office in a subordination to
Christ's Prophetical Office: And many a Prophet there has been under Christ:
But none that has the Office of being the universal infallible Teacher of the
Church as the Pope would be.
They deny Christ to be the only Prophet, whose voice only must be heard,
spiritual King, and Priest of the New Testament.

But they make the Pope also the chief Prophet and Pastor, King and Monarch,
and Priest. Whence it follows that the Pope is not only opposied to Christ as
his adversary, but as his Rival.

11. All Christians are Priests to God, to offer up spiritual sacrifice,
metaphorically so called: And Pastors offer up Christ Representatively,
Commemoratively and Sacramentally, but not really. The name Priest is not worth
contending about.
11. And they make other sacrificing Priests also of the New Testament, having
an external visible Priesthood, and that according to the order of
Melchizedeck: whose office it is to sacrifice Christ again and offer him to his
Father.

12. That the (unchangeable) Priesthood of Christ the eternal Priest, is made
eternal by the succession of such Priests.

13. That an Eternal Priesthood requires an Eternal Sacrifice, but is not
Eternal, unless it be often sacrificed.

14. That this Eternal sacrifice can be nothing else but the sacrifice of the
mass.

15. No doubt but Christ merited the glorifying of his own humane nature: But
that was but consequential to his meriting for us.
15. That Christ (who is God over all blessed for ever) did merit for himself,

16. Some of them prosess that by merit, they mean but Rewardableness by
promise: which we maintain.
16. That Christ's merits are not the only meritorious cause of salvation; But
they hope to be saved by their own and other men's merits.

5. Of the outward means.
LEt us now come to the external means, to wit, Gods Covenant, and the
administration of the Covenant in the Ministry of the word and Sacraments. The
Covenant is twofold, 1. Of works, or the Law. 2. Of Grace, or the Gospel.

1. 1. Its no Covenant of works in Paul's sense, or as Moses Law was; But humane
Actions are its condition. And as all the Ancients use to call it the new Law,
so its justly, seeing Christ is the King of the Church and it has the nature
of a Law. But the promise is the chief part: and the moral precepts prescribe
no other obedience then they did before in nature: But Positives are added.
These two the Papists do almost confound: for they plainly make the Gospel a
Covenant of works, and call it the new Law, which prescribes a more perfect
obedience then the Law it self, for the obtaining of Justification and
Salvation.

2. That faith is stirred up, and so sins forgiven by the preaching of the
word, they say is a fiction of the Heretics of our Times.

3. 3. In this they have some new friends among our selves.
That the Sacraments are not seals of the promises or Covenant of God, nor
instituted to confirm the promise.

4. So say some Anabaptists.
4. That Circumcision was a seal of the Righteousness of faith only to Abraham.

5. I would we could see this in the fruits and proof. But de opere operato
they are not themselves agreed of the sense.
5. That Sacraments of the new Law do confer grace that makes us acceptable, or
justifying Grace, ex opere operato, i. e. upon that very account, because the
external Sacrament is administered, if they put not the Bar of mortal sin.

6. That grace is contained in the Sacraments as in a vessel, nay that the
Sacraments are Physical instrumental causes of Grace, and that they do work
holiness by a power put into them by God, as the heat of the fire is the cause
of the burning of the wood.

7. His real intention is necessary to make it a lawful administration as to
himself, but not to others: but his seeming intention, and their own seeming
intention is necessary to the external being of the Sacrament that it be no
nullity: And the receivers real intention is necessary to the effects and well
being of it to himself.
7. That there is necessarily required the intention of the Administrator to the
truth of the Sacrament, at least of doing what the Church does.

8. It is not the name of a Sacrament that we contend about, but the nature and
definition.
8. That there are seven Sacraments of the new Covenant instituted by that,
neither fewer nor more.

9. 9. They know not what to make of this Character themselves many Schoolmen
make it to be but a Relation: And we confess that Baptism, Ordination, etc. do
fix us in a Relation to God.
That in the Sacraments of Baptism, Confirmation, and Order there is imprinted
in the Soul by God a Character or certain spiritual and indeleble sign or
mark, so that they cannot be re^iterated: In the other Sacraments there is
only an ornament or dress imprinted instead of a Character or mark.

10. 10. They that think it their duty to serve God by such inventions, will
easily be drawn to think too well of their invented works.
That the observation of the Ceremonies which they use in the Administration of
Sacraments (though invented by themselves) through will worship is m^ritorious
and part of Divine worship.

6. Of Baptism.
1. 1. By nature all are Satan's captives, which exorcism will not deliver us
from.
THat all Infants before are possessed by the Devil.

2. 2. This error (in case of Necessity) some ancients and Councils held.
They grant a power to women (even such as are unbaptized themselves) to
baptize.)

3. 3. Some of them except those that have the to^um baptismi: none can be
saved without the thing signified in Baptism: but they may without the sign.
That Baptism is not only necessary, by necessity of precept (which we confess)
but also to be simply necessary to salvation by necessity of means: for none
can be saved without Baptism.

4. There is a ground work laid for the pardon of future sins, but no actual
pardon of them.
4. That the efficacy of Baptism does not extend it self to the future, but
only to that which is past.

5. That the laver of Regeneration is not profitable to those that fall after
Baptism.

6. If the Pope were the head of the Church we must needs be baptized into him.
6. That there is in Baptism a silent and implicit oath of obedience to the
Pope.

7. How comes it then to appear in all, as (...) as they come to age.
7. That no sin remains or is l^^t in the Baptized: for sin is wholly taken
away by Baptism, not only so that it is not imputed, but ^o as that has no
being

8. What goes with i^ in m^st, before they come to age.
8. That Baptism also does confer grace to the Baptized exopere operato by the
work done, by which he is truly and formally justified.

9. In many things they agree, and in many they differ more then all confess:
Of which see Zanchy often and fully.
9. That the Baptism of John was not the same Sacrament, nor had it the same
force and efficacy with the Baptism which is instituted by Christ; as if
Christ were ^ot the Author of Jonh's Baptism.

10. 10. So the Ancients thought, and I think it the safest way.
That after the Baptism of John they must needs receive the Baptism of Christ.

11. 11, 12. There Is no end of humane inventions when once men depart from the
Scripture sufficiency and give way to their own self conceitedness and
arrogance.
That the Bells are to be Baptized by the Bishops or Suffragans with a solemn
Rite.

12. They use and urge some unprofitable and super^itious Ceremonies as if they
were necessary both before Baptism and after. For,

1. The Baptized are signed with the sign of the Cross on the forehead, on the
breast, on the eyes, on the ears, on the nose, and on the mouth; that all the
senses of the body may be guarded with this sign; for by virtue of this sign,
are the Sacraments completed, and the Devils stratagems frustrated.

2. They give them hallowed Salt to eat, that being seasoned with wisdom, they
might be free from the stink of sin; and may not putrify again.

3. They play the Conjurers about little children, as if they were such as were
pulled out of the hands of the Devil, and they blow the wicked spirit out by
their breath, That one spirit may be driven out with another.

4. They touch their nostrils and ears with spitle, saying, Ephata, be opened.

5. They anoint them with consecrated oil in the breast, that they may be
fortified against the adversary, and he may not be able to persuade them unto
unclean and hurtful things: They anoint them also between the shoulders, that
they may receive strength to bear the Lords burden.

After Baptism, they anoint the top of the head of him who is newly Baptized
with Crisme or Oil. After this sacred Unction they cover his head with a holy
veil, that he may know himself to enjoy a Kingly and Priestly Diadem. They
give him a lighted Taper, that he may be taught thereby to fulfill that
Evangelical command, So let your light shine, etc.

7. Of Confirmation.
1. THE Sacrament of Confirmation is more worthy then the Sacrament of Baptism,
for as it is done by greater Priests ( viz. Bishops) which cannot be done by
less, so also it is to be had and held with greater veneration and reverence.

2. That Confirmation does excel Baptism in regard of its effecting grace to
well doing.

3. That the Sacrament of Confirmation does confer Grace making us acceptable,
ex opere operato, and indeed more then Baptism does

4. In which the fullness of the Holy Ghost is conserred, viz. ex opere operato.

5. The matter of this Sacrament is Chrisme, o^ ^unction, which they call the
Chrisme of Salvation

6. That by this holy Chrisme made of Oil and Balsom, and smeered on the
forehead in form of a Cross, the sevenfold Spirit of Grace is given.

7. For that the holy Spirit is given to us by Oil* as it was given to the
Apostles in the form of fire.

8. That he will never be a Christian, that is not by Episcopal Confirmation
Chrismated.

9 Instead of Imposition of hands, the Bishop gives him that is confirmed a
box on the ear, to confirm him forsooth, and to drive away the Devil.

8. Of the Eucharist.
1. IN the Sacrament of the Eucharist they teach and urge the corporal presence
of the flesh of Christ. As if that Sacrament were instituted to nourish bodies
and not souls.

2. And that the body and blood of Christ is made really present in the
Sacrament by Transubstantiation, or conversion of the whole substance of the
bread into the very body of Christ, and of the whole substance of the wine into
his very blood.

3. That this Transubstantiation is made by reciting the Sacramental words, Hoc
est corpus meum, This is my body. And therefore they call these operative words.

4. That these words are to be muttered with a low murmuring: as if Christ had
spoken them Magically to inchant the Bread, and not to instruct his Disciples.

5. Thus they expound them, This ( i. e. under these figures) is my body, and
yet they urge the litteral sense, or (...).

6. That the body of Christ is made of the Bread in the Eucharist as Wine was
made of water.

7. And yet that the Priests when they make the Body of Christ of the Bread, do
not produce it (as some will have it) but do change the substance of the Bread
into the very pre existing body.

8. That after the words of consecration, the mere accidents, and indeed all
the accidents of the bread and wine do remain.

9. That not so much as the first matter does remain after the change of the
bread.

10. That the substance of the bread is consumed and cease to be and yet is
not anihilated.

11. That the substance of the bread ceasing, the substance of the body of
Christ succeeds, and is contained under the accidents of the bread.

12. That those accidents are not in any subject, nor do they subsist of
themselves, but are upheld by God after a supernatural manner.

13. That they are in somewhat else, but do not inhere in it.

14. That the body of Christ does remain in the host, as long as the accidents
of bread remain uncorrupted.

15. That as long as the body of Christ is in the host, It is accompanied with
Angels.

16. That in the corruption of the species, there is matter substituted by God,
in that very instant in which those species cease to be, and in which something
else is Generated.

17. That the subject of these Accidents is quantity, which also it self is an
accident, and which they feign to subsist without a quantum that has
dimensions.

18. That the Elements of the Sacrament of the Eucharist do not nourish if
taken in a great quantity, without a Divine Miracle. And therefore neither do
they nourish the mice that take a small quantity without a miracle.

19. But as they take away the substance of the Bread and Wine, and so with
that the substance of the Sacrament: so they rob the Body of Christ of almost
all the essential properties of a true body by this fiction of
Transubstantiation.

20. And as they feign the Accidents of bread in the Sacrament without the
substance of it; so they must needs feign the substance of Christ's body without
the Accidents of it.

21. Many do teach the presence of Christ's body, affirming that one and same
body of Christ undivided does exist upon innummerable Altars, and every where
whole.

22. That the body of Christ being in many places at once, and yet not in the
space between, is not discontinued or divided from it self in respect of its
proper substance or quantity, but only is divided from it self in respect of
place.

23. That one and the same body of Christ being in heaven and on earth, yea in
innumerable places on earth at once is indeed visible and palpable in heaven,
but on earth invisible, and beyond all our sen^es: There it is limited and
circumscribed; here it is unlimited, there it has its Dimensions, here it is free
from all dimensions.

24. Moreover they teach an Oral and Capernaitical Manducation of the flesh of
Christ, for they say the body of Christ in the Eucharist is really and
sensually touched, broken, and eaten.

5. Yea that wicked men receiving the Sacrament of the Altar, do chew the body
of Christ, and break it with their Teeth.

26. And upon the same account, is the very body of Christ devoured by Mice and
Dogs, if they chance to eat the host.

27. By reason of this Mystery of Transubstantiation, they call the Sacrament
or consecrated host, their Lord and God.

28. That the Mass Priest when he makes the Sacrament, or (as they themselves
speak) the Body of Christ, he is the Maker of his Maker.

29. The Priest does adore the consecrated Host, and does offer it to others by
lifting it up to be adored.

30. And for the same end they keep it and carry it in solemn Procession, that
it may be publicly adored.

31. That the Eucharist when it is carried to the sick is to be adored by all
those that meet it, those that do adore it are to have indulgences, those that
don't adore it are to be counted Heretics, and are to be persecuted with fire
and sword.

32. By this Bread-worship they commit great idolatry, whilst that they adore a
piece of Bread, with the worship of Latria, which is only due to God.

33. In honor of this Breaden-God they celebrate the feast of the body of
Christ.

34. Although they confess Christ did administer this venerable Sacrament with
both Elements of Bread and Wine, and though they acknowledge this Sacrament was
received of the faithful in the Primitive Church with both Elements: Yet they
determine that it is to be communicated to the Laity in one kind or Element
only, and forbid the Priests giving it to the people in both kinds, upon pain
of excommunication.

35. They teach that whole Christ is in either of the Elements, and that the
whole Nature of the Sacrament is to be found in one of them, neither is any
more profit reaped from communion in both kinds then in one.

36. Nay that he gets more who communicates in one, in obedience to the Church,
then he that communicates in both without that huge fruit of obedience.

37. But this taking away of the Cup from the people may seem a small matter;
for it is done but once every year, at which time the Sacrament is given to the
people: For in all the rest of the Masses which are continual and daily, they
deprive both the people and the Clergy that do not consecrate it of both kinds.
For in private Masses it is held forth to be seen by the people and Clergy, and
to be adored, not to be received but only by the Priest that makes it.

38. 38. This the ancient Church used, and I should not refuse it either way.
They urge a mixture of Water with the Wine in the Cup as most necessary.

39. And they assert that the Body of the Lord cannot be rightly taken, but of
those that fast.

40. They have converted the Sacrament of the Eucharist by which God
communicates Christ to us, into a real Sacrifice in which they do offer up
Christ to God.

41. Also the Table into an Altar and the administrator of the Sacrament into a
Priest after the order of Melchizedek.

42. They say this new Sacrificing is required, that Christ's Body may begin to
be an oblation.

43. That Christ in the last Supper did offer his body and blood in both kinds
of Bread and Wine, to God the Father as an oblation.

44. That Christ did once offer up himself for us upon the Cross, in the Mass
often by the hands of the Priests.

45. That it is one and the same sacrifice which is done in the Mass, and which
is offered on the Cross, only they differ in the manner of oblation being
without blood.

46. Every Mass Priest offering Christ to God the Father, prays God to accept
that Sacrifice, and to command that it may be carried by the hands of an Angel
unto the high Altar of God.

47. And therefore they make the Priest Mediator between God and Christ.

48. The Priest in offering that Sacrifice to God for there is, is a Mediator
between God and the men for whom he celebrates the Mass.

49. That Christ, when he said in the Supper, Do this, commanded the Apostles
and their Successors, that they should Sacrifice him and offer him up to God
the Father.

50. That by the same words Christ did appoint his Apostles to be Priests.

51. That one never to be repeated offering of Christ, by which he has
consecrated those that are sanctified for ever, They do offer thousands almost
infinite times.

52. Neither do they do it only at diverse times and in diverse places, but in
the same Temple they celebrate diverse Masses at diverse Altars.

53. They also celebrate Masses ( ^^e they offer Christ himself to God) for the
honor of the Saints, to obtain their intercession with God.

54. That the sacrifice of the Mass, which they confess is without Blood, is
truly propitiatory for the living and for the dead.

55. That the same sacrifice is impetratory not only of Spiritual but Temporal
blessings: hence they are wont to celebrate Mass, i. e. offer Christ to God,
^or the obtaining of health, for defense, for a prosperous journey, for victory
in war, and all other such Temporal benefits; yea for Horses and Hoggs, etc.

56. By the Mass, which being hired they are wont to celebrate for others: They
say, they can apply to them the virtue of Christ's death to take away their
sins, and to obtain all manner of benefits.

57. By Masses are souls delivered out of Purgatory.

58. To conclude, They have most filthily polluted the Sacrament of the
Eucharist with a multitude of foolish Ceremonies, which were too long to
rehearse; And yet in the observation of them they place the worship of God, and
merit, and urge them as most necessary, and not to be omitted without mortal
sin.

9. Of their Sacrament of Penance.
1. The word (Sacrament) is not fit matter for much contention.
1. THat Repentance [Penance] is a Sacrament properly so called.

2. There is some difference in the terminus a quo and ad quem as the Law
differs: but not such as to make one a Sacrament and the other none.

Public profession of Repentance for open scandalous sins, is a needful duty,
sinfully neglected by us, as it is brought to a Sacrament and ceremony with
them.


2. That Repentance in the New Testament is another thing from that which was in
the old, and al^ that in the new Testame^^ which is after Baptism is another
thing from that which ^s before: For that Repentance which is in the Old
Testament, or before Baptism, is not a Sacrament. That saying of Luther is
heresy, A new Life is the best Penance.

3. This is a certain truth: but that freewill is enabled and moved by Gods
grace.
3. They say contrition is an Act of the Will, done by the power of Freewill, or
a sorrow voluntarily assumed.

4. Many of them by merit mean but that ex pacto, it is the qualification of
these to whom God has promised Salvation.
4. That contrition does deserve forgiveness of sins.

5. 5, 6, 7, etc. In flying from their invented way of Confession, we have
lamentably wronged the souls of men, by disusing so much as Christ has made
our duty and necessary, and the ancient Churches used, and we must use before
it will be well with us.
That its necessary to justification that sins all and every one (as far as may
be) be confessed to the Priest as to a judge.

6. That this confession is meritorious of remission of the fault, the
lessening of the punishment, the opening of Paradise, and of confidence of
salvavation.

7. Without Sacramental (which they call Auricular) Confession or the vow of
it, sins cannot be forgiven.

8. That sin which was declared under the Seal of Confession is by no means to
be disclosed (though it were the Crime of Treason or Rebellion.

9. 9, 10. Some of them by satisfying God, mean no more then the answering of
his will, concerning so much of duty or suffering as he has laid upon us. But
others worse.
By the doctrine of satisfaction, they do sacrilegiously, and blasphemously
derogate from the satisfaction of Christ.

10. They teach indeed the satisfaction of Christ to be full for all, both in
respect of the fault and also the punishment; but by way of sufficiency; not by
way of efficiency; but satisfaction by way of sufficiency only deserves not
the name of satisfaction.

11. 11. The everlasting punishment being remitted, the temporal punishment of
God by the Magistrate, or by fatherly castigation may remain. And part of it
does remain on us all. For he chasteneth whom he loves.
They say the fault being remitted, there remains a debt of punishment to be
paid, for which satisfaction must be made.

12. That satisfaction is required for the compensation of the wrong done to
God, and the satisfying of divine justice.

13. That a justified man may truly and properly make satisfation, not only
to the Church, but even to God himself, namely for the guilt of punishment;
which remains to be expiated after the fault is remitted.

14. That it is unbecoming Divine Clemency to remit sin without our own
satisfaction.

Three ways we are said to satisfy the Lord.

15. As satisfying God, signifies but a sincere doing our duty, we may be said
to satisfy him: But to make him reparation for the wrong we have done him, or
satisfy his Law by perfect obedience, or his Vindictive Justice by our
sufferings here, is impossible.
15. First, By patiently bearing the scourges and punishments laid on us by God.

16 Secondly, By voluntary undertaking laborious works.

17. Thirdly, By undergoing the punishment imposed by the discretion of the
Priest.

18. Chastisement is a true and proper species of punishment agreed on.
18. That all the afflictions of the faithful are to be accounted for true and
proper punishments of sin.

19. That the calamities, which are laid upon the just after conversion, are to
be born in some sense to compensate their offense.

20. 20, 28, etc. As satisfying God is but pleasing him, all our duties
satisfy.
That it is not sufficient that we repent except we also satisfy God by
painful and satisfactory works.

21. Amongst those painful works, they reckon their Whippings of themselves,
and Pilgrimages unto the places of the Saints, etc.

22. 22. Prayer and a holy life is a delight and great benefit; but
accidentally may be troublesome so far as we are carnal, and therefore
requires some self-denial.
Prayer they reckon amongst penal works.

23. Fasting also and Alms deeds they teach to be satisfactory works.

24. 24. One man may do a duty that conduces to another spiritual good, but
not by merit.
That one man may satisfy for another, but less suffering is required of him
that satisfies for another.

25. That the satisfactory and penal works of the Saints may be communicated
and applied to others.

26. 26. The Right use of Absolution applies Christ^s blood declar^^^^ly. And
is too much laid by in most Churches.
That the virtue of Christ's blood is applied to us by the Priests absolution.

27. That by virtue of the Pr^^sts absolution, eternal punishment is turned
into temporal, which also the Priest imposes according to his discretion.

28. That the words of absolution are not only a sign but also a cause of
remission of sin, or that they do effect justification: for by the Priests
absolution is sin driven away removed ex oper^ operato as a cloud by the wind.

29. That a man cannot be reconciled to God without a Sacramental absolution.

30. That Sacerdotal absolution has that force of justifying; because many
desiring reconciliation and believing in Christ are damned, only because they
died before they could be absolved by a Priest: or (as they otherwise express
their meaning) do perish for that only they could not have a reconciling
Priest.

31. To Papal absolution we refer the Jubilees and their sale of indulgences.

32. Also in the year of Jubilee (which they have reduced from the hundredth t^
the fiftyeth, and thence to the twenty fifth) they promise full rem^ssion of
all sins to those that visit the Temples of Peter and Paul, and the Lateran
Church.

33. They assert that there is a treasure of overflowing satisfactions in the
Church not only of Christ, but also of the Saints which the Pope by
indulgences can apply both to the living and dead, by which they are delivered
from the guilt of punishment before God.

34. That souls are freed from Purgatory by indulgences.

35. They confess there is no need to add the satisfaction of the Saints to
the satisfaction of Christ (which they cannot deny to be infinite and always
overflowing) yet they (to whom gain ^s godliness) think meet to add them.

36. Neither do they bestow indulgences for a few days or years, but for many
thousands of years: from whence it is manifest they do but make a jest of the
Article of the day of judgment which according to their own opinion will put
an end to Purgatory, and all temporal punishments.

37. To conclude in all their Sacramental penance they make no mention of faith
at all, and of Christ scarce any.

38. For Repentance (Penance) which they will have to be a plank after
shipwreck they say consists (on the penitents part) in contrition; auricular
confession, and satisfaction; on the Priests part in Sacramental absolution, as
the act of a Judge, whose words are, I do absolve thee from all thy sins in the
name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost.

39. That that is a pious prayer which some are wont to use in Monasteries
after absolution given for sin: let the merit of the passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the blessed Virgin Mary, and of all Saints, the Merit of Order, and
the burden of Religion, the humility of Confession, the contrition of heart,
the good works which thou have done, and wilt do for the love of our Lord Jesus
Christ, bestead thee for remission of sin, and increase of merit and grace, and
for the reward of Eternal Life. Amen.

10. Of extreme Unction.
1. THat the extreme Unction is truly and properly a Sacrament of the New
Testament, and indeed an ordinary one.

2. That this Sacrament does confer grace, making us acceptable ex opere
operato: does restore health to the sick, and blot out sins if any remain.

3. That by this Unction (which they apply to the eyes, to the ears, to the
mouth, to the loins, and to the hands) God does grant to the sick whatsoever
is wanting by that fault of the senses.

4. That by this Sacrament a man may sometimes be saved, who should otherwise
plainly be damned.

1. That Ordination is truly and properly a Sacrament of the new Law,
conferring to the Ordained Grace making him acceptable ex opere operato.

2. There are seven, or rather eight Sacraments of Order, all which are truly,
or properly called Sacraments, viz. The Order of Porters, of Readers, of
Exorsists, of Servitors of Subdeacons, of Deacons and Presbyters, and Bishops.

3. In every one of is given to the Ordained, the seven fold Grace of the
Spirit, yea Grace making them acceptable, and that ex opere operato.

4. That anointing is required in Ordination.

Of Marriage.
1. That Matrimony, though it were instituted in Paradise, is truly and
properly a Sacrament of the new Law.

2. And therefore does confer grace upon the married, making them acceptable,
ex opere operato.

3. That the Church has power to constitute impediments that shall hinder
marriage.

4. That the Church has power to dispense with the degrees of Consanguinity
forbidden of God, and to make more degrees which shall not only hinder
marriage, but break it.

5. That marriage confirmed, not consummated, is also dissolved, in respect of
the Bond, by the entrance of one of the parties into a vow without the consent
of the other.

6. That the solemn Vow of Chastity, and holy Orders, are an impediment both
hindering marriage to be made, and breaking it being made.

7. Also difference of Religion does not only hinder marriage to be made, but
also break it being made.

8. That marriage contracted between Infidels, when either is converted to the
faith, is broken, viz. because that marriage was not a Sacrament.

9. That the Church of Rome did rightly prohibit marriage of old to the
seventh, but afterward to the fourth degree of Consanguinity, according to the
Canonical rule of reckoning (but the fourth degree of Canonical reckoning is
the seventh and eighth in the Civil Law.)

10. The Spiritual kindred (which arises forsooth from Baptism and
Confirmation) may hinder marriage to be made, and break it being made.

11. Of the Effects of Grace.
NOw follow the Effects of Grace or the degrees of Salvation, such are
vocation, justification, etc.

1. Gods love or favor is our Radical Grace, from which flow both Relative
effects in pardon, justification, adoption, and Physical in our Renovation: all
which are called also Grace.
1. Where first the Papists do egregiously err in expounding the word [grace]
for when the holy Spirit, speaking of these effects of Divine grace, says we
are justifie^ by grace, and saved by grace, etc. By grace they understand not
the free favor of God in Christ, but the gift of grace inherent in us: as if
the Scripture did not say we are called, justified, and saved by the same grace
we are elected and redeemed by.

2. And then when they divide the grace of God into eternal grace, which they
call the everlasting love of God: and temporary such as the benefit of vocation
and justification are: again they divide this temporary grace into grace freely
given, and grace making acceptable, both which they will have to be a quality
inherent in us, as if either all grace which they call temporary, did inhere in
us, or that which does inhere in us were not all freely given.

3. 3. To deny either Relative or Inherent Grace, is to deny that without which
there is no salvation. The necessity of Pardon at least, many of them confess.
Grace making us acceptable they will not have to be the grace of God, by which
he loves us and makes ^s acceptable to him, according to that, Wherein he has
made us accepted in the beloved: but to be grace by way of habit remaining in
us, by which we love God, therefore they call charity a grace making us
acceptable, as if by reason of its force and merit men were saved of God.

4. 4. No doubt but all have so much grace that they may believe and be saved,
if they will (sincerely) Because though velle credere be not credere, as Doctor
Twiss answers it, yet credere est voluntatis, as Austin answers it. But the
Papists, especially the Dominicans ^ffirm not, sufficient grace to believe to
be given to those that hear not the Gospel: but only sufficient grace to ^^
that which tends to this further grace.
Moreover when they divide grace into sufficient and efficacious grace they say
^ufficient grace is given to all and every man even without the Church, by
which they have a power to will, and they can if they will, believe, and by
believing be saved.

5. If any want sufficient grace to avoid sin, they ^o not truly sin, neither
are they guilty of sin before God.

6 That in the first act of conversion, 6. The will is first passive in
receiving the Divine influx, but active in the eliciting its o^^w^a.
the will is not passive.

7. The will has natural Power or faculty to resist or yield, which will not
be brought into act for yielding, because it wants moral power, that is, it
is dis-inclined. But to resist it has too much moral Power, which is
impotency, yet such as grace can heal.
7. That it is in the power of man's free will to resist o^ yield to efficacious
grace.

12. Of Justification.
BUt now the doctrine of Justification they utterly overthrow.

1. Perverting the term, they cause a strife about a word.
1. For first they confound* justification which is an act of God without us, as
Redemption, Reconciliation, Adoption, with Sanctification and Inherent
Righteousness: and so confound not only the Gospel with the Law, but quite
take away Justification it self, the chief benefit we have by Christ in this
life.

2. Some of them make merit of congruity (which they say, precedeth
Justication) to be properly no merit. And some of them deny that there is any
proper merit of condignity at all: But others are gross in this
2. They teach men to lay the cause of justification and the merit of salvation
in themselves.

3. The term Remission also they abuse, meaning by it, the change of our
qualities, or putting away sin it self, though forgiveness they take in with
it. And so they make many verbal controversies.
3. They will have remission of sin to be a blotting of them out, by which not
only the guilt but also the irregularity it self is abolished.

4. As in warming, 4. This is true of Sanctification, which is the thing they
mean by Justification: But by this abuse of the terms, they misinterpret
Scripture. And also they so much hide the very being of pardon by perverting
the words that signify it, that its hard to find in some of them, whether they
confess any such thing as pardon.
the cold is expelled by the coming of the heat: so in justification sin is
abolished by the infusion of righteousness.

5. Neither will they understand justification in the Scripture, as a Law-term
to be opposed to condemnation, and Sanctification to pollution.

6. 6. As to the Act, they make it their own by merited grace: but the habits
and the grace assisting, they say is of God, and the act, say most.
The Scripture teaches sanctification to be an action of God: they make the
second justification, as they call it, not Gods action but their own.

7. 7. This is their verbal error: no doubt that which they mean by
justification, that is, Sanctification, consists in Inherent grace.
Whereas the Scripture ^eacheth that we are justified by the grace of God
intimating the inward moving cause of justification, which is the free favor of
God in Christ: the Papists understand grace, or rather graces inherent in us:
which yet in the Question of justification (wherein the holy Ghost opposes
works to grace) are not more opposed to works then their first justification is
to the second.

8. This they say of justification taken for sanctification, but not as taken
for Pardon. But they are led still to misinterpret Scriptures by
misunderstanding the word.
8. When the Scripture teaches that we are justified by the righteousness of
God, and the blood of God i. e. of Christ who is God (for by his obedience and
blood, we are justified, and he is our righteousness) I say by a righteousness
which is not revealed in the Law, and therefore not inherent, but which is
revealed in the Gospel without the Law. They understand a righteousness infused
by God and inherent in us.

9 Still they mean sanctification, when they speak of justification. But they
confess that Christ's sufferings and obedience are the meritorious cause of our
Pardon and Renovation, both which they use to comprize in the word
Justification.
9. When the Scripture teaches that we are made the righteousness of God in
Christ, as he is made sin for us, and so that the obedience of Christ is
communicated to us for justification, as the disobedience of Adam for
condemnation namely by imputation; But they say we are justified not by the
imputation of the righteousness of Christ, but partly by the infusion of
habitual righteousness, viz. in the first justification, partly by our own
performance of actual righteousness or good works in the second justification.

10. 16. They may as well talk of a third and fourth justification, for
sanctification has more degrees then two. But doubtless there is such a thing
as that which they mean by a second justification, if they leave out merit: for
there is actual obedience and increase of grace.
For they contend for a double justification; the first which consists in the
infused habit of charity, the other in meritorious works.

When as the Scripture teaches that we are justified by faith without works i.
e. not-by inherent righteousness, The Scripture says we are justified by
believing in the Lord Jesus Christ, that is, By assenting to his Gospel, and
accepting him entirely as Christ, that is, by becoming true Christians, or
Christ's Disciples. For a believer and a Disciple in the Gospel usually signify
the same thing.
but by the righteousness of Christ apprehended ^y faith, and therefore that we
are not justified by faith as it is a part of inherent righteousness, for so
with other graces it sanctifies us) nor by any other faith, then that which
apprehends the righteousness of Christ, or by any other grace (because there is
no other beside faith that apprehends Christ's righteousness) and therefore by
faith alone.

11. 11. It does sanctify as a part of inherent righteousness: and it is the
receptive condition of Pardon.
The Papists on the contrary teach faith to justify as it is a part of
inherent righteousness.

12. 12. I would they said no more but that it disposes to it, for then they
would not say it deserves it.
And not so much to justify, as to dispose us for justification, by obtaining
remission, and deserving justification.

13. For, say they, faith and Repentance do justify as dispositions, and
meritorious causes ex congruo.

14. Still they mean Sanctifying.
14. But that charity is properly the justifying grace.

15. An absurd speech: but they add that its not the form of faith as faith,
but of faith and all other graces, as saving or as a new Life. And we agree
that faith is principally in the will: and the Velle is by the Schoolmen called
the Diligere.
15. And the form of justifying faith.

16. Its unreasonable for them to call that justifying faith, which wants that
which they take to be the form of it.
16. And yet that true justifying faith may be separated from charity.

17. And therefore that a man having true faith may be damned.

18. They say it must be explicit in some points, which we call essential, and
that we must believe in Christ as satisfying justice and meriting for us pardon
and sanctification.
18. Neither do they acknowledge any special faith which apprehends the
righteousness of Christ, but they say that is sufficient, which consists in a
general consent, without all affiance (yea even without knowledge) which they
call implicit faith.

19. That's but some of them.
19 For they say faith is better defined by ignorance then knowledge.

20. 20. They manage this controversy in the dark, not agreeing with us in the
sense of the terms of the Question.
Neither can they endure by any means that we say faith only justifies.

21. 21. Neither faith nor works are proper causes.
When as the Scripture plainly excludes works as causes from the act of
justification, though it require them in the subject or person justified, as
necessary fruits of justifying faith, by which believers are justified that is
declared to be just; but they assert that we are not justified before God by
faith only but also by works as the causes of justification.

22. And in this matter they make James plainly to contradict Paul.

23. And they invert the disputation of Paul, as if the Question he disputes
were, whether faith justifies without works, but whether works justify without
faith.

24. That men are justified by the observation of Gods, and the Churches
commands.

25. That men deserve remission of mortal sins by repentance, Alms deeds,
forgiving injuries, converting an offending Brother, and other duties of piety
and charity by which we do not deny but our belief of the pardon of sin is
confirmed.

26. And that venial sins are purged away by the repetition of the Lords
prayer, by striking the breast, by sprinkling of Holy Water, and the Bishops
blessing etc.

27. That a wicked man may deserve justifying grace, ex congruo, and that this
merit of congruity is when the sinner does his utmost.

28. So did the Ancients, even Augustine himself, and too many Protestants.
28. They deny justificaon be to proper to the Elect.

29. This also was too common with the Ancients, and is now with the said
Protestants.
29. That no man in this life ought certainly to determine that he is of the
number of the elect.

30 Some of them yield a certainty of present Remission and justifi^^^ion, and
moral conjectural certainty of Salvation.
30. That every one must doubt of the remission of their sins.

31. No man can be certain of his justification without a special revelation.

32. That no man in this world ought to seek an infallible certainty of his
salvation or justification.

33. That doubting of the pardon of sin is not an infirmity but a virtue.

34. To be certain of it is a great mercy: but to believe that it is a thing
written in Scripture, that I am pardoned, is not a duty: for it is not there.
34. For any one certainly to believe that his sins are forgiven him through
Christ, is abominable presumption.

35. About this they differ: See Magro in sent that faith has certain
evidence, which Ariminensis and others confute, ^aying it has evidence of
credibility, but not of cer^ainty.
35. That faith which the Apostle calls the substance, and evidence, and full
assurance, they will have to be doubtful and uncertain.

36. Also hope, which yet the Apostle commends as an Anchor sure and steadfast,
and that makes not him, that hopes, ashamed.

13. Of Sanctification and good Works.
1. 1. The mere appetite is no sin, but the corruption and rebellion of it is.
THat concupiscence in the regenerate is no sin.

2. 2. I would we could see one of them do it once. Its a shameful arguing for
perfection by bare words, when* none of them will give us a proof of it by
their own example.
That the regenerate or baptized may perfectly fulfill the Law.

3. 3. They that believe this, know not themselves.
That the works of the righteous are simply and absolutely righteous.

4. That sins are expiated by good works according to the proverb, forsooth, he
that steals much and gives a little, shall escape.

5. 5. Piscator and other of ours maintain this. Though a meritorious
efficiency we all deny.
That good Works do concur by way of efficiency to salvation, or are necessary
not only for their presence, but for their efficiency.

6. And that good works are not only such as are commanded by God: but such as
are voluntarily undertaken by men with a good intention.

7. 7. The Scotists and many more of them deny this: but so do not Bellarmine
and many others.
That the good works of the righteous not only justify, but also by way of
condignity deserve eternal life, both for the Covenants sake and also the works
themselves.

8. Waldensis und others of them deny all merit, but that's not common, see
instances in my Confession.
8. And that that is merit of condignity by which a man endued with grace and
the holy Spirit after he has deserved the habit of love by former merit does
by his good works and their condignity deserve eternal life.

9. To the merit of condignity there is required an equality of proportion in
the merit to the reward.

10. To the good works of the righteous eternal happiness is as well due as
eternal sufferings to the sins of the wicked.

11. That in every Christian work, proceeding from grace the merit of Christ's
blood is applied.

12. That Christ by his death merited that our works might be satisfactory for
sins, and meritorious of eternal life, or thus, Christ merited that by our own
merits we might attain salvation.

13. That every act of charity, or every good work proceeding from Charity,
does absolutely deserve eternal life.

14. That good works are meritorious of three things, viz. of remitting the
punishment, of increase of grace, and of eternal Life.

15. That a righteous man may deserve for himself an increase of righteousness
by way of condignity.

16. Neither do they think they must trust to their own, but to other men's
merits also.

17. That one believer may merit grace for another by way of congruity.

1. That a justified and sanctified man may fall from the grace of God both
totally and finally, and perish for ever.

2. That the grace of justification received, is lost by every mortal sin.

3. The grace of justification being lost by sin, yet faith is not lost.

4. That faith is lost by every act of unbelief.

14. Of good works particularly, of fasting.
1. OF Fasting I have spoken already, that the Papists place Fasting in the
choice of meats.

2. That their fasts are hypocritical.

3. And superstitious.

4. That fasting even as it is observed by them (which indeed is the mere
mockery of a true fast) is a work satisfactory for sin, and meritorious of
eternal life, they impiously and blasphemously teach.

5. Their prayers they pour out not only to God but to Angels and Saints.

6. That we may lawfully and meritoriously beseech and pray the Saints both to
intercede for us with God, and to give assistance to us.

7. They teach men to confess their sins to the Saints that are dead.

8. That God reveals our prayers to the Saints which we put up to them, and yet
that we must go to them as Mediators betwixt God and us.

9. They call upon God represented under some figure or shape.

10. They mutter their prayers before images saying, sometimes the Lords prayer
before a picture of the Virgin Mary, or of some other Saint, and Ave Mary's
before a crucifix.

11 They pray not only in the name of Christ, but also they believe they shall
be heard for the prayers and intercession of the Saints.

12. Neither do they pray for the living only, but also for the dead.

13. That a general intention of worshipping God is sufficient when they pray,
though they neither understand nor mark what they say.

14. They teach their Disciples to pray in an unknown tongue, and so without
faith, without understanding, without feeling like Parrots.

15. They teach them to number their prayers upon certain Beads, and to pay
God, as it were a task of numbered prayers.

16. In which also they teach them mightily to tautologize, and to hope they
shall be heard for their much speaking.

17. They not only reckon the Salutation of the blessed Virgin, and the
Apostles Creed amongst their prayers, but also teach them to say a hundred and
fifty Ave Mary's, and after every ten Ave Mary's, one Pater Noster, and after
fifty, one Creed.

18. And that prayer (even such as they are wont to babble before pictures in an
unknown tongue, either for the dead or to the dead, without faith, wit^out
understanding, without feeling) is a satisfactory work for sin, and meritorious
of eternal Life.

19. Also Almsdeeds to be meritorious and satisfactory.

15. Of Glorification.
1. AS to the state of Believers after this life, they teach, that Heaven was
shut, till Christ's passion.

2. That the thief converted on the Cross, was the first of all believers that
entered into the heavenly Paradise.

3. They make three receptacles of Souls after death, besides heaven and the
place of the damned, viz. limbus patrum, limbus infantum, and Purgatory, to
which they also add a certain kind of flourishing, light, sweet, and pleasant
Meadow, in which they place certain souls who suffer nothing, but remain there
for a while, because they are not yet fit for the beatifical vision.

4. That the souls of the faithful before Christ's resurrection were in a
subterraneous pit, which they call limbus Patrum.

5. That the fathers dead before Christ's ascension were not happy.

6. 6. Some of them say they are punished also with the pain of senses. See
Concius Tractat. in the end of Jansenii Augustine.
All little ones dying before Baptism, they thrust into limbus infantum, to be
punished with eternal punishment of loss, not of sense.

7. The faithful which depart, either with venial sins upon them, or with the
guilt of punishment (the sin being before remitted) they cast into Purgatory,
to be burnt there with corporeal fire, till they be fully purged.

8. That the suffrages of the Church such as the ^^crifice of the Mass and
prayer, penal and satisfactory works, as Almsdeeds, Fasting, Pilgrimages, and
the like, do profit the dead in Purgatory: and especially indulgences by which
the satisfactory works of others are applied to them.

9. For the P^pe can communicate the prayers and good works of believers to
them; whence it follows, as Albertus said, the condition of the rich in this
case is better then the poor, because he has wherewithal to get suffrages for
him.

10. That the Saints in Heaven do not only pray for the living on earth in
particular, but also for the dead in Purgatory.

11. That the Saints are our mediators and advocates with God, understanding
our prayers and necessities, and therefore to be called upon to pray for us.

12. That the Saints after death do obtain whatsoever they desire of God,
because they deserved it in this life.

13. That their merits do profit us for salvation.

14. That the Saints are helpers and coworkers of our salvation.

15. That the faithful living, are ruled and governed by the Spirits of blessed
men.

16. 16. Bellarmine confesses, that in such cases of fact and particular
judgment there^n the Pope may err: And so no Papists living can be certain,
but that they pray to the damned souls in hell, whom the Pope mistakingly
canonized.
That the Saints are to be Canonized by the Pope, and being Canonized to be
worshipped.

17. Therefore we must fly to the Saints in our misery.

16. Of the Church.
1. 1, 2. Yet we confess a Catholic visible continued Church.
THat the holy Catholic Church that we believe, is visible.

2. And always is visible.

3. 3. Some of our own say as much of late; but they mean it of the visible
Church only.
That it depends not on Gods election, nor on true faith and Charity, that one
belongs to this Church. But even wicked and reprobate men are members of the
Catholic Church.

4. 4. This is the heart of Popery.
That the Catholic Church is no other than the Roman, or that which the Roman
Pope is over.

5. That the Catholic Church, and the Pope of Rome are the same terms.

6. Neither are there any Catholics, but those of the Romish Church.

7. That he is a Catholic who believes all that the Roman Church delivers,
whether it be written in the Bible or not.

8. That there is no salvation out of the Roman Church.

9. That the notes of universality, antiquity, unity, and succession in the
Apostles doctrine do agree unto it.

10. That the sincere preaching of the Gospel, and lawful administration of the
Sacraments, are not a certain note of the Church.

11. To acknowledge the Roman Pope, and to be under him as the Vicar of Christ,
the only Pastor, the head of the whole Church, is a note of the true Church.

12. That the particular Roman Church is the Mother, Mistress, and Lady of all
Churches: yea the Mother of Faith.

13. That the Roman Church did obtain the primacy from our Lord and Savior
himself.

14. That the Roman Church has power of judging all, neither is it lawful for
any to judge her judgment.

15. That the Roman Church has authority to deliver doctrines of faith,
without or beside the Scriptures.

16. That the Roman Church cannot err in faith, much less fail.

17. That the Roman Church cannot err, in interpreting Scripture.

. 17. Of the Roman Church The Head, viz. The Pope. The Members.

1. 1. Hence Popery, and Papists are denominated.
THat the Roman Pope is the head, foundation, husband, Monarch of the whole
universal Church, the universal Bishop, or the Bishop of the whole world.

2. That the Roman Pope is the rock upon whom the Church is built.

3. The names which are given to Christ in the Scriptures, from whence it
appears he is above the Church, all of them are given to the Pope. Unto this
Antichristian throne he ascends by a gradation of most impudent lies, such as
these.

4. That the universal Church cannot consist, unless there be one in it, as a
visible head with chief power.

5. Therefore the external regiment of the universal Church is Monarchical.

6. That the Monarchy of the Church was instituted in Peter.

7. That Peter in proper speech, was Bishop of Rome, and remained Bishop there
until death.

8. That the Pope succeeded Peter in the Ecclesiastical Monarchy.

9. Neither do they give the Monarchy of Ecclesiastical power, but of temporal
also to the Pope.

10 Neither do they make the Pope Christ's General Vicar on earth, but Gods also.

11. They give a certain omnipotency to him.

12. They give him power of deposing Kings and Emperors, and absolving their
subjects from the oath of fidelity.

13. Moreover, without shame they defend, that the Pope teaching from his chair
cannot err.

14. That his words when he teaches from his chair, are in a sort the word of
God.

15. That the Pope cannot err, even in those things which belong to good
manners, or in the commands of morality, as well as in matters of Faith.

16. We must piously believe, that as the Pope cannot err as Pope: so as a
private person he cannot be a heretic.

17. Much of these by the French is ascribed to a General Council, and denied
to the Pope: so well are they agreed in their fundamentals.
17. That the chief authority of interpreting Scripture is in him.

18. That the Pope is the chief judge in controversies of Religion.

19. We must appeal from all Churches to him.

20. They give him authority to dispense with humane and Divine Laws.

21. They give him power of absolving men not only from sin, but from
punishments, censures, laws, vows, and oaths.

22. Also of delivering men from P^rgatory.

23. Of Canonizing Saints, and giving them honors, that they may be prayed to
in the Public Prayers of the Church, that Churches and Altars may be built for
their honor, that Masses and Canonical hours be offered publicly for their
honor, and feast-dayes be c^lebrated, That their Pictures be drawn with a
certain splendour, that their Relics be put into precious boxes, and publicly
honored.

24. We must believe that the Pope (who sometime puts Murderers, Traitors,
King-killers, and other Capital offenders into the Calendar of Saints and
Martyrs) never errs in the Canonizing of Saints.

18. The Members of the Church are considered, either as Congregated in
Councils, or Severally.

1. THe office of convocating General Councils, properly belongs to the Pope.

2, That in no case a true and perfect Council can be called, without the Popes
authority, no not if it be necessary for the Church, and yet the Pope will not,
or cannot call one, nor if the Pope be a heretic. And therefore that a Council
held without the Popes Authority is an unlawful meeting or Conventicle, not a
Council.

3. That it is the proper office of the Pope, that by himself or his Legates, he
be president of the universal Council, and as the supreme judge do moderate all.

4. That the decree of a General Council made without the consent of the Pope,
or his Legate, is unlawful.

5. The French agree not to these.
5. That the Power of confirming or rejecting General Councils is in the Pope of
Rome, neither are the Councils authentical, unless they be confirmed by the
Pope.

6. That the distinction of lawful and unlawful Councils does depend upon his
only will.

7. That the sentence of a General Council in a matter of faith is the last
judgment of the Church, from which it cannot appeal: yet that we may appeal
from a General Council to the Pope.

8. That the Pope can neither be judged nor punished by a Council or by any
mortals.

9. That the Pope cannot submit himself to the coactive judgment of Councils.

10. That the Pope is absolutely over the universal Church, and above a General
Council, so that he can acknowledge no judgment above him.

11. We must believe with Catholic faith, that General Councils confirmed by
the Pope cannot err neither in faith nor manners.

12. That particular Councils approved by the Pope cannot err.

13. That the power of the Pope and Council together, is not greater then the
Popes alone. Turrecrem. l. 3. c. 41.

19. Of the Members by themselves.
1. 1. Of the visible Church we say the same.
THat to make a member of the Catholic Church, there is not required grace, or
any internal virtue, but a profession of faith is sufficient.

The Members of the Church considered severally, are, The Clergy. The Laity.


2. That Clergy men are not held under civil Laws, by any coactive, but only
directive bond.

3. That Clergy men breaking the Civil Law, cannot yet be punished by any civil
Judge, nor be brought before the Tribunal of Secular Magistrates.

4. That the goods of the Clergy, both Ecclesiastical and Secular, are free
from the Tribute and Tax of Secular Princes.

5. That men are to be prepared for receiving Orders, by the first shaving.

6. By how much the higher degree of Order any one is in, by so much the larger
shaving is he to be crowned with.

7. That single life is always joined to holy Orders, by Divine right.

The Popish Clergy a^^ either Seculars and those either Regulars Of the lowest
Order. Of the higher Order* which they call Priests and are both The less as
Presbyters. The greater as Bishops.



8. That the Clergy men of the highest Order are Priests, properly so called,
which they say are instituted to offer an external and real sacrifice.

9. The choice of Bishops does belong to the Pope by Divine right.

10. The Spaniards hindered the passing of that in the Council of Trent.
That all the Bishops receive jurisdiction from the Pope.

11. The Roman Church has Cardinals for sidesmen to the Pope, upon whom the
universal Church is turned as upon hinges.

12. These are to be joined with the Pope in the Government of the universal
Church.

13. That those, whether they be Bishops or Presbyters, or Deacons are not only
to be preferred before other Bishops, Archbishops, Primates, Patriarchs, but to
be equalled even with Kings.

20. Of Councils and Monastical vows.
1. THey teach that there are Evangelical Councils distinct from commands,
which no man is bound to perform, but they who profess perfection, and would
deserve more and greater things than eternal life.

2. That the study of perfection is not of command but Councils.

3. Such Councils are those, of not seeking revenge, of loving our adversaries,
of not swearing, etc.

4. Not to obey a Council is no fin.

5. 5. 6. Have the Quakers learned this distinction of perfection, yet?
That some perfection is necessary to salvation, and that consists in the full
observation of the commands.

6. That some other perfection is greater and is necessary, not simply for
salvation, but for a more excellent degree of glory: and that consists in the
observation of Councils.

7. By obedience to Councils, men do supererogate.

8. That vowed Virginity and single life, are most acceptable worship to God.

9. Yea, and the greatest satisfaction for sin, and merit of eternal life.

10. A Monastic life is a state of Perfection.

11. All that is done by vow, is a worship of God.

12. Monastical vows do satisfy for sin, and deserve eternal life.

13. Our entrance into Religion, is a second Baptism, or in stead of a new
Baptism, by which satisfaction is made for all former sins.

14. That perfection is to be placed in true Monastic vows, as the vow of
voluntary poverty, the vow of perpetual chastity, the vow of Monastical
obedience.

15. That voluntary poverty is rightly vowed to God.

16. That its lawful; Lawful? yea a meritorious work, a work of perfection and
supererogation in Monks to live on begging.

17. It is lawful, yea meritorious, for the younger men to vow single life for
ever.

18. The vow of single life, is to he kept by them who have the gift of
continency.

19. There is none, but may always contain, if he will.

20. That it is lawful for children to enter into a vow, against their parents
consent.

21. They allow of great variety of vows, which have various rules of life,
invented by men, beside the holy Scripture. And as if there were greater
perfection in those rules, then in the doctrine of the Gospel, and a more
compendious way to perfection and salvation: they teach, by the observation of
them, eternal life and a more excellent degree of glory is obtained.

22. They give the obedience which is due only to God, unto the men that live
after the Rules of the Franciscan, Domincan order, etc.

23. That the Apostles were the first Christian Monks.

24 To them who are buried in the Cowls of the Monks, especially of the
Franciscans they promise remission of sin in some part.

25. In all causes materially, they are: but not in all formally, for they are
not the supreme in every sort of Government (that is, in Ministerial Directive)
but in their own sort, that is coactive.
25. That Princes are not the supreme Governors of their subjects on earth, in
all causes spiritual and temporal.

26. They make Princes subject to the people as well as to the Pope.

. 21. Of the Law.
Of Charity, or things to be done, the sum of which are in the Decalogue.

1. THat regenerate and baptized persons may perfectly fulfill the Law, so far
as they are bound to fulfill it in this life.

2. 2. What need you confess sin, that can fulfill the Law so easily? out of
your own mouths are you judged now, that do not that which you think so easy.
The fulfilling of the Law in this life, is not only possible but easy.

3. That every degree of Grace is sufficient to fulfill the commandments and
expel all sins.

4. 4. Others of them say the contrary.
That we are not bound in this life to love God with all our hearts.

5. And all our souls, and all our strength: Neither are we bound, not to have
evil concupiscence.

6. That venial sins, as they call them, do not hinder that perfect obedience
which is required in this life.

7. That the regenerate can do more then the Law requires.

8. They teach their Disciples to worship God under a humane shape or figure.

9. That Angels are to be worshipped and called upon.

10. Also Saints that are dead, are to be worshipped and called upon.

11. That a more than ordinary worship is due to the blessed Virgin: such as
they teach Christ's humanity wa^ to be worshipped with; but to the rest of the
Saints, ordinary worship.

12. That the members of the Blessed Virgin are to be adored, for so they touch
them [I worship and Bless thy feet, with which thou did tread down the Old
Serpents head: I worship and bless thy comely eyes, etc.]

23. That according to the five letters of her name Maria, she is the Mediatrix
of God and men, the Auxiliatrix or helper of God and men, the repairer of the
weak, the illuminater of the blind; the Advocate for all sin.

14. They name her the Queen of heaven, our Lady and Goddess; the Lady of
Angels, the fountain of all graces. Orat. Steph. Patracen. in Council. Later.
Sess. 10.666.6. f.

15. For her honor and worship they have composed, Duties, Letanies, Rosaries,
and a Psaltery all full of Idolatry.

16. In the Psaltery of Mary, whatsoever almost David had spoken of God and
Christ, they blasphemously give to her; as for example,

O Lady in thee have I put my trust, deliver my soul from mine enemies. In
Psalm. 7. And I will praise thee, O Lady with my whole heart, Psalm. 9. I put my
trust in thee O Lady, Ps. 10. Save me O Lady, Psalm. 11. Keep me O Lady, because
I have hoped in thee, Psalm. 15. The heavens declare thy Glory, O Virgin Mary!
Psalm. 19. To thee O Lady have I lifted up my soul, Psalm. 25. Have mercy on me,
O Lady, who art the mother of mercies, and according to the bowels of thy mercy
cleanse me from all my sins, Ps. 51. And pour out thy Grace upon me. O Lady,
Save me by thy name, and free me from all my misdeeds, Psalm. 54. Deliver me
from mine enemies, O Queen of the world! Psalm. 59. Praise waits for our Lady
in Sion, Psalm. 65. Make a joyful noise unto our Lady all ye lands, Psalm. 66.
Let Mary arise and let all her enemies be scattered, Psalm. 68. In thee O Lady,
do I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion, Deliver me in thy mercy,
Psalm. 71. Make a joyful noise unto our Lady all ye lands, serve her with
gladness, Psalm. 100. And so in the rest, all which they say are to be spoken
out of a pious affection to the Blessed Virgin.

17. They prefer the Saints to the rule of the world, and the Government of the
Church, as if they were the worlds Presidents, and the Churches Rectors. Yea
they set them in the same place, as the Heathens of old did their titular Gods
and preservers: and assign unto them several Provinces, Offices, and
Jurisdictions (because it would be a vast burden for every one to look to all.)
For, every Region, every Parish, every Fraternity of Artificers have their
titular Gods and Patrons. So P. Jovius calls them, Histor. li. 24. in the end.
And there came forth lately a Commentary of Philip the 39. Bishop of the Church
at Eistreet, of the ^itular Gods of that Church, St Richard* St Wumbald, St
Walpurg. And we may as truly affirm of the Papists what Gregory de valentia
says of the Heathens; For that very thing says he, we may apprehend them to
be idolaters, because they distribute their several Provinces of offices to
several creatures, as to Gods, etc.

There are certain Saints for the cure of every disease almost, and for curing
of evils: as Sebastian and Rochus for the plague: Apollonia for the toothache:
Antony for the Wildfire or Gangrene: Ottilia for sore eyes: Quirinus for
Fistula's, Sigismond and Petronella for a Fever, Apollinaris for the Privities
(as Priapus of old) Liberius for the Stone, and also Benedict. Wolfangus cures
Convulsions, Romanus the possessed, Valentinus the Epilepticks (as Hercules of
old) Anastatius such as are mad.

The work of delivering Captives is committed to Leonard, of assisting in war
to George (as of old to Mars.) Nicholas, and Christopher are Patrons to Seamen:
the three Kings, viz. of Cullen to Travelers: Margaret to women in childbirth
(as Juno Lucina of old.) Gregory and Katharine to Students (as Appollo and
Minerva of old.) To Merchants Erasmus, to Painters Lucas, to Smiths Eulogius,
to Shoo-makers Crispin, to Taylers Gutman, to Potters Goacus, to Weavers
Severinus, to Carpenters Joseph, to horsemen George, to Hunters Eustachius, to
Whores Afra and Ma^dlin (as Venus and Flora of old.)

They appoint Austin for Divines, Juo for Lawyers, Cosman and Damian for
Phisicians (as of old Aesculapius)

John keeps men from Poison, Laurentius and Florianus from fire and burning (as
Vesta of old.) Servatius from diseases, Job from the Scab, Barbaca from
dangers, Paul and John from Tempests, Christopher from sudden death, Hubert
from the biting of a mad dog.

Erasmus and Anne (as Juno of old) make men rich. Protasius and Gervasius
discover thieves, Vincentius and Hierom restore things lost, Felicitas gives
Boys in childbearing.

They set Vrbane over the Vines (as Bacchus of old) St Lupus over Corn (as
Ceres of old) Gallus over the Geese, Wendiline over Sheep, Pelagius over Oxen,
Eulegius over Horses, Anthony over the Swine; Medardus has the care of Wine,
Ludovicus Minorisa of Ale, etc.

They worship fourteen whom they call Assistants or Helpers, George, Basil,
Erasmus, Pantaleon, Vitus, Christopher, Dionysius, Cyriacus, Achacius,
Eustachius, Aegidius, Margaret, Barbary, and Katharine.

18. The Relics also of the Saints they worship and reverence, of which I
will relate twelve errors and abuses of the Papists, as they are noted by
Chemnitius.

1. That the bodies, ashes, or bones of the Saints are to be taken out of their
graves, and placed in some high place, as upon the high Altar, or some other
conspicuous place, and to be dressed with gold and silver, and silk, etc.

2. That those Relics ought to be carried in public processions and prayers,
and to be showed and offered for Christian people to see, and touch, and kiss.

3. That such Relics are to be approved by the Pope; and that approbation is
to be by canonizing them.

4. That it is a singular and meritorious worship of God, if the people to obtain
help by it, shall touch, kiss, or walk before with an adoring mind and gesture,
or shall do reverence to these Relics, by candles, silk coverings, garlands
or other the like ornaments.

5. That the grace and power of God (which they say is in them or present by
them) is to be sought for in these Relics: and that they are made partakers
of it, who do touch them or behold them.

6. That it is an acceptable sacrifice to God, to offer up precious gifts to
these Relics.

7. Many indulgences for sin, are promised to such as touch and kiss them, etc.

8. That our prayer is the better, worthyer, and more acceptable to God, if it
be done by or before the Saints Relics, by whose merits we may obtain help:
And therefore in our necessities we must make Vows, and take Pilgrimages unto
those places, where the Relics of Saints are held to be, that we may call
upon them for their help.

9. That it adds much to the holiness of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, if the
Saints Relics are set enclosed upon the Altar, nay that the Altar is
consecrated by their touching it.

10 That the Saints Relics may be lawfully laid over one, or carried about
ones neck in devotion and faith to God, and the Saints whose Relics they are:

11. Oaths among the Papists are taken by touching the Saints Relics that so
the obligation of the oath may be divided betwixt God and the Saints.

12. All places among the Papists are full of uncertain, counterfeit, and false
Relics, to which without difference the same veneration and honor is given.

19. They make them Pictures to worship them.

20. They dispute, that Images of God are not forbidden.

21. That Images are properly and per se to be worshipped.

23. That Images are to be worshipped with the same worship, as is due to the
Person, or Exemplar.

24. They defend Pilgrimages to holy places, and Relics and Saints Pictures:
and they promise large indulgences to Pilgrims.

25. That the Cross of Christ is to be worshipped with the worship Latria.

26. That they are in some sort sanctified who touch the Relics or the Cross.

27. That some holiness accrues to things that are signed with the Cross

28 That the Sacrament of the Altar* or the host consecrated, is to be
worshipped with Latria

29. They adore the Pope as a kind of Deity.

30. The greatest part of the Popish Religion is mere superstition, and
will worship: yea mere hypo^^isie* or a form of godliness, resting in external
works and observations.

31. They worship God after the commandments of men.

32. they defend the ceremonies invented by themselves or taken from Jews or
Heathens to be a part of worship pleasing to God.

33. And to be observed, as the Law of God.

34 That their observation deserves remission of sin.

35 That no ceremonies appointed by the Church can be omitted without mortal
sin, nor without scandal. 35. I would they had no company in this error.


36. That things consecrated by themselves, as holy Water, Agnus Dei's, etc.
have spiritual effects, to drive away devils, to blot out sins, etc.

37. They conjure salt (yea and herbs) and consecrate it, that it may be
healthful to the mind and body of those that take it.

38. They Baptize and consecrate the Bells, making them Godfathers, to fright
away devils, and drive away Tempests.

39. That their ringing does profit the dead.

40. The Chrism being consecrated the Bishop and Presbyters salute it, in these
words, God save St. Chrisma Ave S. Chrisma.

41. They give it a power to confer upon the anointed health to the body, and
holiness to the soul, and so the Holy Ghost himself

42. That every Church solemnly consecrated, is endued with a divine virtue.

43. The many abuses of fasting and prayer I touched before.

44. They teach men to swear by the creatures.

45. They deny oaths to be fit for the perfect.

46. Vows made to the Saints they defend.

47. That the Pope can absolve from the bond of vows and oaths.

48. They consecrate feast days to the worship of Saints.

49. And some they consecrate to patronize their own errors as the feast of
Conception, the feast of Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, the feast of Christ's
body, and of Peter's chair, and of all souls, etc.

50. That feast days are in truth more holy then others.

51. They exempt the Clergy from the secular yoke, i.e. they exempt
Ecclesiastics, both persons and goods, from the obedience of Temporal Lords,
and from their jurisdiction in personals and reals, in civil things and
criminal; and therefore that the civil judge cannot punish Clergymen.

52. That the Clergy is not bound to pay tribute to Princes.

53. That the Rebellion of a Clergyman against the King, is not Treason.

54. That the Pope can forbid subjects to keep the oath of fidelity, to
Christian Kings, if they be such as acknowledge not the Roman sea.

55. That the Pope can absolve subjects from the oath of fidelity.

56. That the Pope has power to depose Princes.

57. That the subjects of such Princes are bound to obey such a sentence, if it
be published.

58. That if grave and learned men (such as the Jesuits especially are) shall
judge any Prince to be a Tyrant, it is lawful for their subjects to overthrow
them, and if they want power to poison them.

59 That the subjects of the most Christian Kings, whom they call Lutherans and
Sacramentarians, are free from all bonds, and that they may lawfully destroy
their Kings.

60. That it is not lawful for Christians to tolerate a King that is an Infidel
or a heretic indeavoring to draw men to his Sect, but they are bound to depose
him.

61. That the ancient Christians did not depose such because they wanted power.

62. That the Pope may give the Kingdoms and Principalities, and Lordships of
all those whom he judges heretics unto his Roman Catholics, or may adjudge
them to those that can lay hold of them.

63. That it is not only lawful, but meritorious to kill Princes that are
excommunicated by the Pope.

64. They suffer Stews, and stoutly defend their toleration.

65. They forbid the Clergy to mary.

66. That Priest does better, say they, that keeps a Concubine, then he that
marries a wife.

67. That marriage after the vow of Chastity, is worse then Adultery.

68. That single life (even as it is vowed and practiced in the Roman Church)
is a worship most acceptable to God, and satisfactory for sin, and meritorious
of eternal life.

69. That the Pope with a whorish intention, makes gain (as Leno did) by the
prostitution of Whores.

70. That all faults are sold at a certain price, in the Popes Tax.

71. An officious lie they allow of.

72. They approve and teach the Mystery of equivocation.

72, 73. This may give us some light into the juglings of our times.
73. The act of counterfeiting and dissembling with great men, they commend, as
good and profitable.

74. They say Faith is not to be kept with Heretics.

75. That the desires of the will going before assent, are not sins.

76. Neither is concupiscence a sin in the Baptized.

77. That in concupiscence there is only the evil of punishment not of sin.

78. By that command, thou shall not covet, it is not forbidden, that we have
no evil desires.

I have recited a huge Catalogue of errors, to which I doubt not but many more
may be heaped up: As those (which we are refuting in this book) about
Antichrist: By all which it appears, that the opposition of the Pope to Christ's
truth, is not a particular opposition, as in some heretics but universal, such
as we may look for from Antichrist, Thus far Bishop G. Downame.

FINIS.

