THE QUAKERS CATCHISM, OR, THE Quakers questioned, THEIR QUESTIONS Answered,
AND BOTH PUBLISHED, For the Sake of those of them that have not yet sinned unto
Death; And of those ungrounded Novices that are most in danger of their
Seduction.

By RCHARD BAXTER

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Thomas Underhill at the Anchor and Bible in Paul's
Churchyard, and Francis Tyton at the Three Daggers in Fleetstreet. 1655.

TO THE READER.
READER,
I Suppose thou will marvel that I trouble my self with so wild a Generation
as the People called Quakers are; or that I trouble thee with a few hasty lines
which I wrote on such an Occasion; I Will truly tell thee the cause of both: 1.
They sent me five several Papers, one of them containing the Queries which I
answer, and others of them almost nothing but abundle of filthy railing words,
[Thou Serpent, thou Liar, thou deceiver, thou child of the devil, thou cursed
hypocrite, thou dumb dogge] with much more of the like. They chose out one day,
when it pleased God to confine me to my Chamber by sickness, to come into our
Assembly, and after Morning Sermon to fall a questioning the Preacher, my
assistant; and because he avoided public disputing with them at that season,
as not taking it for a profitable spending of the Lords day, they call him the
hireling that flies, it seems referring to Joh. 10. 12. and so confessing
themselves to be the Wolves. I find that they do so challenge, and brag, and
triumph, if we say nothing to them, and that too many simple people expect that
we should answer them, that (after an unprofitable verbal discourse with an
unreasonable railing fellow) I resolved to send them this brief answer to their
Questions: And because they abhor Syllogismes and disputings, I was fain to
deal further with them in their own questioning way: I had before offered to
come and answer all their Queries in their Assembly, if they would consent that
I might do it without disturbance; But instead of permitting that, they denied
it, and sent me a Letter of Reviling, calling me ever and over Serpent and
Hypocrite, and the like Names, and commanding me in the Name of the most High
God to answer their Questions in writing, that they might print them with their
reply; so that if I say nothing they will insult; If I write to them they will
print it: Being therefore so far called to speak, I chose rather to print my
own Papers, how mean soever, then let them do it.

Two Objestions I foresee will be raised against me; One is, that the Persons
are so contemptible and the errors so gross, that it is a needless work to
strive against them; To which I say, Let sad experience witness, whether it be
needless; when they so much multiply, and so many where they come are
presently infected. The salvation of the poorest Christian is so far from being
contemptible, that it is worth much more then our greatest diligence. 2. It
will be said, it is but the Churches of the Separatists and Anabaptists that
are emptied by these Seducers; and it is best even let them alone to keep their
own Flocks, and secure their Churches, or if they fall off it may show others
the tendency of their ways, and so pervent their turning aside; To which I
answer: 1. Though the stream of Apostates be such as first were Anabaptists or
Separatists, yet here and there one of the young unsettled sort do fall into
that stream that were not before of them, but perhaps inclining to them, and so
do some few that had no Religiousness. 2. I had far rather that men continued
Separatists and Anabaptists, then turned Quakers or plain Apostates; And
therefore would do all that I can to hinder such an emptying of their Churches
as tends to the more certain filling of Hell; It Is better to stop them in a
condition where we may have some hope of their salvation, then to let them run
into certain perdition; I did therefore take it to be my duty when these poor
neighbors who had before been Anabaptists, Separatists, and some Seekers, had
turned Quakers, to offer them a verbal answer to all their vain Questions, that
I might have had so much opportunity to undeceive them; When they refused that,
and said, they would not be drawn into a Serpents snare, I thought best to send
them my Answer in writting, committing it to some of their Neighbors, that
they might desire leave to read it in their Assembly; And when I heard that
they would not grant that neither (for all their insulting adjuring of us to
answer them) but talked of Printing something against me, I chose rather to tell
the world of these Passages between us, then leave them to their reports;
especially hearing how they increase in London and other parts, and that the
ignorant have need of some plain Information to prevent their Apostasy and
perdition in this temptation.

April 20. 1655. R. B.

TO THE Separatists and Anabaptists IN England.
THough Gods mind be most plainly revealed to us in his written Word, yet are
his Providence also teaching, and it is the duty of his Servants to read and
study them, especially the Poenall withdrawing or withholding of his grace, and
giving men up to believe lies, and to vile affections, to a reprobate sense,
and to an abominable conversation, these are such discoveries of the sore
displeasure of the Most High, as should make even the beholders to fear, and
all that stand but near to this heavy judgment to fly away from it, as the
Israelites did at the cries of the Rebellious followers of Corah, Number. 16. lest
the earth should have swallowed them up also: I am not of their mind that make
light of the strange Providence in our military affairs and changes of State,
though I think every carnal admirer of them does not understand them: But it is
a matter of very sad consideration, that many of vhose same men that seem so
much to magnify these, do no more observe, understand, and lay to heart the
more remarkable Providence of our heavy spiritual judgments! The overlooking
of these Providence makes many fear lest it be but their own interest which
they study in the other, and lest by reading themselves and their own Names
where they should read God, they turn this light into darkness or seduction,
and by surfeiting on this Feast do contract those diseases that are like to be
their bane; What is Gods Word for but to make himself and our duty known to us?
And so he does very much by his Works, where we may see his Nature, and
something of his Approbation or dislike, especially as they are read by the
help of the Word. Certainly God is known by the judgment which he executes:
(specially when) the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands, Psa. 9. 16.
The hand of God is apparently gone out against your ways of Separation and
Anabaptism: It is your duty to observe it: You may see you do but prepare too
many for a further progress, Seekers, Ranters, Familists, and now Quakers, and
too many professed Infidels, do spring up from among you, as if this were your
Journeys end, and the perfection of your Revolt. And it is your Churches and
those that lean toward you that presently receive the Doctrines of the
deceiver, and are the stream in which some others with them are carried away.
You may see you cannot hold your followers when you have them; Your work is
blasted, You labor in vain, nay, worse then in vain; You do but prepare men
for flat Heresy and Apostasy; I have heard yet from the several parts of the
Land, but of very few that have drunk in this venom of the Ranters or Quakers,
but such as have first been of your opinions, and gone out at that door; The
rest are but here and there a young person that was not noted for any great
matter of Religiousnesse, or only liked it and inclined to your ways; And if
any others be seduced, the evil arises from among you, and from your Graduats
do they receive their taint, as yours do from the Papists and the great
Deceiver. Is it your Ministry or ours that they bend their force against? Is it
not part of their present business to do your work, and cry down
Infant Baptism? One of the Queres which they here put to me is [What express
Scripture I have for Infant Baptism? which I must show without consequences or
else confess my self a false Prophet:] And another tends to prove us no true
Churches: The Quakers then are Separatists and Antipaedobaptists, though more:
I speak not this to reproach you, but to mind you of the tendency of all your
endeavors, that you may seriously as before the Lord consider, whether he do
not witness from Heaven against you and your ways, by giving up your
followers to such abominations as since the days of the Nicolaitans and the
rest of the Gnostics, the Sun has not seen, at least so openly and commonly
owned. Have you well considered into what your Societies were resolved in
Germany and other parts? And do you well consider what fruits they here bring
forth, and now likely they are to be shortly quite corrupted, if a speedy stop
be not made? and what it is that you have done to the Church of God, and how
much it is beholden to you for the prosperity of truth and piety. Is it like to
be Gods way which so ordinarily leads to end ends in such desperate evils?
I make not this my first or chief argument against you, but it is a considerable
second, and should make wise men at least suspicious of such a course: Nor
would I thus argue from the Apostasy of a few, or upon some unusual accident;
but when such has been the Fate of the stream of your party, from the very
first rising of them in the world to this day, I think it not inconsiderable.
Nor would I thus argue from any temporal judgment or oppression by a
persecuting Enemy; for I know that is no such sign of Gods displeasure: But if
I suspect whether those persons are in a way pleasing to God, whom I see him so
usually deliver up to Satan, I hope I may be excused. Certainly Gods Churches
are the places of his Blessing and his Delight: And certainly such spiritual
plagues as our eyes now behold, are as evident Notes of Gods heavy displeasure
as men can expect to see on earth. And we have the more reason yet to be
suspicious that this is Gods disowning of your way, and Testimony from heaven
against it, in that he followed the first Heretics, the Simonians and their
followers, with the same kind of judgments, and by such fearful desertions,
did then witness his detestation of those that withdraw from the Unity of his
Church.

And it is very remarkable, that it is a pretense of our Impurity and of a
greater purity with you, that is pleaded by those that first turn over to you,
and that this height of all impieties should be the usual issue of a way
pretended so exact and clean: Doubtless it is none of Gods mind by this to
discourage any from Purity and true Reformation, but to show his Detestation of
that spiritual pride which makes men have too high thoughts of themselves, and
too much to contemn others, and to desire to be further separated from them
then God in the Day of grace does allow of; Where the Tares (of ungodly men)
are such as cannot be pulled up and cast out of the Church, without danger of
pulling up and casting out some of the Wheat, even the weakest true Believers
with them, there God would; have us let both grow together till the time of
harvest But these proud men will stand at a further distance, and will dislike
Gods gracious cealings with sinners, and their eye is evil because he is good;
and they will not grow in the same Field (or Church) where such Tares do grow,
but will transplant themselves and remove from the field because God will not
pluck up the Tares, (especially if any Ministerial neglect of Discipline be
conjoined as too commonly it is:) and in stead of blaming their own pride, and
misunderstanding of Gods merciful dealings with sinners, they lay the blame on
the corruption of the Church, and call it A Field of Tares and not of Wheat: In
one word, it is most evident that spiritual Pride does turn most men from us to
you, and that this is the very sin that undoes such a multitude of Professors
of Religiousness, and which has let in all Gods Judgments upon us, and the
sin which he is now witnessing against from Heaven. As none more like to
Christ then the humble that are mean in their own eyes and compassionate to
others; so none are more like to the devil then the proud, that think highly of
themselves and contemptuously of others; And the better the thing is that they
are proud of, the worse is their pride in this respect, that it is the setting
up of Gods precious mercies against him, and the building of Satan's house with
Christ's materials: The Pharisees Liturgy is of too frequent use in the
Separated Congregations [I thank thee O God that I am not as other men are,
etc. nor even as this Publicane.] He that makes us to differ from other men,
and expects thanks for his differencing grace, does yet abhor a proud
ostentaiton of it, and a diminutive esteem of his smallest mercies unto others,
and all proud desires that they should be thrust below us further then he has
appointed: It is the good of sinners, and the honor of God that is the end of
discipline, and not that we might personally be extolled and judged of above
what is meet.

I beseech you take this plain Admonition in good part from a Desirer of your
Recovery and Salvation.

Richard Baxter,

An Answer to a young unsettled Friend, who before inclining strongly to
Anabaptistry, at last fell in with the Quakers, and desired my thoughts of them
and their ways, which seemed to him agreeable to the Scriptures.
I Have perused your Request, and am glad that you are not so confirmed in your
misery, but that you will yet ask advice of your Friend; I pray God you be so
ingenious and happy as to take it: It is a very sad thing to me and should be
so much more to you, to think that after so much pains as you have taken in
duty, and so much zeal as you have professed for God, you should yet be so
unacquainted with the will and Word of God, and Christ should have so little
interest in your heart, as that such horrid unchristian doctrines and practices
should be so easily entertained by you, and so far approved of: I marvel why
you took it for so great a work of grace to convert you from profaneness, and
now will take it for a greater work to convert you to it again, or to much
worse? Was it not the same Ordinances that you despised before Conversion,
which you now much more desp^se? Was it not the same Ministers that thou you
scorned whom ye now reproach with far greater bitterness (if you do as those
whom you plead for do?) Is it not the same Christians whom you then derided,
and now revile at, and condemn as Children of the devil: O miserable man! Is
all your hearing and praying come to this? Dare you meet the Messengers of
Christ in the face, and tell them they are Liars and deceivers? Dare you cast
out the holy worship of Christ as false worship, and seek to draw people into
the contempt of it? Dare you damn those Churches and millions of Saints that
Christ has bought with his precious blood? Dare you seek to draw men to hate
their Teachers whom Christ has set over them, and to hate his people as if
they were the Children of the Devil, and to hate his worship and holy ways?
Alas that ever a man in his wits should look upon such abominations as amiable,
and much more that any man should be so mad as to do this under the Name and
profession of a Christian! That you can imagine that the furious opposition to
the whole Army of Christ, his Officers, Church and Ordinances, can yet be a
work that Christ accepts: That you should no better know Christ's work from
Satan's, nor know that it is the Dragon whose warfare these men do manage? I
must needs profess that it is a very grievous thing in mine eyes, that after
all our pains with men's souls, and after the rejoycings which we had in their
seeming conversion, and zealous lives, we should yet see so much ignorance,
levity, and giddiness of professors, as that they are ready to entertain the
most horrid abominations! That the devil can no sooner bait his hook, but they
greedily catch at it, and swallow it without chewing; yea, nothing seems too
gross for them, but so it seems Novelty all goes down. I am afraid if they go
a little further, they will believe him that shall say, The Devil is God, and
to be worshipped and obeyed. Shall I freely tell you whence all this comes? Even
from h^llish pride of heart: You see it not (it is like) in your self or in
them, but I shall endeavor to make you see it both in your selves and them.
For your selves you confess to me that you have long thought that
Infant Baptism was an error, and that now you think the Quakers are in the
right; and yet you neither did once read any one of those Books which we have
written to prove Infant Baptism to be a duty, nor did once scriously and
impartially lay open your doubts to your Teacher, nor ask his advice, as if you
were even then too good to enquire, and would venture your soul to save you a
little labor, yet are you now confident that you are in the right, and he and
all of his mind are in the wrong. You know you are a young man, and have had
little opportunity to be acquainted with the Word of God, in comparison of what
your Teacher has had: If you presume that you are so much more beloved of God
then he, that God will reveal that to you without seeking and study, which upon
the greatest diligence he will not reveal to him; what can this conceit proveed
from but pride? God commands study and meditating day and night in his Laws;
Your Teacher has spent twenty, if not an hundred hours in such Meditation
where you have spent one: He has spent twenty if not an hundred hours in
prayer to God for his spirit of Truth and Grace, where you have spent one: His
prayers are as earnest as yours: His life is much more holy and heavenly then
yours; His Office is to teach, and therefore God is as it were more engaged to
be his Teacher, and to make known his Truth to him th^n to you; Is it not then
apparent pride for you to be confident that you are so much wiser then he, and
that you are so much more lovely in Gods eyes, that he will admit you more in
to the knowledge of his Mysteries, then those that have better used his own
appointed means to know them? and for you, in ignorance to run about with the
Shell on your head, exclaiming to the world of the ignorance of your late
Teachers? I say not that you do so; But the Quakers whom you approve of do so,
and much more.

I pray you tell me, Did you ever study well what Paul meant. ^ Tim. 3. 5.
where he requires that he that is Ordained should [not be a Novice, lest being
lifted up with pride he fall into the Condemnation of the devil;] The Word
translated a Novice signifies a New Plant, a late Convert, or new or young
Christian; You see here that such are in most danger of being lifted up with
pride, and why so? but because 1. They have not yet knowledge enough to
acquaint them with their ignorance and great weaknesses. 2. Nor have they yet
grown to a just degree of humility and other establishing preserving graces;
You see also that to fall into Pride, is to fall into the condemnation of the
devil. You know sure that it is no wrong to you to say that you are but a
Novice or raw Christian, for it is but a few years since you came out of utter
ignorance and carnality; and therefore that you have reason to be very
watchful against this sin, yea, by the evidence that you give in against your
selves, you might see that you are too far ensnared in it already.

And for the Quakers, you are blind if you see not their horrible Pride;
You Will perhaps think it strange that Pride should be the very Master-sinne in
them that go in so poor a garb, and cry out against Pride so zealously as they
do; and go up and down the world, as if they were sent from Heaven to persuade
men to wear no Lace, or Cuffs, or Points, and that down so many Ministers for
being called Masters. But alas do you not know that Pride of inward
qualifications commonly called spiritual Pride, is the most killing and
abominable! the better the thing is that you are proud of, the worse is your
Pride. O what a brave thing does it seem in these men's eyes, that they should
seem to be possessed with such an excellent spirit as can trample upon worldly
glory, and can boisterously contemn all that are not of their sect, and that
can despise Dignities, and be equal with the greatest: yea, that only they
should have this admirable spirit, and all oothers are the Children of the
Devil, and under their feet: Though other men should never so much sl^eght
them, yet do they wonderfully please themselves with these high thoughts of
themselves; For Pride is first an overvaluing of a man's self, and thinking of
himself above what is meet, and then a desire that others should do so by him
too.

If yet you see not the pride of these men, I will show it you in these four
particular Evidences, and that so plainly, that if you know the difference
between the language of heaven and of hell, you may easily perceive the devil
speaking by their mouths. 1. They affirm themselves to be perfect without sin
(yea, some of them say they are Christ and God.) And is it possible that any
man in this life, that is not mad with spiritual pride, can indeed believe that
he has no sin? what? that he transgresses no Law? That he does love God in
the highest degree that he is bound to do? That he never has a thought or word
that is sinful, nor sinfully loses one minute of his time? Yea, and this when
in the eyes and ears of the wisest, they foam out their own shame, as the
raging Sea does cast out the dirt. The devil himself has either less pride or
less ignorance, then to think himself to be perfect without sin; If they have
no sin, what need they pray, Forgive us our sins, or what further need have
they of the blood of Christ or his Intercession to procure them any further
forgiveness? If you can see no pride in this, I fear you are blinded with them
to destruction.

2. And is it not apparent pride in them to set up themselves so far above all
the people of God on earth? yea, to vilify the most holy and eminent Servants
of God, and condemn all the Churches in the world, as if heaven were made for
them alone (if it were so well, that all of them did believe a heaven besides
that within them, which I suppose is but a sorry heaven.

3. And yet more unmatchable pride and impious Infidelity is it, to damn all
the Church and people of God for this 1600 years at least. Indeed God had never
a people on earth of these men's way: But (to let pass the Scripture ages which
condemn them) tell me, Had Christ any Church since the Apostles days till now,
or not? If he had not, then he was no head of the Church, and so no Christ: For
there is no head without a body: If he had a Church tell us, where it was, and
when? Do you not know (if you know any thing of the state of the Church for
1600 Years) that Christ had no Church on earth of the Quakers mind, and that
all his Ministers have been such as they condemn, and have been called by as
honorable Titles as they are now? And is not that man either an Infidel and
enemy to Christ, or stark mad with pride, that can believe that Christ had no
Church till now, and that all the Ministers of the Gospel for 1600 years were
the Ministers of the devil (as they say of us that tread in their steps) and
that all the Christians of that 1600 Years are damned (at now they dare
denounce against those that succeed them,) and that God made the world, and
Christ died for it, with a purpose to save none but a few Quakers that the
world never knew till a few Years ago; or at least a few Heretics that were
their Predecessors of old.

4. And I should suppose that their proud, scornful, railing language should
put it out of doubt what spirit they are of, to any that are acquainted with
the language of Christ's Spirit, and of Satan, and are able to judge of spirits
by the most palpable effects, and to know darkness from light.

But you say, It is Scripture Language which they speak: I answer, the greater
is their presumptuous sin in making so ill a use of Scripture Language, as to
serve Satan by it, and use it to reviling; What if Christ call Judas a devil?
Is it therefore lawful to call Perer so, or any faithful Servants of Christ?
But I perceive you think they justly condemn us, because we are called Masters
of men, contrary to Matthew. 23. Alas that a Christian should be so ignorant, as
not to know that even calling Master and Lord too, is commonly allowed of in
Scripture, and that it is not the Title but 1. The proud affecting of the
Title. 2. And the Lording it over men's faith as Masters of that (as if others
must be of their mind right or wrong) which Christ there condemns; Even as
in the same place he forbids being called Fathers, in the very same sense,
when yet it is frequently allowed in a better sense. But for the fuller
answering of these scruples of yours, and the rest about Tithes, and such like:
I send you herewith, an Answer to the Questions of some Quakers near us in the
Parish of Bromsgrove, and refer you to my Defense of the Worcester shire
Petition Printed some Years ago.

To your Question, What I think of these men? I will tell you what I think and
am past all doubt of.

There are in England a Company of young raw Professors that have more zeal
then knowledge; And there are a company of carnal hypocrites that place all
their Religion in holding certain Opinions, and using certain external
worship, and siding with a Religious party. It is no hard matter to misleade
all these if they be not better guided by others then by themselves: While they
have due regard to the Judgments of their Teachers that know more then
themselves, and so live in a learning way till they have attained to better
understanding, they may escape Deceivers; But if they are once brought to be
wise enough in their own eyes, and to despise their Teachers, then they are
like a man that has lost his way in a dark night, or that has lost his Guide
in an unknown Wilderness, or like a Dog that has lost his Master, and
therefore will be ready to follow any body that first whistleth to him. The
Papists and the devil know this well enough, and therefore their first
endeavor is to unsettle these people, by taking them off all dependence on
their guides, and that must be by bringing the Ministers into contempt with
them; For if they could once accomplish this fully, and separate the people
from their Pastors, and so assault the people alone, or with weak, and
unlearned Teachers only, they might then easily bear down all before them; and
one Popish Friar or Jesuit would nonplus five hundred of our most famous
Sectmasters; They remember yet that it was the disgracing of the Popish Clergy,
partly by their own notorious ignorance and vitiousness, and partly by our
persuading men that the Pope is Antichrist, which was the main advantage which
the Reformers had for the ruining of the Papal Kingdom; And therefore they
would, partly in Policy, and partly in Revenge, attempt the destruction of our
Churches by the same means. These Papists seeing the temper of our foresaid
unsettled Professors do creep in among them, and use their utmost skill to
unsettle them more, and bring them into dislike of their Teachers, without
which they have no hope of succeeding; Their first ways are by reproaching the
settled government of the Church, and by drawing men to separation and
Anabaptism; and then persuading them that these are glorious Truths of God,
which their former Teachers are unable to receive, and that they are but a
blind, self-seeking, proud sort of men that would enthrall all men to their
judgments, when they are in utter darkness themselves: When they have gotten
them but thus far once, to despise their guides, then do they proceed further
with them, and persuade them that they that were blind in the points of
Baptism and Church Order, are so in other things as well as that, and that this
light which they have seen already, is but a spark, and that these being days
of glorious discoveries, there are yet more and greater matters to be revealed.
Hereupon they put a handsome dress upon many of the grossest points of Popery,
and recommend these as the new and rare discoveries. But this they do not in
the Name and garb of Papists, but (as the Popish Jew at New Castle) they turn
Anabaptists, and then rise a step higher, and lead others after them; so that
the silly people shall never know that it is Papists that are their Leaders;
yea, they will cry out of the Pope, and call all that differs from them
Antichristian purposly to divert suspicions, and blind men's eyes. Thus these
Papists have begotten this present Sect of Quakers; first pretending to strange
Revelations, Visions and Trances, such as are commonly mentioned in the lives
of their Saints in the Legends: And so you have here and there a Papist lurking
to be the chief Speaker among them, and these have fashioned many others to
their turns, to supply their rooms, who yet know not their own Fathers.

And so the Quakers among us are [The ignorant, proud, giddie sort of
Professors, first made Separatists or Anabaptists, and perhaps more (for the
most part of them) and then drawn futher by Popish subtlety, and now headed
with some secret dissembling Friars, and by them, and by the devil, enraged
against the Ministers of Christ, and set upon the propagating of the substance
of Popery.

If You ask me, how I know that it is Papists who thus seduce them? I answer,
1. Because they do the Papists work, and maintain their cause, as far as yet
they dare venture to bring it forth; I could tell you of abundance of Popery
that the Quakers and Behmenists maintain; As that the Pope is not Antichrist
(which is at least to their advantage whether Popery or not) and the disgracing
and secret undermining the sufficiency of the Scripture, the decrying of the
Ministry, the unchurching of our Churches, the slieghting of Justification by
Imputed Righteousness, and drawing men to the admiration of their inherent
righteousness, and of their works, the crying up the light within us, and the
sufficiency of common revelation, the setting up the strength of man's
free will, the asserting the necessity of a Judge of Controversy above
Scripture (which they are content should be the Spirit of Revelations a while,
till they can boldlier exchange that for the Pope) the extolling of Monastical
Community and Virginity, and alienation from worldly emploiments, the doctrine
of Perfection without sin in this life, with many more of the like nature:
All this the Papists have taught the Quakers. If You say, They might learn it
without them; I would ask you whether in all these great Points you think the
Papists are righter then the Reformed Churches? If you say they be, speak out,
and confess your self a Papist; If You say they be not, then who think you
should reveal all this Popery to the Quakers; Not the Spirit of God, for he is
not the Author of Popery or any falsehood; If it were the devil, then it seems
that Popery and the Quakers Faith is hatched by the Prince of darkness; And
whether it were Frias or Devils, or both, that make Quakers, it is not worth the
while to dispute, as long as we know that it is Popery that they hold, and the
devil befriendeth it.

Perhaps You will say, That they hold many certain Truths, they cry down Pride
and Drunkenness, and worldliness, and cry up Mortification, and Charity, and
Humility. I answer. And do not we do so as well as they? These are Points
where we are agreed with the Papists: Do You think that God would
extraordinarily send these men to preach down the very same sins which are
commonly preached down already, better then they can do it, by those men whom
they reproach? All that is good among them, is only that which is as common
among us, and I hope a little better maintained and managed; And all that
wherein they differ from us is their Popish and heretical errors.

2. But to give you further satisfaction, it is known by certain proof, that it
is the Papists that do seduce and head them: Many of themselves have confessed
such things, and their present industry among us is well known (which that
they may proceed in with less impediment, they are the Zealous Defendors of
Universal Toleration, or Liberty for Propagating soul-poysoning Doctrines,
for all the torments of the Inquisition in other Countries.) Have you not seen
a Sheet of Paper Published by M. Prin, Containing an Oath of a Citizen of
Bristol taken before the Magistrates of that City? I will transcribe You the
Deposstion lest You have not seen it.

The Information of George Cowlishaw of the City of Bristol Ironmonger, taken
the 22. Day of Januarie. 1654.
WHo informs on his Oath, that in the Month of September last, this
Informant had some Discourse in Bristol with one M. Coppinger; an Irish man,
formerly a Schoolfellow of his, that came thither purposely for his passage
into Ireland, who told this Informant, that he had lived in Rome and Italy
eight or nine years, and had taken upon him the Order of a Friar of the
Franciscan Company; And he told this Informant, that he had been at London
lately for some Months, and whilst he was there, he had been at all the
Churches and Meetings, Public and Private that he could hear of, and that none
came so near him as the Quakers: And being at a Meeting of the Quakers he here
met with two of his Acquaintance in Rome (the which two Persons were of the
same Franciscan Order and Company) that were now become chief Speakers among
the Quakers, and he himself had spoken among the Quakers in London about thirty
times, and was well approved of amongst them. And this Informant further says,
that the said M. Coppinger asked him, What kind of Opinions in Religion there
were in Bristol? And this Informant told him there were several Opinions and
judgments, and not naming any Opinions of the Quakers, the said M. Coppinger
asked him, whether there had been any Quakers in Bristol? And the said
Informant answered him, No; Whereupon the said M. Coppinger told him the said
Informant two or three times, that if he did love his Religion and his soul, he
should not hear them, whereupon this Informant told him, that he thought none
of them would come to Bristol, who expressly replied, that if this Informant
would give him 5 pound he would make it 500 pounds if some Quakers did not come
to Bristol within three weeks or a month then following. And on the morrow
following the said Coppinger departed from this City for Ireland his native
place, and about 18 days after, there came to this City two Persons that bare
the name of Quakers.

This is a true Copy of the Original Information taken upon Oath Jan. 22. last
at Bristol, before the Town Clerk and Magistrates of the City.



IF you further ask me, Why the Papists are so diligent in these kind of
works? I answer, Their Tyranicall Faction and Schism is maintained by works of
darkness and unconscionable deceits; And they know in such works as these they
are not like to lose their labor, they have so many several ends which they
hope to attain; Some they may bring directly to Popery it self, Some they bring
to a great part of Popery before they know where they are; All of them they
procure to do their work in disgracing the Ministry, and many of them in
disparaging the Scripture: At lest they know when men are loosened from all
former grounds, they are readier to receive a new Impression; Also by this
means they think to make the multitudes of Sects, and the madness of them to
be a shame to our Religion; And by this Argument they turn many others to their
side: They use from hence to assault our common ungrounded Protestants, and
say, You may see now what it is to depart from the Unity of the Roman
Catholic Church (for so they will needs call their trancendant schism.) And
when they talk among their own followers in France, Italy, and other Countries,
they mightily frem hence confirm them in their errors, and do so aggravate the
Hiresiies and Sects among us which themselves have cherished, that they make
the world abroad believe that the Protestants or Reformers in England are
almost all running stark mad, and even given over to the devil to possess and
move and shake their bodies, and that we are broken into so many shreds and
pieces, that we are almost So many men so many minds, and have now no face of
a Church among us, especially having the advantage of the suffrages of some few
over-angry Divines among our selves, who (on another ground) comply with the
Separatists, affirming that we have no true Churches, where there is not the
Episcopal pre-eminence; You see then what game the Papists play in their
fomenting of their Sects, and what use they make of them at home and abroad.

To conclude, I entreat you to consider well of the sense of these passages in
the holy Scriptures, Ephesians 4. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. where you may see that
Christ's Officers or Ministers are settled by him in his Church for the
edification, unity, and (at last) the perfecting of the body, and the
preserving of the poor people from the snares of such Seducers [that we
henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of Doctrine by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive.] Young unsettled Novices and proud self-conceited
Professors and Opinionists are like a bundle of feathers tossed up and down, and
carried that way as the wind of temptation drives them.

1 Cor. 11. 18, 19. [When ye come together in the Church, I here that there be
divisions among you, and I partly believe it; For there must be also Heresies
among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest among you:] I pray
you mark here what Gods end is in permitting these Divisions and Heresies among
us? They are the wind that must sift us and show us which was the wheat and
which the chaff. This trial is to prove you and all of us, and see whether we
are light or solid, approved and sound in the faith, or hypocrites; If this
trial turn you quite over to the division of Separation and Anabaptism, and to
the Heresy of the Quakers, we shall know that you were before a proud, giddy,
unsettled Novice, not approved of God nor sound at the heart. And it is an
exellent work of God, thus to prepare for the great Judgment, and make such an
open discovery of superficial, proud, unsanctified men; For as it is said 1 John
2. 19. [They went out from us but they were not of us; for if they had been of
us they would no doubt have continued with us, but they went out that they
might be made manifest that they were not all of us.] The Lord open your eyes,
and humble your heart, and acquaint you with your great darkness and
imperfections, and with the sufficiency of holy Scriptures, and the necessity
of his Order and Ministry, and the need that you have of those Guides whom you
despise, and the obedience and submission that you owe them, and the excellency
of the Churches Unity, and the mischief of all divisions and heresies, and
recover you from their snares.

Your true Friend, RICHARD BAXTER,

AN ANSWER TO THE QUAKERS QUERIES
Miserable Creatures,
BEfore the last I wrote to you, I had received three several Papers, with the
Names of three several Persons of you inscribed, viz. One Jane Hicks, one
Thomas Chaundler, and Edward Neway. These I have yet to show, though the spirit
that possesses you did since prevail with you to call me false Liar and
Serpent in Folio, but for telling you that I had received them from you:
Forsooth, because I named not the woman before, and because Neway wrote not:
But might not I receive them as from them, and having their Names and only
theirs inscribed for all that? Since that time I have received two more, One
subscribed by Richard Farnworth and Thomas Goodier, and another without any
subscribed Name. I showed Tho. Goodier that with his Name, and asked him
whether he owned it, who told me, he neither read it nor mine which it replied
to, and yet so far belived those that bad, that he owned his Name at it.
Having received in your first Letters, almost nothing but some Sheets of [Thou
Serpent, Viper, thou Child of the Devil, thou Son of perdition, thou dumb dog,
thou false hireling, thou false Liar Deceiver, greedy dog, thou ravening Wolf,
thou cursed hypocrite,] with much more of the like; I returned you no Reply, as
confessing my self not so well skilled in that language and learning as you
are; And for the dunghil-heaps of false accusations annexed, I pass them by,
as being well known to be impudent slanders; Such as my [upholding acoursed,
Prelatical Government, false worship, etc.] for which you dare say [the
vengance of the Lord is against me,] while you instance only one word of a
Paper of mine, wherein I moved that men be restrained [from preaching against
the Essentials or Foundamentals of Christianity,] which one of you tells me is a
restraining men from [speaking any more in Christ's name] and a persecuting
Christ's Ministers:] we may see what Christianity and Christ's Ministers are in
your account, who take it for such damnable enmity to Christ, for a man to be
restrained from Preaching that there is no Christ, or from reproaching him: I
do not think if I had desired that men should be restrained from calling you
damnable Heretics, or the Bastards of the Papists, that you would have been so
froward as to have said that herein I was your Enemy; Nor do I think you would
have taken it for any dangerous restraint to the Liberty of their Consciences;
But Christ will deal justly with you though you deal unjustly with him and his.

When your Praters were here, I desired to know the further ground of all these
heavy accusations; that must prove me a child of the devil, a greedy dumb dog,
a Son of perdition, with all the rest. And I could have no proof of all but
this; That I was called Master, That I stood in a high place to preach, and
that I studied, and that I preached by an hourglasse, and so would limit the
Spirit if I had it; and that I took money, for Tithes: False doctrine and
worship I was charged with in general, but not one word of instance in any
particular that I can remember: To these charges I shall give you some account
anon.

When I had received your 24 Queries, I sent you my Answer, that if you would
but subscribe your consent that I should come to your meeting, and answer them
all by word of mouth without disturbance, and you would receive what was made
plain to your selves to be the Truth; I was willing to come over to that end:
This motion you detest and reject with a Sheet of further Revilings in the
same-language as the first were: I hope you will not take it ill if I reply not
in that grinning or barking Rhetoric; For if I be a dumb dog, you cannot
expect that I should equal you in snarling, or barking, or howling.

But have you not bewraied your deceitfulness in refusing to consent that I
should come and answer your Questions? Do not you show by this, that you are
children of the Darkness, and the Works of darkness you are carrying on?
When you hate the Light because your Deeds are Evil? Why would you send me
Queries which you would not give me leave to answer by Speech? What was it that
you feared?

But in stead of this, you [charge and command me in the Name of the most high
God to answer them in writing] that you may [publish them with your Reply if
need be.] But when I desired to see the Commission by which you claim this
Authority, you show me none, but tell me, It is invisible. And may not all the
world command me on these terms as well as you? In stead of admitting me to
answer in your Congregation, some of you came over (taking a time when the Lord
had shut me up by sickness, and could not go to the public meeting) to make
a disturbance in our Assembly, Mar. 25. and to try your Rhetoric on the minds
of People in this place: whereupon it pleased the Magistrate to bind one of
you to the good behavior, for the public Disturbance, and railing at the
Magistrate: And upon this you send another paper with an outcry against us as
persecutors: when you might know, that I was not concerned in the business;
and when indeed no man did so much as once ask my advice in it. But as for them
that did it, I dare no more accuse them of persecution, then I dare accuse them
for persecution who shall burn a Thief in the hand. Alas, what impatient souls
are you, to cry out so much of persecution, when many a poor-scold is duck in
the Gumble-stool for words more incomparably sweet and Lamb-like then yours?

I shall now come to say somewhat to your Papers; and first give you a word of
my reason, why I may not answer them so punctually in order, and word by word,
as you command me to do: 1. Because I dare not be guilty of losing so much
precious time: 2. Because I have much more profitable work to do, though you
accuse me for Idleness, because I do not dig or thresh: when yet your Praters
when they were here, did neither dig nor thresh any more then I: nor do I hear
that they do elsewhere, as they follow their seducing employment. 3. Because
you have heapt up nonsense, vain repetitions and confusions, so as to answer
you accordingly would be of small use to any, and would but prove me to be like
your selves. Many more Reasons I overpasse. There is not a scold in all the
Country, but may as honestly and reasonably command me in the Name of God to
come and scold with them in the Marketplace, as you may Command me thus to
answer your scurrilous scolding Papers. Yet you shall have no Cause to complain
that I have overpassed any thing that is worthy to be regarded.

YOur first Query is, [What's the first Principle of the pure Religion?] To
which I answer, 1. [That God is] and next [that he is a Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him] Heb. 11. 6. 2. Do you ask this as Learners? No that you
renounce. Or as Teachers? Why then do you not show your Commission to teach?
And why do you not plainly Teach, but ask Questions? Or do you ask it for
matter to feed your prating and slandring?

Your second Query is [Whether they are a Church of Christ that beat and
persecute them that witness forth the Truth in his Name? etc.] Answ.
Doubtless it is possible for a true Church to be guilty of injuries. But you
have as little cause to put this Question, as the Turk has. What would you
answer if a Jew or a Turk, or a Witch, should put this Question? [Is it a true
Church that persecuteth them that witness the truth] Surely it is nothing to
you, who witness abominable falsehoods and dreams. 2. But I Will tell you what
do. When you come home, go to some of your Gossips, the Friars or other
Papists, and ask them this Question: Whether it be a true Church which set up
the Spanish Irquisition? and Caused the French Massacre? and has by flames and
sword drawn out the blood of so many hundred thousand true Christians? Ask
them, Whether the Butcheries of the Waldenses, and the Irish murders were done
by a true Church? It may be they will give you a most satisfactory Answer then
I can, because you will sooner hear them.

Your third Question is about Infant Baptism. Of that I have already written a
whole Book, which in modesty you should peruse, before you call to me for more.
Have you soberly read what I have there wrote already? If not, to what purpose
should I write more to you of the same subject.

Only to your Query, I will add this Query to your Founders the Anabaptists:
Whether by this time they do not feel Gods plagues upon their party? And
whether God do not visibly testify against them from Heaven, in giving up
their disciples to all kind of abominations? And whether the Plague of Pharaoh
be not on those hearts, and of the blinded Sodomites on their eyes, that in all
this can see no reason at least to be very suspicious of their way? and whether
they are yet resolved to wink on to destruction, or to stay till all turn
Quakers, Ranters or infidels? And how much England yet feels it self beholden
to Separation and Anabaptistry? And whether it be not the Separated and
Anapaptists Churches that are emptied by the Quakers?

Your fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eight and ninth Queries are all about
Tithes: The substance of which I had answered long ago to some of your leading
Brethren, in a Book called, The Worcestershier Petition Defended; to which
Book I refer you, to spare the labor of speaking one thing twice; and
modestly should have taught you to take notice of that which I have done
already, before you call for the same things again. Only let me now add these
Queries also to you.

Qu. 1. Whether have you read any of those Books that are written long ago, to
prove that Tithes are still of Divine Right? If you have not, were it not well
beseeming a tender Conscience to hear all that can be said, before men
adventure to rail against that which they do not understand.

Qu. 2. Whether there be not sufficient Scripture to warrant a man to Dedicate
part of his Lands to God, for the service of his Church, and promoting of his
Worship? Yea, Whether they did not in the Primitive times, so Dedicate all?
selling it, and laying down the Price at the Apostles feet.

Qu 3. Is it not lawful to take and use that which is so Dedicated? And if the
Apostles and first Church Officers might take all, May not we take the Tenths,
when they are thus Devoted?

Qu. 4. If our Ancestors, many an Age ago have given the Tenths to the Church
for the Ministry, are not those sacrilegious Church-robbers that should now
take them away, having nothing to do with them? And do not you counsel men to
the sin of Judas or of Ananias and Sephira?

Qu. 5. If one that bears the bag prove a Judas and Thief, or one Nicolas a
Deacon should lead a Sect of Nicolaitans, your Predecessors, Whether are all
the Apostles therefore Thieves, or all the Churches and Pastors greedy dogs,
for taking much more then the Tenths, even men's whole Estates that gave them to
that use?

Qu. 6. Whether I, or other Ministers do ask the people so much for preaching
as the Quakers receive themselves? Do not you receive meat and drink, to
sustain your lives? But we ask not meat and drink of any, nor any thing else,
that is theirs: The Tithes is none of theirs, nor ever was, nor their fathers
before them; but they bought or took Leases of their Lands, with the Condition
of paying the Tenths as none of their own. We ask them not for a penny, but only
to divide between theirs and ours, and give us our own.

Qu. 7. If it be not a wrong to the people more then to the Ministers to have
the standing Church-maintenance taken away, Why then do people petition so hard
for Augmentations where Means is wanting? Or else do worse.

Qu. 8. If the Supreme Rulers of the Commonwealth may lay an Excise or Tax on
the Nation, and pay Soldiers with one part of it, what forbids but that they
may pay Ministers of the Gospel with the other part? And if they may lay a Tax
for them, Why may they not fix a settled Maintenance in Tenths for them, much
more, why may they not let them possess that which is theirs already by their
forefathers gift?

Qu. 9. Where does any Scripture forbid paying or taking Tithes? I have showed
you in my other Book, where it commands allowing sufficient Maintenance? Show
where it condemns the Tenth part any more then the ninth, or the eleventh, or
twelfth?

Qu. 10. When God has commanded a sufficient maintenance in general, and left
it to humane prudence to judge what is sufficient (before they give it;) If
then a man shall say [Where does the Scripture require the Tenths? and you are
no true Ministers who take the Tenths;] Is not this as wise as to say, [Though
Christ and his Apostles did wear clothes, yet show where any of them preached in
doublet, or breeches, or stockings, or else you are false Prophets for wearing
these;] Is not this as wise arguing as the other, and to the same purpose?

And where you ask us so often whether the Apostles took the Tenths, I tell you
again, they took more, that is, men sold all and laid down the money at their
feet. It Is true that then the poor also were maintained out of it; And if you
will show a Commission to examine us, we will give you an account how far we
maintain the poor out of our mere tenth part. In the mean time it is
unreasonable, that you demand, that we should so maintain them as to suffer no
beggars; For if all that a Minister has will not maintain twenty poor people
if he give it them all, how should he then maintain a hundred with it?

Your 10th Qu. is, [Whether Christ enlighteneth every one that comes into the
world?] To which I answer, Yea, he does so; All that come into the world of
nature, he enlighteneth with the light of Nature (so called because that it is
a knowledge gotten by the Book of the Creatures and natural means, without
supernatural Revelation though it be of grace also as it is freely given after
a forfeiture;) And all that come into the world of grace he enlighteneth with
the light of supernatural Revelation.

Having said as much to this Query as you require, I will gratis add something
that I may please you by supererrogation: I lately saw another Paper of your
Queries which you have dispersed in other places, which speaks almost only of
This Inward Light; In which I perceived 1. That you falsely intimate that we
deny the necessity of an inward light, when as we maintain that the external
light of the Word alone is not sufficient without the inward light of the
Spirit. 2. You there intimate to us a supposed sufficiency of the inward light
that every man in the world has. Concerning which I shall say more anon, and
now only demand of you. 1. Whether you mean it is sufficient to leave men
without excuse, (That we maintain as well as you) or is every man's light
sufficient to his salvation? If so Q. 2. Was it sufficient before Christ
preached the Gospel and sent his Apostles? Or is it now sufficient to all that
never heard the Gospel; If so, Is not the Gospel a vain and needless thing? or
are you Christians that dare so affirm? Q. 3. If the world have sufficient
light, what need they your teaching, or discourse, or conviction? Q. 4. If all
have sufficient light within them, what need there any converting grace? Q. 5.
Then why did Christ send Paul to open men's eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, if they had sufficient light before, Act. 26. 18. Q 6. I
pray you do not disdain to tell me when you have rubbed your eyes, if all men
have sufficient light within them, Why you got up into the Judgment seat, and
pronounced me so often to be in darkness, and to be void of the light, and to
have none of the Spirit. If all have it, why may not I have it?

But let me tell you further in your ear, that we that you so frantickly bawl
against, have read Bellarmine and other Papists so often, that we cannot be
ignorant who are your Teachers, though your selves are ignorant; We know how
earnestly the Jesuits would persuade us that there is a light in every man's
conscience, which if he improve and husband well, God is bound to give such
additions as shall make it become saving, and that by the good use of natural
light men may certainly get supernatural; and that it is in men's own power,
what light soever they have to improve it to salvation.

Your 11th Query is, [Whether we have seen Gods face?] Ans. Whether these be
Learning, or Teaching, or quarrelling, or doting Questions, I leave to your
consideration: but what Call you had to propound them to such Serpents, Dogs,
and Children of the devil, as you call us, I know not: But however I Will answer
you truly. 1. By the eye of reason I have seen that there is a God, and that he
is infinite, incomprehensible, most great and most good, etc. 2. The same I
have seen more clearly by the eyes of faith. 3. But I never saw God by the eye
of flesh, for none can so see God and live, Nor has any man seen God at any
time, saving the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of his Father, he has
declared him. 4. Nor have I seen him in glory intuitively, or as the glorified
in heaven do. If you say you have seen more, I shall not be very forward to
believe you, till I see better fruits of it. I also therefore demand of you,
Whether he that has seen God do not abhor himself (as Job did) in dust and
ashes? and whether the true knowledge of God do not ever abase the soul, and
make a man very mean in his own eyes? And then is it likely that ever those men
had the true knowledge of God, who make it their business to exalt themselves
as having the Spirit, and beign perfect without sin, and to revile and bedung
other men with their reproaches, as being all the Children of the devil, and of
darkness, that be not of their strain, and rave not as they do? The Pharisee
that thanked God he was not as other men, nor as the Publicane, spoke humbly
and modestly in comparison of you, and yet was he counted a proud
self-justifier: If ever you come to the least saving sight of God, it will
mightily change the proud strain of your spirits, and make you abhor the
thoughts of your present evil ways.

Your 12. Query is. [Whether we have the same infallible Spirit as the holy men
of God had that spoke forth the Scriptures?] Ans. Why must you know this? Are
all Dogs and Serpents with you that have not that Infallible Spirit? But we
hear the croakings of your Papist guides in that word [Infallible;] that is the:
pillar of their Kingdom, and the master-point of their New Religion, That their
Church is infallible; For denying which, Knot the Jesuit against
Chillingworth, and a late ^otable gaudy Orator S. W. against Dr Hammond, and
others of them, would fain persuade us that we subvert Christianity, and are
little better then Infidels, because we are not Infallible: But I will answer
you and your Masters together in a word. 1. The Prophets and Apostles had
infallible Inspirations of new matters of divine verity, not before revealed,
because they were to be Gods penmen and Messengers of such New Revelations, I
have none such that I know of. 2. The Prophets and Apostles were guided
infallibly in the manner as well as the matter, so that every word that they
wrote to the Churches was infallibly true; I have no such Infallibility, nor
your Grandfather the Pope neither: He may err while he pretends to the
greatest Infallibility in deciding Controversies. 3. What man soever he be in
the world that believes any Truth, he does infallibly believe it; For he that
is in the right is not deceived so far, and he that is not mistaken is so far
infallible, which is no more then non fallitur. 4. But if by [Infallibility]
you should mean the clearness and subjective Certainty, as distinct from the
objective and the bare truth of our conceptions, then I say, that is another
thing then Infallibility, and not to be so called, and of that Certainty men
have different degrees: All true Christians are certain of their Fundamentals,
yet sometime with some doubting, so that they may find cause to say with the
Apostles, Lord, Increase our Faith; or, We believe, help thou our unbelief; But
in lesser controverted Points which Salvation depends not on, the best man on
earth may err, much more be uncertain; So that in a word, Every Church in
sensu composite, while a Church is infallible in the essentials of
Christianity; and so is every true Christian: And also they know infallibly
every other truth that indeed they know; because Truth is Truth whether they
know it or not, and when they do know it they are not deceived; But in many
things we all err, because we know but in part, and so far are deceived.

Well, I say still, Fair fall the honest humble Christian that will confess
with Paul that we know but in part; For I shall never like pretenders to
un-erring Infallibility more; I know but two such pretenders, and they are both
the most abominable deceivers and deceived, One is the Pope and his Clergy, and
who more erroneous? The other is your selves, even distracted with error. The
Pope venteth abundance of falsehoods in doctrine, and corruptions in discipline
and worship, and with all these errors in his hands, protests he is
infallible. The Quakers (all that yet have wrote to me or spoke to me) pour out
the greatest abundance of most impudent Lies, and spue their filthy railings in
the faces of almost all they come near, so that I know not whether ever the Sun
saw a more hardened, shameless, abominable Generation then they (with their
brethren the Ranters) are; and yet with all this filth upon their lips, they
confidently profess that they are infallible and without sin; You may well
excuse us that we be not hasty in believing you till we see more reason for it.

Your 13th Qu. is, [What is Hels month that the wicked go in at, etc.] I
answer. 1. You are liker to know ere long then I; If a miracle of grace save
you not, you will be better able to answer this Query then yet your unbelief will
give you leave. 2. It suffices me to know that Hell is a state of endless
misery, where such as you shall everlastingly bear the effects of Gods wrath
and justice with the devils and his Angels that now seduce you, if timely
recovery prevent it not.

Your 14th Qu. is, [Whether the Bible be the Word of God? and Matthew, Mark,
Luke and John be the Gospel, and whether there were any Gospel before them, and
whether they be the light?] To which I answer, 1. Only Jesus Christ is the
co-essentiall, coeternal Word of the Father, being one with the Father. 2. But
the holy Scriptures are the temporal expressed Word, that is, the signs of Gods
mind to man, so that Christ and the Scriptures are nor called the Word in the
same sense, no more then is the Word of a man's mind, and the word of his mouth
or pen. This signifying word was preached before it was written, and then was
the Gospel, but it was written after it was so preached at first, that it might
be a standing Rule, and might be kept entire and sure to the Church to the
worlds end; For the bare memories of men would not have kept them for us with
such certainty as they have been kept in Scripture and delivered unto us, This
Word therefore is the light, but not as Christ is the light, or as the Spirit
is the light, for there are many lights that must concur to give us light. It
is a wise Question of him that shall ask, Whether the light by which a man sees
be the visive faculty of his eyes, or the light of a Candle, or the light in
the air, or the Sun? Why it may be all these, There must be 1. A Sun. 2. A
light from that Sun in the air. 3. An inward light in the eyes. 4. And that
outward received by the inward, before you can see; So God in Christ is the
Sun, Man's Reason is the Eye, The Gospel or Word of God is the external Light
flowing to us from the Sun, The Spirit closes these two together, even the
Gospel and our Reason, and by its powerful work in that closure, breeds a
special illumination in the soul which the Word alone could not produce.

I shall add some Queries to you. 1. Do you believe the Scriptures to be true
or not? If you do, then you must believe what they say of themselves; But they
call themselves the Word of God, Mar. 7. 13. Romans 10. 8. 2 Cor. 2. 17. and 4.
2. 1 These. 4. 15. 1 Pet. 1. 25. And often they are called the Laws of God, his
Testimonies, his Statutes, his Precepts, his Promises, Gospel, Covenants, etc.
All Scripture is written by divine Inspiration, 2 Timothy 3. 16. The word of
Prophecy is a sure Word, 2 Pet. 1. 19.

2. Will you give us leave to smell the Pope in your endeavors to disgrace the
Scriptures, though your own Noses be stopped? For we have been used to deal with
him at this weapon, and know that this is the main point of his New Religion,

Your 15th Qu. is, [Whether we own Revelations or no?] Ans. I own all divine
Revelations, and disown all diabolical ones, so far as I know them. I own
all those blessed Revelations contained in the holy Scriptures; for they were
infallibly sealed by multitudes of uncontrolled miracles and a spirit of
holiness; I believe that the Scriptures or Laws of Christ being finished and
sealed, we must hold these till the coming of Christ, 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14. and
that Christ will be with the Preachers of this same doctrine to the end of the
world, Mat. 28. 20, 21. and that these are able to make men wise to salvation
without any more additions, and therefore no more is to be expected. But yet I
believe 1. That God has not tied himself from revealing particular matters in
subservierty to Scripture extraordinarily, as diverse murders have been
revealed, and the like matters of fact. 2. And I believe that all true
Christians have the illuminating, sanctifying Spirit of Christ to help them to
know all the meaning of the Scripture which is of flat necessity to salvation,
and more, according to their several measures of the Spirit with other helps.

Your 16. Qu. is about Singing David's Psalms;] To which I say, Till you have
considered what is already written on that Question by Mr Cotton and Mr Foard,
I know not why I should add any more: If all Scripture be written for our use
and learning, why may not we speak to God in the words of David's Psalms as well
as any other Scripture? Tell me if you can? And further, Qu. 2. They being used
by the Church till the Apostles times, where do you find that they did ever
forbid or abolish that use? Qu. 3. Whether is it more lawful for us to speak
Gods praises in the words of holy Scripture, and particularly of David's Psalms,
or for you to rake together all the threatenings and sharp reproofs in
Scripture, to serve your turn to rail and slander me with?

Your 17. Qu. is, [What's the soul of man which the Ministers of the Gospel are
to watch for as they that must give an account to God, and what is it that
captivates the soul, and what death is it that has passed over all, etc. and
what is the Serpents head that must be bruised.]

Ans. Seeing I am fallen under your Catechizing, I will readily obey. 1. The
soul is that spiritual substance which causes by its lower power, your life,
growth, and nourishment, by its next power your feeling, and by its highest
power (proper to man of all inferior Creatures) your Reasoning, Intellective
knowledge and rational willing and affections; which together with the Body
constituteth the whole man, Supposing that you look not for a Definition,
because you so abhor Logic, I think this in brief may serve your turns. 2.
The whole man is often called the soul in Scripture, because the soul is the most
noble part of him. 3. I pray mark the Text that you allege, Heb. 13. 17. Obey
them that rule over you, for they watch for your souls as those that must give
account that they may do it with joy and not with grief, for that is
unprofitable for you:] Because you have put this Text into my hand, I will mix
my Answer with these few Queries to you; (For I suppose you expect no great
exactness of order from me.) Qu. 1. Whether many words in Scripture translated
[Masters (...) etc.) be not of as low and humble an importance as [Rulers?] And
therefore seeing God calls Ministers the Rulers of the Church, are they not
so far Masters as the word Master signifies a Guide or Teacher? And why else
are they often called Teachers? Qu. 2. If God bid the people obey them as Rulers,
and the Quakers persuade them to abhor and reject them as dogs, Serpents, and
Sons of perdition, which is to be obeyed, God or the Quakers? and whether is it
the Spirit of God or of the devil and Antichrist that the Quakers speak by? Qu.
3. Is it the Ministers or the Quakers that watch for the good of souls, and
have the rule over them? Q. 4. If the present Pastors of the Churches be not
true Ministers, speak out and tell us who are, and where we shall find them,
and where they have been from Christ's time till now? Or whether Christ has
been so careless of his Church, and so unfaithful of his promise, as to leave
his Church without Pastors from the Apostles days till now; And to leave all
the world without true Pastors even till now, except the Congregations of the
Quakers in England? Q 5. According to this Text, whether will it be to the
peoples profit or disprofit to despise and discourage their teachers and
guides, and make them do their office with sighing and grief? and will they
have in the end a better bargain of it to hearken to their Rulers or to the
despisers of them? Consider well of these things.

4. I proceed in my Answer to your Qu. That which has captivated your souls is
the devil by sin, The understanding by blindness and error, your hearts by
pride and hardness, your wills by transporting passions and perverseness; and
so your lives by open wickedness; Imitating your Leader, and going up and down
like raging beasts night and day seeking whom you may deceive and devour: And
against all your rage it is our duty to wait patiently, in meekness
instructing such as oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them
repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and that they may recover
themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his
will, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25, 26.

5. The Death that passed on all is, The Separation of the foul from the body,
and of Gods special favor or grace from both, and the guilt of everlasting
misery for sin.

6. The Serpents head is the Devils power and policy, when such as you are
vanquished by the light, and your folly made known to all, and when the Kingdom
of Satan in sin and darkness is overthrown, then his head is bruised, as
Christ in his own person gave it the great bruise on earth, in the vanquishing
of Satan's temptations, in the perfect holiness of his life, in his Miracles,
casting out devils, and in his triumphant death and Resurrection, and afterward
in the success of his doctrine.

Your 18. Qu. is, [What is the flaming Sword that keeps the Tree of life, and
what the Cherubims?] Ans. 2 Timothy 2. 2. [But foolish and unlearned Questions
avoid, knowing that they do gender strifes, and the Servant of the Lord must
not strive.] You intrude into those things which you have not seen, vainly puffed
up by your fleshly mind, Col. 2. 18. It shall suffice me to know that the
flaming sword is Gods terrible restraint, and the Cherubims are Angelical
Executioners of his will: Wisdom has two Gates, the Gate of Grace and the
Gate of Glory; These things are seen by faith now, and by intuitive
intellection in the life to come.

Your 19. Qu. is, [Whether they that stand praying in the Synagogues or Idols
Temples, and love greetings in the markets, and binds heavy burdens on the
people, and are called of men Master, be not out of Christ's Doctrine?] Ans.
Because this is all that you go about to prove me a false Prophet by, I shall
say the more to your satisfaction. 1. If our Temples be Christ's Temples, do
they not blasphemously make Christ an Idol, that call them Idols Temples. 2.
If you are not wilfully blind, you may perceive that it is not all the
external actions mentioned Mat. 23. that Christ condemns, but the pride and
hypocrisy which the Pharisees manifested in them. Mark first that he bids men
even hear the hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees, and observe and do what they
bid men observe and do, because they sat in Moses chair. It is not therefore
all the faults there charged on them that will acquit men from observation of
their doctrine. Is this agreeable to your practice who damn men that despise
not and reject not Christ's most upright and faithful Ministers? Their sin is
laid down in the 5ht verse] All their works they do to be seen of men.] Prove
this of us if you can? Because they were proud [They loved the uppermost rooms
at Feasts, and chief seats in the Synagogues] Prove this by us if you can: I
had rather have a lower room at a Feast then a higher, and ordinarily rather
none then either; I use not the chief Seats in Synagogues; I sit in the midst
of the Assembly, and so I may conveniently be heard when I am to speak, I care
not where I stand. Greetings in the marketplace when did I desire? Or to be
called Rabbi? But I pray you mark that it is not [using] but [loving the
uppermost rooms that Christ condemns, else no man must sit uppermost, and
then we must have none but round Tables or not fit at all: So consequently it
is not being called Rabbi or Master that Christ intends, but a proud desire
of and love to those Titles: As a man may accept of the highest room for Order,
that loves it not in Pride; so may he accept of the Title of Master from those
that owe him respect, though he love it not in pride.

Besides I pray you note, that Christ forbids the Name of Master no further
then he forbids the Name of [Father] verse 9. [Call no man your Father upon
earth;] And yet do you not know how often the word [Father] is owned in
Scripture, and children commanded to love and obey their Fathers, and honor
them: I know the highest of your Sect do forbid the owning of any such
Relations, or Names, as Fathers, Children, Husband, Wife, Master, Servant,
Magistrate, Subject; and they forbid all affections to such Relations, or
honor or respect: But if you were not hypocrites, you would plainly speak this
out, and then people would better understand you when you tail as Ministers
for-being called Masters.

But for the sake of those among you that are not past recovery, I will tell
you that which it seems you know not; The Pharisees had their several
Schools, Sects, as the Philosohpers had, and every one gloried in his
Disciples, and those Disciples in their own Sect-masters; One cried up such a
man, and another such a man, insomuch as sometimes the followers of these
several Sect-masters would fall together by the ears and kill each other in the
Temple, and in the streets, while they contended for their Masters honors; And
look what faith the Master was of, the Scholars must all be of his faith; They
must take their belief on trust from him; These leading men that were the
Masters of their Schools and sects, whom none must contradict, were called by
the Jews Rabbi's and Fathers, as the Papists now call their Bishop The Pope,
which signifies A Father, because as children must be wholly ruled by the
Fathers, so would the Pharisees have their Disciples to be by them, be the
matter right or wrong. Just thus do the Papists require, that the people
believe as the Church believes, that is, the Pope and his Consistory whatever
it be, and tell us, that they are infallible, as being guided by the infallible
Spirit, and therefore we must believe them by an implicit faith. Now the Lord
Jesus meets with these Pharisees, and commands his disciples; That they
call no man on earth Father, or Rabbi, or Master, as the Pharisees were called,
that is, To have no such absolute Master of your Religion, or Lord of your
faith, because we have all one such Absolute Father which is God, and one such
absolute Master which is Christ; This is the very same thing that Paul meant
when he chides them for saying, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollo, as if Christ
were divided, or Paul had been crucified for them, 1 Cor. 1. 13. And it is the
same thing that Peter means, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3. where he gives Ministers the
honorable Title of Elders and Overseers, and Pastors, and bids them oversee
and feed the flock of God; but yet forbids them doing it as Lords over Gods
heritage, because the heritage is Gods, and Christ is the chief Shepherd. Paul
calls a Bishop the Steward of God, Tit. 1. 7. One that must rule the Church 1 Timothy 1. 4, 5. and 5. 17. and says, He that desires the Office of a Bishop
desires a good work, 1 Timothy 3. 1. But yet he would not have them taken for
absolute Masters of Christ's School, but as Christ's ushers and as Stewards in
his House; [Let a man so account of us as the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards
of the mysteries of God,] 1 Cor. 4. 1. neither more nor less.

There are diverse words in the Greek tongue which the Gospel was wrote in,
which we translate by one word [Master;] but if our language be more scarce of
words then the Greek, it does not follow that Christ's words are all one. The
word here used in Matthew is (...), and elsewhere (...) which is as much as the
chief Leader of the way or the Sect-master; What if this, be forbidden, is all
Mastership therefore forbidden because this one is? The word (...) is
translated [Master] too, and sometime [a Teacher.] I pray you consider here
your most ignorant and sottish dealing; The Gospel was not written by the
Apostles in English but in Greek: Because one word signifies a Teacher and a
Master (such as a Schoolmaster is) and our Translators sometime translate it a
Teacher and sometime a Master, you impudently cry out that one of them is not
Scripture, and yet yield that the other is; When in the Greek they are the same
word, as you may see it used in Ephesians. 4. 11. Luke 2. 46. 1 Timothy 2. 7. 2 Timothy 1.
11. Acts 13. 1. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Mat. 10. 24. Luke 6. 40. Heb. 5. 12. Iam. 3. 1.
In all which places the holy Ghost uses the word (...) though we English it
sometime Masters, sometime Teachers, and sometime Doctors, yet it is all one
word in the language that the Scripture was written in; and therefore Scripture
allows one as much as another.

And if you will stick to the English, you may find the word [Master] used often
enough: And if it be lawful for another man why not for a Minister? Tit. 2. 9.
1 Pet. 2, 18. 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2. Col. 3. 22. and 4. 1. Ephesians. 6. 5, 9. Though the
word (...) signifies such a Mastership as Ministers of Christ will not own as
Ministers, though over their hired Servants they may own it.

It may be you think Paul crossed Christ's rule and was a false Prophet because
he calls himself [a wise Master-builder] 1 Cor. 3. 10. Or do you think that the
holy Ghost did err when he called Teachers [The Masters of the Assemblies,]
Eccl. 12. 11.

That the Spirit is no enemy to Titles of honor, you may see in 1 Pet. 3. 6.
where Sarah is commended for obeying Abraham and calling him Lord. And Act. 26.
25. Paul calls Festus, Most Noble Festus, and calls Agrippa, King Agrippa,
Act. 26. 2, 26, 27. And Romans 12. 10. We are commanded [In honor to prefer one
another,] So that it is one man's duty to give those Titles which another may not
ambitiously seek. For my part I will gladly make this agreement with you, I
will never wish any man to call me Master, nor be displeased with any that does
not (on that account) if this will satisfy you. But then I confess I dare not
condemn them that use so much civility or respect, because Gods Word is of more
esteem with me then your most confident fancies and reproaches.

By this time me thinks I may well take leave to salute you with this Query,
Whether that man be not void of the fear of God, and given over to a seared
Conscience, that dare go up and down to rail against the most faithful and
painful Ministers of Christ, whom they are not able to charge with any crime
but humane frailties, and that because they are called Masters? and all this
upon mere sottish ignorance of the Scripture that so commonly uses and
allows the Title.

All that I could get to all this from your Prater Tho. Goodier that was here,
was but this, [I deny thy Greek and Hebrew if the Scripture be truly
translated;] which is but to say, I deny the words of Christ and the Apostles:
For ^^e translating, there are many words in the Original Language which have
not so many and apt in English to express them by? Translating excludes not
the necessity of explicating; And who knows not that one English word has many
significations? There is a Beast called a Wolf, and a Fish called a Wolf, and
an eating disease called a Wolf; Are these therefore all one, because they have
one Name; So a Sect-master is called a Master, One that would be the Lord of
men's faith is called a Master, and a Teacher of the Church of Christ is called
a Master: Does it follow that all these are forbidden because one is?

Your Prater also made a stir with me for calling the sacred Languages the
Original, because forsooth the Spirit of God is the Original. And is not that
a wise man to go cry down the Ministry, that cannot discern the difference
between the Original cause and the Original Language.

He charged me also to be empty of the Spirit because I studied, and told me,
he did not study, no not in speaking what to say, I the less marvel at his
nonsense: But I pray God forgive me that I Study no more; Do you think we
cannot talk without study as well as you, and I hope a little better; and when
the lazy fit overtaketh Ministers, they are ready to preach without study as
well as you do: I can bring you a woman fit for the gumblestool, that shall
without any study talk it out with the best of you: We do not so despise God,
his Word or our hearers, as to speak before we consider what to say. Read 2 Timothy 2. 15. Psa. 1. 2. 1 Timothy 4. 15. Psalm. 119. 15, 23, 48, 78, 97, 99, 148.
and see whether it be not our duty to study and meditate continually day and
night. And whereas you call us to thresh and dig, I profess if God would give
me leave, I should take it for a great recreation and refreshment to my body;
and should think it incomparably a more easy life then that which I endure;
Solomon knew, and I know to my sorrow, that much study is a weariness to the
flesh; and might I but plough and dig I should yet hope to live in some
competent health, who now spend my days in continual pain and languishing.
But then how shall I fulfill Gods command, 1 Timothy 4. 15. [Meditate on these
things; Give thy self wholly to them (mark wholly) that thy profiting may
appear to all.] How should I [watch over the Church day and night] Act. 20. 31.
yet whereas your Prater feared not before God to affirm, that if I had no pay I
would not preach: I do here profess before the same God that he is a Liar, and
I prove it, because I have long preached already without pay, and been glad of
Liberty, and I would labor with my hands, as far as my languishing body would
bear, to supply my necessities, as Paul did to stop the mouths of your
Predecessors rather then I would give over preaching the Gospel. Judge
therefore whether your Lying Spirit be the Spirit of God or the meet author of
Reformation, or whether indeed you are perfect without sin?

Your 20. Qu. is, [Did ever the Lord of Heaven and Earth, or Jesus Christ bid
thee, or any of you, Go, and Preach to a people, or was any of the Apostles or
Ministers of Christ made Minister, by the will of man?

Ans. 1. I offered your Prater here to show him my Commission from God, if he
would show me his, and he told me that it was invisible; and why may not you
take the answer that you give? 2. The Lord called his first Apostles by his own
voice, and appointed them to call others, and to establish an Order for the
succeeding of others in that Office of the Ministry to the end of the world,
Matthew. 28. 21. and till the Saints be one perfect man, Ephesians. 4. 11, 14. that
they that should ever after be called, might not expect a voice from Heaven to
their ears, but might be called in Christ's appointed way? And in this way I
have been called by Christ. The Signs of his Call are, 1. My comperent
qualifications. 2. My thirst after the good of souls and the building of that
house of God. 3. The Ordination of authorized Church Officers. 4. The Call and
consent of the people of Christ, over whom he has set me. 5. And afterward
the success of my labors. 6. And some daily assistance of the Spirit in those
labors. 7. And some Testimony of the Spirit to my conscience of Gods
Acceptance. These seven set together are my evidence of mission, show you the
like if you can.

2. Neither Paul not any true Minister is called by the mere will of man, nor
are we the Servants of men; Nor were the Apostles called by men at all, but
immediately by Christ. But all afterward were to be called by Christ, through
the Ordnation of men. Tit. 1. 5. For this end left I thee in Crete, that thou
should ordain Elders in every City:] Act 14. 23. [When they had ordained
them Elders in every Church, etc.] The gift was given Timothy by prophecy with
the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery,] 1 Timothy 4. 14. Paul directs him
whom to make Bishops, 1 Timothy 3. Will not all this suffice you?

Your 21. Qu. is, [Whether had any Ministers of Christan hour-glasse to preach
by, or took a Text, and raised Doctrines, Reasons, Uses, Motives, or a carnal
Bell to call people together by, prove these things by Scripture, or else be
silent, and never profess your selves to be Ministers of Christ more]

Ans. By your patience, I must tell you, that the Conclusion is but your Lordly
ignorant command (such as is joined to many of the other Queries;) Scripture is
Gods Laws, and fa sufficient Rule for Doctrines, and worship it self: But was
never intended to name to you every circumstance that is lawull about that
worship. Has Scripture told you at what place you shall meet, or at what hour?
I tell you again, you speak with no more wisdom then if you should say thus
[Prove that ever man read the Bible with a pair of Spectacles, or that ever
Christ or his Apostles used a printed Bible (when printing was invented but a
while ago) or that ever they used an English Bible (when they wrote in Greek)
or that ever they preached in doublet, breeches, or stockings, or else call
your selves Ministers of Christ no more?] And why so? Because you command us,
and yet tell us your Commission is invisible. These Circumstances are purposely
left by Christ to the determination of humane prudence, as occasions shall
require; and therefore he bids us do all things to edification, and decently,
and in order, 1 Cor. 14. 26. 4. And therefore sure we must discern what is
edifying, decent and orderly; This is plain to them that will see: What, came
the Word of God out from you, or came it unto you only? If any man think
himself to be a Prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that
I write are the Commandments of the Lord; But if any be ignorant let him be
ignorant, 1 Cor. 14. 36, 37, 38.

But I pray you if an hourglasse be unlawful, tell us whether a Clock be
lawful, or a Dial, or a Watch? or whether it be lawful to observe by the Sun
how the time passes? and why one is more unlawful then another?

But your Prater told me, it was a limiting of the Spirit of God; As if I
cannot limit my self and not limit the Spirit? Or as if the Spirit excluded
Reason and Prudence, and set a man's tongue a going, so that he cannot stop it.
Did the Apostles stint the Spirit because they appointed their meetings on the
Lords Day, and did not stay two or three days together? why then may not we
resolve upon an hour as well as they did on a day, For one is limiting as well
as the other. I think if I had your Spirit to liquor my tongue, I should be
angry at the hourglasse, and preach the people of out the place.

And for a Text: 1. Know you not that Christ himself took a Text, Luke 4. and
applied it? Know you not that it was then the common practice of the Church to
read, expound, and apply the Scriptures, as Ezra did? Know you not that there
is Doctrine, Reason, and Use in all the Sermons and Epistles of the Apostles?
Know you not that we are commanded rightly to divide the Word of Truth, as
workmen that need not be ashamed, and to study thereto, 2 Timothy 2. 15. Ah
wretched souls that dare so blindely cavil with the work of God.

For what you say of [a carnal Bell] it is like the rest which I before
answered, not fit for the mouth of a reasonable creature to have mentioned. But
I must tell you that our Bells are not carnal, if they were, they would scarce
sound so well or last so long. If your meaning be, that you would have us
baptize our Bells to make them spiritual as your ghostly Fathers of Rome do, we
will keep our carnal Bells till we know more reason for that practice.

The 23. Qu. is this, [Whether are not they that bear rule by their means, and
seeks for their gain from their quarter, and seeks for the sleece, and makes a
prey upon the people, and are hirelings, be not false Prophets, yea or nay, and
whether such be not to be cried out against now as they were then?]

Answ. To this I have sufficiently answered already to your Brethren in my
other book. Only let me tell you, 1. It is a most certain thing that God
allowed the Priests the Tithes, and much more, when he thus cried out against
them, Dare you deny that? If you dare not, confess then that it was not the
mere taking of Tyches that caused God so to rebuke them. Read but Mal. 2d and
the 3d without Spectacles and then judge. It Is most evident then that the thing
that God condemns was not taking Tithes, but covetous greedy desires after
gain, and neglecting the good of souls and the work of God: And are not we as
willing to cast such out as you are to reproach them? Whether we seek theirs or
them, and whether we are not willing to spend and be spent for the salvation of
our people, we must be tried by a more righteous Judge then you.

Your 23. Qu. is, [Whether do you own trembling and quaking which the Scripture
witnesses?] Ans. I own the fear of the Lord which is the beginning of wisdom,
and think him blessed that fears always, and that he that hardens his
heart shall fall into mischief; But I think that the great Quaking that was in
the Army of the Philistines was no virtue or blessing to them, nor any sign of
God among them, 1 Samuel 14. 15. And I think that Perfect love costeth out fear,
and that those shakings and quakings that come not from the humble sense of sin
or Judgment, or the like, but in violent motions of the body affectedly, are
either Papisticall tricks of deceit, or effects of Fantastical conceit, or the
motions of the great deceiver within you. I read of it as one of Gods curses,
that [The Lord should give them a trembling heart,] Deuteronomy. 28. 65. And I am of
opinion that the curse is fallen upon you which is written, Psa. 69. 23. [Let
their eyes be darkened that they see not, and make their loins continually to
shake.] Gods Kingdom is Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost.

Your 24. and last Qu. is, [Whether do you say you shall be free from the body
of sin while you are on the earth, and whether shall any be perfect yea or nay?]

Ans. I believe that all true Converts are free from the dominion of sin, but
not from the remnants of it; And that our grace is of a perfect kind, as a
small Candle is of a perfect kind of fire, which yet will not enlighten all
the Town or House, nor scatter away all the darkness as the Sun will do; I
believe also that in the instant of death when we part with the flesh, we part
with all the remnants of sin. And for the Doctrine of personal sinlesse
perfection here, I believe the devil, the greatest sinner bred it; the Pharisee
received the foretastes and preparatives to it, the Heretics and Papists first
entertained and cherished it, Christ detesteth it, and never man that knew
himself, or had one spark of true grace and Christian experience, did to this
day heartily believe it of himself. And I think that it is a part of the
Papists dung which they have taught you to feed upon. Christ's Kingdom is an
Hospital, he has no Subjects in it but diseased ones. The Fathers Kingdom
before had perfect Subjects, and so shall it have again when Christ has
perfected us: For when he has perfected us by healing all our diseases and
subduing all our enemies, even the last Enemy Death (at the Resurrection) then
will he give up the Kingdom to the Father. But now, In many things we offend
all, Jam. 3. 2. and there is no man on earth that does good and sins not;
And if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves and the truth is not in us,
therefore the truth is not in you Quakers.

I conclude my Answer with this Question to you; If you think you are perfect
without sin, whether do you also think that you are already in Heaven or
perfect glory? For what can keep the soul from the perfect enjoyment of God,
but sin. And to enjoy God perfectly is to be glorified perfectly: But I
forgot that your Brethren think Heaven and hell is only within men. Perhaps you
look for no more Heaven then you have: And I wonder not at it: For if you did,
in the way you are in, you are no more likely ever to find it then Darkness
is to have communion with light, or Belial with Christ. The Lord give
Repentance unto life, to those of you that have not sinned unto death, and show
you another Heaven before you are out of reach of it, and a further Hell before
you are in it. Though I look for no thanks from you for my charitable desires,
yet you shall have them whether you will or not.

HAving been at this labor at your command to answer your Queries, may I not
in reason expect that you should answer some of mine, which I do but request
and not command: But I desire of you that you will not put me by with
Gumblestool Rhetoric in stead of Answers, but speak considerately, truly, and
to the Point in question. I mean first that you will answer all those Queries
which I have before put to you among my Answers to yours, and then that you
will answer also these twenty Queries following.

Qu. 1. Are they not the very same Ministers which you rail at, and which all
the Drunkards, Swearers, Whoremongers, and sensual wretches in the Country do
hate and rail at as well as you? Are you not then on their side and possessed
with the same Spirit? They despise the Preachers of the Gospel, and would have
them down, and so would you, even the very fame men as they would; When they
had opportunity they raged against them with Swords, and so do you with filthy
tongues: Would not all the covetous, malignant, ungodly Enemies of Piety, have
Tithes down as well as you? What think you? I can witness it of most of my
acquaintance that are such? Moreover, were they not the same sort of Ministers
which the late Bishops silenced, suspended, and otherwise troubled, and which
you revile at? Is it not then the same Spirit by which you and all these were
or are acted? Consider and judge.

Qu. 2. Whether it be not the same Spirit which moves in you and in the
Papists? When the Papists say, that we are no true Ministers of Christ but
deceivers, and teach the Divination of our own brain, and delude souls, and so
say you; The Papists say, Our Congregations are no true Churches, who own us as
their Pastors, and so say the Quakers; The Papists know that the great thing
that must be done before they can feduce the people among us, is first to make
them despise and reject their Teachers, and therefore they bend all their wits
and endeavors to vilify them and draw the hearts of the people from them; And
so do the Quakers. The Papists main error lies in the contempt of the
Scriptures; They say, they will not take it for the Word of God but on the
authority of the Church, and that it is but part of his word; The Quakers say,
It is not the Word of God. The Papists say, It is but a dead Letter, and so do
the Quakers: The Papists say, It is not fit to be the Judge of Controversies,
and so say the Quakers: The Papists prefer the Vulgar Translation before the
same words in Hebrew and Greek which the Spirit did indite the Scriptures in
and so do the Quakers in English. Could the Papists but get down the Regulating
Authority of Scripture, they would think they had won the Field; For they will
not endure that all Spirits should be tried by the written word, no more will
the Quakers. The Papists maintain man's Free Will has power before conversion
to repent and believe, and turn to God, and that it is not only the fruit of
the Spirit in the Elect, and so do the Quakers. The Papists tell men of the
sufficiency of the common-light that is within them, and so do the Quakers. The
Papists say that a man may be perfect without sin in this life, and may fulfill
all Gods Commandments, and so do the Quakers. The Papists make this their
perfection to lie in casting off worldly callings, Emploiments, Relations after
the flesh, and propriety, as their Nuns, Monks, and Hermites do; yea, and in
casting off their old names, as their Pope does when he is made Pope: And so do
many of the Quakers, and much worse, as I have seen in Papers under their own
hands. The Papists place their Righteousness in their own works and
perfection, while they slieght the imputed Righteousness of Christ, and so do
the Quakers. The Papists place this Righteousness of their own Pharisaically
in externals, and things that have a show of wisdom, and humility, and
neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh, as
Touch not, taste not, handle not, which all are to perish with the using, Col.
2. 18, 20, 23. so do the Quakers in stead of preaching the Righteousness of
Christ, call out for a formal Righteousness and perfection of our own,
consisting in such things as these following, to wit that we wear no Points,
nor Cuffs, nor Lace nor any such like, that we preach on the lower places and
not (as Ezra did) in a Pulpit; that we use not an hourglasse to discern how the
time passes (whether a Clock or Watch be as dangerous I know not:) That we say
[Thou] and not [You] to him we speak to (when the word that Christ used
signifies You as well as Thou: That we call not men Masters or women
Mistresses, when the Scripture frequently uses and allows it, and much more:
(though Christ forbid us to have any Sect-Masters or Masters of our Faiths;) In
such like as these does the Quakers Righteousness lie, while they are ignorant
of Christ's Righteousness; And just is it with God that they who set up their
own righteousness against Christ's should be given up to that hellish delusion,
as to take the most Satanical slanders, lies, heresies, and railings, to be
their Righteousness: Were it not tedious and not much necessary, I could show
in many more particulars how the Papists and Quakets do so conspire that we may
well know whence their doctrines and delusions came.

Qu. 3. Whether there were ever greater Monsters of Ingratitude upon the face
of the earth then these are, who set their hearts and tongues against those
Ministers of Christ that lay out themselves for the saving of souls, through
all the scorns and opposition of all sorts of wicked men, with whom these
wretches join against them? Yea, and make their very study and labor their
crime, when it were much easier for us to preach without study, and that I hope
with somewhat more truth, sense, and order then they that so boast of the
Spirit.

Qu. 4. Were not those faithful Servants of God that suffered Martyrdom under
Heathen and Arian Persecutors, just such Ministers as these men do now vilify;
or wherein was the difference? And do not these wretches justify their
murderers?

Qu. 5. Are not the Ministers whom these men despise, of the same calling and
practice as those were that suffered death in the Flames in Q. Mary's days?
Such as Bradford, Hooper, Latimer, Ridly, Cranmer, Saunders, Philpot, and the
rest; Were not these called Masters? Did they not preach in Pulpits, and take
Tithes or money for preaching as their due maintenance, and the other things
that the Quakers accuse us for? And do not these men justify the bloody
opposers of them, and condemn Gods Saints afresh?

Qu. 6. Whether ever the earth bore men that did more proudly despise others in
comparison of themselves? and whether their language savor of the Spirit of
the Lamb of God? Or can he have any taste of that Spirit of Christ in himself
that does not even feel that their proud and railing language is of the devil?

Qu. 7. Was there ever a generation known on the earth, that did more
arrogantly step up into the Throne of God, and censure his Servants, whose
faces they never saw, and whom they can charge with nothing but being Preachers
of the Gospel, and that in a Pulpit, having an hourglasse, taking Tithes, etc.
to be Ministers of the devil, sons of perdition, with much of the like. Though
Christ has said, Judge not that ye be not judged, and who art thou that
judge another man's Servant? To his own Master he stands or falls.

Qu. 8. Was there ever a Generation of men on whom the Image of the devil was
more visible then on these? He is the Prince of darkness, pride and malice;
And the depth of Ignorance and height of pride and malice breaks out so
abundantly in their carriage and discourse, that all not utterly blinded may
see it. It is the work of the devil to be the Accuser of the Brethren; and so
it is the very Religion and business of these wretches to accuse Ministers and
godly people to be hypocrites, Liars, children of the devil, Serpents, Vipers,
with much the like.

Qu. 9 Is it no kin to the blaspheming of the holy Ghost for such wretches,
when they have powered out the most horrid lies, slanders, Railings, and false
doctrines, to profess solemnly that all this is from the Spirit of Christ
within them, and make God and his holy Spirit the Author and Patron of all.

Qu. 10. Can that man that has one spark of grace believe that he has no sin?
Can he have so little knowledge of himself? And consequently of the need he
has of the Physician? Dare you say to Christ, we will not be beholden to thee
for thy blood to wash us any more, or to thy Intercession to pard on us any
more? Do you not believe that In many things we offend all, Jam. 3. 2. If we
say that we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us? If
we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness: If we say that we have not sinned, we
make hem a liar, and his Word is not in us, 1 John 1. 8, 9. 10. Are not all
Christ's Disciples taught daily to pray [Forgive us our trespasses.] For my
part, I am one that is sick and have need of the Physician, and dare not tell
God that I will ask him pardon for no more sins, nor be beholden to him for any
more. But O what a power has the deceiver with these wretches, that in the
midst of their horrid railing, flandring, and other wickedness, will stand to
it that they have no sin; Just like the Swearer that will swear he never swore
an Oath; Or the Drunkard that will swear he was never drunk, when he lies
drunk in the Channel. Solomon says, There is not a just man upon earth that
does good and sins not, Eccles. 7. 20. and these Quakers that Pharisaically
and Papistically justify themselves do give him the Lie.

Qu. 11. Whether those that deny Scripture to be Gods Word as these Quakers do,
and deny that there is any such Person as Jesus Christ who suffered at
Jerusalem; now glorified in heaven in the humane nature, and only call somewhat
within themselves by the Name of Christ, I say, whether these are not
abominable Infidels, having nothing to do with the name of Christians?

Q. 12. Is it not damnable Hypocrisy in these wretches, to prate so much of
Scripture, and call for Scripture, while they thus deny it to be Gods Word?

Qu. 13. Is it not damnable hypocrisy in them to call themselves Christians,
when they are Infidels, and deny the person of Jesus Christ crucified to be in
heaven?

Qu. 14. Is not he a Pagan and no Christian that thinks that the light which is
in all the Indians, Americans, and other Pagans on earth, is sufficient without
Scripture?

Qu. 15. Was that light in Paul which persuaded him that he ought to do many
things against the name of Jesus, sufficient to convert him to the Faith of
Jesus? Or did Christ give him needlessly a light from heaven, and by Ananias his
doctrine? O^ had Con^lius sufficient light within him before Peter preached to
him? Or had all the world sufficient light within them before Christ sent
abroad his Apostles to preach the Gospel to them? Or did Christ send them a
needless light by his Apostles? Have those Persecutors sufficient light within
them to cause them to believe in Christ, who think they do God service in
killing or reproaching his Ministers and people?

Qu. 16. If all have sufficient light within them, what need you go up and down
to teach or persuade them? Is it needless light that you bring then, or is i^
hellish darkness?

Qu. 17. Is it not a most sottish trick of you to go up and down prating and
commanding, and yet refuse to show your Commission from God? And to call
Ministers to show theirs, and refuse to show your own, but say it is invisible
within you: are you so mad as to expect any should belive an invisible and
indemonstrable Commssion. And might not we as well tell you ours is invisible
(but that indeeed it is not;) Or should we believe every one that prates of a
Commission within him or no; If not, why should we belive you more then others
that say the like?

Qu. 18. Seeing you cry down our Ministry and Churches, tell us which is the
true Ministry and Church, and when yours begun, and where it has been since
Christ's abode on earth till now? Speak plainly and let us know whether you are
indeed Papists or Pagans?

Qu. 19. Is not that man an Infidel and a Scorner of Christ, that date say, he
came into the world and shed his blood, to gather only a few raging Quakers in
England 1652 years after his Incarnation? If Christ have no Subjects but these
he is a poor King; If Christ have been till now without Subjects, he was no
King; If without a Body, he was no Head; If without a spouse, he was no
Husband; Therefore show us what Church Christ has had, or confess your selves
Infidels.

Qu. 20. Did not the Spirit of the Quakers speak in Number. 16. 3. just as you do
now against Magistrates and Ministers? And is not God very patient that causes
not the earth to open and swallow you up quick as it did them? Do you
understand that the Simonians (or Disciples of Simon Magus) and the
Nicolaitans, whose doctrine and deeds Christ hates, Rev. 2. and other Gnostick
Heretics in the Apostles days, did deal by them, and the Church then as you
do by us now? and that the second Epistle of Peter, the Epistle of Jude, much
of 1 John and 2 John were written purposly against them; besides many other
Scriptures? And have you well considered those Scriptures, and applied them to
your selves.

When you have answered these Questions, I require you to have no more to do
with me nor any of this Church. For we renounce you as Heretics after a first
and second Admonition, and will have no fellowship with such self-condemned
persons, nor receive you into our houses, or bid you God speed, lest we partake
of your wicked deeds, Tit. 3. 10. 2 Ioh. 10, 11.

Kederminster. March 28. 1655. Richard Baxter.

FINIS.

