A REPLY TO Mr. Tho. Beverley's Answer TO MY REASONS Against his Doctrine of
the Thousand Years Middle Kingdom, and of the Conversion of the Jews.

By Richard Baxter, passing to that World where we shall see face to face. Feb.
20. 1691.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside,
near Mercers Chapel. 1690/1.

AD page 1. You say very well against catching at words, and surmising strange
Opinions: But if an excellent Divine will speak strange and dangerous words,
the Reader must have an Antidote, and it is time enough to forgive the Writer
when he confesses the Error of his words. He that speaks ill, and means
well, should keep his meaning to himself till he can and will intelligibly
express it.

To your page 2. He were malignant that would not acknowledge your Candor: And
it is an encouragement to us that differ from you, that you believe our part in
that Kingdom which it is not given us yet to see. And as you profess your
patient bearing of Contradictions, we should love each other the more for our
likeness. Though I am noted to have too sharp a reproving style, I do profess
that I can bear more than I use; yea, that I love Reproof and my Reprovers.

To your page 3. And your confidence of your right Interpretation of
Prophecies, and of the blessed 1697 year, I say but 1. As Jeremiah to the
Prophets of his time -- Amen. My wishes accompany you further than my belief
(but not to the unhappy end of your New Earth.) 2. And I know how natural it is
for every man to be over-confident of his conceptions, and his way to be right
in his own Eyes.

To your page 4. The description of your Conformity, and recesses from it, is
very modest and discreet. I named you not among Conformists as an Accuser, but
as excusing the Nonconformists, to whom your Millenary Opinion is by
unrighteous men imputed, whiles it is Conformists that are its strongest
Pillars.

But if it be not the Sacred Office that you disclaim, but the bare name (...),
are not those Officers Christ's more special (...), though the Laity also are
his common Lot. You love not, I hope, Controversies about mere names and words:
But if you do, let Acts 1. 17. silence you, (...), yet Judas was not chosen by
Lot as Matthias was.

Though I know not what you mean by [setting up that in Kingdom counterfeit] nor
how men should understand that by [Semi-Sadduces of the Apostacy] you meant no
body, but an Abstract Thing; yet I understand and accept your Retractation.

Page 5. Your [bold avouching] speaks your confidence, but is no help to
convince another, that a Kingdom of One day (1000 years) ascribed to Christ,
does honor him more than an Endless Kingdom of Glory after two thousand (or
six thousand) years Kingdom of Grace.

2. I thank you for disclaiming the Doctrines which your words did favor: And
entreat you that are so accurate in Prophecy, hereafter to be more accurate in
your words, and to speak as you think, and as you would have others think, that
understand words according to common usage.

Page 6. Of your commendations of Dr. Crispe's Book, I think soill, that I have
written a proper Answer to you about it, but stop the publishing of it, because
I find you so ready to retract. But I confess your commending to the World, a
Book so contrary to Christianity it self, does much abate my reverence to your
confidence in Prophecy.

If such as Dr. Crispe and you have no safer and sounder words to Preach
Justification and Grace by, than to tell men how bad it is to think that sin
can possibly do them any hurt, or duty, or any thing they can do (Faith, Hope,
Love, Obedience) do them any good, and to tell them that Christ is the greatest
hater of God, Murderer, Adulterer, etc. in the World, and that not only the
punishment (and guilt of punishment) but the very sins themselves of all the
Elect are Christ's own sins; and that if men commit Murder, Adultery, Perjury,
Treason, it is none of their sin but Christ's, for it cannot be Christ's and
theirs too; they are for all the acts, no Murderers, no Adulterers, no
Traitors, no Haters of God, etc. I say, if this be your excellent Preaching of
Christ and his Kingdom, I shall not admire your Doctrine of the Kingdom; nor
wonder if more of this Doctor's Disciples be like that one, that would come
drunk and kneel to prayer in in his Family, and cry, [Lord, all our
righteousness is not worth twopence, no, Lord, it is not worth a halfpenny.]
And I hope hereafter you will speak more intelligibly of our Justification only
by God's Essential Righteousness.

To page 7, 8. The Kingdom of Grace, which you confess in not another, but the
same that extends to the endless Kingdom of Glory, by degrees destroying Sin
and Curse, and putting down Enemies, and by the Triumphant appearing of Christ
at the Resurrection finishing the Reign of Deliverance, Conquest and
Acquisition, and entering on the Reign of his Reward and glorious Fruition:
There being in Scripture no mention that I can find of any Thousand years
between these two.

I come to your four professed Differences.

I. That there is, besides all the Kingly State of Christ wherein we are
agreed, a distinct Kingdom of Jesus Christ as the great Son of Man, to the
highest Noon tide Glory of which God has assigned a Thousand years: And when
it has utterly subdued all Enemies, it is to be delivered up to God, and the
Father, and the Son, to be subject in that very sense.

Ans. I have recited all your words, that I may be sure that I leave not out
the specific difference: But what it is I am never the wiser, nor know by
these words. I had the unhappiness from my Youth to be inclined to strict
definition and distinction, and accurate Logical Explications, and to abhor
confused Harangues; and therefore the (now despised) Schoolmen were my pleasant
study, next to the Bible and practical Divinity. But now I have lived to see
that kind of study and disputing derided, (which is far easier than learned)
and to hear Disputes about Terms unexplained; and the Question debated in the
beginning, and scarce stated in the end.

Which of these words specify the middle Kingdom from the former and the
latter? Or must it be none of the particulars, but all connext?

1. Is it the word [distinct?] That Is but to beg the Question, which is,
whether there be any middle distinct Kingdom? And it tells us not what it is. A
distinction in the exercise of administration between the beginning and
resignation we are agreed of.

2. Is the difference in the word [The Great Son of Man?] Is he not the Great
Son of Man before and after?

3. Is it in [the highest Noontide Glory?] Will it be greater than the Glory
after the Thousand years?

4. Is it in the time of [1000 years?] Is the time the species of the Kingdom?
And is a Thousand years better than everlasting?

5. Is it in [the subduing of all Enemies] Mean you in fieri, or in facto esse?
If the first, Is he not subduing them now? Does he not subdue them in every
sanctisied Soul? and did he not subdue the Grand Pagan Roman Empire, etc. If
you mean in facto esse, as consummate, then what needs a Thousand years to do
it, when the Resurrection is the finishing of it?

6. Is the delivering up to the Father, the specifying form? then it is not in
being till it is past being. How can it be delivered up before it is in being?
And then the previous Kingdom of Acquisition and Conquest is the same, for that
is delivered to the Father.

7. Is it [the Son's being subject in that very sense?] Little know I what you
mean by [that very sense] But I know that the Son as Man was, and will be
subject: In the former and the everlasting Kingdom. And so here is not one
syllable of the specific difference, but a harangue of words.

As to the Taking of God's Name in vain, I beseech you to fear it. To father a
falsehood on God is dangerous. Suspension is safer, where you say that to
diminish is equally dangerous.] Therefore I do it not: I do not say, that God
tells us that there is no such Millenary Kingdom; but only that I can find no
proof of any such, and therefore tell you what hinders me from your confident
Opinion.

To page 10. It Is very true that you say, that there is needful a comprehensive
knowledge of the whole frame of Prophecy and Chronology to a clear Judgment of
many hard points: But not to the suspension of Judgment, nor to the confutation
of every Error.

And I believe that you have studied Chronology, and Daniel and Ezekiel more
than I have done: But should I enter into a dispute with your pretended
Scripture Chronology, and object against you, all that I find in Usher,
Helvicus, Petavius, Beroaldus, Jos. Scaliger, Carrion, Bucholzer, Functius,
Gutberleth, Micrelius, Mr. Talents, etc. how endless would be the dispute? And
yet must your Chronology and all its consequents be taken for granted Truths?

3. You truly say, that our Infancy, that needs to be fed with Milk, makes us
less capable of these Mysteries. The Lord pity and teach us. But I must say,
that the Ministers and People that have most need of Milk, (but least feel
their need) are most inclined to your Opinion in this point; excepting a few
Learned men (Mr. Mead, and Dr. Twisse, and Dr. Moore, etc.) whom he overcame.

Ad page 11. 1. Call it a distinct Kingdom, or a distinct part of the
administration, as you please, we grant that the glorious appearance of Christ
to Judgment is distinct from his invisible Reign in Heaven. As the Assizes is a
distinct exercise of Judicature, and as Triumph is distinct from Conquest. As
it is the Triumphant end of Christ's Conquests, and the beginning of his
Rewarding Kingdom of Glory, it is often spoken of in Scripture. But of what more
I expect your proof.

But here you pretend a description of this Kingdom; but no other than before,
sine differentid specificd.

1. It is a Supreme Economy; and was not that before and after Supreme?

2. It was toward the Family in Heaven and Earth.] So was that before and
after.

3. It was in the fullness of all times.] Sure then it was after your Thousand
years.

4. It was by the Great Son of Man and Lamb.] So it was before and will be
after.

5. The Humanity shall have a Glory singular to it self, as it had a
Humiliation.] True, but not divided from the Godhead; and so it had before, and
will have to eternity, as you confess.

Is this Elucidation, or an informing way of an Instructor?

But you say, The Rainbow is a symbol of it. This is obscure Information, I
like not your name of [it's Glory distinct and distant from the Sun.] The Glory
of Christ's Humanity is distinct, but not distant from the Deity; and it is as
near before and after, and as glorious as you can justly imagine it to be in
the Thousand years.

Page 12. A Kingdom confined to a Thousand years you affirm indeed, but without
a word of proof. 2. You add seventy five years and some time after the
Thousand, I would you had deigned to tell us what you mean by its [Succession]
and what by its [Investiture] whether the Succession be before or after the
Conflagration, and any part of the Kingdom: Or if only a preparation what that
Church State of preparation is?

Page 13. Gog and Magog you say, [Are Satan and all the wicked, that had been
Raised to lie at the footstool of Christ from the very beginning of the
Thousand years] being loosed, Take to make a bold attempt on the holy City to
draw it to defection.] Is this Christ's Gospel or yours?

Qu. 1. Are these dead raised men invisible bodies, or only as Devils invisible
spirits, or in bodies invisible?

Qu. 2. Rev. 20. says, that Satan deceives the Nations, to gather them
against the holy City: But if they were Devils themselves that do it as other
Devils in malice, what need they a Satan to deceive them?

Qu. 3. Rev. 20. says, They were the Nations that were in the Earth: Were all
the dead wicked raised, dwellers on Earth in the Thousand years?

Qu. 4. If they had bodies, where will there be room on Earth for all the
wicked since Cain till the end, to dwell there all at once?

Qu. 5. And would there be room for them all so near the holy City?

Qu. 6. When the Text says, Satan deceived them to gather them to Battle; why
turn you [Battle] to [drawing the City to defection?]

Q. 7. Where were all these Dead Raised men when the Earth was on fire? If, in
another World, how come they after to be dwellers in the New Paradise Earth? If
they were on Earth, were they raised before, or in, or after the burning? And
how escaped their new bodies? The Paradise Saints have bodies of flesh,
passible, and such as must have food: Sure all the raised wicked have not
bodies less sensible, patible, or that need less food.

Qu. 8. Is not the New City and Earth after a Thousand years experience, worse
than weak Christians are now? If by known Devils, and condemned wicked ones of
all Ages raised, they will be drawn from Christ, after a Thousand years
Miracles?

Q. 9. What becomes of the bodies of all the wicked that are found alive at
the Conflagration? Do they escape out of the fire also as the Saints do? And
does the New Earth at once hold all the Saints that were alive, and all the
wicked alive, and all the wicked dead from Cain's time?

Qu. 10. And is that the New Earth wherein dwells Righteousness, that has so
many wicked?

Qu. 11. If Grace cannot now be lost, will not Christ then keep his Paradise
Saints?

Qu. 12. Or if the New Earth fall away, did not the holy City consist most of
Hypocrites? and is that the Glory of it? We are now in surer keeping than Adam
and the fallen Angels were. None shall take us out of Christ's hands.

Qu. 13. Does not this leave us to fear that those in the New Heaven also may
fall away as the Angels did?

Qu. 14. For will there not (after the Seventy five years preparation) be as
good people found on Earth, as those that died before? Why then think you that
those alive shall be set so far below the rest, as to have but an earthly
generating life, when the rest are in Heaven? And Christ says, The last shall
be first, and the first last.

Qu. 15. Why say you that the Laodicean Apostasy is no greater a wonder than
Adams and the Angels? Is the New World in no better a state? Then the New
Jerusalem may become Devils.

Qu. 16. You say, Christ being to put an end to a Church State on Earth, may
suffer so just an occasion for spewing out of his mouth.] But do you honor or
dishonor the Glorious Kingdom, to feign it to have such an end? That lasting
but one day (a Thousand years) it should end in being spewed out for ever?

Qu. 17. What Word of God have you for your Opinion, that there shall never
more be an Earth, or a Church on Earth? And that God who is delighted in his
wondrous works, will have none of these Worlds, from eternity to eternity, but
only for seven days (seven Thousand years?)

Qu. 18. Peter tells us of the burning of the Earth, but not of the ending of
it: How come you to know so much more than he ever intimated or seemed to know?

Qu. 19. To say that Heaven and Earth have so unhappy an end, does it not tempt
men to Manicheising, to think that an ill God made this world?

Qu. 20. Did not something within you reluctate when you cited 2 Pet. 3. for
the Thousand years duration of the Kingdom?. As if you argued [Peter tells the
unbelievers, Delay of Christ's coming should not make you think that he will
not come: For a Thousand years delay is with God but as a year: Ergo his
Kingdom will be but a Thousand years.] Is this to expound Prophecy?

Qu. 21. Is it more faulty in a Plato, Zeno, or other Pagans to conjecture at
Transmigrations of Souls, revolutions of Worlds, or with Aristotle, to think
the World was an eternal Effect of an eternal Cause: Or for a Christian to say,
Thus says the Lord, and pawn God's Word for his erroneous conjectures.

Your Arguments are too long and loose for any Mood, and Figure, or Reason.

Arg. I. King of Kings is a Title fit for a great Kingdom, etc. What then? Ergo
it proves a Middle Kingdom between that of Recovering Grace, and Resurrection
Glory.) I deny the consequence; no Kingdom is fitter for those Titles than that
of Grace and final Glory. This is not proving.

It Is false that Christ has not yet been an Universal Monarch.

Page 15. Your 2d Argument (as the rest) is but a repeating of your own
formally confuted Opinions, without any reply to the Confutation, as if you had
nothing to do, but assert again what you think.

1 Cor. 15. 24. Is your proof, Then comes the end? And is the Thousand years
the end, and not the Glorious Kingdom of fruition? Judgment will end by Triumph
the Kingdom of Acquisition: But the eternal Kingdom will be the last.

2. Your denial of a Distinct Glory of Christ's Humanity before and after the
Thousand years, is certainly untrue. If the Divine and Humane Nature be
distinct, the Glory of each must needs be distinct, though not divided. Why
obtrude you gross things unproved?

3. Your intimation that [God does then begin to be All in All, and Christ to
be Subject, in some special sense, has no proof from the Text, nor if proved
is it any thing for your purpose.

1. The Text speaks of no such beginning: But that though Christ has done his
Conquering work, yet still God shall be All in All things, as he was.

2. Yet we grant that it speaks of Christ's ending his Kingdom of Conquest and
Acquisition, and the Deity now Governing Man as restored, not needing any more
recovery. I often tell you, as the King's Son made General to reduce Rebels,
gives up his Generalship when he has reduced them, but has after the
promised honor and reward, but as a Subject still, and not a Captain.

Page 16. You say, that our Exposition charge on the Apostle [Impropriety of
speech] but you do but say so, and we deny it. Is it not proper speech to say,
that a General gives up his Office, and yet remains an honored, rewarded
Subject Ruler?] Indeed, had it been as you feign it, said [to become subject]
it would have seemed to signify, that he then began to be subject: But that is
your addition; and yet you before confessed that he was subject before.

2. I told you Distinguishing is not Separating. And I told you wherein the
difference consists, which you confute not.

3. To your 2d Reason, I find no such Scripture as you talk of, that mentions
any middle Kingdom, but a Triumphant Judgment perfecting the Kingdom of Grace,
and beginning that of Endless Glory. The admirable agreement which you mention
seems to me to be but an agreement of your conceit.

Your 3d Argument from Luke 22. 29, 30. says nothing of a third Kingdom: All
that is there said seems to me fulfilled without a third.

Page 17. Is not that you plead for [of the Humane Nature as united to the
Eternal Word?] How can it else be any Kingdom of Christ? But both that of Grace
and Glory are such; but not without the Relation of Mediatorship. By
[Constituted] I suppose you mean, not essential to the nature or person,
without respect to the Office as the product of God's Will: And such is the
Everlasting Kingdom. It is the Reign of the Man Jesus united to the Godhead, as
Mediator of Acquisition first, and then of Fruition, and this over creatures. I
fear it is dangerously untrue therefore that you say, That the Kingdom of the
Humane Nature is united to the Eternal Word, and communicating with it, is an
Essential, and not a Constitutive Kingdom.

Essential to what? Is the Humane Nature, and a World of Creatures essential to
God? It is essential to it self; that is, it is what it is. But can you prove
that the Humane Nature was, or shall ever be united to the Deity, without its
Relation of Mediator? It is Christ's will, that those given him be with him,
and see his Glory: And that sight is of the Mediator of Fruition; and did he
limit that sight to a Thousand years?

To your 2d. 1. You have not proved that the Apostles yet sit not on Thrones of
Judgment: They are equal with Angels.

2. If yet they do not, may it not be at Judgment, and in the Kingdom of Glory?

3. The Title of [His Kingdom, and eating and drinking] are as fully answered
without the middle Kingdom as with it; unless you can prove that those Apostles
with Christ, shall dwell, and eat and drink a Thousand years on Earth, in their
spiritual bodies, or have a middle sort of bodies for that middle Kingdom; and
had they not better before, and must they lay those by for worse?

Arg. 4. You know we deny not that Christ's Throne is distinguished from his
Fathers: You cite the Text, Rev. 3. 21. [He overcame and is set down] and
expounded it [He knew he should sit, but was not yet set down] not indeed in
the Throne of Triumph and of Glory, till he overcame.]

You say, [It cannot be a Throne he has yet] what! when it is said, He is set
down on it?] But Saints must sit with him, you say: And may not he sit down
before them? Must he stay till every Saint be with him?

You say again, It cannot be the Throne of Eternity, because the Son is
subject, and has not a distinct Throne, etc.

Ans. If you mean by the Throne of Eternity] a Kingdom from Eternity: There
could be no such thing, unless there were Eternal Subjects. If you mean only
[To Eternity] the Son will have a distinct, but not a separate Throne, though not
distinct Subjects. For he shall subordinately have all power in Heaven and
Earth.

P. 18. Arg. 5. Mat. 20. 20. You say, This is not the Kingdom of the Eternal
Word. Ans. Then it can be no Kingdom of Christ.

You say, [There is no sitting on the right hand or left.] Ans. Nor no Subjects
from Eternity, unless the World be eternal. But to Eternity there is.

You say, He that sits on the left hand, must sit next the Father. Ans. This is
your way of arguing by Allegories? You are not an Anthropomorphite: You know
that by God's right hand, is but to be next him in Power, subordinate. And may
not others be next to Christ?

Arg. 6. You say is from innumerable Scriptures: Mat. 19. 27. is before spoken
to; who doubts but the Throne of his Glory was future. Mat. 25. 31. confuteth
you. You say, It Is not to be till all be gathered before hi^ to Judgment. Ans.
Therefore not a Thousand years before those alive be gathered before him to
Judgment. Christ speaks of coming to Judge all (not some) to everlasting life
or punishment; but nothing of a Thousand years.

Page 19. 2 Timothy 4. 1. We doubt not of his Judgment or Kingdom: But what word
is here for a middle Kingdom?

Luke 19. 11. Christ went to receive a Kingdom; and did he receive none till
his return at the Resurrection? what can be plainer against you: He ascended to
be presently possessed of a greater Possession of Power: All Power in Heaven and
Earth was given him before his Return.

You say, This is not the State of the Kingdom where God shall be All in All.
Ans. These are but your own words often answered and confuted.

From Mat. 16. 26, 27. One would think that it should be a good Argument that
Christ shall have one Kingdom, that was first obscured by flesh's weakness,
after come in visible Power to Judgment, and pass into Glory, because some then
alive should see the pledge and appearance of it. But you hence gather, that
because men shall see the appearance of his heavenly Glorious Reign, therefore
he shall have none of that Reign in the Kingdom of Grace or Endless Glory, but
in a third and middle Kingdom; such Collections expound your self, more than
the Text.

As soon as Christ ascended to Heaven, he was possessed of the Kingdom of Power,
seen in the Mount, and not only at the Millennium.

P. 20. Arg. 6. You fetch your most conclusive Argument from the one single
note by which the Spirit of God has fixed the beginning of this Kingdom, that
is, The subduing of Enemies] where your fantasy makes two degrees. 1. The
making of Christ's Enemies his footstool. And 2. Putting them Low under his
feet. As if his footstool were not low and under his feet. Can you prove that
Scripture means this as two States, and that at 1000 years distance? Yes, you
say the second is to bring them to the state of no motion or action: And yet
are they haters of God, and have they a self-tormenting Conscience, and when
loosed are Gog and Magog; and assault the holy City; and yet have no motion or
action? I suppose that in your next you will say you meant well, and not that
they were made dead blocks or annihilated; but you should speak as you think,
or say that you think as you speak. It will comfort the wicked to hope that
they shall have only the punishment of Loss as dead insensible carcasses. You
have many passages of this sound.

Page 21. You grossly pervert Psalm. 110. 1. God says not, Sit thou without
Reigning at my right hand, till I all at once, or at the last make thine
Enemies thy footstool. He says not, Sit without Reigning, and Reign only at
thy last coming: But sit next me in Ruling dignity while I am making thine
Enemies thy footstool, which at last shall be perfected: What word says as
you; I intend thee a Great and distinct Kingdom (of one days length) the date
of its beginning shall not be at thy Ascension, etc?] Did not God make the
Pagan Empire his footstool, and subdue Sin and Satan, till the day of Judgment?
It is enough that all will be then finished and the Kingdom of Glory begun. [He
sits and does not Reign] is your fiction against full Scripture.

Heb. 2. 5. We see them not put under him] can mean but [We see not that
subjection perfected.] But we do see them put under him in a great degree. The
Lord reigns; Let the people rejoice. The Kingdoms of the World are made the
Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ before the day of Judgment.

If we see not all things put under him, do we see nothing so put? When
Judgment puts all things under him, what need a Thousand years do it?

The page 22d is but the repetition of what is often answered.

P. 23. It Is a great disparagement to your Cause, to lay your chief stress on
this Text: As if it were not fulfilled by Christ many 100 or 1000 years
treading down Sin, Satan, and Empire of Enemies, and triumphing over them at
his Glorious appearing, and Reigning for ever for that Conquest in Glory,
unless he be a Thousand years more between in Coquering them.

As to 2 Pet. 3. 7. I asked you before whether you feel no reluctance in so
gross an abuse of that Text that speaks of 1000 delay being before Christ's
coming, as if it spoke of 1000 years after. Pardon the Question: The Cause
requires it.

P. 34. You have but one Text in all the Bible that speaks of 1000 years to
give you the least show of Countenance; and that in Prophetic Language: And
can you not stay on the mentioning of it? What else should all your Book have
been, but your clearing of this one Text? You promise to prove abundantly that
it cannot possibly be understood of any time past: But I see no hope of your
performance.

I once more entreat the Reader to read John Fox his Oath of what God from
Heaven revealed to him to the contrary Martyrol. Vol. I. p. 111. and in his
Lat. Expos. of the Revelations, even that John Fox who was no Papist, and
thought Prophetical, when. he told Mrs. Honiwood despairing in Melancholy how
she should recover and live to be old, when in unbelief she threw a Glass to
the Wall or Ground, and took it up whole, and fulfilled his Prophecy.

But you have fitted the rest of your Exposition of the Revelations to your
Exposition of the 1000 years, and then you think that fitness proves all your
Point But if I show that all these Texts were performed on Pagan Rome, it is
not your finding Papal Rome to be like it, that will justify your sense.

It were an impertinent work to show here that the Revelation has a far
different sense, from what you give it.

Page 27. Your 2d Point therefore is of another Controversy, which this in
hand depends not on; unless you confess that you have no other proof of the
Thousand years Kingdom, but Rev. 20. and that it was not fulfilled heretofore.
I am past doubt that Pagan Rome was Babylon mentioned in Rev. But whether Papal
Rome be another Babylon, I leave to enquiry: But if all your Cause lie on that
one Text, I think it has no good foundation. Many Expositors think those
Thousand years long ago past, as well as John Fox, Grotius and Hammond. I am
sure they are before the War of Gog and Magog, and you must say more yet before
you can make me believe that this is another World, by all the wicked dead and
raised.

I have by me an Answer to all your Arguments on this Subject, and more, not
here to be repeated. Though your confidence by the advantage of prejudice, may
seem to many to justify all your heavy charges on the (true) Opinion, that the
Thousand years there mentioned are past.

Page 38. I find all assertive, and the repetition of what you have formerly
said, without true Argument or Answer.

Arg. 1. Is it not the Eternal Word in our Nature, Mediator, that is the Son of
Man, and Christ our Lord? What a distinction is here!

Arg. 2. Isa. 66 speaks of the Carcasses of the Syrians.

The Saints shall to Eternity be united to Christ in our Nature.

Arg. 3. I am sorry that a third time you so abuse Peter's Thousand years
against the plain Text.

Page 39. Arg. 4. The New Heaven and Earth is chap. 21. mentioned as after Gog
and Magog's destruction, and the time of Judgment: And you make it 1000 years
before. If it was before, it rather seems to mean the New State of the Church
as prefiguring the heavenly Glory.

Assert. 2. Arg. 1. The kingdom of Christ shall never cease as Glorious in
Fruition, but only as Victorious in Acquisition.

Arg. 2. 1. The Text speaks of the Old Earth and Heaven flying away, and you
feign it to speak of the New. 2. New and Old, and all things are in the Divine
Immensity: How then does that make the difference? 3. That no other shall
succeed, is but your word, if you had proved that it is the New that fly away.

Arg. 3. Is but repetition. I believe you not that there shall be no use of a
Material Heaven and Earth: Nor that the Humane Nature of Christ shall not be
the Object that Saints shall look upon, and yet shall be the Medium of
Conveyance. Does not Christ say, It is his will that we shall be with him to
see his Glory? Shall it not be an Object, if a Medium? Let us not feign our
selves higher than God has promised. If we be not the bighest creatures, why
should we think that we have not need of higher? Is all our promised Comfort in
Communion with the Angels, Saints, and Christ's Humanity objectively confined
to a Thousand years?

Page 41. Obs. 1. How prove you that God's everlasting Communication to Humane
Nature is not as free as the rest, seeing he freely created and continues
Humane Nature?

2. Is not all Time in Eternity? And does all Time end before all temporary
creatures end? You may as well call one an Economy as the other.

Page 42. Is there no Glory to Eternity but what is from Eternity? Then either
Christ's Humane Nature, and all his Saints were from Eternity, or else they
will not be to Eternity.

Arg. 4. That there shall be no use of the New Heaven or Earth for Saints of
the first Resurrection above, seems contrary to the whole scope of Scriptures.

Christ's Humane Nature and ours, had no Glory with the Father before any World
began. For that which existed not had no Glory.

Page 43. Propos. 3. The spiritual heavenly Bodies will be apparent for ever;
shall they not know and be known even as face to face?

Prop. 4. You answer not what is said to prove that there is no Thousand years
between the Changing and the taking up.

Your Reasons are formerly answered.

Page 44. Prop. 5. Lot was carried out of Sodom, but you hold that the Living
shall be in the fire, and not caught out: That they shall be in it unburnt, you
do not prove. Peter does not speak of keeping them in the fire unburnt.

Page 45. If the Saints changed are to be numbered with the Children of the
Resurrection, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage. And you say, They
both make but one New Jerusalem.

Prop. 7. Tell us your proof of three or four sorts of our Bodies: That the
Earthly Body shall be turned into a Paradise Body, and that into a Spiritual
Body, if not that also into a supercelestial.

Prop. 8. I have proved that the taking up is at the sound of the Trumpet,
which is the time of the Resurrection.

Page 46. If all be One Resurrection, then those in Paradise are Children of
the Resurrection, and marry not.

Point 4. Of the Jews Restoration, you are pleased to leave almost all
unanswered that I brought against you, and so discharge me from any Reply:
Though you say, that your words answer all material Objections, being
themselves what I did before invalidate.

In the conclusion to all my former Questions, I desire your Answer to these
few more added;

Q. 1. Seeing page 5. Tou dare not think of any World before that, Genesis 1. nor
after the Kingdom given up, etc. what mean you by the Eternal Kingdom, when
there are no Eternal Subjects?

Q. 2. If it be all the wicked that died before the Trumpet, that are Raised,
and after assault the New Jerusalem, have they not mostly been bound many
Thousand years already, in that they assault us no more, unless you take them
to be the Devils that tempt us?

Q. 3. Will their punishment all the Thousand years be so easy as to allow
them to cover the Earth and sight against the Saints? and will it no more
convince them?

Q. 4. What became of their Bodies in the Conflagration?

Q. 5. And of the Bodies of all the living wicked?

Q. 6. And of their Souls that lived then in wickedness?

Q. 7. Seeing you take Philadelphia to be the New Earth in its purity, before
its fall, can you believe that in that World, there is but a little strength,
and that there is a Synagogue of Satan called Jews, that must come and worship
before their feet? And that Philadelphia after the fire, is yet to be kept from
an hour of temptation that shall come on all the World, to try them that dwell
on the Earth?

Q 8. Does the New Paradise World hear, Behold I come quickly hold fast, etc
after Christ is come?

Q. 9. Seeing Laodicea is also with you the New Earth and Paradise State, is
that indeed a Changed State, and World of Righteousness in which the New
Jerusalem is neither hot nor cold, and to be spewed out, and is wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, and knows it not, but says, I
want nothing, and is yet counseled to buy, and cover her shame, etc. Is that
World no better than so?

Q. 10. Does God reward all men according to their works, if the Best Saints
found alive are for a thousand years in no better a World, and the Worst Saints
that were dead since Abel till Christ's coming, are in a spiritual higher Body
and Region all that Thousand years? Is this God's Word?

Q. 11. Did any of the Asian Churches, or any Christians for 1300 years at
least (or 1500) believe that the five first Epistles were written to men of
this World, and the two last to the men of the World to come after the Earth
(and Bibles) are burnt?

Q. 12. Consider whether you that so zealously cry down the Papal Antichrist
and Babylon, do not ignorantly maintain the Papal State which you call
Antichristian? What is the Essence of Papacy, but the claim of an Universal
Power over the Church, in the Pope, or his Counsel, he being the Head. And do
not you maintain that the Seven Churches are Seven States of the Church
Universal? And almost all Expositors agree that by the Angel is meant the
Bishop, at least, as Biza says, the Proestos with his Elders: And have even
the Two Churches of the World to come such an Universal Government? Sure then
it is of Divine Institution that such there be: And who claims it but the
Pope and Councils? This is the Effect of over-doing Zeal.

For my part, if I believed that by God's Institution the Church Catholic must
have one Universal Humane Angel or Government, Monarchical or Aristocratical,
or mixed, I would presently be a Papist.

Sir; If any words in this Paper are displeasing to you for their freedom, be
assured it is to your Words and Cause, and not for want of Love and great
Esteem of your Person; who as you are by Birth above me (the Son of a Godly
Knight) so from my heart I believe that you are a far better man than my self.
And though I think you over-confident of your Apprehensions, I love you the
better while I think, How strong a Faith has that good man of God's Word in
general, who is so confident in every hard particular. I beg your prayers for
me, who look from day to day, when sight resolves me of all these
Controversies.

Postscript.
1. I Understand that on further thoughts, some men that are further from me,
than Mr. Beverly, are like by his Book, to be much confirmed against
Christianity. Their Judgment of Christ is much like the Turks, That there is
One God, and Jesus is one of his three great Legislator-Prophets, and to be
called his Son, because of his miraculous Generation: But that as Incarnate and
the Son of Man he has but a Temporal Kingdom, and that Humanity shall at the
end of the Thousand years be put off, and with the Kingdom delivered up to the
Father, shall cease; and that God's being All in All implies this cessation.

Because Mr. Beverley takes himself not accountable for other men's Errors,
and seems himself to renounce all such, I will speak to them my self, (and to
him on the by,) first, desiring him to have so much charity to such men, as to
undeceive them by explaining these few particulars of his.

2. 1. To tell them what he means by his distinction of Christ's Nature and
Kingdom as Man in our Nature, and his Nature and Kingdom as the Son of Man,
which he thinks ends with the Millennium. To tell them what he means by
Christ's Humane Nature before the Incarnation. If it be the Natura Mentalis in
genere, is it not as much an Angelical Nature as a Humane? And he was not Jesus
Christ the Anointed Savior from Eternity, nor before he was here Incarnate of
Mary. If his Body and Humane Soul then received, die or cease, then Jesus
Christ dies or cease, though the Mental Nature Humane or Angelical cease
not: Leave us not to the equivocal of a continued [Humane or our Nature] while
you distinguish [Christ Man] from [Christ the Son of Man] But tell us whether
it be only a Spiritual Mentality, superangelical, or the Soul and Body of a Man
at his Incarnation. If it be the Anima Mundi, is it not the Common Nature of
all things?

2. To tell them yet what he means by the Kingdom of Eternity as distinct
from the Thousand years Kingdom; seeing he denies that there were any
Subjects, or Creatures from Eternity, what is that Kingdom that has no
Subjects, nor Government? If he mean only [To Eternity,] of that anon.

3. To tell us also how it can be that Christ should continue in our Nature,
and yet be no Object of our Souls, but only a Conveying Medium.

3. Now I desire both him and these others that misuse him, to consider as
follows.

I. Is there any Scripture that says, that Christ had two Humane Natures?

II. Cessation is no less than Death, or Transmutation into some other Nature.
If Christ's Incarnate Humanity Die, how is he called Immortal, Eternal, and
said to bring Life and Immortality to light, his Kingdom to have no end, as the
slain Lamb, to be dead and alive for evermore; to have the power or Keys of
Life, and Death, and Hell, etc.

If it be Transmutation, it is either of his Humane, Specific Form: And then
into what other Form, Nature or Being is he changed? It is but the perfecting
of the Humane Form which he had, by turning corruptible flesh and blood into a
spiritual glorious body: And this was done before at his Ascension. And this we
deny not, to be eternal as to come. If this be your swallowing up.]

III. If we shall have the same Humane Nature [in specie spiritualized and
glorified after the Thousand years that we had before, so shall Christ; for he
will make our Vile Bodies like to his Glorious Body. But many Promises assure
us of such a continuance: Else we shall be no Men, but Nothing, or some thing
of another species. And Christ calls us Brethren and Coheirs.

IV. If Christ will be the Head of the Glorified Church after the Thousand
years, then certainly there will be a Unity of Humane Nature, and an
everlasting Communion both as with a Cause Efficient, Objective and Final. And
it cannot be true which you say (and the Infidels will take hold of) that
Christ as Man in our Nature will not be an Object (even of Fruition. For we
shall still be Individual Members of a Political Body: And shall we have a
Head, and King, and not Know him, and not Love him, and not Praise or Honor
him? Shall the Saints praises of the Lamb, that Redeemed them, cease then for
ever? Shall we all then cease to be Kings and Priests, and to sit with him on
his Throne, and to sing the song of the Lamb, and to see him as he is, and face
to face, and to behold his Glory given him as Man? Is he in all this no Object?
And how often does Scripture make him the Final Object under the finis ultimate
ultimus, as he is to be glorified? Shall an Intelligent Head and Members live
together, and neither know, nor love, nor rejoice in each other?

V. Shall the whole Heavenly City, Society and Chore, be dissolved for ever? If
so, do not the Mahometans hope for a better felicity than such, who think
Mahomet will for longer time than a Thousand years give them their desires, and
that his Kingdom shall not end by being spewed out finally in everlasting
disgrace?

But if the Body and City continue, so will the Head and King. And will
Christ's Incarnate Humanity spiritualized be for ever useless? Will he live for
nothing? Heaven and Angels will not be useless: God shall shine in them, and we
shall see that light. Shall it be our joy to sit with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
and to enter into the Joy of our Lord, and this all cease, and the Deity only
be an Object after a Thousand years? O short everlastingness!

VI. Open your Eyes, and see your Contradiction, that think Christ's Kingdom
(as the Son of Man) shall for ever cease, and yet that Christ shall be subject
to the Father. Shall he be subject as God, or as Man? Not as God, for God is
not subject to himself: If as the Son of Man, then that Manhood continues in
being: And doubtless in a Glorious Objective and Effective Being.

VII. But speaking to men inclined to believe that Christ shall be no Christ
after the Thousand years, I will deal with them according to their Principles;
and argue from Natural Order, and from Oeconomical or Instituted.

Do you not believe that God has Creatures of diverse ranks, some above others
in excellency and causality? No wonder that he that believes not any Creatures
continuance, believes not Christ's: Or he that believes not that one is above
others in operation, believes not the continuance of Christ's Power. Do you
think that God works by any second Causes (though he be himself never the
further from the Effect, nor less in the Causality?) Does he not enlighten,
warm and quicken earthly Creatures by the Sun? and govern Men by Angels, and
Subjects by Princes, and Beasts by Men? Certainly if the World cease not, this
Natural Order of Creatures and Causes will not cease. None but madmen, I
think, will doubt that Angels and Devils have Rule and Inferiority.

And if so, after the Thousand years some prime Creature must be a Superior
Cause of operation to the rest, and that according to the Nature of each, and
therefore to Man, that is, Intellectual, Volitive, Affectionate and Active. And
what Creature is this? Why may you not grant it to Christ, as well as to any
other? Will you say with Aristotle, It is the first or highest Orb? That Orb
then must be a Spirit: And what Spirit before Christ the First and Last? If his
Humanity cease, shall Angels cease too? Or shall they be advanced so far above
Christ as a Creature, as to Reign under God for ever when Christ is deposed or
extinct?

Obj. He is not deposed, but his Created Nature will be swallowed up in the
Deity.

Ans. Intelligible sense is swallowed up in such insignificant Metaphors. Is
the Humane Nature turned into the Divine, and a Creature made the Godhead it
self? If not, what can you mean but Extinction or Annihilation?

Obj. But there was no use for a Mediator before the Fall, and and there will
be none after.

Ans. There was no use for his Recovering Government; and there will be none in
perfect Glory: But there will be use for Christ's and his Body's glorious
Fruition, and felicitating work, as the state of Reward: There was no use for
us before we had our Being; and yet we may have everlasting life.

Obj. But the Kingdom it self, and not only the Modus Regendi, will be given
up, and Christ Subject and God all in all. And you say, the Kingdom continues,
and make two Kingdoms, when Scripture makes but one.

Answ. Is the Question de Nomine, or de Re? If de Nomine only, take your
liberty to call it One, or Two, or Three: If de Re, are not these real
differences? 1. Between the Genus or Species Superior, and the Species Inferior
or Specialissima: For in each sense is the word [the Kingdom of God, Christ's
Heaven] often taken in Scripture.

2. Between the Governing of men as an Army, a School, a Hospital, the
Governing them as mere Subjects (healed, taught, subdued.) 1. The state of the
Subjects is not the same 2. The Relation of the Ruler is not the same (a
Captain, a Physician, and a Viceroy.) 3. The finis Relationis is not the same.
4. All the persons are not the same (for Conquest destroys some Rebels.) 5.
The Laws are not the same. 6. The Execution is not the same.

What is it then that you would have? Is it that Christ as a Creature shall
cease? Or that he shall have no power under the Deity? Who shall have it then?
Does not Scripture set him above Angels? Are they not his Ministers? What
Creature shall be over Christ? To say, There shall be no Kingdom, is to say,
There shall be no God. To say, There shall be no Government under God as second
Causes, is to say, There shall be no World.

Obj. But why call you it two Kingdoms?

Ans. Because Scripture and all Divines do so. The Kingdom is taken from the
Jews, and given to another Nation. The Kingdoms of the World are become the
Kingdoms of Christ] And many such Texts, speak not of the Kingdom of endless
glory.

Obj. But after the Resurrection and Thousand years there will be no
Legislation, no Judgment, no Execution; therefore no Kingdom of Christ.

Ans. You may as well say, [No Kingdom of God,] for you infer that or nothing.
But a Law is nothing but the notification of the Rulers will to the Subject:
And will not God make it our Duty to love and praise him? His face, yea and the
face of Christ, will be a Law, or notification of our duty. Cannot God govern
us by a perfect Law of Nature and Intuition? Shall we see God, and not know his
Will? Yea, have Angels now so much work to do, rejoice over men, and Saints
shall judge the World, and shall we for ever have no work of Obedience, Love,
Joy or Praise?

And there will be Executive Judgment of Rewards and Punishments for ever. The
Rebels will not be annihilated: Their Worm dies not. And it is Christ the Lamb
that is said to destroy them, and to bless the just. And this as Believers in
Christ or Unbelievers, 2 These. 1. 6, 9, 10, 11.

It is the sad case of the Church, that even studious Ministers must have new
Books written, to answer every doubt that arises to them, and cannot answer
them themselves.

I conclude, that 1. These men teach the Mahometans to vilify Christ's
Kingdom, and consequently the King himself, as if when the sinful Kingdom
lasts about six thousand years, Christ's Glorious Sabbatical Kingdom shall
last but one, and then for ever be spewed out with loathing as neither hot nor
cold, but naked and miserable.

2. That they tempt men to Paganism, and to take either the Stoics
Revolutions, or Aristotle's Eternity of the World as an Eternal Body and Effect
of an Eternal Cause, to be better than the Gospel.

And did I expound [Delivering up the Kingdom] as grossly as they; I would
rather fall into Peter Sterry's way, that Christ has three Natures, The Divine
uniting it self to the first and noblest Creature; and that prime Created
Nature assuming the Humanity, and so ex Ordine Naturae as superangelical, and
ex Ordine Liberae Institutionis, retaining the Humanity glorified by way of
Reward, Ruling the World as the highest subordinate created Cause. I confess
this would seem to accommodate us in expounding Heb. 1. Col. 2. etc. and to
reconcile the Arrians to the Orthodox, if not to reconcile us to Aristotle, and
them that think it unlikely, that God who now delights in his Creatures,
should have none from and to eternity, but Himself? if Christ had a middle
created superangelical Nature from. But we must not make Doctrines to
accommodate us in our difficulties, especially such as the Church never
commonly received. (Though I will not undertake to confute it.) But if I should
grant this Doctrine (that the Divine Eternal Word, produced creatures in
different Order, and produced the highest creature so as to Unite it self to it
eminently as that by which he would make, or at least operate on the Inferior;
and that this prime Creature at least was God's Eternal Effect, and that this
is either the Natura Mentalis in Genere, comprehending that of Angels and Men,
or some higher Nature above both, and that the Word in this Nature united was
it that appeared to Abraham, Moses, etc. and after to Redeem Man assumed the
Soul and Body of Man as a third Nature, by such an Hypostatical Union, as I
have described, cap. 3. in End of Controversies.] I say, should I grant them
all this, I would never grant them against plain Scripture, that Christ's third
Nature here received, dies or cease after the Thousand years, or that he
continues it Glorified to no use active or objective, and that he will not
still be the Mediator of Fruition.

Nor shall I believe that we Men (no nor Angels) shall have no Existent Nature
to Eternity, but what we had from Eternity in duration.

Or if their last Argument would hold, that [eternal, and everlasting, and for
ever and without End] in the Promise, did mean but [a long time] as it does often
in the Old Testament, I should leave this long time as known only to God (and
all that should follow;) and not confine it, and all Christ's Humane Reign in
Glory, to a Thousand years, upon so unconcluding an Evidence, as one only
obscure Text, Rev. 20. which may clearly be proved to have no such sense.

The Lord inlighten us.

FINIS.

