Two Papers OF PROPOSALS Concerning the DISCIPLINE and CEREMONIES OF THE CHURCH
of ENGLAND. Humbly Presented to His MAJESTY, By the Reverend MINISTERS of the
PRESBYTERIAN PERSUASION.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.

The First PAPER.
May it please Your most excellent Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's loyal Subjects cannot but acknowledge it as a very great
Mercy of God, that immediately after your wonderful and peaceable Restoration
unto Your Throne and Government (for which we bless his Name) he has stirred
up your Royal Heart, as to a zealous Declaration against all Profaneness in
the People, So to endeavor an happy composing of the Differences, and healing
of the sad Breaches which are in the Church. And we shall, according to our
bounden duty, become humble Suitors at the Throne of Grace, that the God of
Peace who has put such a thing as this into your Majesty's Heart, will, by his
heavenly wisdom and Holy Spirit, so assist You therein, and bring your
Resolutions to so perfect an effect and issue, that all the people of these
Kingdoms may have abundant cause to rise up and bless You, and bless God who
has delighted in You, to make You his Instrument in so happy a Work: That as
Your glorious Progenitor, Henry the Seventh, was happy in uniting the two
Houses of York and Lancaster, and your Grandfather King James (of blessed
memory) in uniting the Kingdoms of England and Scotland; So this Honor may be
reserved to your Majesty (as a radiant Jewel in your Crown) That by your
Princely Wisdom and Christian Moderation, the hearts of the People may be
united, and the unhappy differences and mis-understandings amongst Brethren in
matters Ecclesiastical so composed, that the Lord may be One, and his Name One
in the midst of your Dominions.

In an humble Conformity to this your Majesty's Christian Design, we taking it
for granted, that there is a firm Agreement between our Brethren and us in
Doctrinal Truths of the Reformed Religion, and in the substantial parts of
Divine Worship; and that the differences are only in some various Conceptions
about the Ancient Form of Church Government, and some particulars about
Liturgy and Ceremonies; do in all humble obedience to your Majesty represent,

First, In as much as the ultimate end of Church Government and Ministry, is,
That Holiness of Life and the Salvation of Souls may be effectually promoted,
We humbly desire in the first place, that we may be secured of those things in
practice, of which we seem to be agreed in principles: As,

1. That those of our Flocks who are diligent and serious about the matters of
their Salvation, may not by words of scorn, or any abusive usages, be suffered
to be reproachfully handled, but may have Liberty and Encouragement in their
Duties, of exhorting and provoking one another to Love and to Good Works, and
of building up one another in their most holy Faith, and by all religious and
peaceable means of furthering one another in the ways of Eternal Life; who
being not therein opposite to Church Assemblies, nor refusing the guidance and
inspection of their Pastors, and being responsible for what they do or say.

2. That each Congregation may have a Learned, Orthodox, and Godly Pastor
residing among them, to the end the People may be publicly instructed, by
preaching every Lords day, by catechizing and frequent administration of the
Lords Supper, and of Baptism, and other Ministerial Acts, as the occasions and
necessities of the People may require in health and sikness: And that effectual
provision of Law may be made, that such as are insufficient, negligent, or
scandalous, may not be allowed or permitted in so sacred a Function and
Employment.

3. That none may be admited to the Lords Supper, till they can competently
understand the Principles of Christian religion, and do personally own their
Baptismal Covenant, by credible profession of Faith and Holiness, not
contradicting the same by a contrary profession, or by a scandalous life; and
that unto such only Confirmation (if continued in the Church) may be
administered. And that the Approbation of the Pastors, to whom the catechizing
and instructing those under their Charge does appertain, may be produced before
any person receive confirmation. Which course (we humbly conceive) will much
conduce to the quieting those sad Disputes which have greatly troubled the
Church of God amongst us, touching Church Members and Communicants.

4. That an effectual course may be taken for the Sanctification of the Lords
day, appropriating the same to holy Exercises both in public and private,
without any unnecessary divertisments; it being certain and by long experience
found, that the due observation thereof is a special means of preserving and
promoting the power of Godliness, and obviating of Profaneness.

Then for matters in difference, viz. Church Government, Liturgy, and
Ceremonies, We humbly Represent to Your MAJESTY:
That although upon just Reasons, we do dissent from the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy or Prelacy disclaimed in Covenant, as it was stated and exercised in
these Kingdoms; yet we do not, nor ever did renounce the true ancient
primitive Episcopacy, or Presidency, as it was balanced or managed by a due
commixtion of Presbyters therewith, as a fit means to avoid Corruptions,
Partialities, Tyrannies, and other Evils which may be incident to the
administration of one single Person: which kind of attempored Episcopacy, or
Presidency, if it shall by your Majesty's grave Wisdom and gracious
Moderation, be in such manner constituted (as that the forementioned, and
other like Evils, may be certainly prevented) we shall humbly submit thereunto.
And in order to an happy Accommodation in this weighty Business, we desire
humbly to offer to your Majesty some of the Particulars, which we conceive were
amiss in the Episcopal-Government, as it was practiced before the year, 1640.
As,

1. The great extent of the Bishops Diocese, which was much too large for his
own personal Inspection, wherein he took apersonal Charge over the Souls of all
those within his Bishopric; which burden must needs be granted to be too heavy
for any one man's shoulders, the Pastoral Office being a work of Personal
Ministration and Trust, and that of the highest Concernment to the Souls of the
People, for which they are to give an account to Christ.

2. That by reason of this disability to discharge their Duties and Trusts
personally, the Bishops did depute the Administration of much of their Trust,
even in matters of Spiritual cognizance to Commissaries, Chancellors, and
Officials, whereof some are Secular persons, and could not administer that
Power which originally pertains to the Officers of the Church.

3. That those Bishops who affirm, The Episcopal Office to be a distinct Order
by Divine Right, from that of the Presbyter; did assume the sole Power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction to themselves.

4. That some of the Bishops exercised an Arbitrary power, as by sending forth
their Articles of Visitation, inquiring unwarrantably into several things, and
Swearing the Churchwardens to Present accordingly; So also by many Innovations
and Ceremonies imposed upon Ministers and People, not required by Law.

For the reforming of these Evils, we first crave leave to offer to your
Majesty:
1. The late most Reverend Primate of Ireland his Reduction of Episcopacy, unto
the Form of a Synodical Government, received in the Ancient Church as a
Groundwork toward an Accommodation and Fraternal-Agreement, in this point of
Ecclesiastical Government; which we rather do, not only in regard of his
eminent Piety and singular Abilities, as in all other parts of Learning, so in
that especially of the Antiquities of the Church; but also, because therein
Expedients are offered toward in the Healing of these Grievances.

2. And in order to the same End, we further humbly desire, That the Suffragans
Chorepiscopi, mentioned in the Primate's Reduction, may be Chosen by the
respective Synods, and by that Election may be sufficiently Authorized to
discharge their Trust, and that the Associations may not be so Large as to make
the Discipline impossible, or to take off the Ministers from the rest of their
necessary Work.

3. That no Oaths, or Promises of Obedience to the Bishops, nor any
unnecessary Subscriptions or Engagements be made Necessary to Ordination,
Institution, or Induction, Ministration, Communion, or Immunities of Ministers,
they being Responsible for any Transgression of the Law: And that no Bishop,
nor any Ecclesiastical Governor, may at any time Exercise their Government by
their private Will or Pleasure, but only by such Rules, Canons and
Constitutions, as shall be by Act of Parliament ratified and established: And
that sufficient Provision may be made to secure both Ministers and People
against the Rules of Arbitrary Government.

Secondly, Liturgy.
1. We are satisfied in our Judgments concerning the Lawfulness of a Liturgy,
or Form of Worship, Provided it be for the Matter agreeable to the Word of God,
and fitly suited to the Nature of the several Ordinances and Necessities of the
Church, neither too tedious in the whole, nor composed of too short Prayers or
Responsals, not dissonant from the Liturgies of the Reformed Churches; nor too
rigorously imposed, nor the Minister confined thereunto, but that he may also
make use of the Gifts for Prayer and Exhortation which Christ has given him,
for the Service and Edification of the Church.

2. Inasmuch as the Book of Common Prayer has in it many things which are
justly offensive, and need amendment, has been long discontinued, and very
many, both Ministers and people, and persons of pious, loyal, and peaceable
Minds, therein greatly dis-satisfied; whereupon if it should be again imposed,
will inevitably follow sad Divisions and widening of the Breaches which your
Majesty is endeavoring to heal: We do most humbly offer to your Masties
Wisdom, that for preventing of so great Evils, and for settling the Church in
Unity and Peace, some Learned, Godly and Moderate Divines of both Persuasions,
indifferently chosen, may be employed to Compile such a Form as is before
Described, as much as may be in Scripture-Words; or at least to Revise and
effectually Reform the Old, together with an Addition or Insertion of other
Varying Forms in Scripture Phrase, to be used at the Ministers choice; of which
Variety and Liberty there be Instances in the Book of Common Prayer.

Thirdly, Concerning Ceremonies.
We humbly Represent, That we hold our selves obliged in Every part of Divine
Worship, to do All Things Decently, in Order, and to Edification, and are
willing therein to be determined by Authority in such things as being merely
circumstantial, are common to Humane Actions, and are to be ordered by the
Light of Nature, and Humane Prudence, according to the general Rules of the
Word, which are always to be observed.

And as to diverse Ceremonies formerly retained in the Church of England, we do
in all humility offer to your Majesty these ensuing Considerations.

That the Worship of God is in it self Pure, and Perfect, and Decent, without
having any such Ceremonies affixed thereunto; for did they contribute any thing
to that necessary Decency which the Apostle requires, we might expect to meet
with them in the Apostles time, there being no Reason to induce us to the use
of them, which might not have induced them.

That the Lord has declared Himself in the matters that concern his Worship,
to be a Jealous God, and this Worship of His is certainly then most pure, and
most agreeable to the simplicity of the Gospel, and to his Holy and Jealous
Eyes, when it has least of Humane admixtures (in things of themselves
confessedly unnecessary) adjoined and appropriated thereunto. Upon these
accounts many faithful Servants of the Lord knowing his Word to be a perfect
Rule, of Faith and Worship (by which they must judge of his acceptance of their
Services, and must be themselves judged) have ever been exceeding fearful of
varying from his Will, and of the danger of displeasing him by additions or
detractions, in such Duties, wherein they must daily expect the communication
of his Grace and comfort; especially in seeing these Ceremonies have been
imposed and urged upon such Considerations as draw too near to the significacy
and Moral efficacy of Sacraments themselves, that they have together with
Popery been rejected by many of the Reformed Churches abroad; amongst whom,
notwithstanding, we doubt not but the Lord is Worshipped decently, orderly, and
in the beauty of Holiliness: And ever since the Reformation they have been a
matter of Contention and endless Dispute in this Church, and have been a cause
of depriving the Church of the fruit and benefit they might have reaped from
the labors of many learned and godly Divines, some of whom judging them
unlawful, others inexpedient, were in Conscience unwilling to be brought under
the power of them; And they have occasioned through the offense taken at them
by many of the people heretofore great separation in our Church, and so have
rather prejudiced than promoted the Unity thereof: And at this time by reason
of their long disuse, may be more likely than ever heretofore to produce the
same inconvenience. And they are at best indifferent, and in their nature
mutable: And that it is (especially in various Exigencies of the Church) very
needful and expedient, that things in themselves mutable, be sometimes actually
changed, lest they should by perpetual permanency and constant use, be judged
by the people as necessary as the Substantials of Worship themselves. And
though we do most heartily acknowledge your Majesty to be Custos utriusque
Tabulae, and to be supreme Governor over all Persons, and in all Things and
Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, in these your Majesty's Dominions; yet
we humbly crave leave to beseech your Majesty to consider, Whether, as a
Christian Magistrate, you be not as well obliged by that doctrine of the holy
Apostle, touching things indifferent, in not occasioning offense to weak
Brethren, as the Apostle himself (then one of the highest Officers in the
Church of Christ) judged himself to be obliged by? and whether the great Work,
wherein the Lord has entrusted your Majesty, be not rather to provide by your
sacred Authority, that the things which are necessary by Divine Command in Gods
Worship, should be duly performed, than that things unnessary should be made by
humane command necessary and penal? And how greatly pleasing will it be to the
Lord, that your Majesty's heart is so tenderly and religiously compassionate to
such of his poor Servants, differing in some matters, who prefer the peace of
their Consciences in God's Worship, above their own civil concernments
whatsoever.

May it therefore please your Majesty out of your Princely Care for the healing
of our Breaches, graciously to grant, That Kneeling at the Lords Supper, and
such Holy Days, as are but of humane Institution, may not be imposed upon such
as do conscienciously scruple the observation of them. And that the use of the
Surplice, and Cross in Baptism, and Bowing at the Name of Jesus (rather than
Christ or Emmanuel, or any other names whereby the Divine Person, or either of
the other Divine Persons is denominated) may be Abolished. These things being
in the judgment of the Imposers themselves, but indifferent and mutable; and in
the judgment of others, a Rock of Offense; and in the judgment of all, not to
be valued with the peace of the Church. We likewise represent to your Majesty,
that diverse Ceremonies (which we conceive have no foundation in the Law of the
Land) as erecting Altars, Bowing toward them, and such like, have not only
been introduced, but in some places imposed, whereby an Arbitrary power was
usurped, diverse Ministers of the Gospel (though conformable to the established
Ceremonies) troubled, some reverend and learned Bishops offended, Protestants
grieved, and the Papists pleased, as hoping these Innovations might make way to
greater changes.

May it therefore please your Majesty, in such ways as your Royal Wisdom
shall judge meet, effectually to prevent the imposing and using such
Innovations for the future; that so according to the pious intention of your
Royal Grandfather (King James of blessed memory) the public Worship may be
free, not only from blame, but from suspicion.

In obedience to your Majesty's Royal Pleasure signified to us, we have
tendered to your Sacred Majesty, what we humbly conceive may most conduce to
the Glory of God, to the Peace and Reformation of the Church, and to the taking
away, not only our Differences, but the roots and causes of them. We humbly beg
your Majesty's favorable Acceptance of these our loyal and conscientious
Endeavors to serve the Church of Christ; and your Majesty's gracious Pardon,
if in any thing or expression we answer not your Majesty's expectation*
professing before your Majes^^^ and before the Lord the Searcher of all hearts,
that we have done nothing out of strife and vainglory, or emulation, but have
sincerely offered what we apprehend most seasonable, as conducing to that happy
end of Unity and Peace, which your Majesty does so piously prosecute. We humbly
lay ourselves, and these our Addresses, at your Majesty's feet; professing our
unfeigned Resolution, to live and die your Majesty's real, faithful, and
obedient Subjects: And humbly implore your gracious Majesty, according to your
Princely Wisdom and Fatherly Compassion, to lay your Hands upon the bleeding
Rents and Divisions that are among us, that there may be an healing of them. So
shall your Throne be greater than the Throne of your Fathers; and in your days
the Righteous shall flourish, Peace run down like a River, and the Generations
to come shall call you Blessed.

The Second PAPER.
May it please your Majesty,
SO great was the Comfort created in our minds by your Majesty's often expressed
Resolution, to become the Effectual Moderator in our Differences, and your self
to bring us together, by procuring such mutual condescentions as are necessary
thereto; and also by your gracious Acceptance of our Proposals, which your
Majesty heard and received, not only without blame, but with acknowledgement
of their moderation; and as such as would infer a Reconciliation between the
differing Parties; That we must needs say, that the least abatement of our
hopes is much the more unwelcome and grievous to us, in finding so much of the
proposed necessary means for our Agreement (especially in the point of
Government) here passed by in your Majesty's Declaration, as if it were denied
us.

But yet remembering the gracious and encouraging Promises of your Majesty, and
observing your Majesty's Clemency in what is here granted us, and your great
Condescension in vouchsafing not only so graciously to hear us in these our
humble addresses and Requests, but also to grant us the fight of our
Declaration before it is resolved on, with liberty of returning our Additional
Desires, and hope that they shall not be rejected. We reassume our confidence,
and comfortably expect, that what is not granted us in this Declaration that is
reasonable and necessary to our Agreement, shall yet be granted upon fuller
consideration of the Equity of our Requests.

As our designs and desires are not for any worldly Advantages or Dignities to
our selves, So have we not presumed to meddle with any Civil Interest of your
Majesty, or any of your Officers, nor in matters of mere convenience, to cast
our Reason into the balance against your Majesty's Prudence, But merely to
speak for the Laws, and Worship, and Servants of the Lord, and for the Peace of
our Consciences, and for the safety of our own and our Brethrens Souls. It
lifts us up with joy to think what happy Consequences will ensue, if your
Majesty shall entertain these healing motions; How happily our differences will
be reconciled, and the exasperated minds of men composed! How temptations to
contention and uncharitableness will be removed! How comfortably your Majesty
will reign in the dearest affections of your Subjects, and how firmly they will
adhere to your Interest as their own! How cheerfully and zealously the united
Parts and Interests of the Nation will conspire to serve You! What a strength
and honor a Righteous Magistracy a Learned, Loyal, Holy Ministry, and a
faithful, praying People will be to your Throne! and how it will be your glory
to be King of the most Religious Nation in the World! that has no considerable
parties, but what are centred under Christ in You. What a comfort it will be to
the Bishops and Pastors of the Church to be honored and loved by all the most
Religious of their Flocks, to see the success of their labors and the Beauty
of the Church promoted by our Common Concord, and Brethren to assemble and
dwell together in unity, serving one God, according to one Rule, with one heart
and mouth.

And on the contrary, should we lose the opportunity of our desired
Reconciliation and Union, it astonisheth us to foresee what doleful effects
our divisions would produce, which we will not so much as mention in
particular, lest our words should be misunderstood.

And seeing all this may be safely and easily prevented, We humbly beseech the
Lord in mercy to vouchsafe to your Majesty, an heart to discern aright of Time
and Judgment.

And as these are our general ends and motives, So we are induced to insist
upon the Form of a Synodical Government, conjunct with a fixed Presidency or
Episcopacy, for these Reasons.

1. We have reason to believe that no other terms will be so generally agreed
on, and it is no way injurious to Episcopal Power, but most firmly establishes
all in it that can pretend to Divine authority, or true Antiquity: It grants
them much more than Reverend Bishop Hall in his Peacemaker, and many others of
that judgment do require, who would have accepted of the fixing of the
President for Life, as sufficient for the reconciliation of the Churches.

2. It being agreeable to the Scripture and the primitive Government, is
likeliest to be the way of a more universal Concord, if ever the Churches on
Earth arrive to such a blessing: However it will be most accptable to God, and
wel-informed Consciences.

3. It will promote the practice of Discipline and Godliness without disorder,
and promote Order without hindering Discipline and Godliness.

4. And it is not to be silenced (though in some respects we are loath to
mention it) That it will save the Nation from the violation of the Solemn Vow
and Covenant, without wronging the Church at all, or breaking any other Oath.
And whether the Covenant were lawfully imposed or not, we are assured from the
nature of a Vow to God, and from the Case of Saul, Zedekiah, and others, that
it would be a terrible thing in us to violate it on that pretense. Though we
are far from thinking that it obliges us to any evil, or to go beyond our
places and callings to do good, much less to resist Authority, (to which it
does oblige us) yet does it undoubtedly bind us to forbear our own consent to
those luxuriances of Church Government which we there renounced, and for which
no divine Institution can be pretended. Not presuming to meddle with the
Consciences of those many of the Nobility and Gentry, and others, that adhered
to this late Majesty in the late unhappy Wars, who at their Composition took
this Vow and Covenant. We only crave your Majesty's clemency to our selves and
others, who believe themselves to be under its obligations. And God forbid that
we that are the Ministers of the Word of Truth should do any thing to encourage
your Majesty's Subjects to cast off the Conscience of an Oath. Till the
Covenant was decried as an Almanac out of date, and its obligation taken to be
null, that odious Fact could never have been perpetrated against your Royal
Father, nor your Majesty have been so long expulsed from your Dominions. And
the obligation of the Covenant upon the consciences of the Nation, was not the
weakest Instrument of your Return. We therefore humbly beseech your Majesty
(with greater importunity than we think we should do for our lives) That you
would have mercy on the Souls and Consciences of your People, and will not
suffer us to be tempted to the violation of such solemn Vows, and this for
nothing, when an expedient is before you that will avoid it, without any
detriment to the Church; nay, to its honor and advancement.

The Prelacy, which we disclaim, is, that of Diocesans upon the claim of a
superior Order to a Presbyter, assuming the sole power of Ordination, and of
public Admonition of particular Offender* enjoining Penitence, Excommunicating
and Absolving (besides Confirmation) over so many Churches, as necessitated the
corruption or extirpation of Discipline, and the using of humane Officers (as
Chancellors, Surrogates, Officials, Commissaries, Archdeacons) while the
undoubted Officers of Christ (the Pastors of the Particular Churches) were
hindered from the exercise of their Office.

The Restoration of Discipline in the particular Churches, and of the Pastors
to the exercise of their Office therein, and of Synods for necessary
Consultation and Communion of Churches, and of the primitive Presidency or
Episcopacy, for the avoiding of all show of Innovation and Disorder, is that
which we humbly offer as the Remedy, Beseeching your Majesty, that if any thing
asserted seem unproved, an impartial Conference in your Majesty's hearing may
be allowed us in order to a just Determination.

Concerning the preamble of your Majesty's Declaration, we presume only to
tender these Requests.
1. That we are persuaded it is not in your Majesty's thoughts, to intimate
that we are guilty of the Offenses which your Majesty here recites; So we hope
it will rather be a Motive to the hastening the Nations Cure, that our unity may
prevent Man's temptations of that nature for the time to come.

2. Though we have professed our willingness to submit to the Primitive
Episcopacy and Reformed Liturgy, hoping it may prove an Expedient to an happy
Union; yet have we expressed our dislike of the Prelacy and present Liturgy,
while unreformed. And though Sacrilege and unjust Alienation of Church Lands,
is a thing that we detest, yet whether in some cases of true Superfluity of
Revenues, or true Necessity of the Church, there may not be an Alienation which
is no Sacrilege? And whether the Kings and Parliaments have been guilty of
this Crime that have made some Alienations, are Points of high concernment, of
which we never had a Call to give our Judgment; And therefore humbly beseech
your Majesty, that concerning these Matters, we may not to our prejudice be
otherwise understood, than as we have before and here expressed.

3. That as your Majesty has here vouchsafed us your Gracious Acknowledgment
of our Moderation, it may never be said, that a Minister and People of such
moderate principles, consenting to Primitive Episcopacy and Liturgy, could not
be received into the Settlement and countenanced Body of Your People, nor
possess their stations in the Church, and Liberty in the Public Worship of God.

4. And whereas it is expressed by your Majesty, That the Essence and
Foundation of Episcopacy may be preserved, though the Extent of the
Jurisdiction may be altered; This is to us a ground of hope, that seeing the
greatning or lessening of Episcopal power is in your Majesty's Judgment but a
matter of convenience, the Lord will put it into your heart to make such
Alteration in the alterable Points, as the Satisfaction of the Consciences of
sober men, and the Healing and Union of the Churches do require.

And as to our Plea for Primitive Episcopacy; the Offices and Ordinances of
Christ must be still distinguished from the alterable accidents; though we
plead not for the Primitive Poverty, Persecution, or Restraints, yet must we
adhere to the Primitive Order, and Worship, and Administrations in the
substance, as believing that the circumstantiating of them is much committed
unto man, but to Institute the Offices and Ordinances, is the high Prerogative
of Christ, the Universal King and Lawgiver of the Church.

Concerning the Matter of your Majesty's Concessions, as related to our
Proposals.
I. We humbly renew our Petition to your Majesty for the effectual securing of
those premised necessaries, which are the matter of our chiefest care, and
whereunto the controverted Points subserve, Viz.

1. That private Exercises of Piety may be encouraged.

2. That an able faithful Ministry may be kept up, and the insufficient,
negligent, and non-resident and scandalous cast out.

3. That a credible profession of Faith and Obedience be prerequired of
Communicants.

4. That the Lords day may be appropriated to holy Exercises, without
unnecessary devertisements.

I. For Church Government: In this your Majesty's Declaration,
Parish-Discipline is not sufficiently granted us; Inferior Synod: with their
Presidents are passed by: and the Bishop, which your Majesty here declares
for, is not Episcopus praeses, but Episcopus princeps; endued with sole Power
both of Ordination and Jurisdiction: For though it be said, The Bishop shall do
nothing without the Advice of the Presbyters, yet their Consent is not made
necessary, but he may go contrary to the Counsel of them all. And this Advice
is not to be given by the Diocesan Synod, or any other Representatives of the
Clergy, but by the Dean and Chapter, and so many, and such others as he please
to call. In all which there being nothing yielded us, which is sufficient to
the desired Accommodation and Union; we humbly prosecute our Petition to your
Majesty, That the Primitive presidency, with their respective Synods, described
by the late Reverend Primate of Ireland, may be the Form of Church Government
established among us, at least in these three needful Points.

1. That the Pastors of the respective Parishes may be allowed not only
publicly to Preach, but personally to Catechize, or otherwise Instruct the
several Families (admitting none to the Lord's Table, that have not personally
owned their Baptismal Covenants, by a credible profession of Faith and
Obedience) and to Admonish and Exhort the Scandalous, in order to their
Repentance, to hear the Witnesses and the accused party, and to appoint fit
Times, and Places for these Things: And to deny such persons the Communion of
the Church, and the holy Eucharist, that remain Impenitent, or that wilfully
refuse to come to their Pastors to be Instructed, or to Answer such probable
Accusations, and to continue such Exclusion of them till they have made a
credible profession of their Repentance, ^ and then to receive them again to
the Communion of the Church Provided there be place for due Appeals to Superior
Power. All this we beseech your Majesty to Express, under your Fifth Concession,
because it is to us of very great Weight, and the Rubric is unsatisfactory, to
which we are referred.

2. That all the Pastors of each Rural Deanery, having a stated President chosen
by themselves (if your Majesty please to grant them that liberty) may meet once
a Month, and may receive Presentiments of all such persons, as notwithstanding
Suspention from Communion of the Church, continue impenitent, and unreformed;
and having further admonished them, may proceed to the Sentence of solemn
Excommunication, if after due patience they cannot prevail: And may receive the
Appeals of those that conceive themselves injuriously suspended, and may decide
the Cause. Or (if this cannot be attained) at least, that the Pastors of each
Rural Deanery, with their President, may have power to meet monthly, and receive
all such Presentiments and Appeals, and judge whether they are fit to be
transmitted to the Diocesan or not: And to call before them and admonish the
Offenders so presented; yet if the Presentiments against Magistrates and
Ministers be resolved only to the Diocesan Synod, and their Appeals immediately
put in, we shall therein submit to your Majesty's pleasure.

3. That a Diocesan Synod, consisting of the Delegates of the several Rural
Synods be called as often as need requires; and that without the consent of
the major part of them, the Diocesan may not ordain or exercise any Spiritual
Censures on any of the Ministers, nor Excommunicate any of the people but by
the consent of the Synod, or of the Pastors of the particular Parishes where
they had Communion. And that not only Chancellors, but also Archdeacons,
Commissaries and Officials (as such) may pass no Censures purely spiritual, but
for the exercise of civil Government, coercively by Mulcts, or corporal
Penalties, by power derived from your Majesty, as Supreme over Persons and
Things Ecclesiastical, we presume not at all to interpose, but shall submit to
any that act by your Majesty's Commission.

Our Reasons for the first part of Discipline, Viz. In particular Parishes, are
these.
It is necessary to the honor of the Christian profession, to the integrity of
Worship, to the destruction of Impiety and Vice, to the preservation of the
Sound, the raising them that are fallen, the comforting of the penitent, the
strengthening of the weak, the purity, order, strength and beauty of our
Churches, the Unity of Believers, and the pleasing of Christ who has required
it by his Laws: And withal it is agreeable to the ancient Canons and practice
of the Churches; and is consented to by our Reverend Brethren, and so is no
matter of controversy now between us.

Yet is not the Rubric Satisfactory to which we are referred.
1. Because it leaves the people at liberty, whether they will let us know of
their intention to communicate, till the night or morning before, and allows
us then only to admonish them; when in great Parishes it is impossible for want
of time.

2. Because it allows us to deny the Sacrament to those only that maliciously
refuse reconciliation with their Neighbors, and only to admonish other
scandalous sinners to forbear; though the Canon forbid us to deliver them the
Sacrament.

The Reasons why we insist on the second Proposal, are these:
It being agreed on between us, that the younger, less discreeter sort of
Ministers are unfit to pass the sentence of Excommunication without advice and
moderation by others; And every Church is not like to be provided with grave,
discreet, judicious Guides; the necessity of these frequent lesser Synods for
such moderation, and advice, and guidance, will appear by these two general
Evidences;

1. It is the very nature and substance of the Office of a Presbyter to have
the power of the Keys for binding or loosing, retaining, or remitting sin:
which therefore together, or apart, as there is occasion, they are bound to
exercise. And this being the Institution of Jesus Christ, cannot be altered by
man. In their Ordination, according to the established Order in England, it is
said [ Whose sins thou do remit they are remitted, whose sins thou do
retain they are retained.] And they are commanded to minister the Doctrine,
Sacraments, and Discipline of Christ as the Lord has commanded, and as this
Realm has received the same, as expressly as the Bishops are. And as the late
Primate of Ireland observes in his Reduction, that they may the better
understand what the Lord has commanded, the Exhortation of S. Paul to the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus is appointed to be read to them at the time of
their Ordination: Take heed to your selves, and to all the Flock over which the
Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed (or rule) the Congregation of God
which he has purchased with his blood. And it is apparent in this Acts 20.17,
18, 28. Act. 14.23. Act. 15. -- 1 These. 5.12, 13. 1 Timothy 3, 4, 5. 1 Timothy 5.17.
Heb. 13.7, 17, 24. and other places, that it is the Office of a Presbyter to
over-see, rule, and guide the Flock with that Ministerial Rule which consists
in the exercise of the Keys, or management, or personal application of Gods
Word to the consciences and cases of particular persons, for their salvation,
and order of the Church; the Coercive power belonging to the Magistrate. And
this was the practice of the ancient Church, as appears undeniably in
Ignatius, Tertullian, Cyprian, Jerome, Chrysostom, etc. Council. Carthag. 4
Can. 22, 23, 29, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37. And is confessed by the chiefest Defenders
of Episcopacy.

II. If all Presentiments and Appeals be made to the Bishop and his consistory
alone, it will take from us the Parish-Discipline, (which is granted us) and
cast almost all Discipline out of the Church; as is most apparent to them, that
by experience are acquainted with the quality of our Flocks, and the true
nature of the Pastoral work, considering,

1. How many hundred Churches are in a Diocese.

2. How many thousand persons are in many Parishes; and of those, what a number
are obstinate in wilful gross ignorance or scandal, refusing to be instructed
or admonished by their Pastors.

3. How long, and earnestly, and tenderly, sinners must be dealt with, before
they are cut off by Solemn Excommunication.

4. How unsatisfactory it must be to the conscience of a Bishop or Synod, to
cut off a man as impenitent, upon the bare report of a Minister, before they
have upon full admonition proved him impenitent themselves, especially when too
many Ministers are (to say nothing of a passion that may cause partial
accusation) unable so to manage a reproof and exhortation, as is necessary to
work on the consciences of the People, and to convict Resisters of flat
Impentiencie.

5. What abundance of work the Bishop will have (besides constant preaching,
which will require time for preparation) visiting the several Churches,
confirming all the souls in so many hundred Parishes (which alone is more than
any one man can do aright, if he had nothing else to do) Ordaining, Instituting
and Examining the persons so far as to satisfy a tender conscience (that takes
not all on trust from others, and is but the executor of others Judgments:)
These and much more, with a care of Church-building, Lands, and his own Affairs
and Family, and sicknesses, and necessary absence sometimes, will make this
great additional work (which must be constantly performed for so many hundred
Parishes) to be impossible.

6. Reproofs and suspension will so exasperate the scandalous, that they will
vex the Pastors with numerous Appeals.

7. The Pastors will be undone by traveling and waiting, and maintaining such
multitude of witnesses, as is necessary for the prosecuting of Presentiments,
and answering the Many Appeals.

8. The business will be so odious, chargeable and troublesome, that witnesses
will not come in.

9. The Minister by these prosecutions and attendances, will be taken off the
rest of his ministerial work.

10. Bishops being but men, will be tempted by this intolerable burden, to be
weary of the work, and slubber it over, and cast it upon others, and to
discountenance the most conscionable Ministers that most trouble them with
presentiments: which when the people perceive, they will the more insult, and vex
us with Appeals: So that the discouragements of the Ministers, and the utter
incapacity of the Bishops to perform a quarter of this work, will nullify
Discipline, as leaving it impossible, Experience has told us this too long.

And then when our Communion is thus polluted with all that are most incapable
through ignorance, Scandal, and contempt of Piety,

1. Ministers will be deterred from their Administrations to subjects so
incapable.

2. Bishops that are tender-conscienced, will be deterred from undertaking so
impossible a work, and of so ill success.

3. And men that have least tenderness of conscience, and care of souls, and
fear of Gods displeasure, will seek for and intrude into both places.

4. And the tender-conscienced people will be tempted to speak hardly of such
undisciplined Churches, and of the Officers, and to withdraw from them.

5. And hereby they will fall under the displeasure of Superiors, and the scorn
of the Vulgar, that have no religion, but what is subservient to their flesh.

6. And so whilst the most pious are brought under discountenance and
reproach, and the most impious get the reputation of being most regular and
obedient to their Rulers; Piety it self will grow into disesteem, and impiety
escape its due disgrace. And this has been the cause of our Calamities.

II. As to Liturgy. It is matter of very great joy and thankfulness to us,
that we have heard your Majesty more than once so resolutely promising, that
none should suffer for not using the Common Prayer and Ceremonies; but you
would secure them from the penalties in the Act for Uniformity, as that which
your Declaration at Breda intended: And to find here so much of your Majesty's
Clemency in your gracious concession for a future Emendation. But we humbly
crave leave to acquaint your Majesty,

1. That it greives us after all, to hear that it is given in charge by the
Judges at the Assizes to indite men upon that Act, for not using the
Common Prayer.

2. That it is not only some obsolete words, and other expressions that are
offensive.

3. That many scruple, using some part of the Book as it is, lest they be
guilty of countenancing the whole, yet would use it when reformed.

Therefore we humbly crave, that your Majesty would here declare, that it is
your Maje^^^es pleasure, that none be punished or troubled for not using the
Book of Common Prayer, til it be effectually reformed, by Divines of both
persuasions equally deputed thereunto. And that your Majesty will procure that
moderation in the imposition hereafter, which we before desired.

III. Concerning Ceremonies. Returning our humble thanks for your Majesty's
gracious Concessions (of which we are assured you will never have cause to
repent:) We further crave,

1. That your Majesty will leave out those words in your Declaration,
concerning us [That we do not in our Judgments believe the practice of those
particular Ceremonies which we accept against to be in it self unlawful] for we
have not so declared our Judgments. Indeed, we have said, That treating in
order to an happy uniting of our Brethren through the Land; our work is not to
say, what is our own opinion, or what will satisfy us, but what will satisfy
so many as may procure the said Union. And we have said, that some think them
flatly unlawful, some but inconvenient; some think some of them unlawful in
themselves, and others but inconvenient; and while the Imposer thinks them but
indifferent, we conceived they might reasonably be entreated to let them go,
for the saving of their Brethrens consciences, and the Churches peace. We are
sure that a Christians conscience should be tender of adding to, or diminishing
from the matter of Gods Worship in the smallest point. The Laws of God being
herein the only perfect Rule, Deuteronomy. 12.32. And that Synod infallibly guided by
the Holy Ghost, would lay upon the Churches no other burden but necessary
things, Act. 15.28. And that for things indifferent, Christians should not
despise or judge each other, Romans 14. Much less by silencing the able and
faithful Ministers of the Gospel, to punish the Flock even in their Souls, for
the tolerable differences and supposed mistakes of Ministers. We doubt not but
Peter and Paul went to Heaven without the Ceremonies in question.

And seeing your Majesty well expresses it [That the Universal Church cannot
introduce one Ceremony in the worship of God that is contrary to Gods Word,
expressed in the Scriptures.] And multitudes of the Protestants at home and
abroad do think that all Mystical, Sacramental Rites of human^ Institution, are
contrary to the very perfection of Gods Law, and to Deuteronomy. 12.32. etc. (though
the determination of mere circumstances necessary in (...) be not so) and
therefore dare not use them for fear of the displeasure^ of God the Universal
Sovereign. It must needs be an expression of your Majesty's wisdom, and
tenderness of Gods honor, and the safety of your peoples souls, to refuse in
things unnecessary to drive men upon apprehended sin, and upon the wrath of
God, and the terrors of a condemned conscience.

2. We beseech your Majesty to understand, that it is not our meaning by the
word [Abolishing] to crave a prohibition against your own, and other men's
liberty in the things in question. But it is a full liberty we desire, such as
should be in unnecessary things, and such as will tend to the concord of your
people, Viz. That there be no Law nor Canon for or against them, commanding,
recommending, or prohibiting them; as now there is none for any particular
gesture in singing of Psalms, where liberty preserves an uninterrupted Unity.

For the particular Ceremonies.
I. We humbly crave, as to Kneeling, in the Act of receiving the Lords Supper,
that your Majesty will declare a Liberty therein, that none shall be troubled
for receiving it standing, or sitting. And your Majesty's Expressions [upon
Reasons best (if not only) known to our selves] commands us to render some of
our Reasons.

1. We are sure Christ and his Apostles sinned not, by not receiving it
kneeling; and many are sure* that by kneeling they should not sin: And
therefore for the better security, though not for absolute necessity, we crave
leave to take the safest side.

2. We are sure that Kneeling in any Adoration at all in any Worship on any
Lords day in the year, or any Week day between Easter and Penticost, was not
only dis-used, but forbidden by General Councils, (as Council. Nicen. 1 (...)
20. Council. Trull. etc.) and disclaimed by Ancient Writer^; and this as a
general uncontrolled Tradition: and therefore that Kneeling in the Act of
Receiving, is a Novelty contrary to the Decrees and practice of the Church for
many hundred years after the Apostles. And if we part with the venerable
Examples of all Antiquity, where it agrees with Scripture, (and that for
nothing) we shall depart from the Terms which most Moderators think necessary
for the reconciling of the Churches; and Novelty is a Dishonor to any part of
Religion. And if Antiquity be honorable, the most ancient and nearest the
Legislation and Fountain, must be most honorable: and it is not safe to
intimate a Charge of Unreverence upon all the Apostles and primitive
Christians, and the universal Church, for so many hundred years together of its
purest time.

3. Though our meaning be good, it is not good to show a needless countenance
of the practice of Adoring the Bread as God, when it is used by Papists round
about us. Says Bishop Hall in his Life, p. 20. I had a dangerous Conflict with
a Sorbonist, who took occasion by our kneeling at the receipt of the Eucharist,
to persuade all the company of our Acknowledgment of a Transubstantiation.

4. Some of us that could rather kneel than be deprived of the Communion,
should yet suffer much before we durst put all others from the Communion that
durst not take it kneeling; which therefore we crave that we may not be put
upon.

II. We humbly crave also, that the Religious observation of Holy days of
humane Institution, may be declared to be left indifferent, that none be
troubled for not observing them.

III. We humbly tender your Majesty our thanks for your gracious Concession of
liberty as to the Cross and Surplice, and bowing at the Name Jesus, rather than
Christ, or God: But we further humbly beseech your Majesty,

1. That this liberty in forbearing the Surplice may extend to Colleges and
Cathedrals also, that it drive not thence all those that scruple it, and make
those places receptive only for a party. And that the Youth of the Nation may
have just liberty as well as the Elder. If they be engaged in the Universities,
and their Liberties there cut off in their beginning, they cannot afterward be
free* and many hopeful persons will be else diverted from the Service of the
Church.

2. That your Majesty will endeavor the repealing of all Laws and Canons by
which these Ceremonies are imposed, that they may be left at full Liberty.

We also tender our thanks to your Majesty for your gracious Concession of the
forbearance of the Subscription required by the Canon. But,

1. We humbly acquaint your Majesty, that we do not dissent from the Doctrine
of the Church of England expressed in the Articles and Homilies; but it is the
controverted passages about Government, Liturgy and Ceremonies, and some
by-passages and phrases in the Doctrinal part, which are scrupled by those
whose liberty is desired. Not that we are against subscribing the proper Rule
of our Religion, or any meet Confession of Faith: Nor do we scruple the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy: Nor would we have the door left open for Papists
and Heretics to come in.

2. We take the boldness to say, that since we have had the promises of your
gracious indulgence herein, and upon diverse Addresses to your Majesty and the
Lord Chancellor, had comfortable encouragement to expect our Liberty; yet
cannot Ministers procure Institution without renouncing their Ordination by
Presbyters, or being re-ordained, nor without Subscription, and the Oath of
Canonical Obedience.

3. We must observe with fear and grief, that your Majesty's Indulgence and
Concession of Liberty in this Declaration, extends not either to the
abatement of Reordination, or of Subscription at Ordination, or the Oath of
Obedience to the Bishops.

We therefore humbly and earnestly crave, that your Majesty will declare your
pleasure,

1. That Ordination and Institution and Induction, may be conferred without the
said Subscription or Oath.

2. That none be urged to be re-ordained, or denied Institution for want of
Ordination by Prelates, that was ordained by Presbyters.

3. That none be judged to have forfeited his Presentation, or Benefice, or be
deprived of it, for not reading those Articles of the 39. that contain the
controverted points of Government and Ceremonies.

Lastly. We humbly crave, that your Majesty would not only grant us this
liberty, till the next Synod; but will endeavor that the Synod be impartially
chosen; and that your Majesty will be pleased to endavour the procurement of
such Laws, as shall be necessary for our security till the Synod, and for the
ratification of moderate healing Conclusions afterward. And that nothing by
mere Canon be imposed on us, without such Statute-Laws of Parliament.

These favors (which will be injurious to none) if your people may obtain of
your Majesty, it will revive their hearts to daily and earnest Prayer for your
prosperity, and to rejoice in the thankful acknowledgement of that gracious
providence of Heaven, that has blessed us in your Restoration, and put it
into your heart to heal our breaches, and to have compassion on the faithful
people in your Dominions, who do not petition you for liberty to be
Schismatical, Factious, Seditious, or abusive to any; but only for leave to
obey the Lord that Created and Redeemed them, according to that Law, by which
they must all be shortly judged to everlasting Joy or Misery* and it will
excite them to, and unite them in the cheerful service of your Majesty, with
their Estates and lives, and to transmit your deserved Praise to Posterity.

FINIS.

