Sacrilegious Desertion OF THE HOLY MINISTRY REBUKED, AND Tolerated Preaching
of the GOSPEL VINDICATED, Against the Reasonings of a Confident Questionist, in
a Book called [Toleration not to be abused.] With Counsel to the
NONCONFORMISTS, And Petition to the PIOUS CONFORMISTS.

By one that is Consecrated to the Sacred Ministry, and is resolved not to be
a wilful Deserter of it, in trust that any undertakers, can justify him for
such desertion at the Judgment of God; till he know better how those can come
off themselves, who are unfaithful Pastors, or unjust Silencers of others.

1 Cor. 9. 16. For though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of: For
necessity is laid upon me, yea woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel.

1 Timothy 1. 12. and 2. 9. and 3. 6. For which cause I suffer these things,
nevertheless I am not ashamed, etc.

1 These. 2. 15, 16. Who both killed the Lord Jesus and their own Prophets, and
have persecuted us, etc.

Printed in the Year, 1672.

Tolerated Preaching OF Christ's Gospel VINDICATED.
CHAP. I.
Of the Author and the Title.
SECT. I.
I Am one my self that am so greatly desirous of His Majesty's Clemency, and
that this present Toleration should not be abused by any, especially silenced
Ministers; that if this had been all that Author endeavored, I should
earnestly ^e seconded him. And I am not without fear of the Weakness, Rashness,
Injudiciousness and Imprudence of some that yet are earnest and profitable
Preachers. But when I find that by not- abusing our Liberty, he means,
not-using it, and that he has the face to exhort us to desert our Office, when
the King does hinder them from forcible restraining us; and that, when it is
Gods work which we are vowed to, he comes to us (as the old Prophet) in Gods
name, to charge us to forbear it, my Conscience bids me help to save the weaker
sort that need it, from such pernicious fallacies. And if I speak plainly of
the quality of his arguings, I desire the Reader not to interpret it, as if I
had not the heartyest desire of Peace, and all Brotherly Love and Concord with
all conformable, godly, faithful Ministers. But words are not answered
according to their nature, when the nature of them is not opened.

Sect. 2. Who the Author is, and why he resolves his Question on the
Presbyterian Principles, and passes by the Episcopal Non-conformists, as if he
were so ignorant of the present State of England, as not to know that there are
many such (when at the Kings return, 1660. it was Bishop Ushers Form of
Episcopal Government which they all offered for Concord, who were employed in
that work) these are little matters, not to be insisted on. Only I shall tell
him that I have met with few Presbyterian Ministers in England: though most
have that name given them in their Licenses. A Presbyterian is one that is [For
the Divine Right of Ruling-Elders, unordained, having no Power to Preach and
Administer Sacraments; and for the Government of the Church by Presbyteries,
Classes, and Synods, composed of Teaching-Elders in Parity with these
Ruling-Elders Conjunct, so that a General Assembly of them is the true
Ecclesiastical Head of a National-Church.] Of late, a Presbyterian is like the
Puritan of old: A word which has as many and as bad significations, as
speakers have diversity of designs or intents. In one man's mouth a Presbyterian
is an Episcopal Protestant of the soberest sort, who is neither for Sects, nor
for Church-Tyranny; and so impudency has called them Presbyterians many years,
who offered the said Episcopal Form, which A. Bishop Usher proved to be the
true Government of the ancient Churches. And so we have made Episcopal
Presbyterians, who are against unordained Elders, and for Bishops. In another
mouth a Presbyterian is one that is resolute against Popery. In another mouth
a Presbyterian is one that is for the serious practice of a holy life. In
another man's mouth a Presbyterian is one that is against Bishops. And so
Independents and many others Sects would be Presbyterians too. And in other
men's mouths a Presbyterian is one that is of Bishop Reynolds, and Dr.
Stillingfleets judgment, that no Form of Government (besides the mere Pastoral
Office, and Church Assemblies) is prescribed in the Word of God, but variously
left to variety of occasions. Among all these, when you speak with a Railing
Ruffian, he must tell you which he means himself: But when we meet with a
Divine that understands the common use of the Word, we must take him to use
it in the first proper sense. In which sense I say again, that I am acquainted
with few comparatively that are for Presbytery; but I know many that are for
Pastoral Administration without Church-Tyranny or Schism.

Sect. 3. As the Author honors himself with the praise of being a Lover of
the Truth and Peace (which commendation all the contending parties, from the
Papist to the Quaker are as ready to give themselves) so I hope I shall the
easilier obtain his pardon, if (believing him) I shall prove that it is Truth
and Peace which he opposes. And if I offer him a better way to secure them;
assuring him that I agree with him in his main design, to bring the Conformists
and Non-conformists nearer, and to a more amicable concord in the Work of God,
and not to drive any further from mutual Communion than they are.

CHAP. II.
The Nonconformists Resolutions, and the true State of the Case to be debated.
Sect. 1. BE it known to the Reader, that the name of Nonconformists was not
made by our selves, but by others, (as the names of the four Confessors, Dan.
1. was). The Titles which we assume, as signifying our own professed Religion,
are but these, our Religion is Christian, and no other; In opposition to
dividing Sects we are Catholics* In contradistinction from Heretics, we
cleave to the Scripture as our Rule; In contradistinction from the Roman Schism
and Corruptions we are Protestants, that is, we protest to cleave to simple
Christianity, and to the Primitive purity and simplicity against their
introduced Novelties and Vanities.

Sect. 2. As to the Point of Church Government and Worship (the quarrel of the
present age) 1. We easily confess that we are not all of a mind; which is no
cause of alienation of affections, nor should be a cause of mutual
persecutions; It being our judgment that Christians are to bear with one
another in greater matters, than Episcopal, Presbyterians, Independents, and
Anabaptists disagree in. And if any among us have done otherwise heretofore, it
was from a Vice Homogeneal to that of the present Conformists, which now they
smart for; and the Conformists may repent of in due time.

Sect. 3. We take not the name of Nonconformists to be such a Cothurnus or Hose
drawn over the several parties by your prudence as shall make them one, or tie
them closer together than Conformists and Nonconformists are. I pray you try,
if you will not believe us, whether Papists or Quakers take us or you for their
greater Adversaries. Remember how after the Fire of London the Papists in Print
did court you as men much nearer unto them than we are, and much liker to
befriend them. And I doubt you will never make them think otherwise. We take
you for men of the same Religion with us, and much fitter for our Communion,
than such Nonconformists as Papists and Quakers are.

Sect. 4. But we that suffer from you (Hear it now, for you shall hear it from
God ere long,) all the Poverty, Confinements, Calamities, Silencings that have
been inflicted on us, because we would not subscribe, say, swear, and do -- you
know what; can no more go against our Consciences, in Conforming to one
another, than to you. Therefore you must not think that Episcopal,
Presbyterian, Independent, and Anabaptists, will be ever the more of a mind for
this Toleration. Till Reason change their Opinions, they will live according to
their different Principles, though they love each other, and live in peace. And
because you seem to be ignorant of their Principles and Purposes, I will tell
you some of them, that concern the matter in hand.

Sect. 5. 1. They take a Ministry to be ordinarily necessary to the propagating
of the Gospel and the saving of Souls, Romans 10. 14, 15. Act. 20. 17, 18, etc.
2. They suppose that this Ministry does not save men, as Wizards think that
Charms do heal men, by their Presence, Titles, Names, or Habits; By standing in
the Reading-place, or Pulpit, or being called the Parson of the Parish, or
saying his set words over them when they are dead: But by such public and
personal, frequent, plain, serious Instructions, as are suited to their
ignorance security, presumption, hardheartedness, and love to sin; and such as
in other cases would be thought fit to change men's minds and lives. 3. They
suppose that when a well, commended Speech has been said to ignorant
impenitent people, one day in a week, without any personal familiar conference
to set it home, and make it more intelligible, the most make but little more of
it, than if it had been said to them in an unknown Tongue, or at least remain
still ignorant and impenitent. Yea, if Forms of Catechisms themselves be taught
them, it is ordinary with them year after year to say the Forms, and never
understand the matter signified. 4. They suppose that a greater number of the
conformable Priests, than they are willing to mention, do Preach so ignorantly
and dully in the Pulpits, and do so little of this personal or private work
besides, as that there is great need of a far greater number of assistants,
than all the present Nonconformists be. 5. They find that some places, of many
years past, have had no Ministers at all. 6. They are not able to confute the
people in too many places, who tell them that their public Priests are so
defective in their necessary qualifications for their Office, as that they hold
it unlawful to own such for true Ministers, and to encourage them by their
presence, or commit the care of their Souls to such. 7. They think that some
other places have godly, able Conformable Ministers, whom the Christian people
love and honor. 8. They think that Parish bounds of Churches, are of humane
prudential Constitution, and not of Divine Institution, or unchangeable. 9.
They think that a Parish, quatenus a Parish, is not a Church; nor a
Parishioner, as such a Churchmember; for Infidels, Papists, Heretics,
Schismatics and Dissenters may be Parishioners. 10. They think that the
Magistrate has the power of the Temples and Tithes, and public Maintenance
and Liberty, but that he has not the power of Ordination or Degradation; but a
man may be a true Minister without his consent, and so I think all Christians
hold. 11. They think that some of the Nonconformists were true Pastors of their
several Flocks, before they were silenced and cast out. 12. They think that the
ejecting them from the Temples and Tithes did not degrade them, nor make them
no true Pastors to their Flocks. 13. They think that the Magistrates putting
another Parish Minister in possession of the Temple and Tithes, did not
dissolve the foresaid relation of the former. 14. They think yet that prudence
requires Minister and People to consent to such a Dissolution of their
Relations, where they cannot hold it without greater hurt than benefit: Yea,
and to consent that the imposed Minister be their Pastor, when he is fit
himself, and the Worship performed by him fit for them to join in. 15. But
where both are fit, they know no reason but they may take both the Ejected and
the Imposed Person conjunctly for their Pastors, each being to Administer to
the same Church, according to their various Liberties and Capacities. 16. They
greatly difference between London and such like populous Cities, and Country
Parishes, because the burning of Churches, the greatness of Parishes, and the
paucity of Ministers in London is such, that the tenth person in several
Parishes cannot come to Church if they would. 17. In such places therefore they
purpose to hold their Meetings at the time of the Parish meeting, because it
will be no hindrance to it. 18. So they do also in those Parishes where the
Parish Priest is unfit to be owned in that Relation. 19. Where there is a
faithful Pastor in the Parish Church whom yet half the people cannot hear, they
will not draw the people from him, nor disparage him to hinder the success of
his labors, but rather persuade them to honor him, hear him, and obey his
Doctrine; and to judge of the Tolerated Minister but as of his fellow servant,
of the same Religion, helping in the same Work, where all our labors are too
little. 20. Where the Parish Minister is faithful, and the Parish small enough,
and near enough to Assemble in one place, and the people satisfied with the
Liturgy, I suppose the soberest of the Nonconformists (for they are not all of
a mind) will gather no Church out of that Parish, but will join with that
Parish Church and Minister (supposing them united by consent) and will use
their own Ministerial Assistance, at such other times, and place, and manner,
as shall best tend to keep up Love and Concord, and to further and not hinder
the successes of the public Minister. 21. I hope no man worthy the name of a
Minister, will dream that England should have no more Teachers, than there are
(or are like to be) Nonconformists: Or will think it his duty to hinder the
Labors of any sober Protestant Ministers: Nay, I hope they will all understand,
that it was never more their Duty nor their Interest to cherish all brotherly
Love and Concord with such; and woe be to that man who ever he be, whether a
Selfish envious Conformist, or a Schismatical factious Nonconformist, that
after all such sins and sad experience of the fruits, shall yet hinder the
Concord of Protestant Christians, I had almost said, or that does not heartily
and diligently promote it. 22. He that had rather ten thousand persons stayed
idly at home, or went to Sports or Drinking, in Stepney parish, or Giles
Cripplegate, or Sepulchers, or Martins in the Fields, or Giles in the Fields,
or Clement Danes, etc. than a Nonconformist should preach to them, I will not
soul my paper by calling him as he deserves, though he pretend that gathering
a Church out of a Church, is a thing that he opposes.

23. In all these Cases following, the Nonconformists will hold distinct
Church Assemblies from the Parish Churches. 1. Where the Parish Church is not
capable of them, as was last instanced, by reason of the number. 2. When the
Parish Priest is one to whom wise men may not commit the care of their Souls,
and one whose Ministry is not to be owned, (I would there were none such.) 3.
When the Ejected Minister in foro conscientiae and Ecclesiae vere sic dictae,
retains still his Ancient Relation to his Flock, and part of them
Schismatically separate from him, and join with an intruder publicly, that
never had a lawful Call, and the other half separate not from their ancient
Pastor. Its possible the obtruder, though he have the Temple, may be the
Schismatic. Ask Dr. Wild, and Dr. Gunning whether they thought not so 14.
years ago. 4. It may be some that are more complyant than my self with good
peoples weaknesses and humors, when there is none of the foresaid Reasons, may
rather choose to be Pastors to honest Separatists, or Anabaptists, than by
deserting them to leave them to do worse. And what great matter of injury or
provocation should this seem to any peaceable man? Envy is too odious a thing
for any Servant of Christ to own. Is it in the power of Anabaptists to bring
all their judgments to yours. And till they can, must they be quite cast off.
Who knows not how many Ages the Novatians were tolerated by the wisest and
godlyest Emperors and Bishops; yea, what black characters are given by pious
Historians, of Ithacius, and his fellow Bishops, who first in France did set
the Sword awork even against Heresies, and of Cyril at Alexandria, who first as
a Bishop used it himself. 5. But that is not all: What if any number of persons
as good as you, shall think that the Liturgy is guilty of all the Disorders
and Defects which once were charged on it, and of some Doctrinal Corruptions
since: And what if they think that the Parish Churches are void of Christ's true
Discipline, and are under an Alien, one which they judge unlawful. What if they
say that yet your Churches may be true Churches, and all this may be submitted
to, when we can have and do no better; but he that can serve God in a manner
more agreeable to his Word, is bound to do it; and not to offer God the worst,
when the King allows us to do our best. And if withal they say, that you
refuse them and they refuse not you: You will not give them the Lords Supper,
unless they take it kneeling (which I think they may do, but they think
otherwise) you will not Baptize their Children without the transient Image of
the Cross as a dedicating sign, etc. If in this case they choose a distinct
Church-Assembly and Pastor, and Mode of Worship; what harm ^s this to you or
any one, and why should it break Love and Peace? 24. But in this last Case I
suppose the most of the Nonconformists that live in Country Parishes which have
good Ministers of their own, will not call themselves a distinct Church
(totally) but will hold their meetings as Chappel-Meetings are held; Preaching
the Word and Communicating in the Sacraments in the best way they can among
themselves; but so as not to unchurch the Parish Church as none, or to withdraw
themselves from their Communion; but will keep all loving correspondence with
them, and seasonably sometimes Communicate with them, to show their principles
by their practice. For the benefit of Christian Love and Concord, may make it
best for certain seasons to join even in defective Modes of Worship, as Christ
did in the Synagogues and Temple in his time. Though the least defective must
be chosen when no such accidental reasons sway the other way. And perhaps some
Nonconformists own Administrations may be as defective as the Liturgy. 25.
Where the people are satisfied with the Parish Church Communion, I suppose the
Nonconformists will only help to instruct them at seasonable times, and not
meddle with the Sacramental Administrations. 26. The same practice may be done
on various Principles; and many Nonconformists may gather Churches in the
forenamed Cases, without turning Separatists, or forsaking any of their former
principles. Their differences will appear in these respects. 1. They will not
pronounce any of your Parish Churches Null, which have lawful Ministers. 2.
They will not say that your Worship is such as no man may lawfully Communicate
in. 3. They still hold that Parish-bounds are very convenient (though not
absolutely necessary) to be Church-bounds: not taking every Parishione to be of
the Church, but none (ordinarily) but Parishioners to be of the Church. 4. They
are driven from the Parish-Ministry against their wills, and had far rather
hold their ancient stations. 5. They will thankfully return to them when ever
they have leave; And earnestly pray that these seemings and shows of separation
may cease, the occasion of them being taken away. 6. They prefer their own
manner of worshipping God, as better than the Liturgy in their opinion, and
therefore to be chosen when they may choose; but they account it not the only
acceptable Worship, but are present with you in spirit, desiring a part in the
prayers of all true Christians in the world. 7. They set not up the
Church Government of the People over the Pastors, or themselves, nor any of the
rest of the Separatists proper principles of Church Government. 8. Lastly, they
desire nothing more than as Neighbour-Ministers in love and concord to carry on
with you the same work of Christ. And in all these they differ from
Separatists, though they gather Churches.

26. The grand Difficulty to the Nonconformists in their present condition,
lies but in this one case, Whether in competent Parishes, which have able and
godly Conformable Ministers, the obligation to hold Union and Communion with
the Parish Church, or the obligation to exercise a more regular way of
Church Discipline and Worship than the Parish Churches do or will do, should be
judged the more prevalent; And consequently whether they should gather Churches
out of Churches in this case. For in the other forementioned cases the answer
is more easy. I shall give my own opinion as follows: 1. It is lawful and a
duty to be a member of such a Parish Church, when we can have and do no better.
2. We cannot have or do better, when it cannot be without a greater hurt to the
Public Interest of the Gospel, the Church, and the Souls of other men, than
the benefit to us and others is like to countervail. That cannot be done
lawfully which cannot be done without doing more hurt than good, and destroying
the end.

Obj. We must do that which God bids us, and leave it to him what shall be the
success.

Ans. True. But you must prove then that God bids you do it; for we will not
take your word. A^^^^matives bind not to all times: No duty is at all times a
duty; Nay, out of season it is a sin. He that says, Pray continually, would
not have you pray when you should preach or hear, or be quenching a Fire in the
Town: He that commanded Sacrifice, set some to learn the meaning of these words
[I will have mercy, and not sacrifice.] There is few of you but would forbear a
Sermon or Prayer to save your own or others Lives: And you receive the
Sacrament but once a month (at most) which the Primitive Churches used every
Lords Day. 3. The same practice than in one place (where it will do more good
than hurt) is a duty, which in another place (where it will do more hurt than
good) is a sin. 4. The Case is now of so great moment that no Minister should
rashly determine it for himself, nor upon the desires of some of the people
only, but should consult with wise and sober men that are impartial. 5. The
benefits to be expected and compared, are these, 1. The pleasing of God (when
we know it is his will) and the profit of men's Souls, by the most regular
manner of Discipline and Worship. 2. The setting up an imitable example of
right Discipline and Worship to other Churches (but then woe to them that set
up a worse.) 3. The satisfying the Consciences of some honest mistaking people,
who think (erroneously) that a Conforming Minister may not be Communicated
with, or at least not in the use of the Liturgy, or in a Parish Church, or
that the Sacrament may not be received kneeling. 6. The evils to be feared, and
compared with the benefits, are these. 1. The exasperating of the minds of
persons for number or quality considerable, and so alienating them from their
brethren, and hindering their good. 2. And thereby weakening the Protestant
interest, in a time which requires our greatest Concord. 3. And the setting of
parties against parties, and Churches against Churches, and turning Religion
into contentions and mutual oppositions. 4. And the countenancing of unlawful
separations, which will all shelter themselves under such examples; and the
dividers will not see the different principles on which we go, while our
practice seems to be the same. 5. And so it may be injurious to future Ages,
by seeming to give them presidents for unlawful separations. 6. And it is not
the least evil consequent, that we shall cherish not only the Error of those
that think worse of the Parish-Worship and Assemblies than there is cause; but
we shall also accidentally nourish their pride, who will think themselves a
holier people, because they Erroniously over-censure the persons and practices
of others. 7. The prime great obligation for the cure of all this, does I Will
upon some of the conforming side; It were easy for them, not to silence
Christ's Ministers that are as wise and good as themselves. It were easy for
them, not to punish a godly person so heavily as an Excommunication comes to,
for the weakness of scrupling a Sacrament-gesture; and not to punish their
Children with being unchristened, or themselves with Excommunication, who think
the dedicating Image of the Cross unlawful, or think it their own duty to enter
their own Children into the Covenant of God, rather than Godfathers that have
no propriety in them, and they are sure never intend to take them for their
own, or use them as they covenant to do. 8. If on such occasions, true godly
Christians are cast out of their Parish-Churches, whether they err or not, all
Ministers are neither obliged, nor allowed to desert them, and so to add
cruelty and affliction to the afflicted. 9. They that think they answer all by
saying that these peoples scruples are but Errors, do but 1. Show their
self-esteem, who can call that Error which they have said so little to prove
to be so (in some of their instances.) 2. And he talks neither like a Pastor
nor a Christian, nor a Man, that thinks all that err should be cast out of
the Church. 10. To discern whether in this case a distinct Church is to be
gathered or not, is a work of mere Christian prudence and must be determined by
comparing the good and evil consequences together, and discerning truly which
preponderateth. And he that through Imprudence misjudgeth either way, does
sin. 11. Therefore it is folly, and sin for Ministers (Conformable, or
Nonconformable) to expect that in this, all should go the same way, and to
censure those that differ from their Opinion, when they may be under different
circumstances. 12. They that live in London, where it has ever been usual to
go to Neighbor Parish-Churches from their own, and where custom, and
abundance of accidents make the inconveniences less, have not so much against
their different Church-meetings, as those in Country Towns and Parishes have,
13. Those that live where the Nonconformists are the main body of the people,
and the rest are such for number and quality, whose displeasure is of less
public consequence, have the less against their distinct Church-meetings. 14.
Those who live where the Nonconformists are few, and the Conformists for number
and quality most considerable, and are like to be greatly exasperated by
distinct Churches, must deny their own personal conveniences, rather than
hinder a greater good, and may not do that which others may do. 15. When the
public good forbids it, the tolerated Ministers must not gather distinct
Church Assemblies, but join with the public Churches, and help the people by
their instructions at other times. 16. When the public good forbids it not,
the tolerated Ministers must hold distinct Assemblies, for assistance in
Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, as near as they can to the will of God. But
so as to further, and not disgrace nor hinder, the honest Parish-Ministers;
living with them in Unity, Love, and Peace: and whether de nomine their
Assemblies shall be called distinct Churches, is a case of no great moment,
though I think that it is fittest to take them for distinct Churches, secundum
quid, and not simpliciter, as many Chapels be: Seeing though in the Assemblies
they distinctly worship God, etc. yet they hold personal Communion in a godly
conversation with the rest of the Christians in the Parish, and should
sometimes also assemble with them. And so much for my own opinion in this case.

27. If Christians would but give over the censoriousness, contentions, and
abuse of others, which different Assemblies in the same Town are usually
employed in, I see not what great hurt it would do any, for Anabaptists,
Separatists, etc. that cannot join with the Parish-Churches, to have leave to
meet among themselves, and worship God together in peace.

28. As the weakness of the people inclines them to causeless separations and
disjunctions, so the doleful Pride and Selfishness of the carnal part of the
Clergy, has in most Ages made them too impatient with the peoples weakness;
and make such a noise and stir in the World, if a few do but withdraw from
their Communion, as if all that disowned them, disowned Christ. And all,
because Pride would make every man a God to the World, on whom all must depend,
whom all must honor and obey, and no man must contradict; and all that depart
from them, are supposed to accuse and undervalue them. And thus as of our own
selves, some men arise to draw Disciples after them, so others set the Churches
in a flame, for fear of losing any of their Disciples or esteem; and between
both, how sadly and for how many Ages, have the people of Christ been torn in
pieces. What harm does it me or any other (if my Pride will let me be quiet) if
men that differ from me in some Points of Judgment, do quietly Worship God, by
themselves. But it is so rare for Separated Assemblies, not to make it their
Religion and work, to make others odious, and factiously to draw Disciples and
associates to themselves, that they must also thank themselves, that others are
so impatient with them; so certain it is that all sides are too blame.

29. The right Diocesan holds that a Bishop is essential to a Church, and
consequently that we have no more Churches than Diocesses, and that
Parish-Churches are properly no Churches, but Chapels, or Parts of the
Diocesan-Church: And if so, 1. Then he that separateth from a Parish Church,
separateth from no Church (though we think otherwise.) 2. And as he that went
to any Parish in the Diocese, kept still in his own Church, so a tolerated
Church may be as good, a Church, as such a Parish, and it should not be made a
heinous matter for any to go to it, by them that allow men to go from Parish to
Parish.

30. The Nonconformists hold that the Ministerial Office is not to be taken up
on trial, or for a time, but durante vita cum capacitate; And that it is no
less than, 1. Horrid Sacrilege; 2. Perfidious Covenant Breaking; 3.
Disobedience to God; 4. Cruelty to Souls; 5. And unthankfulness for great
mercies, if any of us shall desert our undertaken Offices (yea though a
silencing Diocesan should forbid us the exercise of it, unjustly.) Therefore
Preach and Officiate while we can, we must.

31. Having told you thus far the Nonconformists Principles, I will add, that
[If there be any such Conformable Clergy men, as first will do all they can to
silence and eject us, and forbid us to Preach the Gospel of Salvation, whilst
many hundred thousands that lie in ignorance and impenitency, need more help,
and then will do all they can to hinder our Restoration, and to keep us
silent: And lastly, when His Majesty's Prudence and Clemency gives us liberty
to Preach, when they can no longer hinder us by force, would stroke us into
silence and neglect of our Office, by a few such silly and confident reasonings
as this Author uses, as if to hinder our Ministry and Labor one way or other
were their interest and work, I will not offend the Readers Ears, by giving
them the name that I think they deserve; but wish them to read, 1 These. 2. 15,
16. And to tell them (by what names or Titles soever they be distinguished)
that I that am a dying man, would be loath to stand in their case before God,
and that if they and I were well agreed, that there is indeed a God, a Christ,
a Heaven, and a Hell, I think we should the easilier be agreed in all the rest
of our differences. Some Teachers need these plain Admonitions.

CHAP. III.
The Questionists stating of his Question considered.
Sect. 1. HAving disclaimed the Approving and Censuring His Majesty's
Declaration, he questioneth [Whether it be advisable, especially for the
Presbyterians, either in Conscience or Prudence, to take advantage from His
Majesty's Declaration, to deny or rebate their Communion with the Parochial
Congregations, and to gather themselves into distinct and separate Churches.

Sect. 2. Here note, 1. That the Episcopal, or Erastian Nonconformists, have
none of his especial advice. 2. That he seems to speak to none in London or
elsewhere who denied their Communion with the Parish-Churches before; but only
to those that would take advantage so to do from His Majesty's Declaration. 3.
That he calls them not Parochial Churches, but Congregations. 4. That he
joyneth two questions into one, which therefore must be distinctly answered.

Sect. 3. My Answer is, 1. It is not advisable for any Nonconformists, who
before held the Parish Congregations to be true Churches, and their communion
lawful, and used to communicate with them, to change these principles, nor to
renounce, or totally forbear such communion. 2. But it is advisable for them,
when they are cast out of the Parish-Ministry, and forbidden to Preach in the
Parish-Temples, but have leave to exercise their Ministry elsewhere,
accordingly elsewhere to exercise it; either in stated, or occasional
Assemblies, that shall be parts or no parts of the Parish-Congregations, as the
variety of places and cases shall require, which Assemblies shall be distinct
and separate from the said Perish-Congregations, either as Chapels be, or
(somewhere) as one Parish-Congregation is separate from another, being not one,
nor in one place, if you will call that separation. But this but for a time,
with Profession of great unwillingness, and of a desire to return into the
Parochial Ministry, as soon as you can procure them leave: But resolving not
to be Idle, Cruel, Sacrilegious, and Perfidious till then, but to live with all
godly conformable Ministers, with Christian Love, and Peace, and Concord, if it
be possible, and you will give them leave.

Sect. 4. When you say [They cannot but understand the Declaration to be a very
strict Prohibition of all such private Meetings as the Law styles Conventicles]
you know not whose understandings you talk of. 1. We know not, that the Law
does not call our House-Meetings, now tolerated (though the door be open)
Conventicles: If not, it had been well for us, if you would have proved it
sooner. 2. And if you are sure that the Law calls none of the Papists
tolerated private Meetings, Conventicles, we knew not so much: And why should
you feign us to be as wise as your self.

Sect. 5. As to your three ways, I answer ^ou;

1. I believe the Presbyterians will join with the Independents, not as a Sect
(as you call them) but in all that they think good and warrantable.

2. That they will exercise their Ministry, as they are by Covenant engaged,
for Christ and men's Souls, and will bear with you, if you call that [setting up
for themselves] (hoping yet that you set not up wholly for your selves that
speak so.)

3. And they will worship God with the Sect of the Diocesan Prelatists in the
Parish-Churches also, as far as will stand with the due exercise of their
proper Ministry: But will not promise you to give over Preaching to become
your constant Auditors or Disciples.

Sect. 6. You understand neither the Men that you talk of, nor their Cause:
they take not the Independents Assemblies to be [the Tents of Enemies;] they
leave terms of Enmity among Brethren, to those that have enmity in their
hearts. Nor do they [tamely deliver up the Cause.] The most Nonconformable
Ministers of my acquaintance, whose judgment I ever asked of that matter, do
seem to think as I my self do, that the Episcopal, Pretbyterians, Independents,
and Erastians, have each of them some Truth and Good which above the rest they
do defend; and each of them some special mistake, where they err above the
rest: And if we could know it, we would take the Best from among them all, and
leave the worst: And not maintain Church-quarrels, under pretense, that we must
not fly to the Enemy, and give up the Cause.

Sect. 7. O the confidence of this Adviser in his own understanding; that dare
say [That he is sure that the Presbyterians have no reason to engage in a way
of public Worship contradistinct to our Parochial Congregations.]

1. That is contradistinct which is not opposite, or adverse, but either
coordinate (as one Parish to another) or subordinate (as a Chapel).

2. And what man! Is a Vow and Dedication to Preach the Gospel, no reason to
Preach it elsewhere, when its forbidden us in your Assemblies? Is the
alienation of Consecrated persons no Sacrilege? Is the notorious need of many
hundred thousand Souls no reason? Is the exercising of a Worship and Discipline
more agreeable to Gods Word than yours (we are ready to give you the proof when
we have leave,) no reason? Is the relieving of many godly Christians, who are
cast out of your communion, because they dare not Conform, no reason? Had we
had leave to have conted the silly reasonings of Mr. Fulwood and some such
other Pamphleteers, produced against the Nonconformists, we had long ago showed
you cause to repress such self esteem, which dare say [I am sure they bave no
reason].

Sect. 8. And this man that is sure they have no reason for it, could instance
in no greater than the Objection, that It will seem an undervaluing their
liberty, and ingratitude to the King.

1. We have no reason to be ungrateful to the King, nor to undervalue our
Liberty.

2. But did that move the London Ministers and others, to Preach all this
while, before the Declaration.

3. When you have proved that Greater Hurt than Good, will follow our Preaching
and Ministry; and when you have proved that though all the Papists in England,
do use the liberty of the Toleration in the Declaration, yet the Nonconformists
must not, but silently leave our sufficient Conformists to do all the work
against Ignorance, Infidelity, Popery, and Sensuality themselves; I say, when
you have proved this well, you may again bless the people with our silence, and
persuade us to silence our selves, when you cannot do it otherwise.

Sect. 9. But he says (p. 6.) Their ingenuity and gratitude to God and the
King will be better expressed by their Conformity, and Loyal obedience to the
known Laws, than by the use of the Liberty permitted to the contrary.

Answ. He knows that we must not give him our Reasons against Conformity. He
cannot but know that many that Conform nor, in all the matters of
Subscriptions, Declarations, Oaths, Discipline, etc. (not meddling with other
men's Consciences,) do think it would be in them a composition of such heinous
crimes, as they do forbear to name them, for fear of seeming to be accusers of
others, and to be unpeaceable: And if he think that such toys, as Mr. Fulwoods,
Mr. Stilemans, and Mr. Hinkleys, etc. should satisfy them, he thinks
contemptibly of their understandings. And he that by such poor temptations as
those, will yield to what their Consciences fear, can scarce tell what he may
not yield to before he dies. Let him procure us leave, but to publish ours
Reasons against Conformity, and then let him tell us that we were better
Conform, when he has answered them. It Is easy to talk when none must confute
him, and to brave it against one whose tongue is tied.

Sect. 10. His next Supposition is, that the matter of this Liberty is evil. I
am glad it is not evil for the Conformists to Preach and Worship God, lest it
would have been lawful to none at all. We are glad that Christ is Preached,
even by them that do it contentiously, in envy and strife, to add to our
Afflictions and Bonds: But we will not our selves give over Preaching, Praying,
nor the rest of the Christian Religion, because such men can call it evil. He
that says our Preaching is evil, may tempt men to think that the Gospel which
we Preach is evil, or that Infidelity, Atheism, Sensuality, and Wickedness
which we Preach against is good or harmless. Is it good in you, and evil in us
to Preach the same Gospel? If you turn to them that Calumniate us of Preaching
Error, or Sedition, the Law is open, our Writings and Doctrine are easily
tried: If we say evil, bear witness of the evil: If not, take heed of calling
it evil, Isa: 5. 20.

CHAP. IV.
Whether to gather themselves into distinct and separate Congregations, is
unlawful in the judgment of the Presbyterians themselves?
Sect. 1. THe proving the Affirmative is his work, page 7, etc. But the
Presbyterians do not love confusion, nor to dispute such blindly-stated
Questions. They distinguish,

1. Between bare Local distinction, and separation; and that which is eminently
called Separation in England, and denominated from the Separatists, which is
[separating from the Parish-Churches, Ministry, and Worship, as being no true
Churches, Ministry and Worship; or at least such as no Christians may lawfully
Communicate with, in Doctrine, Prayer, and Sacraments, when they can have no
better.] In the former sense (as is said) one Parish Church is separate from
another. And if there be any difference in their Forms or Modes of Worship; so
was there between Basil at Caesarea, and the Church at Neocesarea, and between
Rome and Millane, and between almost all the Catholic Bishops for many hundred
years. And so now, one Parish-Minister prays freely in the Pulpit after
Sermon, and before; another by a Form; a third bids prayer before; and a
fourth prays not afterward at all. And yet these are not separated Churches,
any otherwise than Locally and in such Modal differences.

2. They distinguish between a Parish Church that imposes nothing on the
Ministers or People that God forbids, and one that does.

3. And between a Parish Church that is Reformable* in that which notoriously
needs Reformation; and one that solemnly Covenanteth against Reformation.

4. They distinguish between a Parish Church that is such, and owneth it self
for such: And a Parish-Congregation that has no proper Bishop, nor Pastor who
has the power of the Keys of Government, but is called by its Rulers only a
part of a Church, (Diocesan) and the Minister, but the Diocesan Bishops-Curat.

5. They distinguish between a Parish Church where the Ministers in question
are forbidden to preach, and the People to have the Sacrament, or their
Children to be baptized, unless they will say and do such things, as they dare
not do for fear of God's displeasure; And a Parish Church, that drives none
such away from Ministry or Communion. And now will this Adviser prove that what
any Presbyterians ever said in one case, must reach to all others, that are so
different.

Sect. 2. He next questioneth, 1. [Do you not allow our Parochial Churches to
be true Churches?]

Answ. Yea, those of them that have true Pastors, but no others, (in a
political or organized sense.)

2. Quest. [And will you not account such Congregations as shall be gathered to
your allowed places to be true Churches also?]

Answ. In some places we will, and in some we will take them but as parts of
the Parish Church; And in some we will take them but for temporary Assemblies,
waiting for a fixed better state; And in some we will take them for Churches
secundum quid, but not simpliciter; Even as the case of each particular place
requires.

Sect. 3. And hence follows the cry of Schism, Independents, Brownists, rank
Separatists, etc. As if the Ministers of Christ did know no difference between
noise and sense. Yea, we are told of Schism from the Church of England, when I
would give him all the money in my purse, to make me understand what the Church
of England is.

1. I know that the King is the Civil-Head or Governor of it. But it is a
Constitutive Ecclesiastical Head that must denominate it, as an essential part.

2. I take it for granted he speaks of a Church organized in a proper political
sense, as constituted of a Pars regens, and a Pars subdita; and not as an
ungoverned Community.

3. I take it for granted that we have two Archbishops, and they tell me, that
one is not under the Government of the other. And if that be true, we may have
a Church of Canterbury, and a Church of York, but no one Church of England as
denominated from one of them as Head.

4. I take it for granted that the Convocation is not the Constitutive-Head, 1.
Because it is so seldom in being, that then we should seldom have a Church of
England: For the Essence cease with the essential part. 2. And the Canon
thundreth against them that deny the Convocation to be the
Representative-Church of England. If it mean of the whole Church, Pastors and
People, then the People rule, and make Canons by them (as the Separatists
hold:) And it is the Head of the Church only that we enquire after. If they
mean the Clergy, then the Representative-Church or Head must be somewhat
distinct from the Real represented. If it be the whole Clergy that is the Real
Represented-Church or Head, then we are Popular, or Presbyterian; for the
Presbyters are the major part by far. And what Rulers are they that never rule
the Church as one, by themselves, but only by Representatives. I confess easily
that many Churches united under one King, and living in one Kingdom, and having
thereby special opportunity for Synods, and Correspondence and Concord, may be
called one Church, by a denomination, 1. accidental, 2. and humane, not used in
Scripture; And we will not be so quarrelsome as to avoid that language where
men will needs use it: But it is the Thing, and not the Name, that we enquire
of: What is that One Essential Constitutive-Head which makes the Churches of
England to be all one Church, in a proper political sense, that is, as a
Governed-Society? None question the Civil-Head; none question the need of
Communion and Agreement among all these Churches. But the Question is only of
the one Ecclesiastic Constitutive Head. And if you will have the Question to
be de nomine, pardon us for holding that forma denominat. But if you will
denominate many Churches [One] from One Accident, instead of One Individual
Form or Essence; and if you will use terms in Divine Matters, which God never
so used in his Word, we contend not against you, but only desire to understand
you, when you charge us with Schism from the Church of England. We have
observed what has been the effect of such another enterprise in the Roman
Empire: It was thought meet by Princes that where the Empire was One, the
Church should be in some sort One also, which was under them. Whereupon Rome
had the chief Patriarchate. But in time, 1. this Humane-Unity (name and thing)
is pretended to be Divine; 2. And this One Imperial Church (under one Emperor)
is taken to be One Universal Church; as if the Indians, Persians, and all other
Christians (even the Abassian Empire) had been part of it, and the Orbis
Romanus had been Orbis Universalis. 3. And then no man is a Christian that is
not baptized into this Papal Church, and made a Subject of the Pope. Tell us
what you mean by our Schism from the Church of England? We divide not our
selves from the King or Kingdom, or from the particular Churches as concordant
in any necessary thing. If it be only that we agree not with the Major Vote in
all Subscriptions, Oaths, Discipline or Ceremonies: No more did the Bishops in
the Roman Empire, who had various Liturgies; nor Gildas with the Britains, nor
Ambrose and Martin with the French and Italian Bishops; nor the Episcopal party
in Scotland heretofore with the Presbyterians, when they were the major part.
Is every difference in things unnecessary from the major part, a Schism from
them? The Bishops thought not so in England fifteen years ago: We do not go so
far with you, as Gildas with his British Clergy, who pronounced him non eximium
Christianum, no excellent Christian, that called them Priests or Ministers, and
not rather Proditores, Traitors, as he himself did. Nor do we make such a
Schism as Martin seemed to do, who renounced Communion with the Bishops and
their Synods (all his life) who had prosecuted the Priscilianists with the
Secular Sword. Yet neither of these holy men are called Separatists or
Schismatics.

But perhaps it is our Disobedience to the Church that is our Schism from it.
1. But every one that makes himself an Ecclesiastical Governor over other
Pastors and Churches, is not therefore their rightful Lord. The King we know,
and his Officers we know, but we know not all that call themselves our Lords or
Masters. Not but that obedience is the easiest course of life, to a quiet
humble mind: But fidelity to our King commands the disowning of Usurpers.

2. We confess that we do not actually obey the Civil unquestionable Power in
every particle about Gods Worship which has been commanded us; I need not tell
you why. No more did the Christians for three hundred years after Christ; nor
the Orthodox Bishops in the days of Constantius, Valens, etc. nor the
Protestants now in France, nor the Calvinists now in Sweden, Denmark Saxony;
nor the Lutherans under Calvinist Governors, etc. We compare not our Rulers to
any of these, in any other respect, but only as Rulers; but if you your selves
are resolved to say and subscribe, and swear, and do whatever lawful Rulers bid
you, its possible that before you dye, you may show that indeed you are not of
our minds.

3. But who ever took every act of disobedience in a Circumstance, in a Family
or Kingdom, to be a Schism from that Family or Kingdom? Do you rule by such a
Law of Works or Innocence, which cuts off men for every disobedience, and
censureth him that obeys not perfectly in all things?

4. And methinks this should not be your meaning, because by Nonconformity, we
more disobeyed our Rulers before their Toleration, than since; and yet it is
our preaching after that you call our Schism from the Church. You see what
trouble you put men to, to understand you, because you speak unintelligibly and
confusedly.

If you tell me that the Presbyterians owned a National Church in Scotland. I
answer,

1. So do I, as before described, that is, as denominated, 1 From an accident,
and not from an Individuating Form, and therefore equivocally and improperly, 2
And humanely, and so unnecessarily,

2. And if Scots or any Presbyterians do it otherwise, that is nothing to me,
who am no more bound to their Opinion than yours. And sure the Church of
England is not called One in the Presbyterian sense, as an Aristrocracie, or as
Headed by the whole Clergy conjunct.

Sect. 4. The rest, p. 8, 9, 10. need no other answer, then

1. That the old Puritanes never held it unlawful for them to preach in houses,
even when they had no Toleration.

2. As they held it lawful to hold Lay-communion with Parish-Churches that have
true Ministers, so do we.

3. They never said, it was unlawful to hold communion with any besides the
Parish-Churches; no more will we. What Law tyeth us to be such Schismatics as
to renounce communion with all other Churches, except Parochial and
Conformists, or what Nonconformists ever held it?

4. Whose conscience should sooner accuse him of Schism; A Conformists, that
will hold Communion with none but his own party, but separateth from all the
other Churches in the Land? Or ours, that resolve to to hold communion
seasonably with all true Christian Churches among us, that teach not Heresy,
nor preach down Holiness, Love or Peace, and deny us not their communion,
unless we will sin? Let the impartial judge which of us is the Schismatic and
Separatist.

5. Do you not hold it lawful for a Minister to remove from one Parish to
another; and for any man for his souls edification, to remove his dwelling into
another Parish where is a better Minister? And what if forty Families do so?
who calls any of this Separation? And what if it had been into the Parish of
Dedham, Ashby, Whitmore, Preston, when John Rogers, Arthur Hildersham, John
Ball, John Dod, all Nonconformists, were allowed to preach there without
Conformity. Had this been Separation and Schism, or not? If yea, what Law of
God or Man forbad it? What Church did they divide from? If nay, why then is it
Schism to join with such men in other places? Where lies your Point of Schism
or Separation? Is it for going out of their own Parishes? 1. So Men in London
have ever done to other Parish-Churches. 2. And who ever made a Parish and a
Church Synonymal, Jure Divino? Shall mutable conveniences be turned into
immutable necessities? What then? Is it for going to a Nonconformist? so did
those before mentioned. Is it for going to a private house? 1. So did many
Episcopal Pastors fourteen years ago. 2. And some in London since the Fire. 3.
And its an ill argument against them, that would fain Preach in the public
Temples, if they could have leave. As far as I discern, this dust of Schism
which you would cast into other men's eyes, obliges you to wink hard, lest it
be blown back into your own.

Sect. 5. The love of peace, and the fear of frightning any further from
Parish-communion than I desire, do oblige me to forbear so much as to describe
or name the additional Conformity, and that sin which Nonconformists fear and
fly from, which makes it harder to us that desire it, to draw many good people
to communion with Conformists, than it was of old. But when both Law, and Love
of Peace and Concord forbid us, so much as to name the Causes, it is
disingenious for the culpable to take that advantage against us, and to urge us
to do that which they themselves cannot bear.

Sect. 6. But with full sail of self-conceitedness he next comes upon us, with
this as an undeniable proof, that [our Members are taken out of true Churches.]
Who would gainsay a man of such understanding?

But 1. Do not those, as aforesaid, that remove from one Parish Church to
another, remove from true Churches?

2. How many Bishops have written that the Church of Rome is a true Church (as
Halls Collection against Burton shows you) and must no Churches therefore be
gathered out of them?

3. What advantage then has every foolish Superstitious Priest above God, and
over all good Christians? God bids us worship him according to his Law, and to
do all things in order and decently, and to edification. And must not God be
obeyed? No, if the Priest will not consent: For if he will worship God
foolishly, with nonsense, undecently, disorderly, against edification, you
cannot help it; his followers may be a true Church still, and then no man must
remove to worship God better than pleases the Priest. He that is fallen under
such drunken Readers, as I was bred under in my youth, that were drunk many
times oftener than they preached (I am ready to prove it, for they never
preached, but were drunk often;) this poor man and his Family must venture their
Souls on this sottish Drunkards conduct, because it is a true Church, and they
must not go from a true Church; What a trick has the Devil found to bind men
to constancy in his service, so it be done in a true Church! Alas poor England,
whose Teachers talk confidently at this rate, because they can say that they do
it in a true Church, and did not the Parliament take a Church out of a true
Church, when they separated Covent Garden from Martins Parish. And so it is
when Parishes are divided into two, one part is separated from the other.

Sect. 7. But factious Disputers see but on one side. You thought not that you
your self were all this while proving your selves Schismatics. I undertake to
prove that Pastors and People are the Constitutive Essentials of a true Church:
That Dr. Seaman, Mr. Calamy, Dr. Manton, Mr. Gouge, Dr. Bates, Dr. Jacomb, and
abundance more such, with the people subject to them, as Pastors, were true
Churches.

Prove you if you can, that on Aug. 24. 1662. they were degraded, or these true
Churches dissolved, on any reason, which any Churches for 600 years after
Christ would own.

4. If not, you seem your self to accuse their Successors, of Schism, for
drawing away part of the people from them (merely by the advantage of having
the Temples and Tithes) and so gathering Churches out of true Churches; so
ordinary is it for self-esteeming men to talk to their own reproach and
condemnation.

Sect. 8. But as to his second Objection, I will take his part; and though we
differ not at all from the Doctrine of the Church of England (till the new
Doctrine about Infants was brought into the new Rubric) yet it is not in
minutioribus that we differ from the Conformists; gather from it what you can.
God knows we think the matters in difference, very far from things
indifferent.

CHAP. V.
Whether the Declaration make the Non-conformists preaching more lawful, or
their duty, than it was before?
Sect. 1. HIs Sect. 2. Pro. 2. is impertinent. For, 1. He knows little, if he
know not, that the Nonconformists did before take such preaching and meetings
to be lawful, and a duty in respect of the Law of God, where they had
opportunity to use them.

2. But they take it for a double sin, to neglect a duty, when they have
Liberty granted them by the King to perform it. But he knows we take God for
our absolute Sovereign, and think that none can repeal his Laws, because that
none has any power but from him; and we suppose that he will pass the final
sentence on Kings and us. To what purpose is it then among Christians to
question, whether Men make it lawful for Christ's Consecrated Ministers to
preach, when God commands it.

Sect. 2. But page 14. he thinks he may safely say, [that the Declaration does
not so much as uncommand and uninjoyn any thing, which the Law properly
commands or injoyns].

Answ. Say you so? 1. The Law commands Magistrates to execute the penal Laws.
The King forbids them: Is not that to uncommand them?

2. The Law commands us not to meet above four in a private house for
worship, otherwise than, etc. The King suspendeth, or dispenses with this
Command, and not only with the penalty. And is not a suspension of a Precept an
uncommanding, though not a commanding of the contrary? I will not instance in
Juries indicting Papists, etc.

Sect. 3. But he subtly tells us that the Declaration meddles neither with
the Preceptive nor Punitive parts of the Law, but only with the Execution,
which is extrinsick to both. All Lawyers must come learn anew of him, what it
is to dispense with a Law. As if the Command [You shall examine and punish such
and such men,] and the prohibition [You shall not punish them, but protect
them] were not contrary. Nor the prohibition [You shall not meet above four
etc.] and the dispensation, [You may meet, etc.]

Sect. 4. But all this is utterly impertinent to them whose Consciences never
allowed them to forbear their Ministry in formal obedience to any men's
prohibition, but only when they had not power or opportunity to exercise; It Is
no duty which cannot be done. And License makes that possible which was
impossible* He that untieth my feet, accidentally makes it my duty to go.

Sect. 5. page 16. Let Mr. Crofton answer for himself, but the other two named
by you, Ball and Baxter have much against you, but nothing for you; and
understand themselves better than you understand them; and he that surviveth,
takes himself to be abused by your Allegations, and provokes you to cite any
of his words, which are against Nonconformists preaching as they have
opportunity. If you had rather that we were all used as Mr. Jos. Allein was,
you may see by his Preface to his Life, whether he was not for such sufferings
rather than silence.

Sect. 6. His reviving his pitiful Objection, That we have the approbation of
Authority for separation, is but a contemptible sporting of himself at the game
he is best skilled at; Objecting nothing, that he may seem to answer it with
something.

Sect. 7. But p. 18. he will bring us to Vtopia (Morus invented it) and there
he will suppose [the Villainies of Theft, Murder and Adultery unpunished, and
public Meetings allowed where they should be practiced.]

Answ. 1. What should the poor Nonconformists hear, if they thus Commented on
the Clemency of the King?

2. But because you will force dumb men to speak, suppose that in the same
Utopia, the Philosophy Schools which had faithful Teachers, and the Christian
Churches that had faithful Pastors, were deprived of near 2000 of them at once,
and those that came in their places, had the consent but of the least part of
the people; and that they were such as did Doctrinally declare to the people
that millions may be PER^ without sin, and that they, ex animo, approve of all
the Gregorian Liturgy, and every thing therein, and of all the Lutherans
Consubstantiation, and Church-Images; and when in Baptism they had vowed to
fight against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil under Christ, they should
contrarily upon deliberation make a solemn public Covenant, that in their
places, and callings, they would never endeavor to reform Cardinals,
Inquisitions, High Places, Consubstantiation, Church-Images, or Church-tyranny,
and so in part renounce their Baptism: And suppose a clement Prince should
release the ejected Teachers from their restraints, and allow them to set up
private schools of Philosophy and Divinity, and the people should say, We
cannot in conscience cast our Souls on the guidance of the PER^ and therefore
crave the benefit of your conduct: If these suffering men shall seek to
reconcile them to the PERS^ and desire them to have a better opinion of them,
but yet tell them, that they will not deny them their own best help; Quaere,
whether they sinned by not being PER^ themselves, or by not being cruel
deserters of men's Souls? and which side is to be compared to the Murderers and
Adulterers? I know this is not our Case in England; but if we must follow you
into Utopia or Moria, let us have the equitable judgment of the place.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Inconveniences of our Tolerated Meetings.
Sect. 1. NOthing more easy than for men that have some great advantages, to
force inconveniences upon other men's greatest Duties. And we look to do
nothing in the World scarce that shall have no inconvenience. I eat not one
meal of ten that does not make me sick. But must I therefore give over? I can
tell you of more than a few inconveniences of your own preaching, and
Church-worship; and yet you will not give it over. But if any shall make those
inconveniences against our wills, and to the grief of our hearts, and then
tell us that to avoid them we must Sacrilegiously and as Soul-murderers desert
our Ministry, we shall easilier answer them, then they will shortly answer God.

Sect. 2. His first inconvenience is, that [We shall lay down the Cudgels and
beg the peace, etc. of the rest of the Sectaries, as well as the Independents.]

Answ. A hard point to that Sect that is Turba gravis paci, placidaeque inimica
quieti; who know not how to lay down the Sworn. But if we have been at Cudgels,
we mean not to live and die at a work so unsuitable to our Religion and our
minds. Reproach not him that said [If it be possible, as much as in you lies,
live peaceably with all men] But if it be our dislike of Schism that are the
Cudgels you mean, you are answered already. Pretend not to know our minds
better than our selves. When were we against our own Preaching, as we had
opportunity?

Sect. 3. He would next raise a suspicion, [That our Principles change with the
times,] and yet says [It is a thing not easily observed in us in any thing
else;] Condemn not your self then by suspecting it in this, till you better
know our minds: [Or else, which is worst of all, that our interest lay at the
bottom, and was the only Spring and Wheel of our zeal, and all our motions, etc]

Answ. Who had been the more accusable of this Carnality and Hypocrisy, in the
eyes of any standers by, the Conformists that take up the Principles that go
along with Safety, Wealth, Preferments and Dignities? or the Nonconformists,
that have near ten years been deprived of all Ecclesiastical maintenance? some
lived in extreme poverty, and some lain in Jails, etc. Sure, if we accuse not
you, even you, of hypocritical following carnal interest, one would think a
little modesty might have cured the Canker that moved these suspicions or
accusations of us, either as to these or former Opinions. But my expectation of
modesty, I see by the following words, needs a pardon.

Sect. 4. He adds [Consider I beseech you, how like to Independent-Ape^ your
new Congregations will make you look, etc.]

Answ. That is to say, Come Nonconformists, if you will not be beaten from your
Masters work, we will try whether we can scoff and scorn you out of it; if that
will not do, we will pretend Christ's Name and Authority as forbiding you. For
as Christ, Matthew. 4. so you must encounter a threefold temptation. But we take
pleasure in infirmities, and can bear to be made as the offscouring of all
things, remembering who was clothed in Purple, and then mocked as being like a
King. If you will take my Spoon and Knife from me, and then say that I eat like
an Ape or a Beast, I will not be so prated and fooled out of my meat. If with
Diogenes I had cast away my Dish to use my bare hands, or forsaken my House to
live in a Tub, I had deserved your derision; but if you take my house and all
my goods from me, you shall not mock me out of my poor Tub also; We would avoid
all appearance of evil; But only in things indifferent, we will not cease
Christianity preaching or praying, when you can make it by your Artifice appear
like evil: Let Us hear the instances.

Sect. 5. [1. Your Churches will be gathered as theirs.]

Answ. As much as all the Churches for three hundred years were; or the
Meetings of Flavianus, Meletius, and others at Antioch, when they were
prohibited the Temple. And as Dr. Wilds and Dr. Gunnings were fifteen years
ago. Or if you will, as the Joannites were in Constantinople, till Chrysostoms
name and bones were honored by wiser men than those that cast him out.

Sect. 6. [2. You can administer Baptisms or the Lords Supper, to none but
those of your select number.]

Answ. 1. Is it because we will not, or because you will not give us leave? Who
then is it long of? O for modesty! Tie men's feet, and reproach them for not
going!

2. But is it not better to give an Alms to the bodies or souls, of some men,
than of none at all? Argue thus with your Physicians, You can medicate none but
your select Patient; Ergo, you are to be scorned if you medicate any at all.
And I profess, were it not for the poor peoples sake, and my duty to God, I
would give you (that desire it) all my practice, and all the gains.

3. But why may we not in the allowed places exercise our Ministry, in
baptizing the Children of any one of your Flocks that shall desire it, or
giving them the Sacrament? I yet understand it not, unless for the avoiding of
your envy and displeasure.

Sect. 7. [3. You cannot exercise Discipline but by the consent of your people.]

Answ. 1. We cannot be Pastors to any against their wills: If you can, and take
that for your honor, keep it, for we will have no part with you. We find
indeed that it is your Opinion to exercise your Discipline on us against our
wills.

2. But though we cannot take men for Christians, nor for our special Flock,
nor bring them to repentance, nor yet absolve them against their wills, we can
admonish and excommunicate them against their wills, and deny them the Lords
Supper from us; if they first voluntarily submit to our Ministry. We take it
not for our part or honor to do in these things so much as you can.

Sect. 8. [4. Neither can you have any Church. Government but in your single
Congregations, and that too Independent on all others.]

Answ. 1. Who is that long of? Is it not you that forbid it us?

2. But indeed we never desired to play the Bishops in other men's Diocese: If
we pretended to govern you, would you take it for our Orthodoxness? I think
not. I would you were of the same Opinion, and I would the Pope were of the
same Opinion, and would let other men alone, and exercise his Discipline over
none that he has nothing to do with. Baxter whom you name has told you, that
Bishop Usher professed his Judgment to him, that even Bishops in a Council
(though they are there Governors of the Flocks, yet) meet not for Government
of one another by Vote, or of other Bishops, but for Concord. And Grotius de
Imp. sum. pot. has showed you that Canons are not Laws but Agreements.

2. But why may not many of us Ministers meet in one allowed place, for such
Agreements in our Pastoral Government? And no greater dependence do we desire:
I assure you we should be glad if all the silenced Ministers these thirty years
had been less dependant on the Diocesans.

Sect. 9. He adds [Thus as others are Independents by choice and Profession,
you will make your selves so by necessity; and that necessity such, as you
wilfully throw your selves into against all the light of
Presbyterian-Conscience, Prudence and Interest, by a needless and sinful, a
scandalous and mischievous separation.]

Answ. 1. Such confidence upon such insignificant reasonings, is a great
dishonor to the wit and humility of the Author. He that no better knows
their judgments, can tell you, what all the light of the Presbyterian
conscience is.

2. He can prove that our Ministry is needless, sinful, etc. because he can
call the exercise of it separation: As if the paucity of ignorant and ungodly
Souls, and the sufficient number, ability, zeal, and diligence of the
Conformists made us and our Labors needless indeed. Alas, what thoughts have
these men of souls, of sin, of holiness, of repentance, and of their own
sufficiency and labors. But, Sir, who made you a fitter Judge of the need of
souls, than themselves and all others? Next persuade us that Tutors are
needless, because all in England are born learned. I have much ado to get
servants in my own Family that have tolerable knowledge and piety: And can our
Conformists alone sufficiently teach many hundred Families, and prove that
other men's help is needless? Try first whether you can persuade men, that you
alone are sufficient to teach all the Children in your Parishes to speak, and
to dress them, and feed them, and that all other persons help is needless. Get
them to fast all till you seed them your selves, and make them believe they
need no other meat. We that have conferred with all the people of our Parishes
when we were permitted, found that multitudes were almost as ignorant as
Heathens: And yet our excellent successors, that do no such thing (as to any
two of them that ever I knew or heard of) but see their faces in the Church,
can prove all our Teaching needless to these poor ignorant souls: Is this
humility, and Ministerial fidelity? Its sin in us to preach, and duty to the
Conformists: I am glad they take it yet for a duty to any.

3. But is it not as easy for us to say, That you have needlessly, and
sinfully, and scandalously taken our places, (I mean as to the Church-Relation,
and not as to the Temples and Tithes,) and drawn some of the people to
separation from those that were before true Churches? We say not so; but put
not your selves on the hard task of disproving it, if you are wise.

4. But our necessity Sir, has visible Causes.

1. God and our own consent at our Ordination, made our necessity of exercising
our Ministry; We are not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, nor that it was our
choice: But God has laid this necessity on us, and woe be unto us if we preach
not the Gospel, as we have opportunity.

2. The Bishops to some of us, and senior Pastors to others, by Ministerial
Investiture imposed this necessity on us.

3. The great necessity of multitudes of fouls (which nothing but gross
ignorance de facto, Infidelity, or Impudency can deny) concurreth to cause this
necessity.

4. The Law imposes a necessity on us, not to preach among you in the Temples:
If then God say, Preach, and the Law say, Preach not in the Temples, we may
conclude we must preach out of the Temples; if we have but as much wit as King
James's Hounds had, that at a double way, if they find the Hare has not gone
one way, will take it for granted he is gone the other. Here is then but two
makers of our necessity, the Imposer and the Restrainer; Reproach neither of
them if you will take our council.

Sect. 10. He adds [In vain do you think to help your selves, and to satisfy
the World, by pleading the moderation of your Principles, and that you do
believe our Parochial Congregations are true Churches, which the other
Sectaries deny: For besides that many of the Independents acknowledge the same,
this is the great aggravation of your Schism: For why then do you separate from
us?]

Ans. 1. We are glad that you confess the Independents themselves are so
moderato toward you.

2. We persuade none to separate from you.

3. Do you silence us, and depose us from the Ministry, and forbid Baptism and
the Lords Supper to all that have not as wide a swallow as your selves, and
then ask, Why separate you from us?

4. Do you draw Churches to your selves out of our true Churches that were
before you, and then charge your act on us?

5. Why come not you to the private Churches among you that have all this while
been kept up? e. g. In London, why may not Dr. Manton, Dr. Annesley, Dr.
Jacomb, and abundance of such, as fairly charge those that go only to the
Temples, for separating from them? They say, They are as true Chuches as you.
If their not hearing you is separation, why is not your not hearing of them so?
Big words when men are got into the Saddle make not their Cause good.

6. But it seems that acknowledging you true Churches will not satisfy you,
without (what?) actual hearing you. But does not every Chapel, and every
neighbor Parish then, and all the World besides your Auditory, sinfully
separate from you? Some men can triumph in such reasonings for themselves, as
would make another sick to read them.

CHAP. VII.
Of the inconvenience from our Brethrens sense of Toleration.
Sect. 1. HIs next Section, page 21, etc. is as mere delusion as any of the
rest.

First, he argues from the Presbyterians being always against a Toleration.
Reader, all sober Divines that ever I met with, use here to distinguish between
Tolerable and Intolerable things and persons, and to conclude that the
Tolerable must be Tolerated, and the other not, though they all agree not how
much is Tolerable. Now what does this man but talk confusedly, as if they had
been against all Toleration. Look up man without blushing, and tell the World,
Whether ever the Presbyterians maintained it a sin to Tolerate Presbyterians.
Alas, for those poor people, that cannot try sense from nonsense! with what
stuff will such men carry them away? If you talk of the Toleration of any that
are Intolerable, what have we to do with it any more than you?

Sect. 2. Any more than you, did I say? Sir, vilify not the wits of those
Clergy men that chiefly contributed to our -- so as to imagine that they did
not know what they did, and foresee this day. Honor their understandings more,
than to take them for so ignorant, (especially being lowdly foretold it,) as
not to foreknow,

1. What number and sort of men would be laid by.

2. How the people would judge of them and their Cause.

3. How both they and the people would go through their sufferings.

4. How wise, sensible, and merciful His Majesty would be, when he saw all this
stir, and dissatisfaction of his people.

5. And that the preaching of silenced Ministers in private, would encourage
all other Sects.

6. And when ever the door was opened for their Liberty, all others would
endeavor to thrust in with them. Who then I pray you has done more for
Toleration, you or we?

Sect. 3. But his next has no bounds, and grieveth me to read it (O posterity,
how will you know what to believe?) viz. p. 22. [Have not you lately refused
the comprehension, and denied so great an advantage to your selves, because you
could not have it without a general Toleration.]

Answ. No, Sir, we have not; nor should you have by a question vented such a
falsehood. Name the men that offered us a comprehension, and the men that
refused it? If you tell us that you, or such another offered it to one of your
neighbors, you may possibly make your words ridiculously true: But if you mean
that either the King or Parliament offered it, tell us when, and and who were
the refusers. If you mean any Parliament Speeches, it is not fit for us to talk
about them. But you will not I suppose presume to say that the Parliament ever
offered either Toleration or acceptable comprehension (that is, to take in
Nonconformists;) much less both.

There was a Rumor of one Man's Speech, called a Presbyterian, as if it had
sounded like a refusal of some abatement, but if you will talk with him as I
have done, he will soon show you the falsehood of that Rumor.

If you could have proved that any secret person ever refused such an offer,
can you thence say to the Presbyterians that they refused it?

If you mean an offer that by a great Minister of State was made, be better
informed of it your self.

1. That it was not refused, but very thankfully accepted.

2. That for the Toleration of other men, besides themselves, those two or
three that meddled in it, answered.

1. That it was their desire that all Tolerable Dissenters might be tolerated.

2. That it was His Majesty's work and not theirs.

3. That therefore those that were to be Tolerated, were accordingly to be
spoken to of the Terms, for we were capable of treating of the Case and Terms
of none but our selves. And after this the endeavor for our Comprehension went
on to our content, till the Parliament sat, and presently shut the door
against it.

I know of no other offer but this, which those few that dealt in it well know
was far from being refused; so that a greater slander could scarce have been
laid on men that have still so greatly desired A COMPREHENSION OF ALL SOBER
PROTESTANTS IN THE PUBLIC MINISTRY, and A TOLERATION ALSO OF ALL TOLERABLE
DISSENTERS, under Laws of peace and safety: This was still the thing which we
begged for in vain: But who should be accounted Tolerable, we were never called
to give our public Opinion or Advise, that I know of. Repent of such
Calumnies, and study not to aggravate your Fault by Excuses.

Indeed, if the offer had been made to them of a Comprehension on condition
they themselves would have APPROVED of an Universal Toleration of all those
whom they account Intolerable. I doubt not but they would have said, We
thankfully accept Comprehension, but cannot approve of such a Toleration, but
leave your own work^ to your own wisdom; we cannot go against our Consciences
for any Liberty: But other men's actions, are not ours.

Sect. 4. And he adds old speeches against Toleration, Universal intolerable
Toleration: Wherein we lament his want of common sense or modesty.

1. If he would insinuate that we are for an Universal Toleration, because we
preach when we have liberty and opportunity, What dealing is to be expected
from such men? When he confesses that we have been still against such a
toleration? When we have almost twelve years ago, cried out, even to
unmannerliness, that if possibly we might have been heard, to the Reverend
Prelates, Cast not out so many in the necessities of the people? O drive not
godly people from your Communion for nothing! If you can prove Crossing, and
your Sacrament-kneeling lawful, with Subscriptions, Canonical-swearing to you,
etc. yet all that think otherwise should not be excommunicated, or forbidden to
preach Christ's Gospel: We have Fornicators, and Drunkards, etc. enough to
excommunicate: O drive not upright conscionable Christians from your Churches!
Force not Ministers to private preaching and sufferings, which will certainly
occasion Sects, and open a door to you know what. And when we can no whit
prevail, if these very men themselves shall say, that it is we that are for
Universal Toleration, with what Forehead --

What man that has not lived in a dream these 12 years, has made any doubt
but that it has been the interest and desire of Infidels, Papists and Quakers,
that our ejections and pressures might be as great as might be, that so the
Protestants might be weakened and broken by their own Divisions, and the chief
opposers of these men be either consumed, or forced by misery to petition for
Toleration, or at least that it might be granted as for our sakes, and we might
be said to open to them the door, that they that confess we have been most
against it, might be able (but qua front) to say that it was our doing and not
theirs. But when men's wits have thus played the game to the utmost, they are
but abusing themselves: For they must dye, I tell you, they must dye, and be
judged by that God that hates Malignity, Cruelty, and Hypocrisy, and will
detect all frauds before the World; when all that is now admired by the
dreaming World, shall be levelled, obscured, and appear contemptible, even to
them that sold their Souls to obtain it.

Sect. 5. Once more Reader, peruse all the Citations of this Author, out of Mr.
Edwards, Mr. Trap (a Conformist, yet numbered with us) or the Jus Divinum
Presbyterii (said to be written by Dr. Roberts, a Conformist;) only read them
not with this Authors Spectacles or Eyes, and then tell me like a man of truth,
whether thou do believe that their meaning was, [An Universal Toleration is
unlawful: Ergo, Presbytery must not be Tolerated, if any others get the power]
or whether ever the Nonconformists said, [We are not to be Tolerated] or,
Whether the Episcopal men told Cromwell in his Usurpation, [It is unlawful to
tolerate us?] It is strange that any party who think themselves only or chiefly
fit for Legal possession, should yet think themselves intolerable.

But if he talk of the Tolerating of others, that are indeed intolerable, let
him talk to them that have to do with it; and let him first talk his friends
into the tears of true Repentance (if they be not past learning) even from the
greatest EXPERIENCE it self.

Sect. 6. But the man will seriously prove what he says, p. 25. [Can you more
signally own, recognize, or more expressly give your unfeigned assent and
consent unto, and approbation of both Toleration and Schism, than not only
des^ring to escape the penalty of the Laws, and to live quietly in a state of
separation by virtue of it, but also by taking the utmost advantage of it, for
the erecting distinct and separate Congregations to your selves.]

Ans. 1. If he mean that we approve of the Toleration of our selves, and all
the Tolerable; sure we never did deny it: Let the enemy of mankind glory in the
contrary, as his proper virtue. But if he mean (as he plainly seems) that we
approve of the Universality of Toleration; Come, weigh his proof.

1. By desiring to escape the penalty of the Laws.

Answ. Now you speak sense, we feel your meaning. It is a crime worthy the name
of Schism, to desire to be unpunished, when you desire our punishment: We do
not toto pectore telum recipere: What if you were for hanging and burning us?
were it Tolerationism and Schism to be unwilling to be hanged or burnt? While
we have such Ithacian Masters in our own Coats, blame us not to desire
Toleration, and to thank the King for saving us from our Brethren.

The penalty of poverty, and losing all Ministerial maintenance, we never
escaped since you succeeded us: Yet God that bids us ask for our daily bread,
would not have charged our desiring it, on us as our sin, if the Law had forbit
it us. Poor Joseph Alleine and many another are gone, and did not escape the
penalty: I never heard that Bradford or Hooper, or Latimer were accused for
desiring to escape penalty. Was it Joseph's sin that the Ishmaelites and
Egyptians were more merciful to him than his Brethren?

But, Brother, what good will our sufferings do you? What harm will it do you if
we escape? Do you feel your self ever the more at liberty when we are in the
Common-Jayls? Are you the fuller, because some Nonconformists wants Bread? We
have been heinously accused by others, for coming within five miles of any
City, Corporation, and place where we lately preached (when Christ said, If
they persecute you in one City, flee to another:) As if it were lawful to
desert all the Souls in Cities and Corporations, or to take you alone for
sufficient, where the very number of Souls proves you least sufficient. But
would you be at more hearts-ease, to think that none of us are within five
miles of you, nor teach any of the people the Gospel of Christ? You have with
less noise endured Infidels and Papists enough within five miles of you? Alas,
when the Stone is set on rolling down the Hill, where will it stop?

Sect. 7. But this is spoken conjunctively with what follows: And what is that?

2. [To live quietly in a state of separation -- ] that is, Not to be your
subject hearers: But,

1. Have not many of us, some constantly, some at times, sat at your feet as
your Disciples.

2. If Ministers be judged by you unworthy to preach the Gospel, have they not
reason to think you judge them unworthy to receive the Sacrament?

3. Are you Separatists for not hearing them? If not, why are they such for not
hearing you? But of this before.

Sect. 8. But the utmost is [Erecting separate Congregations to your selves.]

Answ. 1. You mean, it is sin in us to exercise the Ministry which we are vowed
to, and not to be Sacrilegious and cruel to Souls: For can we Preach without
Auditors? And can those Auditors be no Congregation? And can that Congregation
be out of your hearing, and not be locally separate, as every Parish Church and
Chapel is? Must two Congregations be one, or else be Separatists?

I know two Churches so near that the people may hear each other, and yet they
are two, and therefore one is separate: And I pray, which of them is it? It may
be all in England save Canterbury, or rather Glastenbury, are Separatists, for
separating from the first Church: As if Pythagoras justly cursed the number of
two, because it was the first that durst depart from unity; and all Churches in
the World were Separatists except Jerusalem.

I pray you Sir, tell me, What if a Tolerated Presbyterian should read the
Common Prayer in his Church, and use all your Ceremonies (though he fear
Perjury, and Lying, and Violating his Baptismal Vow): were this a Schismatic
or not? If yea; Then so is every neighbor Parish-Minister, or Chapel Curat.
If not; than it is not a distinct Congregation that makes Separatists. And
then what if he do not use the Liturgy; does that make a Separatist? Were you
all Separatists that used it not fifteen years ago?

I shall next expect to hear that he is a Separatist that reads in his own
Common Prayer Book, and not in yours.

But I doubt the Separation is in this, that the Tolerated Minister will not be
your Curat, and ruled by you: But remember that some are Presbyterians, and
therefore for Parity of Ministers; and I and many others are so much for
Episcopacy, as that we would not have Prelatical Jurisdiction given to those
Parish Priests, who themselves are against Presbyters, and for Prelacy.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Inconvenience from the Nature of the Practice.
Sect. 1. IN all this Section, let the Reader consider,

1. How few words there be, which a Papist Priest in Paris might not say
against the Protestants.

2. Whether this be not the sum of all, [Preaching the Gospel has hazards,
inconveniences and likelihood of frustration; Therefore it is your folly and
sin to Preach it.]

3. Whether there be not much that would not almost as handsomely have served
Celsus, Julian, Porphyry, Eunapius, or Symmachus against Christianity?

Sect. 2. Do not you excommunicate and drive from your several Parishes the
Members of Christ, for not eating with your Spoon, and then repreach them that
will take them in whom you cast out?

Sect. 3. We still hold that Members of the same particular Church, should not
live at a distance so great, as to make them incapable of ordinary Personal
Communion.

Sect. 4. We take your Warning: Independents, as you say, may overreach us;
Peoples inconstancy and weakness may frustrate much of our Labors; Quakers and
Papists may deceive some; We add, And you and others may keep us after all in
Poverty, and in Jayls, for ought we know. And what of all this? Therefore
preach not. Next say, Therefore be no Christians; Therefore damn your own
souls, if your temptations be so great. No, Sir, But, therefore we will serve
Christ the more resolutely, and trust him for our preservation and reward. The
God whom we serve is able to deliver us: But if he will not, be it known unto
you, that we will not cease to preach his Gospel, while we can, and we fear not
being losers by him.

Sect. 5. But your Will seems to bear down your Experience, while you would
tempt us, by the discouragements of Difficult Assembling, and the Peoples
Poverty. Have those kept us from doing what we could till now? Will our Poverty
be greater than you Conformists have made it? Have we served God about twelve
years without one bit of the Levites portion? and cannot we do so till we die?
There is an harmony in all your discourse: To tell us of the discouragement of
Poverty from others, that would help us, were they able, when your Party has
so long kept us without a bit of Bread, but what Alms, or some men's own Stocks
afforded them, is just like the rest. It suffices us to tell you, that we
preach not for Riches, and we will not cease through Poverty. Talk at this rate
to one another.

Sect. 6. When you say, that a Toleration may reduce the common sort to an
indifferency in Religion.

I answer, Get your friends together then that have brought it to that pass, as
that [It must be this or worse] and bring them to weep over their sins before
God; That if a miserable Nation may not be saved from the Fire that you have
kindled, your Souls yet if possible may be saved.

Sect. 7. But, (page 29.) you too boldly make your selves the Stewards of God's
Blessings; and as Magisterially, without proof, pronounce that we are out of
his way, and in opposition to his Church, and contrary to his Word.

Answ. For my self I have long been of an opinion, which one day you will
pardon, that, Perjury, Perfidiousness and Persecution, proud contending who
shall be greatest, and covenanting never in certain points to obey Christ
against the World and the Flesh, is not the way of God: If you take me for
singular, there is no remedy.

2. And what Word of God is it that we contradict? I read in the Rubric of
something about Infants, Certain by the Word of God; but I never heard in what
Chapter or Verse it was.

3. And which is Christ's Church which we oppose? What Chapter and Verse says,
that only Subscribers, Swearers, Declarers and Conformists are the Church of
Christ; and those that fear an Oath and Conformity are none of it?

CHAP. IX.
Of Inconvenience from our present Conformity.
Sect. 1.
HE next confesses that [most of us have hitherto held some measure of
Communion with the Church of England] And now [if we depart and fall quite
away] (when we purpose to go no further from them, but rather come nearer if
they will give us leave) then says he [You will publish to the World, that
your compliance with us before the Toleration, was not out of sense of Duty, or
love of Peace and Unity, or any other good end; but merely out of slavish fear
of Punishment, etc.]

Answ. 1. We will not reflect by recrimination, because we would not provoke
you more than needs.

2. As far as I can promise, we will judge of you no worse than we have done,
nor deny any Communion with you which we have used, and can use without
neglecting our own work. As I constantly join in my Parish Church in Liturgy
and Sacraments, so I hope to do while I live (if I live under as honest a
Minister,) at due times. But what if I had leave without Conformity to preach
in the next Parish Church? I cannot then be in yours at the same time. He that
preaches not, may hear you constantly: But he that may preach himself, must
not cease his Ministry, to be still one of your Flock. We long ago published
our Judgments, that It is a sin not to join with a less-worthy Minister, and a
less-orderly Mode of Worship, when we can have no better; And that it is a sin
to tie our selves ordinarily to such when we may have better lawfully, that is
(consideratis considerandis) upon terms whereon it will not do more hurt than
good. You see then on what terms we may vary our practices, without the crimes
recited by you. If now when we are preaching our selves, you will say that we
are departing from you, (because we cannot be in two places at once), and then
come on with all these Calumnies, we take but this to be your meaning;

1. To tell us that you think we so value the honor of our Names and
Reputations with you, as that you can make us false to our Callings, rather
than be censured by you.

2. That you have always a Quiver full of such Arrows provided, and resolve,
that if we will not give over our Ministry, and be ruled by you, you will make
as many as you can believe, that we never had sense of Duty, love of Peace or
Unity, or any good end, but mere slavish fear. So men, it is like, would say of
Christ, when sometimes he preached openly, and sometimes departed from men's
fury into the Wilderness or obscure places; Or of Paul that was let down by the
Wall in a basket, and when he departed from the Jews Synagogues which he had
before frequented; or those that fled from one City to another. It is a duty to
preach when I can, and no duty when I cannot: And if others make the [can] and
the [cannot,] is it I or they that change my practice? But if you teach men
such apparently causless Censures and Reproaches, you may have many Disciples,
but not very good ones. And some will thus paraphrase your words, [If the King
will not let us persecute them for preaching, we are resolved we will slander
them, and make men believe (on how hard terms soever they serve Christ) that
they do it all but as cowardly self-seeking Knaves.] What abundance have called
me Rogue of late years, that never knew me, or spoke one word to me before, or
heard one from me! As to the rest [That we proclaim our cowardice, or a love of
licentiousness, or put on liberty for a cloak of maliciousness] it all
signifies but what you have a list to say, and calls to us to long for the
judgment-day of Christ, but yet to look well to the integrity of our hearts,
and try our way before we go it.

CHAP. X.
Whether our Ministry by divisions will let in Popery.
Sect. 1. I Love this Author much the better, because he speaks against
divisions, and because he seems willing to draw those men toward him, whom
others drive from them, and because he seems careful of our Protestant
Interest, and desirous of some kind of unity to that end. But, alas, have we so
many years ago besought his party with all humble petition and importunity, and
disputed it with them; that they would have pity on the consciences of
thousands fearing God, that they would have mercy on the thousands of ignorant
souls that need all our Teaching; that they would not cast out so considerable
a part of the Protestant Ministry that should hinder Popery, and would not
necessitate unavoidably those divisions, which by weakening the Protestants,
would do the Papists work; and under the sad denial of our petitions, must we
now hear that (the Pope shall come on the Puritans back?) That word [shall] we
have bin long hearing and feeling. To be Masters of the Game is a great
advantage for the disposal of other men's reputations in this World, a little
while; but in the next, the sport is spoiled.

Sect. 2. And really, Will Popery come in ever the more for our Preaching? (do
you think we shall Preach for it?) or ever the less, if we renounce our
Ministry? Why then will not your silence too prevent it; and so we may all be
silent le^t we preach in Popery.

Sect. 3. But it is Divisions that will do it. No doubt of it, if it ever be
done. Come and impartially debate the case with us, Who have bin the great
causes of Protestants divisions, Conformists or Non-Conformists? But I am
ashamed to say that it needs a debate. But O that you would yet repent of
what is past, instead of reproaching those that you have afflicted; And for the
time to come, if we have not unity and peace, for my own part I can say, it
shall be your doing, and wilful doing, to refuse it.

CHAP. XI.
Counsel to the Non-Conformists, Ministers and People.
BRethren, you hear by this Author that the Conformists are greatly afraid of
Popery, and that the danger by some will he said to be from you: but who ever
takes you for the Papists friends, the Papists themselves will never so esteem
you. You see that some Comformists are desirous of peace and concord with you,
for the common end, the Churches strength against all adversaries. God forbid
that you should not be as forward to love and peace as they. I have these
following counsels to give you before I go out of the World, expecting to have
you ere long in a condition, which will require more wisdom, holiness, and
fortitude, than I fear the most are yet possessed of.

1. Resolve by the grace of God, against all temptations, and through all
difficulties, faithfully to ply your Ministerial work You see how much Satan is
against it, and how he tries every way to hinder it: sometimes by force and
fears, sometimes by flatteries, sometimes as that old Prophet seduced the
other, by coming as in Christ's name, as an Angel of Light, and by Ministers of
Righteousness. He makes not light of your Ministry, else he would not do so
much against it; O do not you make light of it. Our Ordination, Vow and
Covenant is Holy! If Ananias and Sapphira dyed for alienating consecrated money
by a lie, what shall we expect, if we alienate consecrated persons by a lie:
Souls are precious, sin is strong, Satan is subtle, the World is deceitful,
the flesh is unreasonable, deceivers have great advantage, time is short; O
therefore work while it is day, for the night comes when none can work; Our
own floath and sin is the most dangerous silence. How many souls feed or
famish, live or die, as we do our duty, or neglect it? Can you spare your flesh
or labor, when you think what impenitent souls must feel for ever; and what
the Sanctified shall enjoy? Would you not shine your selves as Stars in the
Firmament? Would you not be found by Christ so doing? Would you not convert
Sinners from the error of their way, when it is the saving of a soul from
death, and covering a multitude of sins? What ever Word of God deceivers may
abuse to stop your mouths, be sure that holy Covenants must be kept; that
Sacrilege is a sin; that nature it self tells you, no man has power to
nullify your Obligation to Charity it self in the work of men's Salvation; that
the love of God dwells not in you, if you see your Brother have need, and
shut up the bowels of your compassion from him: Men may regulate your charity
for good, but not destroy it. If the poor were famishing about you, no Law can
disoblige you from relieving them. Be sure that necessity is laid on all the
Ministers of Christ (though not by the same way as it was laid on the
Apostles;) and woe be unto them if they preach not the Gospel. Fear none of
those things that you shall suffer: they are the prognostics of your Crown:
You shall judge the world that judges you: It will be joyful to hear, These
are they that came out of great Tribulation, etc. Even Dr. Th. Jackson notably
concludes, that the reason why Martyrdom among Christians now, is rarer than
among Unbelievers heretofore, and that more suffer not, as John Baptist did of
Herod, is not because Great ones among Christians are not ready to do as Herod
did, but because Ministers more omit their duty; The dearest duty is the most
gainful.

2. I beseech you, Study harder that you may now so preach, as that you may
convince men practically, that you are really useful and needful to the World,
and that your silence is a real loss. They that now take your labors to be
needless, are tempted to it by the weakness of too many. They can scarce find
in their hearts to say so of any Eminent judicious Men; If when you have so
long made the World believe that silencing you is a most heinous sin, you shall
now preach so rawly, so incongruously so injudiciously, and unskilfully, or
coldly, as to confute your selves, and harden those that were for your silence,
how great will your shame be? If you will be thought more useful than others
think you, preach better now than others do. I really fear, lest mere
Nonconformity have brought some into reputation as conscientious, who by weak
preaching will lose the reputation of being judicious, more than their silence
lost it. What now will you do better and more than others to prove that the
Nation cannot spare you? I expect not great Judgment and Learning in all the
younger sort, nor those that in these times have bin kept from study, by
laboring to get their children Bread: but verily the injudiciousness of too
many among you, is for a lamentation. But the grand calamity is, that the most
injudicious are usually the most confident and self-conceited; and none so
commonly give way to their ignorant zeal, to censure; back bite, and reproach
others, as those that know not what they talk of. I impute not this to you as
Non-Conformists, but as sons of Adam: for experience has convinced me, that
PRIDE OF UNDERSTANDING, when men have little to be proud of, or confidence of
all men's own apprehensions, is the vice of Men, Women and Children, when they
are past eighteen years of age, which seems to be most desperately uncurable.
Few sorts so silly, but are always in the right, and others erroneous in
comparison of them: as Bedlams pity the ignorance of their Keepers; So that I
fear not the prevalency of skepticism in the world (though I fear infidelity:)
Self-conceitedness, I warrant you will keep it under. Such ancient as Ephrem
Syrus, Macarius, Martin, etc. who were of little Learning but holy and humble,
and presumed not above their knowledge, were honored in the Churches: but when
the Egyptian Holy Monks would show their humble pride and ignorance, by tumults
and zealous madness, to seek the blood of the Bishops, that believed not that
God had Hands and Feet like Men, and to destroy those as ungodly that were not
as foolish as themselves, what could have bin more scandalous against the
honor of Godliness and Christianity?

3. Over value not your own Preaching* and under value not other man's, because
they are Conformists. The number and necessities of the ignorant and ungodly
indeed do make your labors necessary, were you less fit than many of the
Conformists: but that proves you not more able, or your preaching better than
theirs. Partiality may make some of your own mind, think all well that you say,
and all weak that others say: but the rest of men will the more despise you. Be
not wise in your own conceit; Look not every man at his own gifts and worth,
but at the gifts and worth of others: In honor prefer one another: Pride is the
first born of the Devil: and pride of knowledge and goodness is more common and
pernicious, than pride of Comelyness, Wealth, or Greatness. Mark that Preacher
Conformable or Non-conformable, who striveth hardest for his own honor, and
would raise it by dishonouring others, and is most impatient of all that
clowdeth him, and is only for those that set him up; and look out no further
for a mark of badnes^, but take that man for one of the worst, how well soever
he preach or pray. Except Christ's Apostles had bin converted to the teachable
humble state of little Children, they could not have entered into the Kingdom
of Heaven, Math. 18. 3. You wear not the Livery of Christ, if you are not
humble, and apter to think meanly of your own gifts and doings, proportionably,
than of other men's. How unsavory is it to hear a Nonconformist come from a
profitable Sermon of a Conformist, saying (to hinder the peoples benefit,) This
is poor dry stuff, and carping at every incongruous word; as much as to say, I
can do much better: Through Gods Mercy, some Conformists preach better than
many of you can do.

4. Yet difference between Conformable Ministers, and own not the Ministry of
any that are utterly incompetent and intolerable; Hear them not ordinarily: for
though I say not that all their Ministrations are nullities, yet I say that you
should not encourage an intolerable undertaker, to destroy himself and others.
By into crable men, I mean,

First, Such as are ignorant of, or erroneous against the essentials of
Christianity.

Secondly, Such as are utterly unable to teach them others.

Thirdly, Such as malignantly Preach down the practice of a holy life. Or in a
word, those whose Ministry is such, as really tends to do more hurt than
good; from such turn away. Yea, where the Conformable Minister may be
tolerable, in case no better could be had, yet if indeed his teaching be so
trifling, and sapless, as is like to do but little good, let compassion move
you, to take more liberty your selves to teach the people there, than under
worthyer Men. Too many such young raw triflers, I confess I have heard my self:
and I would not have order or humility pretended, to turn Preaching into a
Ceremony, lest all Religion be next taken but for a Ceremony. It is a serious
work, and must be seriously done.

5 If you live where the Conformable Parish Minister is faithful (truly
endeavoring the salvation of his Flock) I charge you in the name of Christ Do
not only, if possible, as much as in you lies, live in love, familiarity and
peace with him, but also do all that you can to maintain his honor, and
promote his work. Be not Strangers to him: Distance breeds uncharitable
thoughts. If you hear or see any thing that you dislike, go privately and
lovingly, and tell him of it: If any behind his back dishonor him, rebuke
them. If he look for some superiority over you, and some observance from you,
deny it not: It is a duty to submit to one another. You can tell a Prelate,
that he that will be the greatest, must be the Servant of all: Practice as you
preach. He that scorns to stoop is proud, as well as he that would have Men
stoop to him. Live with him as a Brother and as a Servant, in meekness,
humility, and gentleness of behavior: And do not like our young passionate
Persons, trample upon him, as if his Conformity had put him, as a sinner, below
you as more Holy than he, and under the Magistery of your Reproof. You and I
think that he has sinned: But he thinks that it is we that sin: And he that is
without sin, let him cast the first stone. I charge you Love him, as your
selves, and behind his back say nothing, and do nothing, but what is fit to
testify such love. Let all men thus know that you are Christ's Disciples; For
all your Nonconformity, you are no better than he, if you be not more
Charitable than he. If you set your selves in a dividing way, secretly to
rejoice at his Disparagement, and to draw as many from him as you can; you are
but Destroyers of the Church of God: Call your selves what you will, I will
call you Destroyers if you are Dividers. Yea much that else would be your Duty,
must be omitted to avoid Division. The work of God, the good of Souls, the
Defense of the Protestant Religion against Papists, require your most conjoined
strength. And you are be rayers of all these, if you are Dividers. Suppose your
selves as Chapel Curats under the Parish Ministers, and so in concord perform
your work.

6. Therefore go as often as you can to his Congregation, and hold Communion
personally with him, and lead the people with you. Do not say, Now we have
opportunity to do better, it is unlawful to join with them that do worse: For
thoug it be not lawful for you to neglect your own Duty and opportunity, it is
lawful for you by Deed as well as Word, to show your Christian Concord and
Communion: and so to do, may make it at that time much better which else in
regard of the manner would be worse. Otherwise if one Preacher, pray and preach
better than all the rest, all the people should be bound to forsake their
Ministers and go to him as one that does better. But bonum est ex causis
integris: Disjunction and ill effects, your better mode of Worship worse.

7. Therefore in Parishes where all may well hear the Parish Minister, I would
not have you, without necessity, preach at the same hour as he does, but at
some middle time; that you may not seem to vie with him for Auditors, nor to
draw the people from him; But let them go with you to hear him, and after come
and hear you (or before;) But in London and great Parishes where all cannot
come to the Parish Church, as also in Parishes where the Minister is not to be
owned, I persuade you to no such observation: It is so inconvenient to the
people there, to be cast upon unmeet hours, that I persuade you not to do it.

8. Where the Parish Minister is to be heard by you and your hearers, I think
it best to preach there but once a day, and at some neighbor place that has
most need, the other part. My reasons are,

First, Because the people cannot hear and digest four Sermons a day, nor three
well: and those that hear you twice, will not go to the Parish Church; and so
you will but draw them away, from that which might profit them as well as
yours. And it is preaching well that more affects people, then Preaching long
or often.

Secondly, Because, alas, you will hardly live, where some Neighbor Parish
has not so bad a Minister, as that the people have more need of help; and the
rest of your pains may be bestowed on Weekday Lectures, as the people have
leisure.

9. Therefore I greatly desire, that in such places you would bestow the
greater half of your labor in private, in skilful exhorting people from house
to house? If you did not so before you were silenced, repent betime; If you
did, you have found the benefit of it. This is it, which few Conformists do,
and in this you may best live as their true Assistants. Public hearing without
personal conference, seldom brings men to understand well what you say.
Brethren, let me ask you, as before God: Why has no more of this bin done
while you were silenced? Is it not too much Hypocrisy, to cry out against them
that forbid us Preaching, which is one half of our duty, and in the mean time
wilfully to neglect that part which none forbad us? I speak not of them that
were driven from all Cities and Corporations where their acquaintance enabled
them, and forced to live where they had no such opportunity; nor of them that
through poverty had not time. But most men might have done more this way than
was done; This way the Papists have done their work. And it is very
considerable, that most that come to your Chapel Meetings, are such as you
take for the least needy, as being already turned unto God But from house to
house you may speak with the more ignorant: for some of them its like will hear
you. And sincerity inclines men to that way of duty that has least
ostentation.

10. Preach Faith and Repentance, the common Catechism principles, (which are
of greatest need and use, and require the greatest skill in Preachers,) and do
not on pretense of going higher, trouble the peoples heads with unnecessary
things, nor turn them after vain janglings: much less against Conformity, or
any thing that reflecteth upon the Parish Ministers. You may quickly kindle in
your Religious Hearers, a factious opinionative kind of zeal, that shall make
them firebrarnds in the Church, and no whi^ tend to save their souls. And you
may deceive your selves by exercising such an opinionative zeal, while you
think you are doing the work of Christ. O how happy had the Churches bin, if
instead of all the Schoolmens and old contenders curiosities of the Trinity,
and all the blind disputes of Predestination and Free Will, and all the busle
about Episcopacie, Presbytery, Independency, Anabaptistry, etc. the Churches
had heard the Baptismal Covenant it self, with the Creed, Lords Prayer, and
D^alogue well opened, and men's hearts had bin more fired with the love of God
in Christ, rather than their heads heated with such controversies, as the poor
people cannot manage, but only by unskilful Teachers, are tempted by them to be
disturbers of the Church.

11. If there be any among your people, that by such a sinful unpeaceable zeal,
will be censuring and deriding Conformists, Independents, Anabaptists, or any
honest tolerable dissenters, and will be reproaching them behind their backs,
and making them odious to the Hearers, rebuke them sharply, and cherish not
their sin; And if they hear not, rebuke them before all, and if they amend not,
cast them out of your Communion: and as you love your selves, the Church and
others, let not the proudest censerious people be your Masters: Take heed of
that base complying humor, that makes some they dare not displease them,
least they should call them as bad as they do the Conformists. For if you come
to this, it is the Women and Boys that have least knowledge, and most proud
censorious passions, that will be the Church Governors. Keep your Authority,
let them take it how they will, and be not servile followers of the peoples
errors and irregular ways.

12. Possess your Hearers with true Gospel principles of Love, that they may be
first pure, then peaceable and gentle. Preach zealously for Love, against
love-killing envious zeal. Teach them to know that all men are imperfect and
faulty, and so is all Men's Worship of God; and that he that will not
communicate with faulty Worship, must renounce communion with all the World
(and all with him.) Unteach them that false conceit, that all Book-prayers are
unlawful, yea, or all that is imposed: Read over to them those Psalms that have
frequent repetitions and responses, that they may know that such are not
unlawful. If it be lawful for the people to sing Gods praise, it is not
unlawful to say it. Do you doubt of the consequence: Prove to us, what
difference there was between the ancient singing, and our Laudatory saying, and
you will find your task too hard. Unteach them that paultry principle, of
placing Religion in being cross to the rest of the Congregation. As when they
will not stand up at the Creed, or at all the Hymns of praise, when reason and
use tell us, that standing up is a convenient praising gesture; and when the
primitive Churches (from an unknown original, calling it an Apostolical
Tradition) unanimously commanded standing only, in all the Lords Days
Adorations; which because we cannot now well observe, it is decently confined
to praises only. And in this the Conformists do better and more decently than
you: and it is sorry perverseness to fly from a better way, because that others
use it. Unteach them their unwarrantable self-made Tests of Church Communion;
as if there must be any other proof of Holiness needs given, besides a sober
profession of Christianity, (that is, of the Baptismal Covenant) not provedly
contradicted by Heresy, or a wicked life: If we are Non-Conformists, because
we cannot comply with all that we think to be invented incapable terms of
Communion from others, why shall we make such engines to divide the Churches
our selves, and do the very things which we condemn in others. Unteach them
their expectations, that all the Church must be satisfied of the sincerity of
each Communicant; or that the presence of the unworthy, who are admitted by
their own false profession, or by the Ministers fault, does make it unlawful
to others there to communicate. The Book called, The Cure of Church Divisions
will tell you more such dividing principles, which you must unteach them. The
Ministers that have bred and cherished these, have bin our subverters, and are
our shame: and such principles are the shame of too many well meaning honest
people. Woe to the selfish Teachers, that for their personal interest, dare not
contradict them, but cherish them into their dividing errors; when their eyes
are opened, and they see their mistakes, they will be tempted to show their own
dislike of them, by running as far on the extreme of formality; In a word,
help to save and faulty, and so is all Men's Worship of God; and that he that
will not communicate with faulty Worship, must renounce communion with all the
World (and all with him.) Unteach them that false conceit, that all
Book-prayers are unlawful, yea, or all that is imposed: Read over to them those
Psalms that have frequent repetitions and responses, that they may know that
such are not unlawful. If it be lawful for the people to sing Gods praise, it
is not unlawful to say it. Do you doubt of the consequence: Prove to us, what
difference there was between the ancient singing, and our Laudatory saying, and
you will find your task too hard. Unteach them that paultry principle, of
placing Religion in being cross to the rest of the Congregation. As when they
will not stand up at the Creed, or at all the Hymns of praise, when reason and
use tell us, that standing up is a convenient praising gesture; and when the
primitive Churches (from an unknown original, calling it an Apostolical
Tradition) unanimously commanded standing only, in all the Lords Days
Adorations; which because we cannot now well observe, it is decently confined
to praises only. And in this the Conformists do better and more decently than
you: and it is sorry perverseness to fly from a better way, because that others
use it. Unteach them their unwarrantable self-made Tests of Church Communion;
as if there must be any other proof of Holiness needs given, besides a sober
profession of Christianity, (that is, of the Baptismal Covenant) not provedly
contradicted by Heresy, or a wicked life: If we are Non-Conformists, because
we cannot comply with all that we think to be invented incapable terms of
Communion from others, why shall we make such engines to divide the Churches
our selves, and do the very things which we condemn in others. Unteach them
their expectations, that all the Church must be satisfied of the sincerity of
each Communicant; or that the presence of the unworthy, who are admitted by
their own false profession, or by the Ministers fault, does make it unlawful
to others there to communicate. The Book called, The Cure of Church Divisions
will tell you more such dividing principles, which you must unteach them. The
Ministers that have bred and cherished these, have bin our subverters, and are
our shame: and such principles are the shame of too many well meaning honest
people. Woe to the selfish Teachers, that for their personal interest, dare not
contradict them, but cherish them into their dividing errors; when their eyes
are opened, and they see their mistakes, they will be tempted to show their own
dislike of them, by running as far on the extreme of formality; In a word,
help to save Religious people from being superstitious while they cry out
against superstition; and make them know that a Religion which consists in
our own modes and ways of worship, and in decrying other men's, may stand with
all unmortified sin; and that the flesh is no more denied by sitting, than by
kneeling, and that to say I am Godly because my gestures, and orders are more
Scriptural than the Conformists, is a pitiful way for an Hypocrite to cheat
his soul: and make them know that few things have hardened men against
Religion, and made Non-Conformists a scorn instead of being helpers of men's
souls, so much as to see that many place their Religion in superstitions of
their own, Touch not, taste not, handle not; and make it piety to avoid that as
sin, which is no sin: and then men judge of all the rest by this.

13. And I will presume to tell you my opinion, as of a matter, not absolutely
necessary, but at this time, of such convenience, as if I were to keep a Church
Meeting, I would resolve upon it, as my duty: and that is, that your own
practice now show a sound and healing judgment about that Church troubling
Controversy of Praying freely, or by Forms; even that now you would seasonably
do both. The contention about this has bin childish, and yet a fire not yet
quenched in the Church: while one belyeth God, as if he had forbidden all FREE
Prayer in the Church; and others belie him as if he had forbidden all Forms or
Book-prayer: when God has left both free, to be done as edification most
requires. His understanding is low that thinks either of them simply
unlawful; and he knows little in such matters, that knows not, that both
ways have many and great conveniences, and both have many and great accidental
inconveniences, (which having enumerated else where I must not now repeat.) And
they that are all for the one only, or the other only, shall have all the
inconveniences with the benefits: but he that will seasonably use both, shall
have the benefits of both, and the least part of the inconveniences of either;
Therefore in the Churches of England, free prayers were allowed in the Pulpits,
after the Liturgy.

And pardon me for saying, that when this petty controversy has so much
distracted us, those Ministers* that use but one way only, seem scandalously
to the people to be only for that way, and so do harden them in their error,
and keep the fire burning in the Church. He that prays only by Book or Form,
persuades the poor people that free prayer is Fanatical, uncertain and
unlawful: and they that never pray otherwise, persuade the poor people, that
all Forms or Book-prayers are unlawful; if a whole party agree in forbearing
all Forms at such a time as this, when so many take them for unlawful. And so
they corrupt men's very Religion, and teach them to make duties and sins to
themselves which God never made, and thereby set them in a way of Hypocrisy,
Self-delusion, and endless quarreling with others.

I prescribe to no man; and toleration so far takes off public Impositions,
as that none can now say, This Form is imposed on me, and therefore unlawful.
But (though I will not bind my self) I here tell the world, That if my strength
and toleration, and a call should ever more give me opportunity for the free
exercise of mine Office, I would sometimes pray freely without Forms, and
sometimes use some part of the common Liturgy, and sometimes use the Reformed
Liturgy, which in 1660. was agreed on by the Commissioned Non-Conformists,
(though being done in extreme have, it should be reviewed and perfected:) I
would ordinarily pronounce the Creed, (as the Faith which the Church Assembleth
in the profession of,) and ordinarily recite the Lords Prayer and Decalogue,
and read two Chapters and the Psalms: And they that would not join in this way
of Worship, should freely go choose them a Teacher more agreeable to their
opinions: for I would not serve the humors of any in their dividing errors.

And Brethren, endure me to tell you,

1. That pleasing the ignorant professors humors, is a sin that shows us too
humane and carnal, and has always sad effects at last.

2. And that I confess to you I think your day is short; and that it is now of
more importance, what the future effects of your course will be to posterity,
or those to come, than how it will take with your present followers. And when
the History of this Age is written, do that now which you would have there
recorded. My chief meaning is, This will be a controversy when we are dead and
gone: Do that now, which being recorded may best tend to the right decision of
it then. Leave to Posterity now you have liberty, that example (as well as
words) which thou would have them follow. Tempt not future Contenders to plead
that all Forms are unlawful by your examples.

If any say, We shall thus loose our people, and the Separatists, who will
cherish all such humors, will have them all: I answer, We have too long tried
the pleasing way already, and see that we cure not, but cherish their disease.
Take Gods way, and let us deny our selves, as well with the humourous people as
we have done with the Conformists, and then leave the issue to God. And if they
will follow Separatists, it is fitter that they be mislead by such erroneous
persons, than by you.

14. And on this occasion let me say a word to this kind of Religious people:
Is it not a shame to you that your worthiest Ministers should be fain to go
besides their own judgment in Gods Worship to humor you? And that they must
tell the world, We would mix Free-prayer and Forms in public, but the people
then will be gone to the Separatists. I say not that they go against their
Consciences; For their consciences have directed them to omit what else would
have bin fittest, lest crossing your humor, it should drive you away to your
own subversion: But how came you to be so much holyer and wiser than the
Holiest and wisest of your Teachers? Mark, is it not more of the Women and
Apprentices that are of this mind, than of the old experienced Christians. Is
it not a high degree of Pride for persons of your standing and understanding,
to conclude that almost all Christ's Churches in the World for these thirteen
hundred years at least to this day, have offered such worship unto God, as that
you are obliged to avoid it, and all their Communion in it; And that almost
all the Catholic Church on earth, this day, is below your Communion for using
Forms? And that even Calvin and the Presbyterians, Cartwright, Hildersham, and
the old Non-conformists, were unworthy of your Communion: Would you have run
away from Dod or Perkins, or from Cyprian or Augustine, and said, They are
formal Fellows, not to be joined with? Does God use by Miracle to make
self-conceited Women and young Men, so much wiser than the most ancient
studious experienced Divines. It is best then to turn Preachers before we grow
old, and to avoid study and experience lest it make us more ignorant than we
were.

Brethren and Friends, I profess for your sincerity many of you are our joy,
and it is not a little that we have done and suffered for your sakes; But I
must tell you (for Adversaries will t^ll if you) that for your ignorance,
injudiciousness, pride, self-conceitedness, you are our grief and shame. We are
hit in the teeth with such self-wise ignorant giddy unpeaceable followers, And
we have nothing to say, but to blush, and say that you mean well, and that it
is not long of us. Can Gods Spirit which ordains Elders to be Pastors in his
Church, be the Guide of your judgments, when with such shameless pride you set
up your errors against the knowledge of your Guides? If you are wisest be you
the Pastors, (which some are prone enough to arrogate.) It shameth us, it
grieveth us, to see and hear from England, and from New England this common
cry. We are endangered by Divisions, principally because the self conceited
part of the Religious people, will not be ruled by their Pastors, but must have
their way, and will needs be Rulers of the Church and them.

Yea, I tell you with truth and grief, I am confident (next to men's own sin,
which leaves them to a judicial delusion,) nothing has done more to set up
Popery, and the Prelacy you dislike, than the scandalous instances of your
unruliness and Church tearing humors: And that you have made more Papists,
than ever you or we are like to recover. Nothing is any whit considerable that
a Papist has to say, till he comes to your case and says, Does not
experience tell you, that without Papal unity, and force, these people will
never be ruled or united? It is you that tempt them to use fire and Faggot, that
will not be Ruled nor kept in concord, by the wisest, and holiest and most
self-denying Ministers on Earth. Even Ainsworth the Learnedest and Godlyest
Pastor of the Separatists, though he went with them beyond Sea, and was of
their opinion, and carded wool to maintain himself while he was their Teacher,
yet could not keep that one separated Church in peace. And must you, even you
that should be our comfort, become our shame, and break our hearts, and make
men Papists by your temptation. Woe to the World, because of offenses, and woe
to some by whom they come.

I thank God, I speak not my own case; I think those many Religious people that
I have had the oversight of, are as ready to be ruled by me, and as undivided,
as any that ever I have known? But alas, in too many places it is otherwise:
Should the Ministers in London, that have suffered so long, but use any part of
the Liturgy and Scripture Forms, though without any motive, but the pleasing of
God, and the Churches good, what muttering and censuring would there be against
them? And woe to those few Teachers that make up their designs by cherishing
these distempers. One would think that their warning had bin fair. But -- si
nati sint ad bis perdendam Angliam -- The Lord have mercy on us!

15. Seeing places and numbers and other Church-circumstances are matters left
to humane prudence, be sure that you prudentially discern the divesity of
duties, according to the diversity of places and occasions. These things I here
include.

First, That you be not of those Church-tearers opinion, who must have all go
just one way, in all those undetermined variable things; And will censure all,
and take them for dividers, that do not as they do.

Secondly, That Edification or the Public good is the end, rule and measure of
these Prudential actions.

Thirdly, That in looking to this rule and end, you must not look only to your
present Congregation or the present Age, but to all the Churches abroad, and to
posterity.

Fourthly, That nothing here should be rashly done, but by great advise.

Fifthly, That therefore other Brethren, (as well dissenting as consenting
Ministers) should for safety be consulted with, not to be your Governors, but
for Counsel and for Concord.

Sixthly, To which end correspondencies of Ministers is necessary.

16. In those places where the name of a distinct Church, and that your
administration of the Sacraments is like to do more harm than good, it is your
duty to forbear it, and only to Teach. How to discern this, Prudence and
Counsel must direct you: If there be a worthy Parish Minister, and the people
are all or almost all satisfied (or may be satisfied by you) to communicate
with him according to the liturgy, and if your own administration would stir up
so much offense and hurt, as that the benefit cannot countervail it, the case
is plain. But if you live in London, or where all the people cannot come to the
Parish Church, or the Minister is intolerable, and the good is like (on
prudent advise) to be apparently greater then the hurt, I know not but you may

1. Know your flock by name.

2. And take it either as a Chapel (in some places) or as a distinct Neighbor
Church (in other places.)

3. Duly Administer the Sacraments.

4. And soberly and wisely use Christ's Discipline.

17. Be sure that the Concord of all the true Protestant Non-Conformists
Churches, be established upon the simple ancient Catholic terms, and not upon
any self-devised Additions: That is, that all that own the Scripture in
general, and the Baptismal Covenant, the Creed, Lords Prayer, and Decalogue in
particular (as the summary of Holy Belief, holy Desires, and holy Practice,) be
taken for fellow Christians, till it be proved against them that by Heresy or
wickedness they nullify this profession. This is the Rule and Test of
universal concord. Here all agree: And if after this one Church will use Forms
of Prayer, and another will not, one will Baptize Infants, and another will
delay it, etc. they are differences that must be born, where Love and Reason
cannot heal them, without breach of Charity, Concord or Communion; yea in the
same Church, such different opinions may be born, further than as those that
dissent from the Pastors mode of worship, will separate themselves when none
rejects them. We have all naturally a Pope born in us, and when men have
never so much talked against Popery and Prelacy, too many censure or run away
from all that are not of their way.

If any tell you that so wide an entrance will let into the Church Socinians
and other Heretics, who will mis-expound the words, Ask them again,

First, Whether Baptising men is not a taking them into the Church? And whether
the Apostles and Churches for many hundred years, required any more of those
that were Baptized? And whether their business be to show themselves wiser than
the Apostles, and the primitive Church?

Secondly, Whether Heretics will not subscribe to all the Scripture, while
they misinterpret it; And whether all the Scripture therefore be not big enough
for a Creed?

Thirdly, Whether all Heresy be not a contradiction of some of the aforesaid
Articles of Faith, and he that says, I believe this Creed and all that is
contrary to it, renounce not all Heresy.

Fourthly, Whether all Laws be faulty which men can misinterpret; And whether
the Law must be changed and enlarged as often as any break it.

Fifthly, Whether all the Volumns of General Councils, be not yet too little by
that rule, the sense of many being still controverted?

Sixthly, If we must have new Creeds and Church Articles as often as Heretics
misexpound the old, whether it be not in the power of the Devil and Heretics
to make our Faith ridiculously alterable every year, till it grow intolerably
voluminous?

Seventhly, And who is it that must be still the Creed-makers or menders? And
where will they stop? And how shall we know when we have all?

Eighthly, Is he a wise Pastor, that reads how the Churches have ever since
the Council at Nice bin distracted with new Creeds, and yet will take no
warning? Read how Hilary Pict. inveigheth against them. When they vexed Hierome
himself with suspicions of Heresy about the Trinity, (because he was not for
the term Hypostasis as a person) his answer was, They ask me of my Belief (or
Faith) as if I had bin Newborn (or Baptized) without a Belief: As if he should
say, Is it not a true and sufficient Creed or profession of Faith, which we all
make at Baptism? Why else are we Baptized?

Ninethly, Tell them, that Pastors indeed must know more than all the people:
but not by having a new Creed or Scripture, but at their Oraination they are to
give an account of a fuller understanding the same Creed than the people must
do: And the Ordainers must examine them where they suspect them of Heresy.

Tenthly, Lastly, Tell them that no more than this is necessary, at the door;
but if any after prove an Heretic, the accuser must prove it by him; and what
is the use of Church Discipline, but to reform him or cast him out? And Laws
will not serve alone instead of Judgment.

If they say that a Heretic may do much mischief before it can be proved
against him, Tell them.

1. That it must not be Thoughts but Words that do mischief in the Church; And
Words are proveable.

2. That such proud tyrannical overdoers, have bin the Churches undoers? And it
is they that have done as much mischief as most Heretics: And that they that
will be so much wiser and better than God, as to keep out all Heresy by their
self-conceited ways, are the men that let in Heresy and Impiety, and keep or
cast out faithful Pastors, and are the Officers and Agents of the great Divider
and Destroyer of the Churches.

Let me add, Brethren, we that have lived in an Age, when the Engines of
Church-Division have so sadly prospered, and have smarted thereby, and born our
Testimony against them, are doubly obliged to leave this Testimony of ours to
Posterity to warn them, that if possible they may escape the snare; And
therefore TO PUBLISH THIS OUR JUDGMENT, and OUR OWN CONCORD ON THESE PRIMITIVE
TERMS to all the World, as against the Romish tyrannical-uncertain-confounding
Church-dividing, and still growing Articles of Faith; Remembering that the same
men that have made their Religion so big as that the French Impression of it
(viz. their Councils) is too dear for the purse of a Non-conformable Minister;
can yet tell you that even ^aith in Christ himself (explicit) is not
absolutely necessary, at least to justification, and that the knowledge even of
much of the Law of nature as well as of the Gospel may not be absolutely
necessary, as Sancta Clara, Deus-Nat-Grat. Problem. 15. and 16. proves out of
the Schoolmen at large.

18. Manage your Ministerial converse prudently and piously. The converse of
Ministers is of great use, and therefore frequent Meetings needful: Use them to
these ends.

1. To advise and prevent the effects of rashness or imprudencie in Church
affairs: when every weak man has the use of the wisdom of all his seniors, it
is safe.

2. To preserve Concord, and prevent backbitings, animosities and sactions, and
discordant scandalous singularities.

3. That young Ministers may be Learners as well as Teachers, and may grow up
under the Helps of their Seniors.

I think therefore you may best thus improve your Converse.

I. Often meet for fasting and prayer, to lament our former and later sin, and
to pray for the Church of Christ and for all men; for the King and all in
Authority, that we may live a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and
honesty.

II. Set up constant regular Disputations, (not about trifles, nor with
litigious licenciousness) But about the grounds of our Religion, especially the
differences between us and the Socinians, and Papists; And this with School
order, under Moderation. Because,

1. Too many of us are young and unstudyed in these matters, and little fit to
deal with the Philistines Goliahs, and have great need to increase in holy
defensive skill.

2. It will by the bounds of order prevent all contentions and wranglings, and
meddling with Rulers or other men's matters, and all loss of time by impertinent
discourse.

III. Counsel and Concord about Church practice must take up the rest of your
time. And these three seasonably used Prayer, Disputation, and Counsel will
conduce much to your growth and strength.

But see that Ministerial Meetings turn not from Counsel and Agreement to
Formality and Usurpation of a Ruling power over one another, and so degenerate
not into Synodical Church-tyranny; much less usurp the Magistrates right: For
Synods ill managed have bin the Fevers and Pleurisies of the Churches.

19. Therefore be sure to keep out, both the Tyranny of Major Votes, and of the
proud Magisterial self-arrogations of any individuals, that think all others
must stoop to them.

1. When it is once thought that the Major Vote must carry it, an Ithacian
Synod, will tyrannize; and every weak self-conceited man, that has nothing of
sense to say against you will charge nine Learned judicious grave Divines with
Insolency, if they will not be governed by ten that are unlearned or
injudicious self-esteemers. Voteing is not for government, but for Concord; And
not to be used, (lest it seem an appearance or introduction of usurpation,)
except in cases where mere Concord is your work.

2. But nothing has more plagued the Church than the Pride and Arrogance of
some of the Pastors, that think they are wronged if they may not Rule. Think
not that this Spirit is only in Papists or Diocesans; Pride is the heart of the
old man, and born in all; And doleful experience tells how it surviveth in
too many Antiprelatical Ministers, of humbling principles, and unhumbled souls.
Do we not know that the Pride of some among our selves, that must be All, and
do all, till they have undone all, is the very thing, that has silenced so
many Ministers, and brought us to the state that we are now in? There are some
men that must only be heard in all debates, and seldom hear; who are angry if
they be gainsaid; who think that nimble Tongues, or popular Interest, or gray
hairs, must pass for uncontrolled reason. And they study to make parties, and
set up their own Dictates, by passion or indirect contrivances: They can seldom
debate a cause, but their spleen swells against those that say not as they
say, but contradict them, and they secretly back-bite them to blast their
names! They note those that follow them, and those that oppose them, and make
two parties of them. And all comes from the common sin of mankind, An
unhumbled overconfident understanding.

These men must first be meekly desired to be quiet, and to let you be quiet,
and to remember that Non-conformists are not for self-obtruding Prelacy; And
that they are Brethren and not Lords: If that will not do, try by Prayer to
prevail with God, for more of humility and peace in his Ministers. If that will
not do, silently bear their importunity with neglect: If that do not, Meet
without them:

3. And yet there is as great a mischief as any of these to be avoided also:
Which is the self-conceitedness and Pride of the younger and the more
injudicious Sort of Ministers, hindering them from following the Counsels of
wiser experienced men. For though we must have no arrogant Lordly Usurpers
among us, yet all that know any thing must confess, that in all professions
wise and eximious men are few: It is but to few Divines that God gives clear
and accurate judgments; And undoubtedly there is a threefold Superiority and
submission of divine obligation,

1. Of Subjects to men in Office over them.

2. Of the younger to the Elder.

3. Of them that have less knowledge, to them that have more. For Office and
Seniority are but formalities, did they not suppose an eximious fitness by
Superior knowledge. If therefore God endow here and there one man with
extraordinary judgment, it is the wisdom and happiness of the times to know
him, and to kindle their Torches at his fire: So did one Luther, one
Melanchthon, one Calvin, one Erasmus, one Jewel, Whitakers, Reignolds,
Davenant, etc. profit many. You may go a hundred miles amongst the less
judicious sort, and miss of that light which one Amesius ^ne Camero, one
Strangius, one le Blanch etc. could show the world. And it is the Plague of
corrupted nature that Ignorance keeps men from knowing it self, and not one
of a multitude (even of Religious men) who are injudicious will believe that
they are injudicious; but every man is so much the more confident that he is in
the right and others err, by how much the more he erreth himself: so that few
ignorant Ministers are teachable, but think that they are too wise to learn,
because by office they undertake to teach: But through Gods mercy, my own
converse has bin with an humble sort of Ministers, which was the occasion of
our unity and peace. And London and the Country have many such, who I hope
will be able to resist the dividing attempts of the self ignorant and
self-conceited.

20. Lastly, Spend this little time as in the way to speedy sufferings and
death: Your present Winters day is short. Work hard: Live wisely: Suppose your
trial were the next year: Behave your selves as men that stand in prospect of
the Grave: It is not likely that God will pass over twenty years wilful
divisions, wantonness, proud contention, self-distraction, scandals, and great
sins so little repented of, that men cannot endure to hear them named, with so
short or small a suffering as we have undergone. And the same Spirit yet
blinding the guilty, and keeping some of the separating party in Impenitence,
and working still by unlawful means to their unlawful ends, is the fearful
Prognostic, that more of the old effects are to be produced by the old uncured
cause. O be not partakers in the guilt and blindness lest you partake of the
destruction, and dementation be the sure prognostic of perdition. But O Lord
spare thy people, and bless thine Inheritance, and let not the weakness or
willfulness of the Pastors or people, deliver it up as a prey to the Destroyer.
And though our folly and scandal have made us a scorn, let it not turn to the
extirpation of true Religion, and to the further advantage of Church-tyranny,
Ignorance, or Malignity in the world. And if we the foolish sinful Pastors,
have forfeited our honor and station in thy Church, let not the Tyrannical
Foolish and Wicked, but those that shall be wiser, holyer and more faithfully
and succesfully diligent succeed us.

CHAP. XII.
An humble Petition to the Conformists.
Sect. 1. FAthers and Brethren, though I presumed to counsel the
Non-Conformists as my equals, I will presume no higher with you, than to lay my
self at your Feet, and humbly a second time to become your Petitioner for the
souls of men, for the Gospel, the Church, and the interest of Christ. It is
your Office to be Petitioners to mankind for Christ, and to beseech them in his
stead to be reconciled to God. And a man might hope that one that should become
a Petitioner to you, that your selves would not destroy that Church, might find
acceptance and prevail. But Satan has got so great advantage, that the wisest
man living is incapable of speaking rightly to you without offense. He that can
draw men into great disgraceful sin, has thereby raised a Bulwark to defend
his work. To be silent and comply, is to be cruel to the sinner and himself,
and who can do it that believes Death and Judgment: To call men to
repentance, is utterly to lose them by implying that they have sinned. O little
did I once think that Repentance had bin so hard a work, when God offers
pardon of all other sins, against the Law of innocence, on so low and
reasonable a condition.

Sect. 2. It is not in my thoughts to confound all Conformists, as if there
were no difference among your selves. I know that there are many sorts of you:

I. There are some Learned zealous high Conformists, who think they have done
good service to God, by all that they have done already; and no doubt, were
wise enough to foresee what they were bringing to pass, and are not, by any
sober man, to be accused of doing either they knew not what, or what they did
not suppose was good, and would countervail all that it should cost to procure
it. Their work has prospered; And the hinder part of it is yet in their hands;
But it is also in the hands of God. To these Reverend persons, I have formerly
spoken to their great offense.

Sect. 3. II. And I would there were no Ministers so pitifully dark, and
young, and raw, or so much out of love and relish, with things Spiritual,
through the prevalency of a stronger appetite, as that their incapacity
convinces me, that I am not to expect much regard from them, as knowing with
what ears they hear.

Sect. 4 III. There are also some called Latitudinarians, who love not
Fopperyes or violence, but are men of Reason and sober Conversations, though
they are not so tender and scrupulous as the Non-conformists, but can break
over greater rubs.

Sect. 5. IV. And there are other Godly sober unwilling Conformists, who by the
benefit of subscribing in their own sense, have stretched themselves to do what
they have done; who conform on the terms of Mr. Sprint, submitting to what
would else be evil, only to obtein the liberty of Preaching; (Far be it from
me to put in any selfish ends.) Who are unwillingly Conformists, as the
Westminster Assembly were, that after took down Prelacy.

Sect. 6. To all of them that yet have ears to hear, I humbly present these
following Requests.

I. O be not too angry with those that censure you as sinners. I detest rash
censoriousness: But you know men that differ in this world, about Speculatives,
may differ about matters of Practice too: The Jesuists, Friars and Jansenists
do so, in not a few or little things. And in such a difference, one party must
needs consure the practisers of the contrary, as sinners. If you and I differed
about Usury, Stage plays, Gaming, etc. one party must needs think that the
other side do live in sin. And who lives and sins not? Either the censure
is true or false: If true, should you not be as thankful as to one that would
save you from the Plague? Will sin do you less hurt than censure? If it be
false, Consider

1. You are fallible; and the notice of a possible pernicious danger, should be
received with self-suspicion and thanks.

2. And you should love them the better for their aversness to sin, though they
should mistake the matter of it. A proud heart says swellingly, Am I to be
accounted herein a sinner? A humble person will say: Alas, I am too likely to
mistake and sin: but if I do not, I will love, even a mistaken enemy of sin.
And to deal faithfully with you, Had those honest Conformists of my
acquaintance, but come first to the ablest dissenters, and impartially heard
and weighed all that they had to say, and not secretly slipped into Conformity,
as if they had bin afraid of hearing all, I should have bin the more offended
with their Censurers. But God hates sin, and so must all that truly love him.
And they are our best friends that do most to preserve us from it. And they are
our greatest enemies, that would flatter us into it. To Preach against sin, is
your Ministerial Office: And if any man thinks that you make a solemn Covenant
to sin, that you may have leave to preach against sin; Yea, that you
deliberately commit a great one, that you may have leave to preach against a
less in other men, this man deserves to be heard though he mistake. At Death
and Judgment, nothing in the world but sin will be your danger: Unjust censures
will be none. If we say nothing to you yet its easy to gather by the costly
terms on which we avoid it, that we take conformity for a sin.

And if any of the people carry it censoriously or contemptuously toward you
(which we abhor) remember that you take them for weak and pievish persons: And
honor or contempt is valuable according to the quality of the honourer or
contemner: You take your followers to be the wiser as they are the more: And we
bear their censures of us, and much more: And cannot you bear the censures of a
few that you judge weaker? You will proclaim the Non-Conformists to be the
stronger Christians, if they can bear poverty and restraints, with the censure
of the most, when you cannot bear the censure of the fewest, with liberty and
Ministerial maintenance and honor.

II. For your souls sake and for the Churches sake, Take heed of selfishness
and Pride, lest it fill you with envy against your Brethren that serve the same
Lord, when you think they any way diminish your reputation and honor. I would
have others keep up your Reputation to the utmost; which in the name of God, I
charge upon them; Yea, and in honor to prefer you: But if you think they do
not, remember that you are the Servants of a Crucified Christ, who made himself
of no reputation, but took upon him the form of a Servant, and yet this way got
a name above every name. As sure as you live, contending for honor, is one of
the readiest ways to loose it, and giving it to others, and contemning it your
selves, is one of the surest ways to get it, It is its motto, Quod sequitur
fugio; quod fugit ipse sequor.

Self-esteem, and Pride is odious in all: but in a Minister of Christ more
odious, than in any man: but never so odious as when it rises to such
malignity, as to envy or hinder the work of God, because another more esteemed
does it. It is a sin that I am readyer to tremble to think of, than further to
reprove.

And remember what work it has made in the Churches of Christ already. Read
but what Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen, Evagrius, Nicephorus, etc. say of the
fewds of the old Bishops: Read but the Acts of the Councils at Ephesians. 1, and 2.
of Chalcedon, at Ariminum, at Sirmium, at Nice, 2d. etc. and if horror and
shame do not overwhelm you, to think what Christian Bishops did, and that so
early in the face of the Heathens, you are not men. Read but how Nazianzene was
used at Constantinople, by a Synod of Orthodox Bishops, when he had overcome
the Arrians: Read the Controversies between Basil and Anthymius, and others:
Read the doleful story of Theophilus Alexandrinus, and the Egyptian Monks, and
of the same Theophilus his manner of dealing against the Origenists, and of his
double Letters and Present which he sent by Ifidore a Priest, to the Emperor
and Maximus, to be given to him that got the better: Read the odious story of
the said Theophilus and Epiphanius his proceedings against Chrysostom, and his
ejection by a Council of Bishops: Read the proceedings of Ithacius and Idacius
and their Synods in Sulp. Severus: There is no end of instances: Read but the
destruction of the many hundred British Monks at Bangor, and the great
suspicions that Augustine caused it. Look but on the face of the Greek and
Latin Churches to this day, from the beginning and cause of their divisions:
And see what the Lutherans have done often times against the Calvinists in
Saxony, and other parts of Germany, (as in Gasp. Peucers sufferings for one:)
And see what the Roman Papacy and Clergy have done in the world by Lordly Pride
and selfishness: And lastly, See what has bin done by it in this Land; and at
last learn by experience, and judge of Church-mens Pride by the effects.

Brethren, what harm will it do to you, if a Nonconformist preach by you? if
many follow him? If some prefer him before you? Do not others prefer you before
him? What if his followers think Conformity to be sin? Do not you and yours
think so of our Nonconformity? It is not your selves that you preach for, but
the peoples Souls: And why may not Christ's Gospel profit them from another as
well as from you? Nature teaches men to relish their own food, and partly to
feel what does them good? Clemens Alexand. Strom. 1. gives it as the reason
why the Church (then, not now) left it to every Communicant at the Sacrament,
to Take their own part, Because man having free will, shall be the chooser, or
refuser of his own good. If they choose a worse Teacher than you, it is not you
but they that are the loosers: If they choose a better, you have your end, if
you are Christians; If you preach not so well as another, you are not fit to be
Ministers of Christ, if you be not glad that another does better, and is a
blessing to the Flock. If you preach better, its two to one but goodness will
have an insuparable attraction: Or if mistake make them more capable of good
from another than from you, should you not desire that they might have it? Will
you say, It is their partial humor? I have heard many Ministers say so, that
had reason to have said, It is my unskilfulness or dullness: But suppose it be
so; A Physician will let his patient take his Medicine from one man's hand, if
he refuse it from another. The Father will not let the Infant famish if he will
take no meat from him, but from the Mother. If the people had no faults or
weaknesses, what need were there of you or other Ministers.

I am as apt to speak sharply against the humors and weakness of Religious
people, as most that are not envious and malignant. But I must give them this
Testimony, that though many of them cannot well judge of judiciousness in their
Teachers, yet most of them love a serious Preacher and a Godly Liver; And few
of them distaste either Prelates or Conformists, if they preach seriously, and
live Holily. But when in all the Countries they see such Preachers and Livers
chosen out for silencing, all the world cannot keep them from disliking such
Bishops as shall do thus. I am most confident for those of my old acquaintance,
that if they had seen Bishops (after their long disacquaintance with them) to
have Preached and Prayed in a sound and serious Holy manner, and set themselves
to promote the labors of Godly Preachers, and to encourage piety in the people
and repress iniquity, they would generally have loved and honored them,
without respect to Presbytery or Independency: It is Godliness that Godly
people care for. But since I and abundance about us were ejected, and since
many of themselves have bin laid in Goals, it is no more in my power to make
them love such Bishops, than to make them love the Goal it self.

Yea further, Brethren, what if the Non-Conformable Minister do give the
Sacrament to some, as you do to others? What if they think their way best, as
you think yours? What if they call themselves a Church and exercise Discipline,
(which without need I would not have them do,) What harm will this do to you or
others? If it do them harm, let them thank themselves: But to you it can do
none, unless the unchristian sin of pride and envy cause it: or unless by
reproaches and contentiousness they hinder the success of your labors; which
is another thing. I confess I have ever bin jealous of such Arbitrary Churches,
where there is room for all in one Church, lest they should turn Anti-Churches
and Theaters of emulation and contention; (which I charge all conscionable
persons to abhor:) But all this may be avoided at cheaper rates, than silencing
so many laborious Ministers, or excommunicating all the people that are
Non-conformists.

III. Join lovingly with your Brethren, as Servants of one Lord, to promote one
work. Look not strange at them, if they desire your friendship; Yea, if any of
them prove censorious and pievish, if you are the more patient, condescending,
and forward to love and unity, and to further the peoples good, I shall take
you for better men than them; And so will all that judge by the fruits of the
Spirit. Try this way instead of wrath, and I dare undertake that it shall more
maintain your honor, with your peace of Conscience.

Brethren, our great account is near: The Judge is at the door: It will be then
comfortable to give a true account of Ministerial fidelity, and hear, Well done
good and faithful servant; rather than to hear, We have beaten our fellow
Servants, or unfaithfully kept the Key of knowledge. The souls of your charge
are many and precious: It is a hard and great work to cure one: to make one
Ignorant person understand, one proud person humble, one infidel to believe,
one worldling to become Heavenly, or one sensualist to be a mortified Saint:
What help then do you need; what labor is requisite, to bring a Parish of many
hundred or thousand persons to this change! As our weakness must make us all
cry out, Who is sufficient for these things, so when one man has ten men's work
to do, he may well say, He is insufficient: In the first three Centuries, when
one Congregation had a Bishop with a College or Company of fellow Presbyters,
they were not too many, though one only could preach at once. I speak not
uncertainties: We have tried the Pastoral work; and know by experience that a
Parish of a thousand (much more of many thousand) families, has work enough
for many the most able and diligent Ministers in the Land: Yea, a Parish of an
hundred Families, needs more help than any one Minister is able to afford
them: Try them all by personal conference house by house as we have done, and
judge. Would you then have the people taught, reformed and saved, or not? If
yea, Would you not have necessary help to do it? I cannot believe that man to
know truly what it is to be a Minister or a Christian, that perceives not a
necessity of help if he can have it: And if you had converted all now living,
those that are born next will have need of as much labor as their Parents: For
ignorance, sensuality and pride will be born with them.

Thank God therefore that you may have help, and take it, whether you meet in
one or two Assemblies: Help your tolerated Brethren in their work, as those
that more desire the good of the peoples souls than they. Consult together for
the removing of impediments, and for the strengthening of each other. And if
any factious, or froward Nonconformist should happen to be your Neighbor, go
to him, and by love and familiarity seek to win and cure him; and you will win
the hearts of all good people. And if he be really turbulent, and do more harm
in the place than good, I am persuaded the rest of the Non-conformists will
rebuke him, and disown him. I add,

IV. If any difference between you cannot be composed, instead of troubling the
people about it, quietly refer it to some indifferent Arbitrators. Is there not
a wise man among you? Must Abraham's and Lots Servants, separate them for a
Well? Must Paul and Barnabas part for different censures of another man's
omission? Shall Christians, Protestants, Ministers, the Teachers of Love, and
Concord and Patience, be so weak, so selfish, so bad, such contradicters of
their daily Doctrine, as not to be able to carry on Christ's work in peace; nor
to make an amicable composure of their differences? If you are Christians
indeed, the difference is not who shall have the most followers, applause or
honor, but who serves God and saves souls, in the right and true effectual
way? And may not prayer and consultation reconcile such a controversy? For my
own part I am conscious of pride and selfishness; Yet I can confidently say,
that when I had a Pastoral charge, where I needed many Assistants, if I had
known where that man lived whom the people would have loved, honored and
profited by, more than my self, I would have rid night and day to get him to be
the man: And when I have heard my Neighbor Ministers that were younger men (I
can scarce forbear naming them) preach much more affectionately and profitably
than my self, I have sat under them with tears of joy. But alas, What has ten
years silence of such men, deprived the souls of the poor people of! I never
(...) it meet with Saint Francis and the Fry^^s, to abase my self by going
naked, or by taking on me to be an Awfe, or by filthiness, or ridiculous
behavior; As if Heaven and a Swinesty were most like: (See Foulis his History
of Popery.) But I have thought it my duty to cast away deliberately and
knowingly much of my Reputation, even with Religious people, by the discharge
of such duty as I knew would do it; Believing that Reputation is one thing to
be resolutely denied for Christ, and that he that saves his honor shall lose
it, and he that loses it for Christ shall have everlasting honor.

Brethren, there is no great matters to be done in the Church of Christ in the
midst of so many corruptions and temptations, without confirmed Resolution:
Resolve t^ be wholly the servants of Christ, and to seek men's Salvation, and to
take no thought for your carnal interest and honor; And then the God whom you
serve will take care of it. Think not that other men's selfishness or
frowardness is an excuse to yours: Who knows man; and knows not that pride
and selfishness is as common as sin, that is, Is the last-dying heart of all
our corruption? Will you expect none of it in others, when you know (if you
know your selves) that you have much of it in your selves?

(...) dealing is not the Sign of enmity but love. (...) must tell you, that we
cannot but think that you need Repentance, great Repentance, for sinning more
(and that by public, deliberate, chosen, covenanted, Ministerial sin,
protesting against Repentance) in the day when Judgments called us all to
renew our Repentance for our former sins. But yet we suspect our own
understandings: We know what different apprehensions of things good men may
have: We know that we are great sinners our selves: We take not all this to
warrant our censorious separations from you. But we beseech you be not too
angry with us, for differencing between good and evil, between him that
swears, and him that fears an Oath. As long as we do it to the cost and
suffering of our own flesh, which disputes in us more cunningly and strongly
for Conformity, then all the Durels, the Fullwoods, the Stilemans, etc. in
England. We have naturally no more love to poverty, to scorn, to a prison, than
you have: And why may not those that do nothing else almost say, that its like
we study to know the truth, as hard as any of you all? And the love of beggary,
scorn and imprisonment, is not likely much to byas us. And if you think that
our honor with our party does it, you must needs think that we (who so sharply
reprove them,) do think very highly of that poor despised party, when we prefer
their opinions, not only before your Magnates and Plures, but also before our
Livelihoods, Liberties and Lives. Woe to the Hypocrite that has no better a
reward!

And why should we do it? Were we not as capable of the more Noble and General
applause as you, if we could have taken your way?

As we are none of your Judges then, Be you none of ours, but let us with
Resolved unity (though not uniformity) serve that one God whom we are all
devoted to. Remember that to Preach Love is your Ministerial work; And to
practice it is your Christian work. Resolve as much to maintain Christian Love
as inviolate, even to Martyrdom, as the Martyrs did to maintain the Christian
Faith. Remember Ridley and Hooper: You may come to Ridley's Confessions ere you
die. We purpose not to Unminister you so much a^ Gildas did his Britains, nor
to separate from you so much as Martin did to the death, from all the Neighbor
Synods and Bishops, for a far lesser cause than the silencing of eighteen
hundred Ministers. We take not you whom I now write to, to be consenting to
this work. (Though your silence and non-resistance, has bred such thoughts of
you in people, as we would fain have you cure by the contrary means.) We are
for peace: Be not you against it: But we cannot buy it, by deserting the
Ministry, to which we were consecrated and devoted, nor by neglecting so many
thousand miserable souls. Bring things in England once to that pass, that
really our labor may be unnecessary, in the judgment of those that are not
Infidels, Ignorants, or Malignant enemies of a holy life, and we will presently
gratify all that desire our silence, or our banishment, and will not trouble
men with needless work.

Thus, Brethren, you see, I have presumed no higher than to Petition you; And
that not to your cost or detriment; nor for our preferment, wealth or ease: We
ask you not for food or raiment; We crave from you none of your Dignities, nor
Estates: Though when I find this Author dissuading us from our Ministry,
because the people are poor, I think that reason might almost as aptly have
served to persuade us to live no longer, because the world is too poor to keep
us; We do but eat if we preach, and so we must if we do not: And I think it had
savoured of no excess of Charity and Ministerial ingenuity, if he had rather
said, Brethren, you must perform your undertaken Ministry, and we and the
peoples souls have need of all your help; And the maintenance is given for the
work, Therefore you that work with us, shall have part of the Church
maintenance with us, at least a fifth part, as was allowed to the ejected by
the Parliament, because the people cannot maintain you, and it is hard to serve
God without anxiety, while your families are in want. This had better beseemed
our Brethren; but we crave and expect no such thing from you; but only
patiently to suffer us to live and labor by you, and let God provide for us as
he please.

And if we had expected that heretofore you had Petitioned our Rulers, for the
liberty of our Ministry, it had bin no unreasonable expectation. All knew that
our own Petitions had no hope: Ministers should of all men have bin most
sensible of the Churches breaches, loss and danger, and most compassionate of
the peoples souls: If you had but humbly acquainted our Rulers, That all our
labors conjoined are too little; that you needed our help, and the ignorant
our teaching; That your own judgment was, that our Ministry was more necessary
than our personal Conformity,

1. You know not but you might have bin heard: For no doubt our Rulers thought
they did that which the Reverend Churchmen did advise or think best: I hope
you do not think that our civil Rulers would have done all that they have done
against us, if it had bin against the Bishops and conformable Clergies judgment
and advise: Civil Governors are never so cruel in matters of Religion, as the
Ruling and exasperated Clergy are, as the Histories of all ages testify.

2. Or at least you might have had the greater peace of Conscience, in all the
confusions that have followed, and said, It is not long of us. And you would
have acquitted your selves in the judgment of all your hearers, and they would
have bin the less prejudiced against your Ministry.

Had you Petitioned and prevailed but for these two things, you had healed all
our breaches,

First, That the door of entrance might not have bin barred by any other
subscriptions, professions or Oaths, than what were used in the Churches of
Christ, till the exaltation of the Papacy (for 600 years,) besides the Oaths of
Allegiance and supremacy, and the subscribing the Doctrine of the Church of
England, in the 39. Articles, according to the 13th. of Queen Elizabeth.

Secondly, That those (so subscribing) who dare not use the Liturgy and
Ceremonies, might have leave to preach in the Churches which use them, under
Laws which shall restrain them from all unpeaceable opposition to what they
dare not use, or to the Government of the Church. And having mentioned this,
What if I added yet this clause to my present Petition to you?

V. That you will yet Petition for us, or rather for the Church of Christ, that
upon the foresaid terms we may be, if possible, taken in to the established
Ministry, If not, yet tolerated as Lecturers under you in such Churches, where
the Ministers desire us, not taking any of their maintenance from them, but
trusting God for our daily bread.

By this means you shall have no need to fear our injuring of your wealth or
reputation; Nor the strengthening of the Papists by the weakening of
Protestants through our-own divisions; (Only let not the people who scruple
Conformity, be therefore denied Church Communion and Sacraments.)

And now as God will judge, so let the world judge, and let posterity judge
whether we are unworthy in comparison of the present Ministers of England, to
be permitted to preach Christ's Gospel on these self-denying and self-abasing
terms; And whether they that cry out of the danger of Popery. Infidelity,
Profaneness and Heresies, and yet had rather let them in all, than give us
leave to exercise that Ministry to which we were consecrated, in poverty and
subjection; and while they cry out of Divisions, will not lay by the
Dividing-engines; should rather accuse us or themselves, if the evils overwhelm
us, which they seem to fear?

It is not pleasure, profit or worldly preferments, that we contend for: We
would do no man hurt or wrong: If our lovers of Church Power do think us
intolerable, because we obey them not as fully as they desire, we profess
before God and Man, that it is not because we would not be subject and obedient
to any, as far as will stand with our obedience to God, but only because we
dare not, we will not do that which we believe that God forbideth us: And if we
err, it is not for want of studying, perhaps as hard and impartially as they,
to know the truth: And to him that thinks he does evil it is sin. It is sin,
and no small or tolerable sin, which our consciences fear, in our forbearing
subscriptions and Conformity: If they also take it to be a sin to suffer us to
preach the Gospel, and a greater sin, than to suffer the inundation of
Infidelity, Popery and the rest which they say is ready to break in upon us,
And if they think our not Subscribing, Swearing, etc. to be in us so great a
sin, that the punishment laid on Swearers, Drunkards, or Fornicators, will not
serve turn to avenge it on our selves, nor any other of our personal
sufferings, unless the souls of many thousands, and the Protestant Religion,
and our Posterity also suffer for it, the Judgments of God must be endured. But
remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our Forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: Spare us good Lord; Spare thy people whom thou
have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever.
And hasten O Lord Jesus thy more Righteous Judgment.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 13. l. ^^. the thing, p. 19. l. ^. del. (...), p. 28. l. 21* r. you, p. 45.
l. 15. del. 4* p. 65. l. 6. r. work. p. 67. l. ^8. r. by not only, p. 70. l. 3.
for [?] r. [:] p. 89. l. ^. r. intolerable, p. 9^. l. ^. r. make your, p. 108.
l. 21. r. and renounce all.


