TWO TREATISES Tending to awaken Secure Sinners. Viz. 1. The Terror of the Day
of Judgment, from 2 Cor. 5. 10. 2. The Danger of slighting Christ and his
Gospel, from Matthew. 22. 5.
By RICHARD BAXTER.

The Gift of the Author.

LONDON, Printed for Jonas Luntley at the Three Bibles in Little
Lincolns-Inn-fields. 1696.

To the Ignorant or Careless Reader.
SEeing the Providence of God has commanded forth these plain Discourses, I
shall hope (upon Experience of his dealing in the like Cases with me) that he
has some work for them to do in the World. Who knows but they were intended
for the saving of thy Soul, by opening thine Eyes, and awaking thee from thy
Sin, who art now in reading of them! Be it known to thee it is the certain
Truth of God, and of high Concernment to thy Soul that they treat of, and
therefore require thy most sober Consideration. Thou have in them (how weakly
soever managed by me) an Advantage put into thy Hand from God, to help thee in
the greatest Work in the World, even to prepare for the great approaching
Judgment, and not to slight Christ and his Gospel. In the Name of God, I
require thee cast not away this Advantage: Turn not away thine Ears or Heart
from this warning that is sent to thee from the living God! Seeing all the
World cannot keep thee from Judgment, let not all the World be able to keep
thee from a speedy and serious Preparation for it. Do it presently, lest God
come before thou art ready. Do it seriously, lest the Tempter overreach thee,
and thou should found among the foolish Self-deceivers when it is too late to
do it better. I entreat this of thee on the behalf of thy Soul, and as the
und^^^st thy everlasting Peace with God, that (...) would afford these
Matters thy deepest Consideration. Think on them, whether they are not true and
weighty: Think of them lying down and rising up. And seeing this small Book is
fallen into thy hands, all that I would beg of thee concerning it, is, that thou
would bestow now and then an Hour to read it, and read it to thy Family or
Friends as well as to thy self: and as you go, consider what you read, and pray
to the Lord to help it to thy Heart, and to assist thee in the Practice, that
it may not rise up in Judgment against thee. If thou have not leisure at other,
take now and then an Hour on the Lord's Days, or at Night to that purpose: and
if any Passage through brevity (specially near the Beginning) seem dark to
thee, read it again and again, and ask the help of an Instructor, that thou
may understand it. May it but help thee out of the Snares of Sin, and
promote the saving of thy Immortal Soul, and thy Comfortable Appearance at the
great Day of Christ, I have the thing which I intended and desired. The Lord
open thy Heart, and accompany his Truth with the Blessing of his Spirit. Amen.

A Discourse of the Terror of the Day of Judgment.
2 Cor. 5. 10, 11. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in his Body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad. Knowing therefore the Terrors of the
Lord, we persuade Men.
IT is not unlikely that some of those Wits that are taken more with things new
than with things necessary, will marvel that I choose so common a Subject, and
tell me that they all know this already. But I do it purposely upon these
following Considerations. 1. Because I well know it is these common Truths that
are the great and necessary things which Men's everlasting Happiness or Misery
does most depend upon. You may be ignorant of many Controversies and in^eriour
Points, without the Danger of your ^ouls, but so you cannot of these
Fundamentals. ^. Because it is apparent by the Lives of Men, that few know these
common Truths savingly, that think they know them. 3. Because there are several
Degrees of knowing the same Truths, and the best are imperfect in Degree; the
principal Growth in Knowledge that we should look after, is not to know more
Matters than: (...) knew before, but to know that better and with a clearer
Light and firmer Apprehension, which we da^kly and slightly knew before. You
may more safely be without any Knowledge at all of many lower Truths, than
without some ^arther Degree of the Knowledge of those which you already know. 4.
Besides, it is known by sad Experience, that many perish who know the Truth,
for want of the Consideration of it, and making use of what they know, and so
their Knowledge does but condemn them. We have as much need therefore to teach
and help you to get these Truths which you know, into your Hearts and Lives, as
to tell you more. 5. And indeed, it is the Impression of these great and
Master-Truths, wherein the Vitals and Essentials of God's Image upon the Soul
of Man does consist: and it is these Truths that are the very Instruments of
the great Works that are to be done upon the Heart by the Spirit and our
selves. In the right use of these it is that the principal Part of the Skill
and holy Wisdom of a Christian does consist; and in the diligent and constant
Use of these lies the Life and Trade of Christianity. There is nothing amiss
in Men's Hearts or Lives, but is for want of sound Knowing and Believing, or
well using these Fundamentals. 6. And moreover, methinks in this Choice of my
Subject, I may expect this Advantage with the Hearers, that I may spare that
Labor that else would be necessary for the Proof of my Doctrine: and that I
may also have easier Access to your Hearts, and have a suller Stroke at them,
and with less Resistance. If I came to tell you of any thing not Common, I know
not how far I might expect Belief from you. You might say, These things are
uncertain to us, or all Men are not of this Mind. But when every Hearer
confesses the Truth of my Doctrine, and no Man can deny it, without denying
Christianity it self; I hope I may expect that your Hearts should the sooner
receive the Impression of this Doctrine, and the sooner yield to the Duties it
directs you to, and the easier let go the Sins which from so certain a Truth
shall be discovered.

The Words of my Text, are the Reason which the Apostle gives both of his
persuading other Men to the Fear of God, and his Care to approve to God his own
Heart and Life. They contain the Assertion and Description of the Great
Judgment, and one Use which he makes of it. It assures us that judged we must
be, and who must be so judged, and by whom, and about what, and on what Terms,
and to what End.

The meaning of the Words, so far as is necessary, I shall give you briefly. We
all, both we Apostles that preach the Gospel, and you that hear it, must,
willing or unwilling, there is no avoiding it, appear, stand forth, or make
your appearance, and there have your Hearts and Ways laid open, and appear as
well as we. Before the Judgment Seat of Christ, i. e. before the Redeemer of
the World, to be judged by him as our Rightful Lord. That every one, even of
all Mankind, which are, were, or shall be, without Exception; may receive, that
is, may receive his Sentence, adjudging him to his due; and then may receive
the Execution of the Sentence, and may go from the Bar with that Reward or
Punishment that is his due according to the Law by which he is judged. The
things done in his Body, that is, the due Reward of the Works done in his Body;
or as some Copies read it, The things proper to the Body, i. e. due to the Man,
even Body as well as Soul, according to what he has done, whether it be Good
or Bad; i. e. this is the Cause to be tried and judged, whether Men have done
well or ill, whilst they were in the Flesh, and what is due to them according
to their Deeds. Knowing therefore, etc. i. e. being certain therefore that
these Things are so, and that such a terrible Judgment of Christ will come, we
persuade Men to become Christians and live as such, that they may then speed
well, when others shall be destroyed; or as others, Knowing the Fear of the
Lord, that is, the true Religion, we persuade Men.

Doct. 1. There will be a Judgment. Doct. 2. Christ will be the Judge. Doct. 3.
All Men shall there appear. Doct. 4. Men shall be then judged according to the
Works that they did in the Flesh, whether Good or Evil. Doct. 5. The End of
Judgment is, that Men may receive their final Due by Sentence and Execution.
Doct. 6. The Knowledge and Consideration of the terrible Judgment of God, should
move us to persuade, and Men to be persuaded to careful Preparation.

The ordinary Method for the handling of this Subject of Judgment should be
this. 1 st. To show you what Judgment is in the General, and what it does
contain: and that is, 1. The Persons. 2. The Cause. 3. The Actions. 1. The
Parties are, (1.) The Accuser. (2.) The Defendant. (3.) Sometime Assistants.
(4.) The Judge. 2. The Cause contains, (1.) The Accusation. (2.) The Defense.
(3.) With the Evidence of both. (4.) And the Merit. The Merit of the Cause is
as it agrees with the Law and Equity. 3. The judicial Actions are, I.
Introductory, 1. Citation. 2. Compulsion, if need be. 3. Appearance of the
Accused. II. Of the Essence of Judgment, 1. Debate by, (1.) The Accuser. (2.)
Defendant, called the Disceptation of the Cause. 2. By the Judge. 1.
Exploration. 2. Sentence. 3. To see to the Execution: But because this Method
is less suitable to your Capacities, and has something humane, I will reduce
all to these following Heads.

1. I will show what Judgment is.

2. Who is the Judge: and why.

3. Who must be judged.

4. Who is the Accuser.

5. How the Citation, Constraint and Appearance will be.

6. What is the Law by which Men shall be judged.

7. What will be the Cause of the Day, what the Accusation, and what must be
the just Defense.

8. What will be the Evidence.

9. What are thos^ frivolous insufficient Excuses by which the Unrighteous may
think to escape.

10. What will be the Sentence, who shall die, and who shall live, and what the
Reward and Punishment ^s.

11. What are the Properties of the Sentence.

12. What and by whom the Execution will be. In ^hese particular Heads we
contain the whole Doctrine of ^his Judgment, and in this more familiar Method
shall ^andle it.

I. For the first Judgment, as taken largely, comprehends all the
sorementioned Particulars; as taken more strictly for the Act of the Judge, it
is the Trial of a controverted Case. In our Case note these things following.

1. God's Judgment is not intended for any Discovery to himself of what he
knows not already, he knows already that all Men are, and what they have done,
and what is their Due: But it is to discover to others and to Men themselves
the ground of his Sentence, that so his Judgment may attain its End, for the
glorifying ^his Grace on the Righteous, and for the convincing the Wicked of
their Sin and Desert, and to show to all the World the Righteousness of the
Judge, and of his Sentence and Execution. Romans 3. 4, 26. and Romans 2. 2.

2. It is not a Controversy therefore undecided ^in the Mind of God, that is
there to be decided; but only one that is undecided, as to the Knowledge and
Mind of Creatures.

3. Yet i^ not this Judgment a bare Declaration, but a Decision, and so a
Declaration thereupon: the Cause will be then put out of Controversy, and all
farther Expectation of Decision be at an End; and with the Justified there will
be no more Accusation, and with the Condemned no more Hope for ever.

II. For the second Thing, who shall be the Judge; I answer, The Judge is God
himself by Jesus Christ.

1. Principally, God as Creator.

2. As also, God as Redeemer; the humane Nature of Jesus Christ having a
derived subordinate Power. God lost not his Right to his Creature either by
Man's Fall, or the Redemption by Christ, but by the latter has a new farther
Right: but it is in and by Christ that God judges: For as mere Creator of
innocent Man, God judges none, but has committed all Judgment to the Son, who
has procured this Right by the redeeming of fallen Man, Joh. 5. 22. But as the
Son only does it in the nearest Sense, so the Father as Creator does it
remotely and principally.

1. In that the Power of the Son is derived from the Father, and so stands in
Subordination to him as Fountain or Efficient.

2. In that the Judgment of the Son (as also his whole Mediatorship) is to
bring Men to God their Maker as their ultimate End, and recover them to him
from whom they are fallen; and so as a Means to that End, the Judgment of the Son
is subordinate to the Father.

From hence you may see these following Truths worthy your Consideration.

1. That all Men are God's Creatures, and none are the Workmanship of
themselves or any other; or else the Creator should not judge them on that Right.

2. That Christ died for All, and is the Redeemer of the World, and a Sacrifice
for All, or else he should not judge them on that Right. For he will not judge
Wicked Men as he will do the Devils, as the mere Enemies of his Redeemed Ones,
but as being themselves his Subjects in the World, and being bought by him, and
therefore become his own, who ought to have glorified him that bought them, 2
Cor. 5. 14, 15. 2 Pet. 2. 1. 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. 1 John 2. 2. Heb. 2. 9. 1 Timothy
2. 6, 7.

3. Hence it appears that all Men were under some Law of Grace, and did
partake of some of the Redeemer's Mercy. Tho the Gospel came not to all, yet
all ^ad that Mercy which could come from no other Foun^in but his Blood, and
which should have brought them ^^arer to Christ than they were, (though it were
not ^fficient to bring them to Belief) and which should ^ave led them to
Repentance, Romans 2. 4. For ^e neglecting of which they justsy perish, and not
^eerly for sinning against the Law that was given Man in ^nnocency: Were that
so, Christ would not judge them (...) Redeemer, and that for the Abuse or not
Improvement of his Talents, as he tells us he will do, Mat. ^5. per to^um.

4. If God will be the Judge, then none can expect ^y any Shifts or Indirect
Means to escape at that Day. For how should it be?

1. It is not possible that any should keep out of Sight, or hide their Sin and
the Evil of their Actions, and so delude the Judge: God will not be mocked now,
nor deceived then, Gal. 6. 7. they grossly deceive themselves that imagine any
such thing: God must be Omni^cient and All-seeing, or he cannot be God. Should
you ^ide your Cause from Men and from Devils, and be ignorant of it your
selves, yet cannot you hide it from God. Never did there a Thought pass thy
Heart, or a Word pass thy Mouth, which God was not acquainted with: and as he
knows them, so does he observe them. He ^s not as impersect Man, taken up with
other Business, so that he cannot mind All. As easy is it with him t^ observe
every Thought, or Word, or Action of thine, as if he had but that one in the
World to observe; and ^s easy to observe each particular Sinner, as if he had
not another Creature to look after in the World. He is a Fool indeed that
thinks now that God takes no notice of him, Ezekiel. 8. 12. and 9. 9. or that
thinks then to escape in the Crowd: He that found out one Guest that had not
on a Wedding Garment, Mat. 22. 12. will then find out every unholy Soul, and
give him so sad a Salutation as shall make him speechless. Joh. 11. 11. For he
knows vain Man; be seech Wickedness also, and will be not consider it?

2. It is not possible that any should escape at that Day by any Tricks of Wit
and false Reasoning in their own Defense. God knows a sound Answer from an
unsound, and a Truth from a Lie. Righteousness may be perverted here on Earth,
by out-witting the Judge; but so will it not be then. To hope any of this, is to
hope that God will not be God. It is in vain then for the unholy Man to say he
is holy; or for any Sinner to deny, or excuse, or extenuate his Sin; to bring
forth the Counterfeit of any Grace, and plead with God any Shells of
hypocritical Performances, and to think to prove a Title to Heaven* by any
thing short of God's Condition: all these will be vain Attempts.

3. And as impossible will it prove by Fraud or Flattery, by Persuasion or
Bribery, or by any other Means, to pervert Justice by turning the Mind of God
who is the Judge: Fraud and Flattery, Bribery and Importunity may do much with
weak Men, but with God they will do nothing. Were he changeable and partial, he
were not God.

4. If God be Judge, you may see the Cavils of Infidels are foolish, when they
ask, How long will God be in trying and judging so many Persons, and taking an
Account of so many Words, and Thoughts, and Deeds? Sure it will be a long Time,
and a difficult Work. As if God were as Man that knows not things till he
seek out their Evidence by particular Signs. Let these Foo^s understand, if
they have any Understanding, that the infinite God can show to every Man at
once, all the Thoughts, and Words, and Actions that ever he has been guilty
of. And in the twink of an Eye, even at one view, can make all the World to see
their Ways and their Deservings, causing their Consciences and Memories to
present them all before them in such a sort, as shall be equivalent to a verbal
Debate, Psalm. 50. 21, 22. he will set them in Order before them.

5. If Jesus Christ be the Judge, then what a Comfort must it needs be to his
Members, that he shall be Judge that loved them to the Death, and whom they
loved above their Lives, and he who was their Rock of Hope and Strength, and
the Desire and Delight of their Souls!

6. And if Jesus Christ must be the Judge, what Confusion will it bring to the
Faces of his Enemies, and of all that set light by him in the Day of their
Visitation? to see Mercy turned against them, and he that died for them now
ready to condemn them, and that Blood and Grace which did aggravate their Sin,
to be pleaded against them to the Increase of their Misery: How sad will this
be?

7. If the God of Love, and Grace, and Truth, be Judge, then no Man need to fear
any Wrong. No Subtlety of the Accuser, nor Darkness of Evidence; no Prejudice
or Partiality, or whatsoever else may be imagined, can there appear to the
Wrong of your Cause. Get a good Cause and fear nothing: and if your Cause be
bad, nothing can deliver you.

III. For the third Point, Who are they that must be judged?

Answ. All the rational Creatures in this lower World. And it seems Angels
also, either all or some: But because their Case is more darkly made known to
us, and less concerns us, we will pass it by. Every Man that has been made or
born on Earth (except Christ, who is God and Man, and is the Judge) must be
judged. If any foolish Infidels shall say, Where shall so great a Number stand?
I answer him, That he knows not the things Invisible; either the Nature of
Spirits and spiritual Bodies, nor what Place contains them, or how; but
easily he may know that he that gave them all a Being, can sustain them all,
and have room for them all, and can at once disclose the Thoughts of all, as I
said before.

The first in Order to be judged are the Saints, Mat. 25. and then with Christ
they shall judge the rest of the World, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. not in an equal
Authority and Commission with Christ, but as the present Approvers of his
righteous Judgment. The Princes of the Earth shall stand then before Christ
even as the Peasants, and the Honorable as the Base; the Rich and the Poor
shall meet together, and the Lord shall judge them all, Prove. 22. 2. No Men
shall be excused from standing at that Bar, and giving up their Account, and
receiving their Doom. Learned and unlearned, young and old, godly and ungodly,
all must stand there. I know some have vainly imagined that the Righteous shall
not have any of their Sins mentioned, but their Graces and Duties only; but
they consider not that things will not then be transacted by Words as we do
now, but by clear Discoveries by the infinite Light; and that if God should not
discover to them their Sins, he would not discover the Riches of his Grace in
the Pardon of all these Sins: even then they must be humbled in themselves that
they may be glorified, and for ever cry, Not unto us Lord, but unto thy Name be
the Glory.

IV. For the fourth Particular, Who will be the Accuser?

Answ. 1. Satan is called in Scripture the Accuser of the Prethren, Revel. 12.
10. and we find in Joh* 1. and other Places, that now he does practice it even
before God: and therefore we judge it probable that he will do so then. But we
would determine of nothing that Scripture has not clearly determined.

2. Conscience will be an Accuser, though especially of the Wicked, yet in some
sense of the Righte^us, for it will tell the Truth to all; and therefore so far
as Men are faulty, it will tell them of their Faults. The Wicked it will accuse
of unpardoned Sin, and of Sin unrepented of; the Godly only of Sin repented of
and pardoned. It will be a Glass wherein every Man: may see the Face of his
Heart and former Life, Romans 1. 15.

3. The Judge himself will be the principal Accuser; for it is he that is
wronged, and he that prosecutes the Cause, and will do Justice on the Wicked.
God judges even the Righteous themselves to be Sinners, or else they could not
be pardoned Sinners. But he judges the Wicked to be impenitent, unbelieving,
unconverted Sinners. Remember what I said before, that it is not a verbal
Accusation, but an opening of the Truth of the Cause to the view of our selves
and others, that God will then perform.

Nor can any think it unworthy of God to be Men's Accuser by such a Disclosure,
it being no Dishonor to the purest Light to reveal a Dunghill, or to the
greatest Prince to accuse a Traitor. Nor is it unmeet that God should be both
Accuser and Judge, seeing he is both absolute Lord, and perfectly Just, and so
far beyond all suspicion of Injustice. His Law also does virtually accuse, Joh.
5. 45. but of this by it self.

V. For the fifth Particular, How will the Sinners be called to the Bar?

Answ. God will not stand to send them a Citation, nor require them to make
their voluntary Appearance: but willing or unwilling he will bring them in.

1. Before each Man's particular Judgment, he sends Death to call away his
Soul, a surly Sergeant that will have no Nay: How dear soever this World may be
to Men, and how loath soever they are to depart, away they must, and come before
the Lord that made them; Death will not be bribed. Every Man that was set in
the Vineyard in the Morning of their Lives, must be called out at Evening to
receive according to what he has done: then must the naked Soul alone appear
before its Judge, and be accountable for all that was done in the Body, and be
sent before till the final Judgment to remain in Happiness or Misery, till the
Body be raised again and joined to it.

In this Appearance of the Soul before God, it. seems by Scripture, that
there is some Ministry of Angels; for Luke 16. 22. it is said that the Angels
carried Lazarus, that is, his Soul, into Abraham's Bosom. What local Motion
there is, or Situation of Souls, is no fit Matter for the Enquiry of Mortals;
and what it is in this that the Angels will do, we cannot clearly understand as
yet; but most certain it is, that as soon as ever the Soul is out of the Body,
it comes to its account before the God of Spirits.

2. At the end of the World the Bodies of all Men shall be raised from the
Earth, and joined again to their Souls, and the Soul and Body shall be judged
to their endless State; and this is the great and general Judgment where all
Men shall at once appear. The same Power of God that made Men of nothing, will
as easily then new-make them by a Resurrection, by which he will add much more
Perfection, even to the Wicked in their Naturals, which will make them capable
of the greater Misery; even they shall have immortal and incorruptible Bodies,
which may be the Subjects of immortal Woe, 1 Cor. 15. 53. John 5. 28, 29.

Of this Resurrection and our Appearance at Judgment, the Angels will be
someway the Ministers: as they shall come with Christ to Judgment, so they
shall sound his Trumpet, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. and they shall gather the Wicked out
of God's Kingdom, and they shall gather the Tares to burn them, Matthew. 13. 39,
40, 41. in the End of the World the Angels shall come forth and sever the
Wicked from among the Just, and shall cast them into the Furnace of Fire,
Matthew. 17. 49, 50.

VI. For the sixth Particular, What Law is it that Men shall be judged by?

Answ. That which was given them to live by: God's Law is but the Sign of his
Will to teach us what shall be due from us and to us: before we fell he gave us
such a Law as was suitable to our Perfection; when we had sinned and turned from
him, as we ceased not to be his Creatures, nor he to be our Lord, so he
destroyed not his Law, nor discharged or absolved us from the Duty of our
Obedience. But because we stood condemned by that Law, and could not be
justified by it, having once transgressed it, he was pleased to make a Law of
Grace, even a new, a remedying Law, by which we might be saved from the
deserved Punishment of the Old. So we shall be tried at Judgment upon both
these Laws, but ultimately upon the last. The first Law commanded perfect
Obedience, and threatened Death to us if ever we disobeyed; the second Law
finding us under the Guilt of Sin against the first, does command us to repent
and believe in Christ, and so return to God by him, and promises us pardon of
all our Sins upon that Condition, and also if we persevere, everlasting Glory.
So that in Judgment though it must be first evinced that we are Sinners, and
have deserved Death according to the Law of pure Nature; yet that is not the
Upshot of the Judgment. For the Enquiry will be next, whether we have accepted
the Remedy, and so obeyed the Law of Grace, and performed its Condition for
Pardon and Salvation, and upon this our Life or Death will depend. It is both
these Laws that condemn the Wicked, but it is only the Law of Grace that
justifies the Righteous.

Obj. But how shall Heathens be judged by the Law of Grace, that never did
receive it?

Answ. The express Gospel some of them had not, and therefore shall not
directly be judged by it; but much of the Redeemer's Mercy they did enjoy,
which should have led them to repent and seek out after Recovery from their
Misery, and to come nearer Christ; and for the neglect and abuse of this they
shall be judged, and not merely for sinning against the Law that was given us
in pure Innocence: so that Christ as Redeemer shall judge them as well as
others; though they had but one Talent, yet must they give an account of that
to the Redeemer from whom they received it. But if any be unsatisfied in this,
let them remember that as God has left the State of such more dark to us, and
the Terms on which he will judge them; so does it much more concern us to look
to the Terms of our own Judgment.

Obj. But how shall Insants be judged by the Gospel, that were incapable of it?

Answ. For ought I find in Scripture, they stand or fall with their Parents,
and on the same Terms; but I leave each to their own Thoughts.

VII. For the seventh Head, What will be the Cause of the Day to be enqu^ed
after? what the Accusation, and what the Defense?

Answ. This may be gathered from what was last said, The great Cause of the Day
will be to enquire and determine who shall die and who shall live, who ought to
go to Heaven, and who to Hell for ever, according to the Law by which they must
then be judged.

1. As there is a twofold Law by which they must be judged, so will there then
be a twofold Accusation. The first will be that they were Sinners, and so
having violated the Law of God, they deserve everlasting Death according to
that Law: If no Defense could be made, this one Accusation would condemn all
the World; for it is most certain that all are Sinners, and as certain that all
Sin deserves Death. The only Defense against this Accusation ^ieth in this
Plea; confessing the Charge, we must plead that Christ has satisfied for Sins,
and upon that Consideration God has forgiven us; and therefore being forgiven,
we ought not to be punished: To prove this we must show the Pardon under God's
Hand in the Gospel. But because this pardoning doning Act of the Gospel does
forgive none but those that repent and believe, and so return to God, and to
sincere Obedience for the time to come; therefore the next Accusation will be,
that we did not perform these Conditions of Forgiveness; and therefore being
Unbelievers, Impenitent and Rebels against the Redeemer, we have no right to
Pardon, but by the Sentence of the Gospel are liable to a greater Punishment
for this Contempt of Christ and Grace. This Accusation is either true or false:
where it is true, God and Conscience, who speak the Truth, may well be said to
be the Accusers: Where it is false, it can be only the Work of Satan the
malicious Adversary, who, as we may see in Job's Case, will not stick to bring
a false Accusation.

If any think that the Accuser will not do so vain a Work, at least they may
see that potentially this is the Accusation that lies against us, and which we
must be justified against. For all Justification implies an actual or
potential Accusation.

He that is truly accused of final Impenitency, or Unbelief, or Rebellion, has
no other Defense to make, but must needs be condemned.

He that is falsely accused of such Nonperformance of the Condition of Grace,
must deny the Accusation, and plead his own personal Righteousness as against
that Accusation, and produce that Faith, Repentance and sincere Obedience and
Perseverance, by which he fulfilled that Condition, and so is Evangilically
Righteous in himself, and therefore has part in the Blood of Christ, which is
instead of a Legal Righteousness to him in all things else, as having procured
him a Pardon of all his Sins, and a Right to everlasting Glory.

And thus we must then be justified by Christ's Satisfaction only against the
Accusation of being Sinners in general, and of deserving God's Wrath for the
Breach of the Law of Works; but we must be justified by our Faith, Repentance
and sincere Obedience it self, against the Accusation of being Impenitent,
Unbelievers and Rebels against Christ, and having not performed the Condition
of the Promise, and so having no part in Christ and his Benefits.

So that in sum you see that the Cause of the Day will be to enquire, whether
being all known Sinners, we have accepted of Christ upon his Terms, and so have
Right in him and his Benefits or not? whether they have forsaken this vain
World for him, and loved him so faithfully, that they have manifested it, in
parting with these things at his Command? And this is the meaning of Mat. 25.
where the Enquiry is made to be, whether they have sed and visited him in his
Members or not? that is, whether they have so far loved him as their Redeemer,
and God by him, as that they have manifested this to his Members according to
Opportunity, though it cost them the Hazard or Loss of all; seeing Danger, and
Labor, and Cost are fitter to express Love by than empty Compliments and bare
Professions.

Whether it be particularly enquired after, or only taken for granted that Men
are Sinners, and have deserved Death according to the Law of Works, and that
Christ has satisfied by his Death, is all one as to the matter in hand, seeing
God's Enquiry is but the Discovery and Conviction of us. But the last Question
which must decide the Controversy will be, whether we have performed the
Condition of the Gospel?

I have the rather also said all this, to show you in what sense these Words
are taken in the Text, that every Man shall be judged according to what he has
done in the Flesh, whether it be good or bad. Though every Man be judged worthy
of Death for sinning, yet every Man shall not be judged to die for it, and no
Man shall be judged worthy of Life for his good Works: It is therefore
according to the Gospel, as the Rule of Judgment, that this is meant. They that
have repented and believed, and returned to true, though imperfect Obedience,
shall be judged to everlasting Life, according to these Works; not because
these Works deserve it, but because the free Gift in the Gospel through the
Blood of Christ, does make these things the Condition of our possessing it.
They that have lived and died Impenitent, Unbelievers and Rebels against
Christ, shall be judged to everlasting Punishment, because they have deserved
it both by their Sin in general against the the Law, and by these Sins in
special against the Gospel. This is called the Merit of the Cause, that is,
what is a Man's Due according to the true meaning of the Law, though the Due
may be by free Gift. And thus you see what will be the Cause of the Day, and
the Matter to be enquired after and decided as to our Life or Death.

VIII. The next Point in our Method is, to show you, What will be the Evidence
of the Cause?

Answ. There is a fivefold Evidence among Men. 1. When the Fact is notorious.
2. The Knowledge of an unsuspected competent Judge. 3. The Parties Confession. 4.
Witness. 5. Instruments and visible Effects of the Action. All these Evidences
will be at hand, and any one of them sufficient for the Conviction of the
guilty Person at that Day.

1. As the Sins of all Men, so the Impenitency and Rebellion of the Wicked was
notorious, or at least will be then. For though some play the Hypocrites, and
hide the Matter from the World and themselves, yet God shall open their Hearts
and former Lives to themselves, and to the view of all the World. He shall set
their Sins in Order before them, so that it shall be utterly in vain to deny or
excuse them. If any Man will then think to make their Cause as good to God as
they can now do to us, that are not able to see their Hearts, they will be
foully mistaken. Now they can say they have as good Hearts as the best: then
God will bring them out in the Light, and show them to themselves and all the
World, whether they were good or bad. Now they will face us down that they do
truly repent, and they obey God as well as they can; but God that knows the
Deceivers will then undeceive them. We cannot now make Men acquainted with
their own unsanctified Hearts, nor convince them that have not true Faith,
Repentance or Obedience, but God will convince them of it; they can find Shifts
and false Answers to put off a Minister with, but God will not so be shifted
off. Let us preach as plainly to them as we can, and do all that ever we are
able to acquaint them with the Impenitency and Unholiness of their own Heart,
and the Necessity of a new Heart and Life, yet we cannot do it, but they will
believe whether we will or not, that the old Heart will serve the turn. But how
easily will God make them know the contrary? We plead with them in the dark,
for though we have the Candle of the Gospel in our hands when we come to show
them their Corruption, yet they shut their Eyes and are wilfully blind; but God
will open their Eyes whether they will or not, not by holy Illumination, but by
forced Conviction; and then he will plead with them as in the open Light. See
here thy own unholy Soul; can thou now say thou did love me above all?
can thou deny but thou did love this World before me, and serve thy Flesh
and Lusts, though I told thee if thou ^idst so thou should die? Look upon thy
own Heart now, and see whether it be an holy or an unholy Heart, a spiritual or
a fleshly Heart, a heavenly or an earthly Heart. Look now upon all the Course
of thy Life, and see whether thou did live to me, or to the World and thy
Flesh. O how easily will God convince Men then of the very Sins of their
Thoughts, and in their secret Close^s, when they thought that no Witness could
have disclosed them! Therefore it is said that the Books shall be opened, and
the Dead judged out of the Books, Rev. 20. 12. Dan. 7. 10.

The second Evidence will be the Knowledge of the Judge. If the Sinner would not
be convinced, yet it is sufficient that the Judge knows the Cause; God needs
no farther Witness, he saw thee committing Adultery in secret, Lying, Stealing,
Forswearing in secret. If thou do not know thine own Heart to be unholy, it is
enough that God knows it. If you have the Face to say, Lord, when did we see
thee hungry? etc. Mat. 25. 44. yet God will make good the Charge against thee,
and there needs no more Testimony than his own. Can foolish Sinners think to
lie hid or escape at that Day, that will now sin wilfully before their Judge?
that know every Day that their Judge is looking on them, while they forget him,
and give up themselves to the World, and yet go on even under his Eye, as if to
his Face they dared him to punish them?

3. The third Evidence will be, the Sinners Confession God will force their own
Consciences to witness against them, and their own Tongues to confess the
Accusation. If they do at first excuse it, he will leave them speechless, yea
and condemning themselves before they have done.

O what a difference between their Language now and then! Now we cannot tell
them of their Sin and Misery, but they either tell us of our own Faults, or bid
us look to our selves, or deny or excuse their Fault, or make light of it: but
then their own Tongues shall confess them, and cry out of the wilful Folly that
they committed, and lay a heavier Charge upon them than we can now do. Now if
we tell them that we are afraid they are unregenerate, and lest their Hearts
are not truly set upon God, they will tell us they hope to be saved with such
Hearts as they have: But t^en, O how they will confess the Folly and Falseness
of their own Hearts! You may see a little of their Case even in despairing
Sinners on Earth, how far they are from denying or excusing their Sins. Judas
cries out, I have sinned in betraying innocent Blood, Mat. 27. 4. out of their
own Mouth shall they be judged. That very Tongue that now excuses their Sin,
will in their Torments be their great Accuser. For God will have it so to be.

4. The fourth Evidence will be the Witness of others. O how many thousand
Witnesses might there be produced, were there need, to convince the guilty Soul
at that Day!

1. All the Ministers of Christ that ever preached to them, or warned them,
will be sufficient Witnesses against them; we must needs testify that we
preached to them the Truth of the Gospel, and they would not believe it. We
preached to them the Goodness of God, yet they set not their Hearts upon him;
we showed them their Sin, and they were not humbled: we told them of the danger
of an unregenerate State, and they did not regard us: we acquainted them with
the absolute Necessity of Holiness, but they made light of all: we let them
know the Deceitfulness of their Hearts, and the need of a close and faithful
Examination, but they would not bestow an Hour in such a Work, nor scarce once
be afraid of being mistaken and miscarrying. We let them know the Vanity of
this World, and yet they would not forsake it, no not for Christ and the Hopes
of Glory: we told them of the everlasting Felicity they might attain, but they
would not set themselves to seek it.

What we shall think of it then the Lord knows, but surely it seems now to us
a matter of very sad Consideration, that we must be brought in as Witnesses
against the Souls of our Neighbors and Friends in the Flesh. Those whom we now
unfeignedly love, and would do any thing that we were able to do for their
good, whose Welfare is dearer to us than all worldly Enjoyments. Alas, that we
must be forced to testify to their Faces for their Condemnation! Ah Lord, with
what a Heart must a poor Minister study, when he considers this, that all the
Words that he is studying must be brought in for a Witness against many of his
Hearers! with what an Heart must a Minister preach when he remembers that all
the Words that he is speaking must condemn many, if not most of his Hearers? Do
we desire this sad Fruit of our Labors? No, we may say with the Prophet, Jer.
17. 16. I have not desired the woeful Day thou know: No, if we desired it, we
would not do so much to prevent it, we would not study, and preach, and pray,
and entreat Men, that if it were possible we might not be put on such a Task.
And doubtless it should make every honest Minister study hard, and pray hard,
and entreat hard, and stoop low to Men, and be earnest with Men in season and
out of season, that if it may be they may not be the Condemners of their
Peoples Souls. But if Men will not hear, and there be no remedy, who can help
it? Christ himself came not into the World to condemn Men, but to save them,
and yet he will condemn those that will not yield to his saving Work: God takes
no Pleasure in the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he repent and return and
live, Ezekiel. 18. 23, 32. and yet he will rejoice over those to do them hurt, and
destroy them that will not return, Deuteronomy. 28. 63. And if we must be put on such
a Work, he will make us like-minded. The Holy Ghost tells us that the Saints
shall judge the World, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. and if they must judge, they will judge as
God judges; you cannot blame us for it, Sinners: we now warn you of it
beforehand, and if you will not prevent it, blame not us but your selves.
Alas, we are not our own Masters! As we now speak not to you in our own Names,
so then we may not do what we list our selves, or if we might, our Wills will
be as God's Will. God will make us judge you and witness against you. Can we
absolve you when the righteous God will condemn you? when God is against you,
whose side would you have us be of? we must be either against God or you; and
can you think that we should be for any one against our Maker and Redeemer? we
must either condemn the Sentence of Jesus Christ or condemn you: and is not
there more reason to condemn you than him? Can we have any Mercy on you, when
he that made you will not save you, and he that formed you will show you no
Mercy? Isa. 27. 11. yea when he that died for you will condemn you, shall we be
more merciful than God? But alas! if we should be so foolish and unjust, what
good would it do you? If we would be False-witnesses and partial Judges, it
would not save you; we are not justified if we absolve our selves, 1 Cor. 4. 4.
how unable then shall we be against God's Sentence to justify you? If all the
World should say you were holy and penitent, when God knows you were unholy and
impenitent, it will do you no good. You pray every Day that his Will may be
done, and it will be done: It will be done upon you, because it was not done by
you. What would you have us say, if God ask us, Did you tell this Sinner of the
need of Christ, of the Glory of the World to come, and the Vanity of this?
Should we lie and say we did not? What should we say if he ask us, Did not you
tell them the Misery of their natural State, and what would become of them if
they were not made new? Would you have us lie to God, and say we did not? Why
if we did not, your Blood will be required at our hands, Ezekiel. 33. 6. and 3.
18. and would you have us bring your Blood upon our own Heads by a ^ie? yea,
and to do you no good, when we know that Lies will not prevail with God? No,
no, Sinners; we must unavoidably testify to the Confusion of your Faces; if God
ask us, we must bear Witness against you and say, Lord, we did what we could
according to our weak Abilities to reclaim them: indeed our own Thoughts of
everlasting Things were so low, and our Hearts so dull, that we must confess we
did not follow them so close, nor speak so earnestly as we should have done: we
did not cry so loud, or lift up our Voice as a Trumpet to awaken them (Isa. 58.
1.) we confess we did not speak to them with such melting Compassion, and with
such Streams of Tears beseech them to regard, as a Matter of such great
Concernment should have been spoken with; we did not fall on our Knees to them,
and so earnestly beg of them for the Lord's sake, to have Mercy upon their own
Souls as we should have done. But yet we told them the Message of God, and we
studied to speak it to them as plainly and as piercingly as we could. Fain we
would have convinced them of their Sin and Misery, but we could not: fain we
would have drawn them to the Admiration of Christ, but they made light of it,
Mat. 22. 5. we would fain have brought them to the Contempt of this vain World,
and to set their Mind on the World to come, but we could not. Some Compassion
thou know, Lord, we had to their Souls, many a weeping and groaning Hour we
have had in secret, because they would not hear and obey, and some sad
Complain^s we have made over them in public: we to^d them that they must
shortly die and come to Judgment, and that this World would deceive them and
leave them in the Dust: we told them that the time was at hand when nothing but
Christ would do them good, and nothing but the Favor of God would be
sufficient for their Happiness, but we could never get them to lay it to heart.
Many a time did we entreat them to think soberly of this Life and the Life to
come, and to compare them together with the Faith of Christians and the Reason
of Men, but they would not do it: many a time did we entreat them but to take
now and then an Hour in secret to consider who made them, and for what he had
made them, and why they were sent into this World, and what their Business here
is, and whither they are going, and bow it will go with them at their latter
End: but we could never get most of them to spend one Hour in serious Thoughts
of these weighty Matters. Many a time did we entreat them to try whether they
were Regenerate or not, whether Christ and his Spirit were in them or not,
whether their Souls were brought back to God by Sanctification; but they would
not try: we did beseech them to make sure Work, and not leave such a Matter as
everlasting Joy or Torment to a bold and mad Adventure, but we could not
prevail. We entreated them to lay all other Businesses aside a little while in
the World, and to enquire by the Direction of the Word of God, what would
become of them in the World to come, and judge themselves before God came to
judge them, seeing they had the Law and Rule of Judgment before them; but their
Minds were blinded, and their Hearts were hardened, and the Profit, and
Pleasure, and Honor of the World did either stop their Ears, for quickly steal
away the Hearts, so that we could never get them to a sober Consideration, nor
ever win their Hearts to God.

This will be the Witness that many a hundred Ministers of the Gospel must give
in against the Souls o^ their People at that Day. Alas, that ever you should
cast this upon us! For the Lord's sake, Sirs, pity you^ poor Teachers if you
pity not your selves. We ha^ rather go 1000 Miles for you, we had rather be
scorne^ and abused for your sakes, we had rather lay our Hands under your Feet,
and beseech you on our Knees with Tears were we able, than be put on such Work
as this. It i^ you that will do it if it be done. We had rather follow you from
House to House, and teach and exhort you^ if you will but hear us and accept of
our Exhortation Your Souls are precious in our Eyes, for we know they were so
in the Eyes of Christ, and therefore we ar^ loath to see this Day; we were once
in your Case* and therefore know what it is to be blind, and careless* and
carnal as you are, and therefore would fain obtain your Deliverance. But if you
will not hear, but we must accuse you, and we must condemn you, the Lord judge
between you and us. For we can witness that i^ was full sore against our Wills.
We have been faulty indeed in doing no more for you, and not following you with
restless Importunity, (the Good Lord forgive us) but yet we have not betrayed
you by silence.

2. All those that fear God, that have lived among^^ ungodly Men, will also be
sufficient Witnesses against them. Alas, they must be put upon the same Work*
which is very unpleasant to their Thoughts, as Minister^ are! They must witness
before the Lord that they did as Friends and Neighbors admonish them; tha^
they gave them a good Example, and endeavored to walk in Holiness before them.
But alas, the most did but mock them, and call them Puritans and precise Fools,
and they made more ado than needs for their ^^lvation: They must be forced to
restify, [Lord, we ^ould fain have drawn them with us to hear the Word and to
read it, and to pray in their Families, and to ^^nctify the holy Day, and take
such happy Opportu^ities for their Souls; but we could not get them to (...):
we did in our Places what we were able to ^^ve them the Example of a godly
Conversati^n, and they did but deride us, they were rea^^er to mark every slip
of our Lives, and to observe ^ll our Infirmities, and catch at any Accusation
that was against us, than to follow us in any Work of holy ^bedience, or Care
for their everlasting Peace.] The lord knows it is a most heavy thing to
consider now that ^oor Neighbors must be fain to come in against those ^hey
love so dearly, and by their Testimony to judge them to Perdition. O heavy Case
to think of, that Master must witness against his own Servant! Yea, Husband
against his own Wife, and a Wife against ^er Husband; yea, Parents against
their own Children, and say, [Lord I taught them thy Word, but they would ^ot
learn; I told them what would come on it if they ^eturned not to thee, I
brought them to Sermons, and (...) prayed with them and for them. I frequently
^inded them of these everlasting Things, and of ^his dreadful Day which they
now see. But youth^ul Lusts and the Temptations of the Flesh and the Devil led
them away, and I could never get them ^hroughly and soundly to lay it to their
Hearts.] O ^ou that are Parents, and Friends, and Neighbors, ^n the Fear of
God bestir you now, that you may not ^e put to this at that Day of Judgment. O
give them ^o rest, take no nay of them till you have persuaded their Hearts
from this World to God, lest you be put ^o be their Condemners: It must be now
that you must prevent it, or else never; now while you are with them, while you
and they are in the Flesh together, which will be but a little while: Can you
but now prevail with them, all will be well, and you may meet them ^oyfully
before the Lord.

3. Another Witness that will testify against the Ungodly at that Day, will be
their sinful Companions, those that drew them into Sin, or were drawn by them,
or joined with them in it. O little do poor Drunkards think, when they sit
merrily in an Alehouse, that one of them must bear witness against another,
and condemn one another! If they thought of this, methinks it should make them
have less Delight in that Company: those that now join with you in Wickedness,
shall then be forced to witness, [I confess, Lord, I did hear him sweat and
curse, I heard him deride those that feared the Lord, and make a Jest of a holy
Life: I saw him in the Alehouse when he should be hearing the Word of God, or
reading, or calling upon God, and preparing for this Day: I joined with him in
fleshly Delights, in abusing thy Creature and our own Bodies.] Sinners, look
your Companions in the Face the next time you are with them, and remember this
that I now say; that those Men shall give in Evidence against you, that now are
your Associates in all your Mirth. Little thinks the Fornicator and lustful
Wanton, that their sinful Mates must then bear Witness of that which they
thought the Dark had concealed, and tell their Shame before all the World. But
this must be the Fruit of Sin. It Is meet that they who encouraged one another
in Sin, should condemn one another for it. And marvel not at it, for they shall
be forced to it whether they will or no; Light will not then be hid: They may
think to have some case to their Consciences, by accusing and condemning
others. When Adam is questioned for his Sin, he presently accuses the Woman,
Genesis 3. 12. when Judas his Conscience was awakned, he runs to the Pharisees
with the Money that drew him to it, and they cast it back in his own Face, See
thou to il, what is that to us? Mat. 27. 4, 5, 6. O the cold Comfort that
Sinners will have at that Day, and the little I leisure that they will find in
remembering their evil Ways! Now when a Foruicator or a Worldling, or a merry
voluptuous Man is grown old, and cannot act all his Sin again, he takes
Pleasure in remembering and telling others of his former Folly; what he once
was, and what he did, and the merry Hours that he had: but then when Sinners
are come to themselves a little more, they will remember and tell one another
of these things with another Heart. O that they did but know now how these
things will then affect them!

4. Another Witness that will then rise up against them, will be the very
Devils that tempted them: They that did purposely draw them to Sin, that they
might draw them to Torment for Sin: They can witness that you hearkened to their
Temptations, when you would not hearken to God's Exhortations: They can witness
that you obeyed them in working Iniquity. But because you may think the
Accuser's Testimony is not to be taken, I will not stand on this. Though it is
not nothing where God knows it to be true.

5. The very Angels of God also may be Witnesses against the Wicked; therefore
are we advised in Scripture not to sin before them, Eccl. 5. 6. 1 Cor. 11. 10.
1 Timothy 5. 21. I charge thee before the Elect Angels, etc. They can testify that
they would have been ministering Spirits for their good, when the Wicked rather
chose to be Slaves to the Spirit of Maliciousness. The holy Angels of God do
many a time stand by you when you are sinning: They see you when you see not
them; they are employed by God in some sort for your good, as well as we. And
as it is the Grief of Ministers that their Labors succeed not, so may we
suppose that according to their State and Nature it is theirs. For they that
rejoice in Heaven at the Conversion of one Sinner, may be said to sorrow, or to
lose those Joys when you refuse to be converted. These noble Spirits, these
holy and glorious Attendants of Christ that shall wait upon him to Judgment,
will be Witnesses against rebellious Sinners to their Confusion. Sirs, you have
all in you naturally a Fear of Spirits and invisible Powers: Fear them aright,
lest harkening to the deceiving Spirits, and refusing the Help of the Angels of
God, and wilfully sinning before their Faces, you should cause them at that
Day, to the Terror of your Souls, to stand forth as Witnesses against you to
your Condemnation.

6. Conscience it self will be a most effectual Witness against the Wicked at
that Day. I before told you it will be a Discerner, and force them to a
Confession: But a farther Office it has, even to witness against them. If none
else in the World had known of their secret Sins, Conscience will say, I was
acquainted with them.

7. The Spirit of Christ can witness against the Ungodly that he often moved them
to repent and return, and they rejected his Motions; that he spoke to their
Hearts in secret, and often set in with the Minister, and often minded them of
their Case, and persuaded them to God; but they resisted, quenched and grieved
the Spirit, Acts 7. 51. As the Spirit witnesses with the Spirits of the
Righteous that they are the Children of God, Romans 8. 16. so does he witness
with the Conscience of the Wicked that they were Children of Rebellion, and
therefore are justly Children of Wrath. This Spirit will not always st^ive with
Men: at last being vexed, it will prove their Enemy, and rise up against them,
Genesis 6. 3. Isa. 63. 10. If you will needs grieve it now, it will grieve you
then. Were it not a Spirit of Grace, and were it not free Mercy that it came to
offer you, the Repulse would not have been so condemning, nor the Witness of
this Spirit so heavy at the last. But it was the Spirit of Jesus, that came
with recovering Grace, which you resisted: And though the Wages of every Sin is
Death, yet you will find that it will cost you somewhat more to reject this
Salvation, than to break the Creator's Law of Works. Kindness, such Kindness
will not be rejected at easy Rates.

Many a good Motion is now made by the Spirit to the Heart of a Sinner, which
he does not so much as once observe; and therefore does not now remember them.
But then they shall be brought to his Remembrance with a witness. Many a
thousand secret Motions to Repentance, to Faith, to a holy Life, will be then
set before the Eyes of the poor, unpardoned, trembling Sinner, which he had
quite forgotten: And the Spirit of God shall testify to his Confusion. [At such
a Sermon I persuaded thy Heart to repent, and thou would not; at soch a time
I showed thee the Evil of thy Sin, and persuaded thee to have forsaken it, but
thou would not; I minded thee in thy secret Thoughts, of the nearness of
Judgment, and the certai^ty and weight of everlasting things, the need of
Christ, and Faith, and Holiness, and of the danger of Sinning; but thou did
drown all my Motions in the Cares and Pleasures of the World. Thou harkenedst
rather to the Devil than to me; the sensual Incl^nations of thy Flesh did
prevail against the strongest Arguments that I used: Though I showed Reasons,
undeniable Reasons, from thy Creator, from thy Redeemer, from Nature, from
Grace, from Heaven and from Hell; yet all would not so much as stop thee, much
less turn thee, but thou would go on; thou would follow thy Flesh, and
now let it pay thee the Wages of thy Folly; thou would be thy own Guide, and
take thine own Course, and now take what thou gettest by it.]

Poor Sinners, I beseech you in the Fear of God, the next time you have any
such Motions from the Spirit of God, to repent, and believe, and break off your
Sins, and the Occasions of them: consider then what a Mercy is set before you,
and how it will confound you at the Day of Judgment, to have all these Motions
brought in against you, and that the Spirit of Grace it self should be your
Condemner! Alas, that Men should choose their own Destruction, and wilfully
choose it! and that the Foreknowledg of these things should not move them to
relent.

So much concerning the Witness that will be brought in against the Sinner.

5. The fifth Evidence that will be given against the Sinner will be, The
Instruments and Effects. You know among Men, if a Man be found murdered by the
highway, and you are found standing by with a bloody Sword in your Hand;
especially if there were a former Dissension between you, it will be an
Evidence that will prove a strong Presumption that you were the Murderer; but
if the Fact be certain by other Evidence, then many such things may be brought
for aggravation of the Fault.

So a twofold Evidence will be brought against the Sinner from these things.
One to prove him guilty of the Fact, the other to aggravate the Fault, and
prove that his Sin was very great.

For the former. 1. The very Creatures which Sinners abused to sin, may be
brought in against them to their Conviction and Condemnation. For though these
Creatures shall be consumed with the last destroying Fire, which shall consume
all the World; yet shall they have a Being in the Memory of the Sinner, (an
esse Cognitum;) the very Wine or Ale, or other Liquor which was abused to
Drunkenness, may witness against the Drunkard. The sweet Morsels by which the
Glutton did please his Appetite, and all the good Creatures of God which he
luxuriously devoured, may witness against him, Luke 16. 19, 25. He that fared
deliciously every Day in this Life, was told by Abraham when he was dead, and
his Soul in Hell, [Remember that thou in thy Lifetime receivedst thy good
things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art
tormented.] Though their sweet Morsels and Cups are past and gone, yet must
they be remembered at Judgment and in Hell. [Remember Son] says Abraham; Yea,
and remember he must whether he will or no; long was the Glutton in sinning,
and many a pleasant bit did he taste: and so many Evidences of his Sin will lie
against him, and the Sweetness will then be turned into Gall.

The very Clothing and Ornaments by which proud Persons did manifest their
Pride, will be sufficient Evidence against them; as his being clothed with
Purple and fine Linen, is mentioned Luke 16. 19.

The very Lands, and Goods, and Houses of Worldlings will be an Evidence
against them: Their Gold and Silver, which the Covetous do now prefer before
the everlasting Riches with Christ, will be an Evidence against them: James 5.
1, 2, 3, 4. Go to now, ye rich Men, weep and howl for your Miseries that shall
come upon you. Your Riches are corrupted, and your Garments Mothtaten; your
Gold and your Silver is cankered, and the Rust of them shall be a Witness
against you, and shall eat your Flesh as it were Fire; ye have heaped Treasure
together for the last Days. Behold, the Hire of the Laborers, which have
reaped down your Fields, which is of you kept back by Fraud, cries; and the
Cries of them which have reaped, are entered into the Ears of the Lord of
Sabbath. Ye have lived in Pleasure on the Earth, and been wanton; ye have
nourished your Hearts as in a Day of Slaughter. O that Worldlings would well
consider this one Text; and therein observe whether a Life of Earthly Pleasure
and fullness of worldly Glory and Gallantry, be as desirable as they imagine,
and to what Time and Purpose they now lay up their Treasures; and how they must
hear of these things hereafter; and what effect the review of their jovial Days
will have upon their miserable condemned Souls.

2. The very Circumstances of Time, Place, and the like, may evidence against
his Condemnation. The Drunkard shall remember in such an Alehouse, I was so
often drunk, and in such a Tavern I wasted my time. The Adulterer and Fornicator
shall remember the very Time, the Place, the Room, the Bed, where they
committed Wickedness. The Thief and Deceiver will remember the Time, Place, and
the Persons they wronged, and the things which they robbed or deceived them of.
The Worldling will remember the Business which he preferred before the Service
of God; the worldly Matters which had more of his Heart than his Maker and
Redeemer had; the Work which he was doing when he should have been praying or
reading, or Catechizing his Family, or thinking soberly of his latter End. A
thousand of these will then come into his Mind, and be as so many Evidences
against him to his Condemnation.

3. The very Effects also of Men's Sins will be an Evidence against them. The
Wife and Children of a Drunkard are impoverished by his Sin; his Family and the
Neighborhood is disquieted by him. These will be so many Evidences against
him. So will the Abuse of his own Reason, the enticing of others to the same
Sin, and hardening them by his Example.

One covetous unmerciful Landlord does keep an hundred, or many hundred Persons
or Families in so great Necessities, and Care and Labor, that they are tempted
by it to overpass the Service of God, as having scarce time for it, or any Room
for it in their troubled Thoughts; all these miserable Families and Persons,
and all the Souls that are undone by this Temptation, will be so many Evidences
against such Oppressors.

Yea, the Poor whom they have neglected to relieve when they might; the Sick
whom they have neglected to visit when they might, will all witness then
against the Unmerciful, Mat. 25.

The many ignorant, worldly, careless Sinners, that have perished under an idle
and unfaithful Minister, will be so many Witnesses against him to his
Condemnation! They may then cry out against him to his Face, [I was ignorant,
Lord, and he never did so much as teach me, catechize me, nor tell me of these
things; I was careless, and minded the World, and he let me go on quietly, and
was as careless as I, had never plainly and faithfully warned me, to waken me
from my Security.] And so their Blood will be required at his hands, though
themselves also shall perish in their Sins, Ezekiel. 33. 7, 8.

2. And as these Evidences will convince Men of Sin, so there are many more
which will convince them of the greatness of their Sin. And these are so many,
that it would too much lengthen my Discourse to stand on them. A few I shall
briefly touch.

1. They very Mercy of God in creating Men, in giving and continuing their
Being to them, will be an Evidence for the Aggravation of their Sin against
him. What, will you abuse him by whom it is that you are Men? will you speak to
his Dishonor that gives you your Speech? will you live to his Dishonor who
gives you your Lives? will you wrong him by his own Creatures? and neglect him
without whom you cannot subsist?

2. The Redemption of Men by the Lord Jesus Christ, will be an Evidence to the
exceeding Aggravation of their Sins. You sinned against the Lord that bought
you, 2 Pet. 2. 1. When the Feast was prepared, and all things were ready, you
made light of it, and found Excuses and would not come, Mat. 22. 4, 5, 6. Luke
14. 17, 18. Must Christ redeem you by so dear a Price from Sin and Misery, and
yet will you continue the Servants of Sin, and prefer your Slavery before your
Freedom, and choose to be Satan's Drudges, rather than to be the Servants of
God? The Sorrows and Sufferings that Christ underwent for you, will then prove
the Increase of your own Sorrows. As a neglected Redeemer it is that he will
condemn you. And then you would be glad that it were but true Doctrine, that
Christ never died for you, that you might not be condemned for refusing a
Redeemer, and sinning against him that shed his Blood for you. How deeply will
his Wounds then wound your Consciences! You will then remember that to this end
he both died, rose and revived, that he might be Lord both of the Dead and the
Living: And that he therefore died for all, that they which live, should not
henceforth live to themselves, but to him that died for them and rose again;
Romans 14. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. 1 Pet. 1. 17, 18. You will
then understand that you were not your own, but were bought with a Price; and
therefore should have glorified him that bought you with your Bodies and
Spirits, because they were his, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. This one Aggravation of your
Sin will make you doubly and remedilesly miserable, that you trod under foot
the Son of God, and counted the Blood of the Covenant, wherewith you were
sanctified, an unholy thing, Heb. 10. 26, 27, 28, 29. and crucified to your
selves the Son of God afresh, and put him to open Shame, Heb. 6. 5, 6.

3. Moreover, all the personal Mercies which they received, will be so many
Evidences for the Condemnation of the Ungodly. The very Earth that bore them,
and yielded them its Fruits, while they themselves are unfruitful to God. The
Air which they breathed in, the Food which nourished them, the Clothes which
covered them, the Houses which they dwelt in, the Beasts that labored for
them, and all the Creatures that died for their Use: All these may rise up
against them to their Condemnation. And the Judge may thus expostulate with
them, [Did all these Mercies deserve no more Thanks? Should you not have served
him that so liberally maintained you? God thought not all these too good for
you, and did you think your Hearts and Services too good for him? He served
yours with the weary Labors of your Fellow Creatures; and should you have
grudged to bear his easy Yoke? They were your Slaves and Drudges, and you
refused to be his free Servants and his Sons: They suffered Death to feed your
Bodies, and you would not suffer the short Forbearance of a little forbidden
fleshly Pleasure, for the sake of him that made you and redeemed you.]

O how many thousand Mercies of God will then be reviewed by those that
neglected them, to the Horror of their Souls, when they shall be upbraided by
the Judge with their base Requital! All the Deliverances from Sickness and from
Danger; all the Honors, and Privileges, and other Commodities which so much
contented them, will then be God's Evidences to shame them and confound them.
On this Supposition does the Apostle reprove such, Romans 2. 4, 5, 6. Despisest
thou the Riches of his Goodness, and Forbearance, and Longsuffering, not
knowing that the Goodness of God leads thee to Repentance? But after thy
hardness and impenitent Heart, treasurest up unto thy self Wrath against the
Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, who will render
to every Man according to his Deeds.

4. Moreover, all the Means which God used for the Recovery of Sinners in the
Day of their Visitation, will rise up against impenitent Souls in Judgment, to
their Condemnation. You can hear Sermons carelessly and sleepily now: but O that
you would consider how the Review of them will then awake you! You now make
light of the Warnings of God and Man, and of all the wholesome Advice that is
given you, but God will not then make light of your Contempt. O what cutting
Questions will they be to the Hearts of the Ungodly, when all the means that
were used for their Good, are brought to their Remembrance on one side, and the
Temprations that drew them to Sin on the other Side, and the Lord shall plead
his Cause with their Consciences, and say, [Was I so hard a Master, or was my
Work so unreasonable, or was my Wages so contemptible that no Persuasions could
draw you into my Service? Was Satan so good a Master, or was his Work so honest
and profitable, or was his Wages so desirable, that you would be so easily
persuaded to do as he would have you? Was there more persuading Reason in his
Allurements and Deceits, than in all my holy Words, and all the powerful
Sermons that you heard, or all the faithful Admonitions you received; or all
the good Examples of the Righteous, or in all the Works of God which you
beheld? Was not a Reason fetched from the Love of God, from the Evil of Sin,
the Blood of Christ, the Judgment to come, the Glory promised, the Torments
threatened, as forcible with you, and as good in your Eyes to draw you to
Holiness, as a Reason from a little fleshly Delight or worldly Gain, to draw
you to be unholy?]

In the Name of God, Sinners, I entreat you to bethink your selves in time, how
you will sufficiently answer such Questions as these. You should have seen God
in every Creature that you beheld, and have read your Duty in all his Works;
what can you look upon above you, or below you, or round about you, which might
not have showed you so much of the Wisdom, and Goodness, and Greatness of your
Maker, as should have convinced you that it was your Duty to be devoted to his
Will? and yet you have his written Word that speaks plainer than all these; and
will you despise them all? will you not see so great a Light? will you not hear
so loud and constant Calls? shall God and his Ministers speak in vain? And can
you think that you shall not hear of this again, and pay for it one Day? you
have the Bible and other good Books by you; why do you not read them? You have
Ministers at hand; why do you not go to them, and earnestly ask them, Sirs,
What must I do to be saved? and entreat them to teach you the Way to Life: You
have some Neighbors that fear God; why do you not go to them, and take their
good Advice, and imitate them in the Fear of God, and in a holy Diligence for
your Souls? Now is the time for you to bestir your selves; Life and Death are
before you. You have Gales of Grace to further your Voyage: There are more for
you than against you. God will help you: his Spirit will help you: his
Ministers will help you: every good Christian will help you: the Angels
themselves will help you, if you will resolvedly set your selves to the Work;
and yet will you not stir? Patience is waiting on you: Mercies are enticing
you: Scourges are driving you: Judgment stays for you: The Lights of God
stand burning by you to direct you: And yet will you not stir, but lie in
^^arkness? And do you think you shall not hear of this? Do you think this will
not one Day cost you dear?

IX. The ninth part of our Work is to show you, that are those frivolous
Excuses by which the Unrighteous may then endeavor their Defense?

Having already showed you what the Defense must be, that must be sufficient to
our Justification;

If any first demand, Whether the Evidence of their Sin will not so overwhelm
the Sinner, that he will be speechless and past excuse? I answer, Before God
has done with him, he will be so; but it seems at first his clark
Understanding, and partial corrupted Conscience will set him upon a vain
Defense. For Mat. 7. 22, 23. Christ tells us, that [Many will say to me in
that Day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name have
cast out Devils, and in thy Name have ^lone many wonderful Works? And then will
I profess to them, I never knew you, Depart from me ye Workers of Iniquity.]
And in Mat. 25. 11. the foolish Virgins cry, [Lord, Lord, open to us.] And ver.
44. [Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when ^aw we thee an
hungered, or thirst, or a Stranger, or Naked, or Sick, or in Prison, and did not
minister unto thee?] And verse. 24, 25. they fear not to cast some of the Causes
of their neglect on God himself, [Then he which had received the one Talent
came and said, Lord, I knew thou art an hard Man, reaping where thou have not
sown, and gathering where thou have not strawed; and I was afraid, and went and
hid thy Talent in the Earth; lo, there thou have that is thine.]

It is clear then, that Excuses they will be ready to make, and their full
Conviction will be in order after these Excuses, (at least as in their Minds,
if not in Words) but what the particular Excuses will be, we may partly know by
these Scriptures which recite them, and partly by hearing what the Ungodly do
now say for themselves. And because it is for their present Benefit that I now
make mention of them, that they may see the Vanity of all such Excuses, I will
mention them as I now meet with them in the Mouths of Sinners in our ordinary
Discourse: and these Excuses are of several sorts; some by which they would
justify their Estate; some Excuses of particular Actions; and that either in
whole, or in part; some by which they would put by the Penalty, though they
confess the Sin; some by which they lay the blame on other Men; and in ^ome
they would cast it upon God himself. I must touch but some of them very briefly.

The first Excuse. I am not guilty of these things which I am accused of. I did
love God above all, and my Neighbor as my self. I did use the World but for
Necessity, but God had my Heart.

Answ. The All-seeing Judge does know the contrary, and he will make thy
Conscience know it: Look back, Man, upon thy Heart and Life: How seldom and how
neglectfully did thou think of God? how coldly did thou worship him, or
make any mention of him? how carelessly did thou serve him, and think much of
all that thou did therein? Thou rather thoughtest that his Service was making
more ado than needs, and did grudg at those that were more diligent than thy
self; but for the World, how heartily and how constantly did thou seek and
serve it? and yet would thou now persuade the Judge that thou did love God
above all? He will show thee thy naked Heart, and the Course of thy former
Life, which shall convince thee of the contrary.

The Second Excuse. I lived not in any gross Sin, but only in small
Infirmities; I was no Murderer, or Adulterer, or Fornicator, or Thief, nor did
I deceive or wrong any, or take any thing by violence.

Answ. Was it not a gross Sin to love the World above God, and to neglect
Christ that died for thee, and never to do him one Hour's hearty Service, but
merely to seek thy carnal self, and to live to thy Flesh? God will open thine
Eyes then, and show thee a thousand gross Sins, which thou now forgettest or
make light of; and it is not only gross Sin, but all Sin, great or small,
that deserves the Wrath of God, and will certainly bring thee under it for
ever, if thou have not part in Christ to relieve thee. Woe to the Man that ever
he was born that must answer in his own Name for his smallest Offenses!

The third Excuse. I did it ignorantly; I knew not that there was so much
required to my Salvation. I thought less ado might have served the turn: and
that if I looked to my Body, God would take care of my Soul; and that it was
better to trust him what would become of me hereafter, than to trouble my Mind
so much about it. Had I known better, I would have done better.

Answ. If you knew not better, who was it long of but your self? Did God hide
these things from you? Did he not tell them you in his Word as plainly as the
Tongue of Man can speak, That except you were regenerate and born again, you
should not enter into the Kingdom of God? John 3. 3, 5. That without Holiness
none should see God, Heb. 12. 14. That you must strive to enter in at the
strait Gate; for many shall seek to enter, and shall not be able, Luke 13. 24.
That if you lived after the Flesh, you should die: and if by the Spirit you
mortified the Deeds of the Body, you should live, Romans 8. 13. That if any Man
have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, Romans 8. 9. And to be
carnally minded is Death; but to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace, Romans
8. 9. That you must not lay up for your selves a Treasure on Earth, where Rust
and Moths do corrupt, and Thieves break through and steal, but must lay up for
your selves a Treasure in Heaven, where Rust and Moths do not corrupt, nor
Thieves break through and steal, Mat. 6. 19, 20. That you must seek first the
Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof, Mat. 6. 23. and not labor for
the Food that perishes, but for the Food that endures to everlasting Life,
which Christ would have given you, John 6. 27. That if you be risen with
Christ, you must seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the
right hand of God, and not the things that are on Earth, Col. 3. 1, 2, 3. Yea
your very Conversation should be in Heaven, Phil. 3. 19, 20, 21.

What say you? Did not God tell you all this and much more; and plainly tell it
you? Turn to your Bibles and see the Words, and let them witness against you.

2. And could you think with any Reason, that your Souls being so much more
precious than your Bodies, you should yet do so much more for your Bodies than
your Souls? could you think all the Labor of your Lives little enough for a
frail Body that must lie shortly in the Dirt; and that your Immortal Souls
should be no more regarded? Could you think with any Reason, that your Souls
should do so much for a Life of a few Years continuance, and do no more for a
Life that shall have no end?

3. And whereas you talk of trusting God with your Souls, you did not trust
him: You did but on that Pretense, carelessly disregard them. If you trust God,
show any Word of Promise that ever he gave you to trust upon, that ever an
impenitent, carnal, careless Person shall be saved: No; he has told you enough
to the contrary. And could you think that it was the Will of God that you
should mind your Bodies more than your Souls, and this Life more than that to
come? Why, he has bid you strive, and run, and fight, and labor, and care,
and seek, and use Violence, and all Diligence for the safety of your Souls, and
for the Life to come: But where has he bid you do so for your Bodies? No, he
knew that you were prone to do too much for them; and therefore he has bid you
[Care not, and labor not] that is, Do it as if you did it not: and let your
Care and Labor for earthly Things be none in comparison of that for heavenly
Things. You know God can as well maintain your Lives without your Care and
Labor, as save your Souls without it: And yet you see he will not, he does
not: You must plough, and sow, and reap, and thresh, for all God's Love and
Care of you, and not say, I will let all alone and trust God. And must you not
much more use diligence in much greater Things? If you will trust God, you must
trust him in his own Way, and in the use of his own Means.

The fourth Excuse. I was never brought up to Learning, I cannot so much as
read: nor did my Parents ever teach me any of these things, but only set me
about my worldly Business, and provide Food and Raiment for me: but never once
told me that I had a Soul to save or lose, and an everlasting Life to provide
and prepare for, and therefore I could not come to the Knowledge of them.

Answ. The greater is their Sin who thus neglected you. But this is no
sufficient Excuse for you. Heaven is not prepared for the Learned only; nor
will Christ ask you at Judgment whether you are good Scholars or not, no nor so
much as whether you could write or read. But consider well, Was not God's Word
so plainly written, that the Unlearned might understand it? Did he not put it
into the most familiar Style, though he knew it would be offensive to the proud
Scholars of the World, of purpose that he might fit it to the Capacities of the
Ignorant? And if you could not read, yet tell me, could not you have learned to
read at 20 or 30 Years of Age, if you had been but willing to bestow now and
then an Hour to that end? Or at least, did you not live near some that could
read? and could you not have procured them to read to you, or to help you? and
did you not hear these things read to you in the Congregation by the Minister,
or might have done if you would? and if your Parents did neglect you in your
Youth, yet when you came to a fuller use of Reason, and heard of the Matters of
Salvation from God's Word, did it not concern you to have looked to your
selves, and to have redeemed that time which you lost in your Youth, by
doubling your Diligence when you came to riper Years? The Apostles gathered
Churches among Heathens that never heard of Christ before; and converted many
thousand Souls that were never once told of a Savior, or the Way to Salvation,
till they had past a great part of their Lives. If you loitered till the latter
part of the Day, it behoved you then to have bestirred your selves the more;
and not to say, Through the Fault of my Parents, I lost the beginning of my
Life, and therefore I will lose all; they taught me not then, and therefore I
will not learn now: Have you not seen some of your Neighbors who were as ill
educated as your selves, attain to much Knowledge afterward by their Industry?
and why might not you have done so, if you had been as industrious as they? May
not God and Conscience witness, that it was because you cared not for Knowledge,
and would not be at pains to get it, that you knew no more? Speak truth, Man,
in the Presence of thy Judge; was thy Heart and Mind set upon it? Did thou
pray daily for it to God? Did thou use all the means thou could to get it?
Did thou attend diligently on the Word in public, and think of what thou
heardst when thou came home? Did thou go to the Minister, or to others that
could teach thee, and entreat them to tell thee the Way to Salvation? Or did
thou not rather carelessly neglect these Matters, and hear a Sermon as a common
tale, even when the Minister was speaking of Heaven or of Hell? It was not then
thine unavoidable Ignorance, but thy Negligence.

Yea further, answer as in the Presence of God; Did tou obey so far as thou
did know? Or did thou not rather sin against that Knowledge which thou
had? Thou knew that the Soul was better than the Body, and everlasting
Life more to be regarded than this transitory Life; but did thou regard it
accordingly? Thou sure knew that God was better than the World, and Heaven
than Earth: at least thou wast told of it, but did thou accordingly value
him, and love him more? Thou knew sure that there was no Salvation without
Faith, and Repentance, and newness of Life, and yet they were neglected. In a
word, many a thousand Sins which were committed, and Duties that were omitted
against thy own Knowledge and Conscience, will mar this Excuse.

The fifth Excuse. I lived not under a powerful Minister to tell me of these
things; but where there was no preaching at all.

Answ. And might you not have gone where a pow^^ful Minister was, with a little
pains? Yea, did not the very plain Word that you heard read, tell you of these
things? and might you not have had a Bible your selves, and found them there?

The sixth Excuse. I was a Servant, and had no time from my Labor to mind
these matters; I lived with an hard Master that required all his own Work of
me, but would allow me no time for the Service of God. Or else, I was a poor
Man, and had a great Charge to look after, and with my hard Labor had much ado
to live, so that I had no time for heavenly things.

Answ. 1. Who should be first served, God or Man? What should be first sought
after, Heaven or Earth? Did not Christ tell thee, One thing is necessary? Luke
10. 41, 42. Was it not as needful to see that you escape Damnation, and get
safe to Heaven when this Life is ended, as to see that you had Food and Raiment
for your selves and yours?

2. Did you spend no time in Recreation, nor Idleness, nor vain talking? why
might not that at least have been spent about heavenly things?

3. Could you have taken no time from your rest, or eating, or at other
Intermissions? Man's Body will not endure so great Labors as have no
Intermission. And why then might not Godliness have been your Ease and
Recreation?

4. Or might you not have minded these things ever when you were about your
Labor, if you had but a Heart to them?

5. At least you might have spent the Lord's own Day in hearing, reading and
pondering of these Matters, when you were forced to forbear your worldly
Labors, even by the wholesome Law of the Land. These therefore are all but vain
Excuses; and God will shortly make thee speak out and plainly confess, it w^
not so much for want of Time or Helps, or warning as for want of a Heart to use
them well. I should have found some time, though it had been when I should have
slept, if my Heart had been but set upon it.

The seventh Excuse. Little did I think to have sen^ this Day: I did not
believe that ever God would be so severe. I thought his Threatenings had been
but to keep Men in awe^ and I suspected either that the Scripture was not his
Word, (...) else I thought he would be better than his Word. I thought all that
I heard of another Life had been uncertain; and therefore was loath to let go a
Certainty for an Uncertainty, and lose my present Pleasures which I had in hand
for the Hopes o^ that which I never did see.

Answ. He that will not know his Misery by believing* to prevent it, shall know
it by feeling to endure it. You were told and told again what your Unbelief
would bring you to. Did God's Word make Heaven and Earth? does it support them,
and secure them? and (...) not his Word sufficient Security for you to have
^usted your Souls upon? did you know where was ^y better Security to be had?
and where was any ^rer Ground for your Confidence? And did you think (...)
basely and blasphemously of God, that he would ^sify his Word, lest such as you
should suffer? and ^at he was fain to rule the World by a Lie? Did God ^ake the
World so easily? and can he not govern it by ^^e and righteous Means? what need
God to say that which he will not do, to awe Sinners? can he not awe ^em by
Truth? is it not just that those should eter^lly perish, that will entertain
such desperate Thoughts ^f God, and then by such wicked Imaginations encou^ge
themselves in Sin against him?

And for the Truth of Scripture, God did not bid ^ou believe it without
Evidence. He stamped on it ^e Image of his own Purity and Perfection, that you
^ight know it by that Image and Superscription, if ^ou had Eyes to see them: He
sealed it by uncontrouled Multitudes of Miracles: He delivered it down to your
^ands by infallible Witnesses, so that he left you no ^oom for rational
Doubting.

And you knew that the Matters of this World were ^ot only uncertain, but
certainly vain and transitory, and would shortly come to nothing, and leave you
in ^istress. If it had then been uncertain whether there ^ere a Glory and
Misery hereafter, (as it was not) should not Reason have taught you to prefer
the least Probabilities of an everlasting unspeakable Happiness, before that
which is certainly perishing and vain? These vain Excuses will but condemn you.

The eighth Excuse. I was so enticed and persuaded by ^inners to do as they
did, that I could not deny them: they would never let me rest.

Answ. And were you not as earnestly persuaded by God to forsake Sin and serve
him, and yet that would not prevail with you? You could not deny the Devils and
Fools, but you could deny God and all his Messengers Were not Ministers as
earnest with you even Week to repent and amend? What did Men entice you with?
with a little deluding fleshly Pleasure for a few Days? And what did God entice
you with? with the Promise of endless unconceivable Felicity! And if this were
a smaller Matter in your Eyes than the other, then you have had your choice; be
content with it, and thank your selves. In your Lifetime you had the good
things which you chose, and preferred before Heaven, and therefore cannot
expect to have Heaven besides.

The ninth Excuse. I lived among ungodly Persons, that derided all that feared
God; so that if I had not done as they did, but had made any more ado to be
saved, I should have been the very Scorn of the Place where I lived.

Answ. And was not Heaven worth the enduring of a Scorn? Is not he worthy to go
without it that thinks so basely of it? Did not Christ tell you that if you
were ashamed of him before Men, he would be ashamed of you before his Father
and the Angels of Heaven? Mark 8. 38. He suffered more than Scorns for you: and
could not you suffer a Scorn for him and yourselves? seeing you chose rather to
endure everlasting Torment, than a little derision from ignorant Men, take that
which you made choice of. And seeing so small a Matter would drive you from
Heaven, and part God and you, as a Mock, as the Wind of a Man's Mouth, no
wonder if you be commanded to Depart from him into everlasting Fire.

The tenth Excuse. I had ungodly Persons to my Parents, or Masters, or
Landlord, or Governors, who threatened to undo me, if I had addicted my self to
so strict a Life, and if I would not believe and do as they did.

Answ. What if they threatened you with present Death? Did not God also threaten
you with everlasting Death, if you were not ruled by him? And whose threatening
should you have chiefly feared? Is Man more dreadful than God? Is Death more
terrible than Hell? Did not Christ bid you fear not them that can kill the
Body, and after that can do no more; but fear him that is able to ^estroy both
Body and Soul in Hellfire; yea I say unto you, fear him? Mat. 10. 28. Luke 12.
4, 5. and Isa. 51. 7. Fear ye not the Reproach of Men, neither be afraid of
their Revilings. For the Moth shall eat them up like a Garment, and the Worm
shall eat them like Wool: but my Righteousness shall be for ever, and my
Salvation from Generation to Gene^tion. Seeing therefore you have chosen rather
to suffer from God for ever for your Sin, than to suffer small Matters for
well-doing for a Moment, you must ever bear your own Choice. Christ told you
before-and, that if you could not forsake all the World and your own Lives for
him, you could not be his Disciples, Mat. 10. 37, 38, 39. And seeing you
thought his Terms too hard, and would needs seek you out a better Service, even
take what you have chosen and found.

The eleventh Excuse. I saw so many follow their pleasure and their worldly
Business, and never look after these higher things, and so few go the other
way, that I thought sure God would not damn so great a Part of the World, and
therefore I ventured to do as the most did.

Answ. God will make good his Word upon many or few. Did you doubt of his Will,
or of his Power? For his Will he has told it you in his Word. For his Power he
is as able to punish many as one Man. What is all the World to him, but as the
Drop of a Bucket, as ^e Dust of the Balance? He told you beforehand that the
Gate was strait, and the Way to Heaven was narrow, and few did find it; and the
Gate to Destruction was wide, and the Way was broad, and many did enter in at
it, Mat. 7. 13, 14. And if you would not believe him, you must bear what your
Unbelief has brought you to. What if you had twenty Children, or Servants, or
Friends, and the greater part of them should prove false to you and seek your
Destruction, or prove disobedient, and turn to your Enemy? would you think it a
good Excuse if the rest should do the like because of their Example? will you
therefore wrong God because you see others wrong him? would you spit in the
Face of your own Father if you saw others do so? God warned you, that you
should not follow a Multitude to do Evil, Exodus 23. 2. And if yet you will do
as most do, you must even speed as most speed. You should not so much consider
who they be, as what they do, and whither they go, and wh^ they forsake, and
what they lose, and what strength is in the Reasons that move them to do this.
And then you would find, it is God they forsake, it is Sin they choose; it is
Heaven they lose, it is Hell they run into and it is no true Reason, but
Satan's Delusion and sensual Inclination that lead them to it. And should Men
be imitated, be they many, or be they few, in such a Course as this?

The twelfth Excuse. I saw so many Faults in those that were accounted Godly,
and saw so much Division among them, that I thought they were as bad as others;
and among so many Opinions, I knew not what Religion to be of.

Answ. 1. A Spot is soonest seen in the fairest Cloth: And the malicious World
uses to make such far work than they are.

2. But suppose all were true that Malice says of some, you could not say the
like by others.

3. Or if you could, yet it was God's Law, and not Men's Faults that was made
the Rule for you to live by* Will it excuse you that others are bad?

4. And from their diverse Opinions, you should have taken counsel at God's
Word, which was right: Did you first search the Scripture impartially, as
willing to know the Truth, that you might obey it? and did you pray daily that
God would lead you into the Truth* and did you obey as much as you knew? Did
you joi^ with the Godly so far as they are all agreed? they an^ all agreed in
the Fundamental Articles of Christianit^ and in all things absolutely necessary
to a holy Life, and to Salvation: that all known Sin is to be forsaken, and all
known Duty to be done. Why did you not ^o far then agree with them? Alas, the
Imperfections of the Godly, and the false Accusations of the malicious World,
will prove but a poor Cover for your wilful Ungodliness, and Christ will
convince you of the Vanity of these Excuses.

The thirteenth Excuse. The Scriptures were so dark that I could not understand
them. And I saw the wisest Men differ so much in the Exposition of them, that I
thought it was in vain for me to trouble my self about then. If God would have
had us live according to the Scriptures, he would sure have written them
plainly, that Men might understand them.

Answ. 1. It is all plainly written according to the Nature of the Subject: But
a prejudiced, disaffected, ^ea or but untaught, disused Soul cannot at first
under^and the plainest Teaching. The plainest Greek or Hebrew Grammar that can
be written, will be utterly ^bscure to him that is but newly entered the English
^chool; yea after many Years time that he spends in ^earning. Did you study
hard, and pray for God's ^eaching, and enquire of others, and wait patiently in
Christ's School, that you might come to farther Know^dg by degrees? and were
you willing to know even those Truths that called you out to self-denial, and
that ^id put you on the hardest Flesh-displeasing Duties? ^ad you done thus,
you would have admired the Light (...) the Holy Scripture, and now have
rejoiced that ever you saw them, and not have quarrelled at its seeming
Darkness. This Word might have made you wise to Salvation, as it has done
others, Act. 20. 32. 2 Timothy 3. ^ 5, 16, 17. This Law of the Lord is perfect,
converting ^he Soul; the Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the Simple;
the Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the Heart; the Commandment of the
Lord is pure, enlightening the Eyes. Psalm. 19. 7, 8.

2. So much as is of Necessity to Salvation, is as plain as you could desire.
Yet if you be judged by these, you will be condemned: For you did not obey that
which was most plain. What Darkness is in such Words as these, Except ye
repent, ye shall all perish, Luke 13. 3, 5. Love not the World, nor the things
in the World: if any Man love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him,
1 John 2. 15. He that will come after me, let him deny himself? etc. Mat. 16.
24.

3. If there had been nothing that seemed difficult to you, would you not have
despised its simplicity, and have thought your selves wise enough at the first
Reading, and needed no more?

The fourteenth Excuse. There were so many seeming Contradictions in the
Scripture, and so many strange improbable things, that I could not believe it.

Answ. The Contradictions were in your fancy, that did not understand the Word
which you read. Must the raw unexperienced Learner despise his Book or Teacher,
as often as in his Ignorance he thinks he meets with Contradictions? Did you
think God was no wiser than you, and understood not himself, because you
understood him not? Nor could reconcile his own Words, because you could not
reconcile them? You would needs be a Judge of the Law, instead of obeying it,
and speak evil of it rather than do it, Jam. 4. 11.

2. And those things which you called improbable in the Word, were the Wonders
of God, of purpose to confirm it. If it had not been confirmed by Wonders, you
would have thought it unproved; and yet now it is so confirmed, you will not
believe the Doctrine, because the Witness seems incredible. And that is,
because they are Matters above the Power of Man: as if they were therefore
above the Power of God! You shall at last have your Eyes so far opened, as to
see those seeming Contradictions reconciled, and the certa^nty of those things
which you accounted improbable: that you may be forced to confess the Folly of
your Arrogance and Unbelief: and then God will judge you in Righteousness, who
presumed unrighteously to judge him and his Word.

The fifteenth Excuse. It seemed so unlikely a thing to me, that the merciful
God should damn most of the World to everlasting Fire, that I could not believe
it.

Answ. 1. And did it not seem as unlikely to you, that his Word should be false?

2. Should it not have seemed as unlikely that the Governor of the World
should be unjust, and suffer his Law to be unexecuted, and the worst to speed
as well as the best, and to suffer vile sinful Dust to despise his Mercy, and
abuse his Patience, and turn all his Creatures against him without due
Punishment?

3. Did you not feel Pain and Misery begin in this Life?

4. You saw Toads and Serpents which had never sinned: And you would rather
live in any tolerable Suffering than be a Toad. And is it not Reason that it
should go worse with contemptuous Sinners, than with those Creatures that never
sinned?

5. Could you expect that those should come to Heaven, that would not believe
there was such a State, but refused it; and preferred the World before ^it? And
to be out of Heaven, is to be out of all Happiness: and he that is so out of
all Happiness, and knows that he lost it by his own Folly, must needs torment
himself with such Considerations, were there no other Torments. And as Man is
capable of greater Felicity than Brutes, so must he needs be capable of more
Misery.

The sixteenth Excuse. The things which God promised in Heaven, and threatened
in Hell, were all out of my Sight: and therefore I could not heartily believe
them. Had I but once seen them, or spoke with one that had seen them, I should
have been satisfied, and have contemned the things of the World.

Answ. Will you not believe till you see or feel? Wa^ not God's Word sufficient
Evidence? would you have believed one from the dead that had told you he ha^
seen such things? and would you not believe Stephen that saw them? Act. 7. 56.
Or Paul that heard and saw them? 2 Cor. 12. 3, 4. Nor Christ that came
purposely from Heaven to reveal them? why Flesh and Blood cannot see them: You
see not God: will you not therefore believe that there is a God? Indeed,
whatever you imagine, if you would not believe Moses and the Prophets, Christ
and his Apostles, neither would you have believed though one had risen from the
dead: For God's Word is more credible than a dead Man's: and Christ did rise
from the dead to attest it. Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet
believed. Noah saw no Rain when he was preparing the Ark: but because he
believed, he made ready and escaped, Heb. 11. 7. when the World that would not
believe did perish. But seeing God's Word was of no more weight with you, and
no Knowledge would serve your turn but by seeing and feeling; you shall see and
feel everlastingly to your Sorrow.

The seventeenth Excuse. It was so strict a Law that God would have ruled me
by, and the Way to Heaven was so strait and difficult, that I could not endure
it. I was not able to deny my Flesh, and live such a Life.

Answ. 1. You were not able, because you were not willing. What was there but
your own wicked Hearts that should make such a Life seem grievous to you? Every
thing is hard and grievous to him who loathes it, and whose Heart is against it.
The chief thing that God called you to, was to love him, and make him your
Delight: and are Love and Delight such grievous things? It was not grievous to
you to love your Meat, or Drink, or Money: It was no hard matter to you to love
a Friend that loved you; no nor to love your Sin, which was your Enemy: and
what should make it seem hard to love God, but a wicked Heart? Is not he better
and more lovely than all these? And had you but ^oved him, all the rest of his
Service would have seem^d easy to you. To think of him, to speak of him, ^o
pray to him, to praise him; yea, to deny all and suffer for him, would have
been sweet and pleasant to you, so far as you had loved him. It was not God
therefore, but your own naughty Hearts that made his Work seem grievous to you,
and the Way to Heaven ^^em hard. He told you truly, that his Yoke was easy, and
his Burden light, and his Commandments were not grievous, Mat. 11. 29. 1 John
5. 3. They that tried them found them the very Joy and Delight of their ^ouls;
and why could not you do so?

2. But what if the Way to Heaven had been harder than it was? Was not Heaven
worth your Labor? Were you afraid of being a loser by it? Could not God
requite your Labor or Sufferings? Does any repent when they come to Heaven,
that it cost them so ^^ear to come thither? And is not Hell worse than the
^^ardest Way to Heaven? Seeing you have chosen Hell to save you a Labor and
Suffering in this Life, you must have your Choice. And seeing you thought not
everlasting Life to be worth so much as God required, that is, the accepting
thankfully, and minding, and seeking, and preferring it before this Life, you
have one to blame for the loss of it but your selves.

The eighteenth Excuse. It was God that made me of a sensual Nature: He gave me
an Appetite to Meat, and Drink, and Ease, and Lust: he gave me that Flesh which
^uled me; how then can he condemn me, for living according to the Nature which
he gave me?

Answ. He gave that Appetite to be exercised moderately under the Rule of
Reason, for the Preservation and Propagation of Mankind: But did he not also
give you Reason to govern that Appetite? and the Revelation of his Will to
guide that Reason? He gave you your Flesh to be a Servant, and not a Master.
Your Beast has fleshly Appetite without Reason; and therefore God has put him
under you, who have Reason that you should rule him. Will you let your Beast do
what he list, and madly run upon whom he list, and say, you do but let him live
according to his Nature which God has given him? Why God that gave him such a
Nature, did intend him to be ruled by a higher Nature, even by the Reason which
he gave to you: and so he did also by your Flesh and sensual Appetite.

The nineteenth Excuse. But I lived among so many Baits which enticed this
Flesh, that I could not resist them. My Meat was a Snare to me, my Drink a
Snare, my Clothes, my House, my Land a Snare, every Beauty that I saw was (...)
Snare: and the better all these were, the stronger was my Snare. If God would
not have had my Heart ensnared and drawn from him, he should not have put so
many Baits in my way. Yea and they were so near to me, and daily with me, that
though I was resolved to forbear them before, yet when they were brought to my
hand, I could not forbear.

Answ. Is this the Thanks that God has for his Mercies? He sent you all these
as Favors from his own hand: he wrote his own Name upon them, that in them you
might see his Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, and so be led up to the
Consideration of him, that you might fall in love with himself, who was the
Fountain, the Life, the End of all. And do you overlook God in the Creature,
and live as without him in the World, and dote upon that which should have
drawn you to himself, and then lay the Blame on God? If he send a Suitor to
speak to you in his Name, and write you a Love-Letter with his own Hand, will
you fall in love with the Messengers or the Letter, and neglect the Sender, and
then blame him that wrote his Letter on so fair a Paper, or in so neat a Hand,
or that sent it by such a comely Messenger? Certainly, these Excuses are too
gross, to take with the wise and righteous God, or to seem sufficient to a well
informed Conscience.

2. And whereas you speak of the Power of these Objects, was there not much
more in God, in Christ, ^n the promised Glory, to have drawn your Heart anoter
Way? Why then did not these take as much with you as the other? You could not
choose forsooth, but be enticed with such Baits as were fitted to your sensual
Appetite, and such things as a Dog, or a Swine may enjoy as well as a Man: but
you could choose, when Christ and Glory were offered you: yea you did choose to
refuse the Offer, and tread them under Feet by your neglect. When Satan set
your Cups, and your Harlots, and your Profits before you on one side; did not
God set his Favor and everlasting Happiness on the other side? And was it wise
or equal Dealing, to prefer your Lusts before that Glory?

3. Moreover, it was not in the Power of any of those Baits to force your Will,
or to necessitate you to choose them. They could be but Baits to entice you,
and it was still in your own Choice, whether you would yield to the Enticement,
and choose them or not. Shall every Man be false to God that has any Bait to
entice him from him? will you excuse your Child or Friend, if he would be false
to you, upon as great Enticements as these? If a Cup of Drink, or a Whore, or a
little Gain, could draw him more than all your Love and Interest, I do not
think you would hold him excused.

And whereas you speak of the nearness and continuance of these Allurements, I
would fain know, was not God as near you, continually near you, to draw you to
himself? Faith might have seen him, though Flesh and Blood cannot. Did he not
stand by you when you were in your Cups and lustful Pleasures? Did he not tell
you of the Danger, and offer you far better things, if you would obey him and
despise those Baits? But you would hearken to none of this; you should have
remembered that he stood over you, and was looking on you, and you should have
said as Joseph, Genesis 39. 9. How can I do this great Wickedness, and (...)
against God? You had also Scripture near you, and Reason near you, and
Conscience near you, as well as the Bait was near you. And therefore this is a
vain Excuse.

The twentieth Excuse. It was God that let loose the Devil to tempt me; and he
was too subtle for me to deal with; and therefore what wonder if I sinned and
were overcome?

Answ. 1. He did nor let loose the Devil to constrain you to Sin. He could but
entice, and you might choose whether you would yield. The Devil could neither
make you sin against your Will, nor yet necessitate you to be willing.

2. You were a sure Friend to Christ that while, that would forsake him as often
as you were tempted by the Devil. Is that a Friend or a Servant worthy to be
regarded, that will disobey you, or betray you as often as he is tempted to it?

3. Will you excuse your Servant if he leave your Work undone, and follow
Cards, or Dice, or the Alehouse, and say I was tempted to it by one that was
cunninger than I? Shall every Murderer or Thief escape hanging, because the
Devil was too cunning for him in his Temptations? Would you have the Jury or
the Judge to take this for a good Excuse?

4. And why did you not hearken to God that enticed you the other way? You
forget what Helps he afforded you to discover the Wiles of Satan, and to
vanquish the Temptation? He told you it was an Enemy that tempted you: and
would you hearken to an Enemy? He told you it was a Dream, a Shadow, a painted
Pleasure, a gilded Carcass, a lying Promise, and deceitful Vanity by which you
were tempted; and yet would you regard it before your God? He told you that it
was your God, your Savior, your Hope, your everlasting Happiness that the
Tempter would beguile you of: And yet would you be beguiled? He told you, and
plainly, and often told you that the Temper would ^ead you to eternal Fire, and
undo you everlastingly beore you were aware; and that a fatal Hook was cover^d
with that Bait: And yet would you swallow it?

5. It is plain by all this that it was not your natural Weakness of Faculties
that caused you to be over^^me by the Subtilties of the Devil, as a silly Child
(...) deceived by a crafty Fellow that overwits him: But it was your
Carelessness, Inconsiderateness, your ^ensual Inclinations, and vicious
Disposition, that drew you to a wilful Obeying of the Tempter, and rejecting
the wholesome Advice of Christ. This therefore is a ^rivolous Excuse of your Sin.

The one and twentieth Excuse. But I hope you will not say that all Men have
Free Will! And if my Will were not free, how could I choose but sin?

Answ. 1. Your Will was not free from God's Rule and Government. 2. Nor was it
free from its natural Inclination to Good in general; for either of these were
more properly Slavery. 3. Nor was it free from the Influence of a dark
Understanding. 4. Nor free from its own contracted vicious Inclination. 5. Nor
freed from the Temptations of the Flesh, the World, and the Devil.

But it was, 1. Free from any natural Determination to Evil, or to any thing
that was doubtful. 2. And free from the Coaction or Violence of any. 3. And
free from an irresistible Determination of any exterior Cause, at least
ordinarily. So that naturally, as Men, you have the Power or Faculty of
determining your own Wills, and by your Wills of ruling your inferior
Faculties in a great measure; yea, of ruling the S^nses and the Phantasy it
self, which does so much to dispose of our Understanding. And if your Wills,
which are naturally free, are yet so habitually vicious, that they incline you
to do evil, that is not an Excuse, but an Aggravation of your Sin. But of this
more under the next.

The two and twentieth Excuse. But I have not Power of my self to do any thing
that is good: what can the Creature do? without Christ we can do nothing. It is
God that must give me Ability, or I can have none: and if he had given it me, I
had not been an Unbeliever or Impenitent. I can no more believe of my self,
than I can fulfill the Law of my self.

Answ. 1. These are the vain Cavils of learned Folly, which God will easily
answer in a Word. The Word [Power] is taken in several Senses. Sometime, and
most commonly and fitly, for a Faculty or a Strength by which a Man can do his
Duty if he will. This physical Power you have, and the worst of Sinners have
while they are Men on Earth. Were they actually willing, they might acceptably
perform sincere Obedience; and were they dispositively willing, they might
actually believe and will. And thus the Ungodly have Power to believe.

Sometime the word [Power] is taken for Authority or Leave, for legal or civil
Power. And thus you have all not only Power or Liberty to believe, but also a
Command which makes it your Duty, and a Threatening adjoined, which will condemn
you if you do not.

Sometime the Word [Power] is taken ethically, and less properly, for a
Disposition, Inclination, Habit, or Freedom from the contrary Habit or
Disposition. And in this Sense it is true, that none but the effectually called
have a Power to believe. But then observe, 1. That this is but a Moral, less
proper, and not a Physical proper Impotency: And therefore Austin chooses
rather to say that all Men have power to believe, but all have not a Will, or
Faith it self; because we use to difference Power from Willingness; and
Willingness actuateth the Power which we had before. And therefore our Divines
choose rather to call Grace a Habit when they speak exactly, than a Power; and
Dr. Twiss derides the Arminians for talking of a Power subjected in a Power. 2.
Note that this Impotency is but the same thing with your Unwillingness and
wilful Blindness in another Word. 3. Note that this Impotency is long of your
selves as to the Original, and much more as to the not curing and removing of
it. Has God given you ^o means toward the Cure of this Disability, which you
have neglected? 4. Note that this Impotency is not a just Excuse, but an
Aggravation of your Sin. If you were willing to be the Servant of Christ, and
yet were not able either because he would not accept you, or because of a want
of natural Faculties, or because of some other natural Difficulty which the
willingest Mind could not overcome, this were some Excuse: But to be habitually
wilful in refusing Grace, is worse than to be merely actually unwilling. If a
Man have so accustomed himself to Murder, Drunkenness, Stealing or the like
Wickedness, so far that he cannot leave it, will you therefore forgive him, or
will any Judge or Jury hold him excused? Or rather think him the more unfit for
Mercy? 5. Note also that the want of a supernatural Habit, no nor the Presence
of the contrary Habit, do not efficiently determine the Will to particular
Acts, much less take away its natural Freedom. 6. And that till Habits attain
an utter Predominancy, (at least) there is a Power remaining in the Will to
resist them, and use Means against them. Though eventually the perverse
Inclination may hinder the use of it.

The three and twentieth Excuse. I have heard from learned Men, that God does
determine all Actions, natural and free, as the first efficient physical
immediate Cause: or else nothing could act. And then it was not long of me that
I chose forbidden Objects, but of him that irresistibly moved me thereto, and
whose Instrument I was.

Answ. This is a trick of that Wisdom which is Foolishness with God, and to be
deceived by vain Philosophy.

1. The very Principle it self is most likely to be false, and those that tell
you this do err. Much more, I think, may be said against it than for it.

2. I am sure it is either false, or irreconcilable with God's Holiness, and
Man's Liberty and Culpability; so that its a mad thing to deceive your selves
with such philosophical Uncertainties, when the Truth which you oppose by it is
infallibly certain. That God is not the Author of Sin, but Man himself, who is
justly condemned for it, is undoubtedly true: and would you obscure so clear a
Truth, by searching into Points beyond humane Reach if not unsound, as you
conclude them?

The four and twentieth Excuse. But at least, those learned Divines among us
that doubt of this, do yet say that the Will is necessarily and infallibly
determined by the practical Understanding, and that is as much unresistibly
necessitated by Objects: and therefore whatever act was done by my
Understanding or Will, was this necessitated, and I could not help it. They
say, Liberty is but the Acting of the Faculty agreeably to its Nature: And it
was God as Creator that gave Adam his Faculties, and God by providential
Dispose, that presented all Objects to him, by which his Understanding, and so
his Will were unavoidably necessitated.

Answ. This is of the same Nature with the former; uncertain, if not certainly
false. Were this true, for ought we can see, it would lay all the Sin and
Misery of this World on God, as the unresistible necessitating Cause; which
because we know infallibly to be false, we have no reason to take such
Principles to be true which infer it. The Understanding does not by a necessary
Efficiency determine the Will, but morally; or rather, is regularly a Condition
or necessary Antecedent, without which it may not determine it self. Yea the
Will by commanding the Sense and Phantasy, does much to determine the
Understanding. As the Eye is not necessary to my going, but to my going right,
so is not the Understanding's Guidance necessary to my willing, (there the
simple Apprehension may suffice) but to my right willing. There are other ways
of determining the Will. Or if the Understanding did determine the Will
efficiently and necessarily, it is not every act of the Understanding that must
do it. If it be so, when it says, This must be done, and says it
importunately; yet not when it only says, This may be done, or you may venture
on it, which is the common part which it has in Sin.

I am not pleased that these curious Objections fall in the Way, nor do I
delight to put them into vulgar Heads; but finding many young Scholars and
others that have conversed with them, assaulted with these Temptations, I
thought meet to give a Touch, and but a Touch, to take them out of their Way:
As Mr. Fenner has done more fully in the Preface to his Hidden Manna, on this
last point, to which I refer you. I only add this.

The Will of Man in its very Dominion does bear God's Image. It is a
self-determining Power, though it be biassed by Habits, and needs a Guide. As
the Heart and Vital Spirits by which it acts, are to the rest of the Body, so
is it to the Soul. The Light of Nature has taught all the World to carry the
Guilt of every Crime to the Will of Man, and there to leave it. Upon this all
Laws and Judgments are grounded. From Ignorance and intellectual Weakness, Men
commonly fetch Excuses for their Faults; but from the Will they are aggravated.
If we think it strange that Man's Will should be the first Cause, so much as of
a sinful Mode, and answer all occurring Objections: it may suffice that we are
certain the Holy Majesty is not the Author of Sin; and he is able to make all
this as plain as the Sun, and easily answer all these vain Excuses, though we
should be unable. And if we be much ignorant of the Frame and Motions of our
own Souls, and especially of that high self-determining Principle, Free Will,
the great Spring of our Actions, and the curious Engine by which God does
sapientially govern the World, it is no wonder, considering that the Soul can
know it self but by Reflection, and God gave us a Soul to use, rather than to
know it self; and to know its Qualities and Operations, rather than its Essence.

The five and twentieth Excuse. No Man can be saved, nor avoid any Sin, nor
believe in Christ, but those whom God has predestined thereto. I was under
an irreversible Sentence before I was born: and therefore I do nothing but what
I was predestined to do; and if God decreed not to save me, how could I help
it?

Answ. 1. God's Judgments are more plain, but his Decrees or secret Purposes
are mysterious: And to darken Certainties, by having recourse to Points
obscure, is no part of Christian Wisdom. God told you your Duty in his Word,
and on what Terms you must be judged to Life or Death; hither should you have
recourse for Direction, and not to the unsearchable Mysteries of his Mind.

2. God decrees not to condemn any but for Sin. Sin, I say, is the Cause of
that Condemnation, though not of his Decree.

3. God's Decrees are Acts Immanent in himself, and make no change on you, and
therefore do not necessitate you to sin, any more than his Fore-knowledg does.
For both cause only a necessity of Consequence, which is Logical, as the
Divines on both sides do confess. And therefore this no more caused you to sin,
than if there had been no such Decree. And it is a Doubt whether that Decree be
not negative; a willing Suspending of the Divine Will, as to evil; or at most a
Purpose to permit it.

The six and twentieth Excuse. If it be no more, yet does it make my Perdition
unavoidable; for even God's Fore knowledge does so; for if he foreknow it, all
the World cannot hinder it from coming to pass.

Answ. Must God either be ignorant of what you will do, or else be the Cause of
it? If you foreknow that the Sun will rise to morrow, that does not cause it to
rise. If you foreknow that one Man will murder another, you are not the Cause
of it by foreknowing it. So is it here.

The seven and twentieth Excuse. God might have hindered my Sin and Damnation if
he would.

Answ. And will you wilfully sin, and think to escape because God does not
hinder you? The Prince that makes a Law against Murder, could lock you up, and
keep you from being a Murderer. But are you excusable if he do not? We are
certain that God could have hindered all the Sin and Death, and Confusion, and
Misery that is in the Word: and we are as certain that he does not hinder it
(but by forbidding it, and giving Men means against it:) and we are certain
that he is Just, and Good, and Wise in all, and not bound to hinder it: And
what his Reasons are, you may better know hereafter: In the mean time, you had
been better have looked to your own Duty.

The eight and twentieth Excuse. How could I be saved if Christ did not die for
me? He died but for his Elect; and none could be saved without his Death.

Answ. He did die for you, and for more than his Elect, though he absolutely
purposed only their Salvation. Your Sins crucified him, and your Debt lay upon
him; and he so far ransomed you, that nothing but your wilful Refusal of the
Benefits could have condemned you.

The nine and twentieth Excuse. It was Adam's Sin that brought me into this
Depravedness of Will, which I can neither cure, nor could prevent.

Answ. 1. If Adam cast away his Holiness, he could no more convey that to us
which he cast away, than a Nobleman that is a Traitor, can convey his lost
Inheritance or Honors to his Son.

2. You perish not only for your Original Sin, but for rejecting the recovering
Mercy of the Redeemer: you might have had Christ and Life in him for the
accepting.

The thirtieth Excuse. God will require no more than (...) gives. He gave me
not Grace to repeat and believe; (...) without his Gift I could not have it.

Answ. 1. God will justly require more than he gives; that is, the improvement
of his Gifts, as Mat. 25. shows. He gave Adam but a Power to persevert, and not
actual Perseverance: Yet did he justly punish him for want of the Act; even for
not using by his own Wll the Power which he had given him.

2. It is long of your self if God did not give you Grace to believe: It was
because you wilfully refused some preparatory Grace. Christ found you at a
great distance from him, and he gave you Grace sufficient to have brought you
nearer to him than you were; you had Grace sufficient to have made you better
than you were, and restrained many Sins, and brought you to the means, when you
turned your back on them: tho this were not sufficient to cause you to believe,
it was sufficient to have brought you nearer to believing; and through your own
wilfulness, became not effectual; even as Adam had sufficient Grace to have
stood, which was not effectual. So that you had not only Christ offered to you,
if you would but accept him; but you had daily and precious* Helps and Means,
to have cured your Wills, and caused you to accept him; for neglect of which,
and so for not believing, and so for all your other Sins, you justly perish.

The one and thirtieth Excuse. Alas, M^^ is a Worn, a dry Leaf! Job 13. 25. a
silly foolish Creature, and therefore his Actions be not regardable, nor
deserve so great a Punishment.

Answ. Though he be a Worm, and as nothing to God, and (...) by Sin, yet he is
naturally so noble a Creatur^ (...) ^^age of God was on him, Genesis 12. 26. (...)
1. James 3. 9. and the World made his Serv^^^ (...) Angels his Atten^ants, Heb.
1. 14. so noble (...) Christ died for him, God takes special care of him; he is
capable of knowing and enjoying God, (...) Heaven is not thought too good for
him if he will ^ey. And he that is capable of so great Good, must (...) capable
of as great Evil, and his Ways not to be so ^^erlooked by that God that has
undertaken to, be (...) Governor. When it tends to Infidelity, the evil will
teach you to debase Man, even lower than (...) would do.

The two and thirtieth Excuse. Sin is no Being: and ^ll Men be damned for that
which is nothing?

Answ. 1. It is such a Mode as deformeth God's Create. It is a moral Being. It
is a Relation of our ^^tions and Hearts to God's Will and Law.

2. They that say, Sin is nothing, say Pain and Loss (...) nothing too. You
shall therefore be paid with one ^^thing for another. Make light of your
Misery, and (...), it is nothing, as you did of your Sin.

3. Will you take this for a good Excuse from your ^hildren or Servants, if
they abuse you? or from a ^hief or a Murderer? shall he escape by telling the
^dg that his Sin was nothing? Or rather have Death, ^ich is nothing, as the
just Reward of it?

The three and thirtieth Excuse: But Sin is a transt^ Thing. At least it does
God no harm, and therefore why ^uld he do us so much harm for it?

Answ. 1. It hurts not God, because he is above ^rt. No thanks to you if he be
out of your reach.

You may wrong him, when you cannot hurt him. and the Wrong deserves as much as
you can bear. If a ^aitor endeavor the Death of the Prince in vain, (...)
Endeavor deserves Death, though he never hurt him. You despise God's Law and
Authority; you cause the Blaspheming of his Name, Romans 2. 24. He calls it a
Pressing him as a Cart is pressed with Sheaves, ^^os 2. 13. and a Grieving of
him.

3. And you wrong his Image, his Church, the pub^^ck Good, and the Souls of
others.

The four and thirtieth Excuse. But God's Nature is so ^^od and merciful, that
sure he will not damn his own Crea^^re.

Answ. 1. A merciful Judge will hang a Man for a Fault against Man: By
proportion then what is due for Sin against God?

2. All the Death and Calamity which you see in the World, comes from the Anger
of this merciful God: why then may not future Misery come from it?

3. God knows his own Mercy better than you do; and he has told you how far
it shall extend.

4. He is infinitely merciful, but it is to the Heirs of Mercy, not to the
final Rejecters of his Mercy.

5. Has not God been merciful to thee in bearing with thee so long, and
offering thee Grace in the Blood of Christ, till thou did wilfully reject it?
Thou wi^^ confess to thy everlasting Woe that God was merciful; had he not been
so merciful, thou would not have been so miserable for rejecting it.

The five and thirtieth Excuse. I would not so torment mine Enemy my self.

Answ. No reason you should. Is it all one to wrong you, and to wrong the God
of Heaven? God is the only Judge of his own Wrongs.

The sixth and thirtieth Excuse. All Men are Sinners; and I was but a Sinner.

Answ. All were not impenitent, unbelieving, rebelious Sinners, and therefore
all are not unpardoned, condemned Sinners. All did not live after the Flesh,
and refuse to the last to be converted as you did. God will teach you better to
difference between Sinners and Sinners.

The seven and thirtieth Excuse. But if Christ have satisfied for my Sins, and
died for me, then how can I justly suffer for the same Sins? will God punish
one Sin twice?

Answ. 1. Christ suffered for Man in the Christ of Man; but not in your Person,
nor you in him. It was not you that provided the Price, but God himself: Christ
was not Man's Delegate in satisfying, and therefore received not his
Instructions from us, nor did on our Terms, but his own. It was not the same
thing which the Law threatened, that Christ underwent: for that was the
Damnation of the Sinner himself, and not the Suffering of another for him; it
cannot therefore be yours but on Christ's own Terms. He died for thy Sin, but
with this intent, that for all that if thou refuse him, thou shall die thy
self. It is therefore no wrong to thee to die, for it was not thou that diedst
before, and Christ will take it for no wrong to him: for he will judge thee to
that Death. It is for refusing a Christ that died for thee, that thou must
perish for ever.

The eight and thirtieth Excuse. But I did not refuse Christ. I believed and
trusted in him to the last; and repented of my Sins, though I sometime was
overtaken with them.

Answ. Had this been true, thy Sin would not have condemned thee. But there is
no mocking God. He will show thee then thy naked Heart, and convince thousands
that thought they believed and repented, that indeed they did not. By thy Works
also will this be discovered, that is, by the main bent and scope of thy Life,
as Mat. 25. throughout, and Jam. 2.

The nine and thirtieth Excuse. I did many good Works; and I hope God will set
those against my evil Works:

Answ. Thy good Works were thy Sins, because indeed they were not good, being
not done in sincerity of Heart for God. The best Man's Works have some
Infirmity, which nothing can cleanse but the Blood of Christ, which thou have
made light of, and therefore have no part in. If all thy Life had been spent in
perfect Works except one day, they would not make satisfaction for the Sins of
that Day. For they are but part of thy Duty. Woe to him that has no better a
Savior at Judgment, than his own good Works.

The fortieth Excuse. I lived in Poverty and Misery on Earth, and therefore I
hope I have had my Suffering here, and shall not suffer in this World and
another too.

1. By that Rule all poor Men and Murderers, and Thieves that are tormented and
hanged, should be saved. But as Godliness has the Promise of this Life and
that to come, so Impenitency and Wickedness has the Threatening of this Life
and that to come.

2. The Devils and the damned have suffered much more than you already; and yet
they are never the nearer a Deliverance. When thou have suffered ten thousand
Years, thy Pain will be never the nearer an end. How then can a little Misery
on Earth prevent it? Alas, poor Soul, these are but the Foretasts and
Beginnings of thy Sorrow. Nothing but Pardon through the Blood of Christ could
have prevented thy Condemnation; and that thou rejectedst by Infidelity and
Impenitency. His Sufferings would have saved thee, if thou had not refused
him; but all thy own Sufferings will yield thee no Relief.

So much for the answering of the vain Excuses which poor Sinners are ready to
make for themselves; wherein I have been so large, as that this part I confess
is disproportionable to the rest: but it was for these two Reasons.

1. That poor careless Souls might see the Vanity of such Defenses; and
consider if such a Worm as I can easily confute them, how easily and how
terribly will they be all answered by their Judge?

2. I did it the rather, that godly Christians might the better understand how
to deal with these vain Excuses when they meet with them: which will be daily
if they deal with Men in this sad Condition.

X. We have done with that part of the Judgment which consists in the
Exploration or Trial of the Cause: we now come to that which is the Conclusion
and Consummation of all; and that is, to show you what the Sentence will be,
and on whom.

And for this, we must go strait to the Word of God for our Light, it being
impossible for any Man to have any particular Knowledge of it, if Christ had not
there revealed it unto us. Indeed almost all the World do acknowledge a Life
after this, where it shall go well with the Good, and ill with the bad. But who
shall be then accounted righteous, and who unrighteous, and on what Terms and
Grounds, by whom they shall be judged, and to what Condition, they know not.

The Sentence in Judgment will be, 1. Either on those that never had Means to
know Christ. 2. Or on those that had.

1. For the former, as it less concerns us to enquire of their Case, so it is
more obscurely revealed to us in the Scripture. It is certain that they shall
be judged according to their Use of the Means which they had, Romans 2. 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16. and the Talents which they received, Mat. 25. But that it ever
falls out that he that has but the one Talent of natural Helps, does improve
it to Salvation; or that ever they who knew not Christ, are justified and saved
without that Knowledge, (being at Age and Use of Reason) I find not in the
Scriptures. I find indeed that [as many as have sinned without Law, shall also
perish without Law: and as many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by
the Law Romans 2. 12. but not that any are justified by the Works of Nature, such
as are here said to be without Law.] I find also, that [They have the Work of
the Law written in their Hearts, their Conscience also bearing witness, and
their Thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another, in the
Day when God shall jude the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ, according to the
Gospel] Romans 2. 15, 16. And I believe it is a just Excuse, and not an unjust
which is here meant. But it will be but an Excuse so far as they were
guiltless: and that will be but in tanto, and not in toto, in part only; and so
not a full Justification. A Heathen's Conscience may excuse him from those Sins
which he was never guilty of; but not from all. But no more of them.

2. The Case of those that have had the Gospel, is more plainly opened to us in
God's Word. Their Sentence is opened in many Places of Scripture, but most
fully in Matthew. 25. whence we will now collect it.

There we find that Jesus Christ the Redeemer, as King of the World, shall sit
in Judgment on all Men at the last; and shall separate them one from another,
as a Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats, and so shall pass the final
Sentence. This Sentence is twofold, according to the different Condition of
them that are judged. To them on the right Hand, there is a Sentence of
Justification, and Adjudication to everlasting Glory: To them on the left Hand,
there is a Sentence of Condemnation to everlasting Punishment.

The Sentence on each of these contains both the State which they are judged
to, and the Reason or Cause of the Judgment to that State. For as God will not
judge any to Life or Death without just Cause, so he will publish this Cause in
his Sentence, as it is the manner of Judges to do. If you say, Christ will not
use a Voice; let it satisfy, that though we know not the manner, yet if he do
it but by mental Discovery, as he shows Men what shall everlastingly befall
them, so he will show them why it shall so befall them.

1. The Sentence on them on the right Hand, will contain, 1. Their
Justification and Adjudication to Blessedness, and that both as generally
denominated, and as particularly determined and described. 2. And the Cause of
this Judgment.

1. In general they shall be pronounced Blessed. Satan would have had them
cursed and miserable: the Law did curse them to Misery; many a fearful Though
has possessed their own Breasts, lest they should prove at last accursed and
miserable: but now they hear the contrary from their Judge. All the Promises in
the Gospel could not perfectly overcome those their Fears; all the comfortable
Words of the Ministers of the Gospel could not perfectly subdue them; all the
tender Mercies of God in Christ did not perfectly subdue them* but now they are
vanquished all for ever. He that once had heard his Redeemer in Judgment call
him blessed, will never fear being cursed more. For he that Christ blesses,
shall be blessed indeed.

The Description of their Blessedness follows, Come inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the Foundation of the World. And also they are called
Blessed of the Father. Here is the Fountain of their Blessedness, the Father;
and the State of their Blessedness in being the Father's: for I suppose they
are called the Blessed of are Father, both because the Father blesses them,
that is, makes them Happy, and because these blessed Ones are the Father's own.
And so Christ will publish it to the World in Judgment, that he came to glorify
the Father, and will proclaim him the principal Efficient, and ultimate End of
his Work of Redemption, and the Blessedness of his Saints; and that himself is
(as Mediator) but the Way to the Father. It is the Father that prepared the
Kingdom for them, and from the Foundation of the World prepared it; both for
[them] as chosen ones, and for them as future Believers and righteous Ones. It
is called a Kingdom, partly in respect to God the King, in whose Glory we shall
partake in our Places; and partly metapherically, from the Dignity of our
Condition. For so it is that our selves are said to be made Kings, Rev. 1. 6.
and 5. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 9. and not that we are properly Kings; for then we must
have Subjects who must be governed by us.

Thus we see their Blessedness in the Fountain, End and State of Dignity. As to
the receptive Act on their Part, it is expressed by two Words; one signifying
their first Entrance on it, Come: the other their Possession, Inherit: That is,
possess it as given by the Father, and Redeemed by the Son, and hold it in this
Tenure for ever.

The true Believer was convinced in this Life, that indeed there was no true
Blessedness, but this Enjoyment of God in the Kingdom of Heaven. The Lord
revealed this to his Heart by his Word and Spirit. And therefore he contemned
the seeming Happiness on Earth, and laid up for himself a Treasure in Heaven,
and made him Friends with the Mammon of Unrighteousness, and ventured all his
Hope in this Vessel. And now he finds the Wisdom of that Choice in a rich
Return. God made him so wise a Merchant as to sell all for this Pearl of
greatest Price: and therefore now he shall find the Gain. As there is no other
true Happiness but God in Glory; so is there nothing more suitable and welcome
to the true Believer. O how welcome will the Face of that God be, whom he
loved, sought, longed and waited for! How welcome will that Kingdom be which he
lived in hope of, which he parted with all for, and suffered for in the Flesh!
How glad will he be to see the blessed Face of his Redeemer, who by his
manifold Grace has brought him unto this I leave the believing Soul to think
of it, and to make it the daily matter of his delightful Meditation; what an
unconceivable Joy in one Moment, will this Sentence of Christ will fill his
Soul with? Undoubtedly it is now quite past our Comprehension; though our
imperfect Forethoughts of it may well make our Lives a continual Feast.

Were it but our Justification from the Accusations of Satan, who would have us
condemned either as Sinners in general, or as impenitent, unbelieving Rebels,
against him that redeemed us, in special, it would lift up the Heads of the
Saints in that Day: After all the Fears of our own Hearts, and the slanderous
Accusations of Satan and the World, That we were either impenitent Infidels or
Hypocrites, Christ will then justify us and pronounce us righteous. So much for
the Condition to which they are judged.

2. The Reason or Cause of this Justification of the Saints, is given us both,
1. In a general Denomination, and 2. In a particular Description. 1. In
general, it is because they were righteous, as is evident, Mat. 25. 6. The
Righteous shall go into Life everlasting. And indeed it is the Business of
every just Judge to justify the Righteous, and condemn the Unrighteous. And
shall not the Judge of all the Earth judge righteously? Genesis 18. 25. God makes
Men righteous before he judges them so: and judges them righteous because they
are so. He that abominateth that Man who says to the Righteous, Thou art
wicked; or to the Wicked, Thou art righteous; who justifies the Wicked and
condemns the Righteous, will certainly never do so himself.

Indeed he will justify them that are Sinners, but not against the Accusation
that they are Sinners, but against the Accusation, that they are guilty of
Punishment for Sin: but that is, because he first made them just; and so
justifiable, by pardoning their Sin, through the Blood of Christ.

And it is true also, that he will justify those that were wicked; but not those
that are wicked: but Judgment finds them as Death leaves them, and he will
not take them for wicked, that are sanctified and cleansed of their former
Wickedness. So that Christ will first pardon them before he justify them
against the Charge of being Sinners in general; and he will first give Men
Faith, Repentance and new Obedience, before he will justify them against the
Charge of being Impenitent, Infidels or Hypocrites, and consequently
^mpardoned, and doubly guilty of Damnation. This twofold Righteousness he will
first give Men, and so constiture them just, before he will declare it, and
sentence them just.

2. The Reason of the Sentence, particularly described, is from their Faith and
Love to Christ, expressed in their Obedience, Self-denial, and forsaking all
for him. For I was hungry and ye fed me; I was thirsty and ye gave me daink; I
was a Stranger and ye took me in; naked and ye clothed me: I was sick and ye
visited me: I was in Prison and ye came to me. Verily I say unto you, inasmuch
as ye have done it to one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it
unto me, Mat. 25. 35 to 41. Here is, 1. The causal Conjuction for. 2. And the
Cause or Reason it self.

Concerning both which, observe. 1. How it is that Man's Obedience and
Self-denial is the Reason and Cause of his Justification. 2. Why it is that God
will have the Reason or Cause thus declared in the Sentence.

For the first, observe that it is one thing to give a Reason of the Sentence,
and another thing to express the Cause of the Benefit given us by the Promise,
and judged to us by the Sentence. Man's Obedience was no proper Cause why God
did in this Life give Pardon of Sin to us, or a Right to Glory, much less of
his giving Christ to die for us. And therefore as to our constitutive
Justification at our Conversion, we must not say or think that God does justify
us, for, or because of any Works of our Obedience, legal or evangelical. But
when God has so justified us, when he comes to give a Reason of his Sentence
in Judgment, he may and will fetch that Reason partly from our Obedience, or
our Performance of the Conditions of the new Covenant. For as in this Life, we
had a Righteousness consisting in free Pardon of all Sin through the Blood of
Christ, and a Righteousness consisting in our personal Performance of the
Conditions of the Promise, which gives that Pardon and continues it to us; so
at Judgment we shall accordingly be justified. And as our evangelical personal
Righteousness, commonly called inherent, was at first only in our Faith and
Repentance, and Disposition to obey, but afterward in our actual sincere
Obedience, in which Sense we are constitutively justified or made righteous
here by our Works, in James his sense, James 2. 24. so accordingly a double
Reason will be assigned of our sentential Justification; one from our Pardon by
Christ's Blood and Merits, which will prove our Right to Impunity and to Glory;
the other from our own Faith and holy Obedience, which will prove our Right to
that Pardon through Christ, and to the free Gift of a Right to Glory: and To
this last is to be pleaded in Subordination to the former. For Christ is become
the Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. He
therefore that will be saved, must have a Christ to save him as the Author, and
an Obedience to that Christ as the Condition of that Salvation; and
consequently both must be declared in the Judgment.

The Reason why the Judge does mention our good Works rather than our believing,
may be because those holy self-denying Expressions of Faith and Love to Christ
do contain or certainly imply Faith in them, as the Life of the Tree is in the
Fruit: but Faith does contain our Works of Obedience but only as their Cause.
The Works also are a Part of the personal Righteousness which is to be enquired
after, that is, we shall not be judged righteous, merely because we have
believed, but also because we have added to our Faith Virtue, and have improved
our Talents, and have loved Christ to the hazard of all for his sake. For it is
not only or principally for the Goodness of the Work considered in it self, or
the Good that is done by it to the Poor; but it is as those Works did express
our Faith and Love to Christ by doing him the most costly and hazardous
Service; that by Faith we could see Christ in a poor Beggar or a Prisoner, and
could love Christ in these better than our worldly Goods or Liberties, which we
must part with, or hazard by the Works that are here mentioned.

2. The Reasons why Christ will so publicly declare the personal Righteousness
of Men, to be the Reason or Cause of his justifying Sentence, is because it is
the Business of that Day, not only to glorify God's mere Love and Mercy, but
eminently to glorify his remunerative Justice; and not only to express his Love
to the Elect, as such, but to express his Love to them as faithful and
obedient, and such as have denied all for Christ, and loved God above all; and
to show his Justice to Men, and Faithfulness in fulfilling all his Promises,
and also his Holiness, in the high Estimation of the Holiness of his People. I
shall express this in the Words of a Learned Divine (Dr. Twiss against Mr.
Cotton, page 40.) Was there no more in God's Intention when he elected some,
than the Manifestation of the Riches of his glorious Grace? Did not God purpose
also to manifest the Glory of his remunerative Justice? Is it no undeniable
that God will bestow Salvation on all his Elect, (of ripe Years) by way of
Reward, and Crown of Righteousness, which God the righteous Judge will give? 2 Timothy 4. 2 Thessalonians. 1. It is great pity this is not considered, as usually it is
not, especially for the momentous Consequence thereof in my Judgment. So far he.

So much of the Sentence of Justification which shall be passed by Christ at
Judgment upon the Righteous.

2. We are next to consider of the Sentence of Condemnation which shall then by
Christ be passed on the Unrighteous. Which is delivered to us by Christ, Mat.
25. in the same Order as the former.

The Sentence contains, 1. The Condemnation it self. 2. The Reason or Cause
of it.

The Condemnation expresses the Misery which they are judged to. 1. Generally
in the Denomination, Cursed. 2. Particularly by Description of their cursed
State.

To be cursed, is to be a People destinated and adjudged to utter Unhappiness,
to all kind of Misery without remedy.

2. Their cursed Condition is described in the next Words, Depart from me into
everlasting Fire prepared for the (...) and his Angels.

1. Depart: From whom? from the God that made them in his Image; from the
Redeemer that bought them by the Price of his Blood, and offered to save them
freely, for all their Unworthiness, and many a time entreated them to accept
his Offer, that their Souls might live: From the Holy Ghost, the Sanctifier and
Comforter of the Faithful, who strove with their Hearts, till they quenched and
expelled him. O sad Departing! who would not then choose rather to depart from
all the Friends he had in the World, and from any thing imaginable; from his
Life, from himself, if it were possible, than from Christ? Depart: from what?
why from the Presence of the Judge, from all farther Hopes of Salvation for
ever, from all possibility of ever being saved, and living in the joyful
Inheritance of the Righteous. Depart: Not from God's Essential Presence, for
that will be with them to their everlasting Misery, but from the Presence of
his Grace in that Measure as they enjoyed it. Depart: Not from your fleshly
Pleasures, and Honors, and Profits of the World; these were all gone and past
already: and there was no farther need to bid them depart from these: Houses
and Lands were gone. Mirth and Recreations were gone. Their sweet Morsels and
Cups were gone. All the Honor that Men could give them was gone before they
were set at Christ's Bar to be judged. But from all Expectations of ever
enjoying these again, or ever tasting their former Delights; from these they
must depart: not from their Sin, for that will go with them; but the Liberty of
committing that part of it which was sweet to them, as Gluttony, Drunkenness,
Whoredom, Idleness, and all Voluptuousness; from these they must depart. But
this is consequential; it is Christ and the Possibility of Salvation, that they
are sentenced to depart from.

But whither must they depart? 1. Into Fire. 2. Into that Fire which was
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. 3. Into everlasting Fire.

1. Not into a purifying, but a tormenting Fire. Whether elementary or not;
whether properly or metaphorically called Fire, let us not vainly trouble our
selves to enquire. It is enough to know, that as Fire is one of the most
grievous Tormentors of the Flesh, so grievous will be those infernal Torments
to the whole Man, Soul and Body; such as is most fitly represented to us under
the Notion of Fire, and of Burning. It is easy for a secure unbelieving Soul to
read and hear of it; but Woe and ten thousand Woes to them that must endure it!
In this Life they had their good things, when it went harder as to the Flesh
with better Men; but now they are tormented, when the Godly are comforted, as
Luke 16. 25.

2. But why is it called a Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels? 1. What
is this Devil that has Angels? 2. Who are his Angels? 3. When was it prepared
for them? 4. Wat it not also prepared for wicked Men? To these in order.

1. It seems by many Passages in Scripture, that there is an Order among
Spirits both good and bad; and that there is one Devil that is the Prince over
the rest.

2. It seems therefore that it is the rest of the evil Spirits, that are called
his Angels. And some think that the Wicked who served him in this Life, shall
be numbered with his Angels in the Life to come. Indeed the Apostle calls him
the God of this World, 2 Cor. 4. 4. as is ordinarily judged by Expositors; and
the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit that now works in the Children
of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. And he calls false seducing Teachers the
Ministers of Satan, 2 Cor. 11. 15. But that wicked Men are here meant as part
of his Angels, is not clear.

3. If it be the Preparation of God's Purpose that is here meant, then it was
from Eternity: but if it be any Commination of God as Ruler of the Angels, then
was this Fire prepared for them conditionally, from the beginning of that
Commination, and was due to them at their Fall.

4. It seems that the Reason why here is no mention of preparing Hellfire for
the Wicked, but only for the Devils, is not because indeed it was not prepared
also for the Wicked; but to note that it is the Torment which was first
prepared for, or assigned to the Devils, thereby showing the greatness of the
Misery of the Wicked, that the Devil and his Angels must be their Companions:
Though some think, as is said before, that the Reason why wicked Men are not
mentioned tere, is, because they are part of the Angels of the Devil, and so
included. And some think it is purposely to manifest God's general Love to
Mankind, that prepared not Hell for them, but they cast themselves into the
Hell prepared for the Devils. But the first seems to be the true sense.

And how apparently Righteous are the Judgments of the Lord! that those Men who
would here entertain the Devil into their Hearts and daily Familiarity, should
be then entertained by him into his Place of Torments, and there remain for
ever in his Society! Though few entertained him into visible Familiarity with
their Bodies as Witches do, who so make him their Familiar: yet all wicked Men
do entertain him into more full and constant Familiarity with their Souls than
these Witches do with their Bodies; how familiar is he in Thoughts, to fill
them with Vanity, Lust or Revenge! How familiar is he in their Hearts, to fill
them with Covertousness, Malice, Pride, or the like Evils! and to banish all
Thoughts of returning to God, and to quench every Motion that tends to their
Recovery! How familiar is he with them, even when they seem to be worshipping
God in the public Assemblies, stealing the Word out of their Hearts, filling
them with vain and wandering Thoughts, blinding their Minds that they cannot
understand the plainest words that we are able to speak to them, and filling
them with a proud Rebellion against the Direction of their Teachers, and an
obstinate Refusal to be ruled by them, be the Matter never so necessary to
their own Salvation? How familiar are these evil Spirits in their Houses,
filling them with Ignorance, Worldliness and Ungodliness, and turning out God's
Service, so that they do not pray together once in a Day, or perhaps at all!
How familiarly does Satan use their Tongues, in Cursing, Swearing, Lying,
Ribaldry, Backbiting or Slandring! And is it not just with God to make these
Fiends their Familiars in Torment, with whom they entertained such Familiarity
in Sin? As Christ with all the blessed Angels and Saints will make but one
Kingdom or Family, and shall live altogether in perpetual Delights; so the
Devil and all his hellish Angels and wicked Men shall make but one Household,
and shall live altogether in perpetual Misery. O poor Sinners, you are not
troubled now at his Presence and Power in your Hearts! but will you not then be
troubled at his Presence and tormenting Power? As long as you do not see him,
let him do what he will with you, it grieves you little or nothing at all; but
what will you say when you must see him, and abide with him for ever? O Sirs,
his Name is easily heard, but his Company will be terrible to the stoutest
Heart alive. He shows you a smiling Face when he tempts you, but he has a
grimmer Face to show you, when Temptations have conquered you, and Torments
must succeed. As those that write of Witches, say, he appears at first to
them in some comely tempting Shape, till he have them fast tied to him; and
then he beats them, and affrights them, and seldom appears to them but in some
ugly Hew. Believe it, poor Sinners, you do not hear or see the worst of him,
when you are merry about your sinful Pleasures, and rejoicing in your Hopes of
the Commodities or Preferments of the World: he has another kind of Voice
which you must hear, and another Face to show you, that will make you know a
little better whom you had to do with! You would be afraid now to meet him in
the Dark: what will you be to live with him in everlasting Darkness? Then you
will know who it was that you entertained and obeyed, and played with in your
Sins.

3. And as the Text tells us, that it is a Fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels: So it tells us, that it is an everlasting Fire. It had a Beginning,
but it shall have no End. If these Wretches would have chosen the Service of
God, they would have met with no Difficulty or Trouble, but what would have had
a speedy End. Poverty and Injuries would have had an End: Scorns and Abuses
would have had an End: Fasting, Humiliation, Sorrow for Sin, watching and
fighting against our spiritual Enemies, would all have had an End. But to avoid
these, they chose that Ease, that Pleasure, which has brought them to that
Torment which never will have end. I have said so much of these things already
in my Book called the Saints Rest, that I will now say but this much. It is one
of the Wonders of the World, how Men that do believe, or think they do believe
this Word of Christ to be true, that the Wicked shall go into everlasting Fire,
can yet venture on Sin so boldly, and live in it so fearlesly, or sleep quietly
till they are out of this unspeakable Danger! Only the commonness of it, and
the known Wickedness of Man's Heart, does make this less wonderful. And were
there nothing else to convince us that Sinners are mad and dead as to spiritual
Things, this were enough; that ever the greatest Pleasures or Profits of the
World, or the most enticing Baits that the Devil can offer them, should once
prevail with them to forget these endless things, and draw them to reject an
everlasting Glory, and cast themselves desperately into everlasting Fire: Yea,
and all this under daily Warnings and Instructions; and when it is told them
beforehand by the God of Truth himself! For the Lord's sake, Sirs, and for your
Souls sakes, if you care not what Ministers say, or what such as I say, yet
will you soberly read now and then this 25 th Chapter of Matthew, and regard
what is told you by him that must be your Judge! and now and then bethink
yourselves soberly, whether these are Matters for wise Men to make light of;
and what it is to be everlastingly in Heaven, or in Hellfire.

2. We have seen what is the Penalty contained in the Sentence against the
Ungodly: The next thing that the Text directs us to, is the Cause or Reason of
the Sentence, ver. 42. For I was hungry, and ye gave me no Meat, etc. The
Reason is not given expressly, either for their Sin against the Law of Works,
that is, because they were Sinners, and not perfectly innocent nor yet from
their Unbelief, which is the great Sin against the Law of Grace: But it is
given from their not expressing their Faith and Love to Christ in Works of
Mercy and Self-denial. And why is this so?

1. We must not suppose that these Words of Christ do express the whole
judicial Process in every Point; but the chief Parts. It is supposed that all
Men are convicted of being Sinners against the perfect Law of the Creator, and
that they are guilty of Death for that Sin; and that there is no way but by
Christ to obtain Deliverance. But because all this must be acknowledged by the
Righteous themselves, as well as by the Wicked; therefore Christ does not
mention this, but that only which is the turning Point or Cause in the
Judgment. For it is not all Sinners that shall be finally condemned, but all
impenitent, unbelieving Sinners, who have rebelled finally against their
Redeemer.

2. And the Reason why Faith itself is not expressed is, 1. Because it is
clearly implied, and so is Love to Christ as Redeemer; in that they should have
relieved Christ himself in his Members: That is, as it is expressed, Mat. 10.
42. they should have received a Prophet in the Name of a Prophet, and a
Disciple in the Name of a Disciple; all should be done for Christ's sake, which
could not be, unless they believed in him, and loved him. 2. Also because that
the bare Act of Believing is not all that Christ requires to a Man's final
Justification and Salvation; but holy self-denying Obedience must be added. And
therefore this is given as the Reason of their Condemnation that they did not
so obey.

We must observe also, that Christ here puts the special for the general;
that is, one way of self-denying Obedience and Expression of Love, instead of
such Obedience in general: For all Men have not Ability to relieve those in
misery, being perhaps some of them poor themselves. But all have that Love and
Self-denial, which will some way express it self. And all have Hearts and a
Disposition to do thus, if they had Ability; without such a Disposition none
can be saved.

It is the fond Conceit of some, that if they have any Love to the Godly, or
wish them well, it is enough to prove them happy. But Christ here purposely
lets us know that whoever does not love him at so high a rate, as that he can
part with his Substance or any thing in the World, to those Uses which he shall
require them, even to relieve his Servants in want and Sufferings for the
Master's sake, that Man is none of Christ's Disciple, nor will be owned by him
at the last.

XI. The next Point that we come to, is to show you the Properties of this
Sentence at Judgment.

When Man had broken the Law of his Creator at the first, he was liable to the
Sentence of Death, and God presently sat in Judgment on him, and sentenced him
to some part of the Punishment which he had deserved; but upon the
Interposition of the Son, he before the rest, resolved on a Way that might tend
to his Recovery; and Death is due yet to every Sinner for every Sin which he
commits, till a Pardon do acquit him. But this Sentence which will pass on
Sinners at the last Judgment, does much differ from that which was passed on
the first Sin, or which is due according to the Law of Works alone. For,

1. As to the Penalty, called the Pain of Loss, the first Judgment did deprive
Man of the Favor of his Creator, but the second will deprive him of the Favor
both of the Creator and Redeemer: the first Judgment deprived him of the
Benefits of Innocence; the second deprives him of the Benefits of Redemption,
the loss of his hopes and possibility of Pardon, of the Spirit, of
Justification and Adoption, and of the Benefits which conditionally were
promised and offered him; these are the Punishments of the last Judgment, which
the Law of Works did never threaten to the first Man, or to any, as it stood
alone.

Also the loss of Glory as recovered, is the proper Penalty of the violated Law
of Grace, which is more than the first loss. As if a Man should lose his Purse
the second time, when another has once found it for him; or rather as if a
Traitor redeemed by another, and having his Life and Honors offered him, if he
will thankfully accept it and come in, should by his Refusal and Obstinacy,
lose this recovered Life, which is offered him; which is an Addition to his
former Penalty.

Besides that the higher Degree of Glory will be lost which Christ would bestow
on him, more than was lost at first. The very Work of the Saints in Heaven,
will to praise and glorify him that redeemed them, and the Father in him; which
would not have been the Work of Man, if he had been innocent.

2. As to the Pain of Sense, the last Judgment by the Redeemer will sentence
them to a far sorer Punishment than would have befaln them, if no Savior had
been offered them, Heb. 10. 29. The Conscience of Adam if he had not been
redeemed, would never have tormented him for rejecting a Redeemer, nor for
refusing or abusing his gracious Offers, and his Mercies; nor for the
forfeiting of a recovered Happiness; nor for refusing of the easy Terms of the
Gospel, which would have given him Christ and Salvation for the accepting; nor
for neglecting any Means that tended to Recovery: no nor for refusing
Repentance unto Life, nor for disobeying a Redeemer that bought him by his
Blood. As all these are the Penalties of the Redeemer's Law and Judgment, so is
it a sorer Penalty than Conscience would have inflicted merely for not being
perfectly innocent: and they will be far soarer Gripings and Gnawings of the
never-dying Worm for the abuse of these Talents, than if we had been never
trusted with any after our first Forfeiture. Yea and God himself will
accordingly proportion his Punishments. So that you see that privatively and
positively, or as to their Loss and their Feeling, the Redeemer will pass on
them a heavier Doom than the Creator did, or would have done according to the
first Law to perfect Man.

3. Another Property of the Judgment of Christ is, that it will be final,
peremptory, and excluding all farther Hopes or Possibilities of a Remedy. So
was not the first Judgment of the Creator upon fallen Man. Though the Law of pure
Nature knew no Remedy, nor gave Man any Hope of a Redeemer, yet did it not
exclude a Remedy, nor put in any Bar against one; but God was free to recover
his Creature if he pleased. But in the Law of Grace he has resolved, that
there shall be no more Sacrifice for Sin, but a fearful looking for of Judgment
and Fire which shall devour the Adversary, Heb. 10. 26, 27. and that the Fire
shall be everlasting, the Worm shall not die, and the Fire shall not be
quenched, Mat. 25. ult. Mat. 13. 42, 50. John 5. 27. Mat. 5. 26. Mat. 3. 12.
and Luke 3. 17. Mark 9. 43, 44, 45, 46, 48. He that now breaks that pure Law
that requires perfect Innocence, (as we have all done) may fly to the Promise
of Grace in Christ, and appeal to the Law of Liberty or Deliverance to be
judged by that. But he that falls under the Penalty of that Law which should
have saved him, as all final Unbelievers and impenitent ungodly Persons do,
has no other to appeal to. Christ would have been a Sanctuary and Refuge to
thee from the Law of Works, had thou but come into him: But who shall be a
Refuge to thee from the Wrath of Christ? The Gospel would have freed thee from
the Curse of the Law of Works, if thou had but believed and obeyed it: But
what shall free thee from the Condemnation of the Gospel? Had there no
Accusation lain against thee, but that thou wast in general a Sinner; that is,
that thou wast not perfectly innocent, Christ would have answered that Charge
by his Blood. But seeing thou art also guilty of those special Sins which he
never shed his Blood for, who shall deliver thee from that Accusation? When
Christ gave himself a Ransom for Sinners, it was with this Resolution both in
the Father and himself, that none should ever be pardoned, justified or saved
by that Ransom, that did not in the time of this Life sincerely return to God
by Faith in the Redeemer, and live in sincere obedience to him, and persevering
herein. So that he plainly excepted final Infidelity, Impenitency and Rebellion
from Pardon: He never died for the final Nonperformance of the Conditions of
the New Covenant. So that his Judgment for these will be peremptory and
remediless. If you say, Why cannot God find out a Remedy for this Sin, as well
as he did for the first? I say, God cannot lie, Tit. 1. 2. He must be true and
faithful, as necessarily as he must be God, because of the absolute Perfection
of his Nature; and he has said and resolved, that there shall be no more
Remedy.

Many other Properties of God's Judgment general there are, as that
Righteousness, Impartiality, Inflexibility, and the like, which because I would
not make my Discourse too long, I will pass over, contenting my self with the
mention of these which are proper to the Judgment of the Redeemer according to
his own Laws in special.

XII. The twelfth and last thing which I promised to unfold, is, The Execution
of this Judgment. Here I should show you both the Certainty of the Execution,
and by whom it will be, and how: but having done all this already in the third
Part of the foresaid Book of Rest, I shall now only give this brief Touch of it.

No sooner is the dreadful Sentence past, Go ye cursed into everlasting Fire,
but away they must be gone: There is no delay, much less any Reprieve to be
expected; and yet much less is there any hope of an Escape. If the Judge once
say, Take him Jailor; and if Christ say, Take him Devils, you that ruled and
deceived him, now torment him: all the World cannot rescue one such Soul. It
will be in vain to look about for help. Alas, there is none but Christ can help
you; and he will not, because you refused his help: Nay, we may say, He cannot;
not for want of Power, but because he is True and Just, and therefore will make
good that Word which you believed not. It is in vain then to cry to Hills to
fall on you, and the Mountains to cover you from the Presence of him that
sits on the Throne. It will be in vain now to repent, and wish you had not
slighted your Salvation, nor sold it for a little Pleasure to your Flesh. It
will be then in vain to cry, Lord, Lord, open to us; O spare us; O pity us; O
do not cast us into these hideous Flames! Do not turn us among Devils! Do not
torment thy redeemed ones in this Fire! All this will be then too late.

Poor Sinner, whoever thou art that read or hear these Lines, I beseech
thee in Compassion to thy Soul, consider how fearful the Case of that Man will
be, that is newly doomed to the Everlasting Fire, and is haled to the Execution
without Remedy! And what mad Men are those that now do no more to prevent such
a Misery, when they might do it on such easy Terms* and now have so fair an
Opportunity in their hands.

The time was when Repentance might have done thee good: but then all thy
Repentings be in vain. Now while the Day of thy Visitation lasts, had thou
but a Heart to pray and cry for Mercy, in Faith and Fervency through Christ,
thou might be heard. But then Praying and Crying will do no good, should
thou roar out in the Extremity of thy Horror and Amazement, and beseech the
Lord Jesus but to forgive thee one Sin, or to send thee on Earth once more, and
to try the^ once again in the Flesh, whether thou would not love him, and
lead a holy Life, it would be all in vain Nay, should thou beg but one Hour
before you were cast into those Flames, it would not be heard; it would do thee
no good. How earnestly did a deceased Gentleman, Luke 16. 24. beg of Abraham
for one Drop of Water from the Tip of Lazarus's Finger to cool his Tongue,
because he was tormented in the Flame: And what the better was he? He was sent
to remember that he had his good things in this Life; and that Remembrance
would torment him more. And do not wonder or think much at this, that Christ
will not then be entreated by the Ungodly. You shall then have a Remember too
from Christ or Conscience. He may soon stop thy Mouth, and leave thee
speechless, and say, Remember Man, that I did one Day send thee a Message of
Peace, and thou would not hear it. I once did stoop to beseech thee to
return, and thou would not hear. I besought thee by the tender Mercies of
God; I besought thee by all the Love that I had showed these, by my holy Life,
by my cursed Death, by the Riches of my Grace, by the Offers of my Glory; and I
could not get thee t^ for sake the World, to deny the Flesh, to leave one
beloved Sin for all this. I besought thee over and over again: I sent many a
Minister to thee in my Name: I waited on thee many a Day, and Year, and all
would not do: thou would not consider, return and live: and ^ow it is too
late, thy Sentence is past, and cannot be re^alled: away from me thou Worker of
Iniquity, Mat. 7. 22, 23.

Ah Sirs, what a Case then is the poor desperate Sinner left in! How can I
write this, or how can you that read or hear it, without trembling, once think
of the Condition that such forlorn Wretches will be in! When they look above
them, and see the God that has forsaken them, because they forsook him first;
when ^hey look about them, and see the Saints on one hand whom they despised,
now sentenced unto Glory; and the Wicked on the other hand whom they
accompanied and imitated, now judged with them to everlasting Misery: when they
look below them, and see the Flames that they must abide in, even for evermore:
and when the Devils begin to hale them to the Execution: O poor Souls! Now what
would they give for a Christ, for a Promise, for a time of Repentance, for a
Sermon of Mercy, which once they slept under, or made no account of! How is the
Case altered now with them! Who would think that these are the same Men that
made light of all this on Earth, that so stoutly scorned the Reproofs of the
Word, that would be worldly, and fleshly, and drunk, and proud, let Preachers
say what they would; and perhaps hated those that did give them warning. Now
they are of another Mind; but all too late. O were there any Place for
Resistance, now would they draw back, and lay hold of any thing, before they
would be dragged away into those Flames! But there is no resisting; Satan's
Temptations might have been resisted, but his Executions cannot: God's
Judgments might have been prevented by Faith and Prayer, Repentance and a holy
Life; but they cannot be resisted when they are not prevented. Glad would the
miserable Sinner be, if he might but turn to nothing, and cease to be; or that
he might be any thing rather than a reasonable Creature: but these Wishes are
all in vain. There is one Time, and one Way of a Sinner's Deliverance; if he
fail in that one, he perishth for ever: all the World cannot help him after
that 2 Cor. 6. 2. I have heard thee in a time accepted: and in the Day of
Salvation have I succored thee: Behold now is the accepted Time; behold now is
the Day of Salvation. Now he says, Rev. 3. 20. Behold, I stand at the Door and
knock; if any Man hear my Voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and
will sup with him, and he with me. But for the time to come hereafter, hear
what he says, Prove. 1. 24, 25, 26. Because I have called, and ye refused, I
have stretched out my hand and no Man regarded; but ye have set at naught all
my Counsels, and would none of my Reproof: I also will laugh at your Calamity;
I will mock when your fear comes; when your fear comes as a Desolation, and
your D^struction comueth as a Whirlwind; when Distress and Anguish comes upon
you: then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me
early, but they shall not find me: for that they hated Knowledge, and did not
choose the Fear of the Lord; they would none of my Counsels: they despised all
my Reproofs; therefore shall they eat of the Fruit of their own way, and be
filled with their own Devices: for the turning away of the Simple shall slay
them, and the Prosperity of Fools shall destroy them; but whosoever hearkneth to me
shall dwell safth and shall be quiet from fear of Evil. I have recited all
these Words that you may see and consider, whether I have spoke any other thing
than God himself had plainly told you of.

Having said this much of the Certainty of the Execution, I should next have
spoke somewhat of the Manner and the Instruments, and have showed how God will
be for ever the principal Cause, and Satan and their own Consciences the
Instruments in part; and in what manner Conscience will do its part, and how
impossible it will be to quiet or resist it. But having spoke so much of all
this already elsewhere, as is said before I will forbear here to repeat it,
leaving the Reader that desires it, there to peruse it.

The Uses.
Use 1. Beloved Hearers, it was not to fill your Fancies with News that God
sent me hither this Day: nor to tell you of Matters that nothing concern you:
nor by some terrible Words to bring you to an Hour's Amazement and no more: But
it is to tell you of things that your Eyes shall see, and to foretell you of
your Danger while it may be prevented, that your precious Souls may be saved at
the last, and you may stand before God with Comfort at that Day. But because
this will not be every Man's Case, no nor the Case of most, I must in the Name
of Christ desire you to make this day an Enquiry into your own Souls, and as in
the Presence of God let your Hearts make answer to these few Questions which I
shall propound and de^te with you.

Qu. 1. Do you soundly believe this Doctrine which I have ^ached to you? What
say you Sirs? Do you verily be^ve it as a most certain Truth, that you and I,
and (...) the World must stand at God's Bar and be judged to everlasting Joy or
Torment? I hope you do all in some (...) believe this: but blame me not if I be
jealous whether you soundly believe it, while we see in the World so little of
the Effect of such a Belief. I confess I am forced to think that there is more
Infidelity than ^ith among us, when I see more Ungodliness than God^ess among
us: And I can hardly believe that Man ^at will say or swear that he believes
these things, ^d yet lives as carelessly and carnally as an Infidel. I ^ow that
no Man can love to be damned; yea, I ^ow that every Man that has a reasonable
Soul, has ^turally some love to himself, and a fear of a Danger which he
verily apprehends: he therefore that lives ^thout all fear, I must think
lives without all appre^nsion of his Danger. Custom has taught Men to hold
these things as the Opinion of the Country; but if Men soundly believed them,
surely we should see strange^ Effects of such a Faith, than in the most we do
see. Does the sleepy Soul that lives in Security, a^ follows this World as
eagerly as if he had no greater Matters to mind; that never once trembled at
the Thoughts of this great Day, nor once asked his own Soul in good Sadness, My
Soul, How do thou think then to escape? I say, does this Man believe that he
is going to this Judgment? Well Sirs, whether you believe it or not, you will
find it true: and believe it you must before you can be safe. For if you do not
believe it, you will never make ready. Let me therefore persuade you in the
Fear of God to consider, that it is a Matter of undoubted Truth.

1. Consider that it is the express Word of the God of Truth, revealed in
Scripture as plainly as you can desire. So that you cannot be unbelieving
without denying God's Word, or giving him the Lie, Mat. 13. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42,
43, 49, 50. Mat. 25. throughout, Romans 2. 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 16. and 1. 32. John 5.
28, 29. The Hour is coming in which all that are in the Graves shall hear his
Voice, and shall come forth: they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of
Life; and they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation. Heb. 9.
27. It is appointed to all Men once to die, and after this the Judgment. Romans
14. 9, 12. So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God. Rev.
20. 12. And I saw the dead small and great stand before God: and the Books were
opened: and another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life; and the Dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the Books according to
their Works. Mat. 12. 36, 37. But I say unto you that every idle Word that Men
shall speak, they shall give account thereof at the Day of Judgment For by thy
Words thou shall be justified, and by thy Words thou shall be condemned. Many
more most express Texts of Scripture do put the Truth of this Judgment out of
all question to all that believe the Scripture, and will understand it. There
is no place left for a Controversy in the Point: It is made as sure to us as
the Word of the living God can make it: And he that will question that, what
will he believe? What say you Sirs! Dare you doubt of this which the God of
Heaven has so positively affirmed? I hope you dare not.

2. Consider, it is a Master-part of your Faith, if you are Christians, and a
fundamental Article of your Creed, that Christ shall come again to judge the
quick and the dead. So that you must believe it or renounce your Christianity,
and then you renounce Christ and all the Hopes of Mercy that you have in him.
It Is impossible that you should soundly believe in Christ, and not believe his
Judgment and Life everlasting: because as he came to bring Life and Immortality
to Light in the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. so it was the End of his Incarnation,
Death and Resurrection, to bring you thither; and it is part of his Honor and
Office which he purchased with his Blood, to be the Lord and Judge of all the
World, Romans 14. 9. Joh. 5. 22. If therefore you believe not heartily this
Judgment, deal plainly and openly, and say you are Infidels, and cast away the
hypocritical Vizor of Christianity, and le^ us know you, and take you as you
are.

3. Consider that it is a Truth that is known by the very Light of Nature, that
there shall be a Happiness for the Righteous, and a Misery for the Wicked after
this Life: which is evident,

1. In that we have undeniable natural Reason for it. (1.) God is the Righteous
Governor of the World, and therefore must make a difference among his Subjcts,
according to the Nature of their Ways: which ane see is not done here, where
the Wicked prosper, and we Good are afflicted; therefore it must be hereafter.
(2.) We see there is a Necessity that God should make Promises and Threatenings
of everlasting Happiness or Misery, for the right Governing of the World: for
we certainly perceive that no lower things will keep Men from destroying all
humane Society, and living worse than brute Beasts; and if there be a Necessity
of making such Threats and Promises, then there is certainly a Necessity of
fulfilling them. For God needs no Lie or Means of deceiving, to rule the
World.

2. And as we see it by Reason, so by certain Expe^rience, that this is
discernable by the Light of Nature for all the World, or almost all do believe
it. Ev^ those Nations where the Gospel never came, and have nothing but what
they have by Nature, even the most barbarous Indians acknowledge some Life after
this and a Difference of Men according as they are here therefore you must
believe thus much, or renounc^ your common Reason and Humanity, as well as your
Christianity. Let me therefore persuade you al^ in the Fear of God to confirm
your Souls in the Belief of this, as if you had heard Christ or an Angel from
Heaven say to you, O Man, thou art hasting to Judgment.

Qu. 2. My next Question is, Whether you do ever soberly consider of this great
Day? Sirs, do you use when you are alone to think with your selves, how certain
and how dreadful it will be, how fast it is coming on, and what you shall do,
and what Answer you mean to make at that Day? Are your Minds taken up with
these Considerations? Tell me, is it so or not?

Alas Sirs! Is this a Matter to be forgotten? Is not that Man even worse than
mad, that is going to God's Judgment, and never thinks of it? when if they were
to be tried for their Lives at the next Assize, they would think of it, and
think again, and cast 100 times which way to escape. Methinks you should rather
forget to go to Bed at Night, or to eat your Meat, or do your Work, than forget
so great a Matter as this.

Truly I have often in my serious Thoughts been ready to wonder that Men can
think of almost any thing else, when they have so great a thing to think of.
What, forget that which you must remember for ever! forget that which should
force Remembrance, yea and does force it with some, whether they will or not! A
poor despairing Soul cannot forget it: He thinks which way ever he goes he is
ready to be judged. O therefore Beloved, fix these Thoughts as deep in your
Hearts as Thoughts can go. O be like that holy Man, that thought which way ever
he went, he heard the Trumpet sound, and the Voice of the Angel calling to the
World, Arise ye Dead, and come to Judgment. You have warning of it from God and
Man, to cause you to remember it; do not then forget it. It will be a cold
Excuse another Day, Lord, I forgot this Day, or else I ^ight have been ready:
you dare not sure trust to such Excuses.

Qu. 3. My next Question to you is, How are you ^ffected with the Consideration
of this Day? Barely to think of it will not serve: to think of such a Day as
this with a dull and senseless Heart, is a Sign of fearful Stupidity. Did the
Knees of King Belshazzar knock together with trembling, when he saw the
Handwriting on the Wall? Dan. 5. 6. How then should thy Heart be afffected
that sees the Handwriting of God as a Summons to his Bar?

When I began to preach of these things long ago, confess the Matters seemed to
me so terrible, that I was afraid that People would have run out of their Wits
with Fear; but a little Experience showed me, that many are like a Dog that is
bred up in a Forge or Furnace, that being used to it, can sleep though the
Hmmers are beating, and the Fire and hot Iron flaming about him, when another
that had never seen it, would be amazed at the sight. When Men have heard us 7
Years together, yea 20 Years, to talk of a Day of Judgment, and they see it
not, nor feel any hurt, they think it is but talk, and begin to make nothing of
it. This is their Thanks to God for his Patience: Because his Sentence is not
executed speedily, therefore their Hearts are set in them to do evil, Eccles.
8. 11. As if God were slack of his Promise, as some Men accoun^ Slackness, 2
Pet. 3. 9. when one Day with him is as (...) 1000 Years, and a 1000 Years as
one Day. What (...) we tell you 20 Years together that you must die, wi^^ you
not believe us, because you have lived so long, and seen no Death coming?

Three or Four things there be that should bring any Matter to the Heart. 1. If
it be a Matter or exceeding Weight. 2. If it concern not others only, but our
selves. 3. If it be certain. 4. If near.

All these things are here to be sound, and therefore how should your Hearts be
moved at the Consideration of this great Day!

1. What Matter can be mentioned with the Tongue of Man of greater moment? For
the poor Creture to stand before his Maker and Redeemer, to be judged to
everlasting Joy or Torment? Alas! all the Matters of this World are Plays, and
Toys, and Dreams to this; Matters of Profit or Disprofit are nothing to it,
Matter^ of Credit or Discredit are unworthy to be named with it; Matters of
temporal Life or Death are nothing to it. We may see the poor brute Beasts go
every Day to the Slaughter, and we make no great matter of it, though their
Life be as dear to them as ours to us. To be judged to an everlasting Death or
Torment, this is the great Danger that one would think should shake the
stoutest Heart to consider it, and awake the dullest Sinner to prevent it.

2. It Is a Matter the concerns every one of your^selves, and every Man or
Woman that ever lived upon the Earth, or ever shall do; I am not speaking to
you (...) the Affairs of some far Country that are nothing to you but only to
marvel at; which you never saw, not ever shall do: no, it is thy own self, Man
or Woman that hear me this Day, that shall as surely appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, as the Lord lives, and as he is true and faithful;
and that is as sure as thou live on this Earth, or as the Heaven is over
thee. That Man that hears all this with the most careless blockish Heart,
shall be awakened and stand with the rest at that Day; that Man that never
thought of it, but spent his time in worldly Matters, shall leave all and there
appear; that Man that will not believe these things to be true, but make a Jest
ofthem, shall see and feel that he would not believe, and he also shall be
there; the Godly that waited in Hope for that Day, as the Day of their full
Deliverance and Coronation, they shall be there; those that have lain in the
Dust these 5000 Years shall rise again, and all stand there. Hearer, whoever
thou art, believe it, thou may better think to live without Meat, to see
without Light, to escape Death, and abide for ever on Earth, than to keep away
from that Appearance. Willing or unwilling thou shall be there. And should not
a Matter then that so concerns thy self, go near thy Heart, and awake thee
from thy Security?

3. That it is a Matter of unquestionable Certainty, I have partly showed you
already, and more would do if I were preaching to known Infidels. If the
careless World had any just Reason to think it were uncertain, their
Carelessness were more excusable. Methinks a Man should be affected withthat
which he is certain shall come to pass, in a manner as if it were now in doing,
1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. Ye perfectly know that the Day of the Lord so comes, etc. says
the Apostle.

4. This day is not only certain, but it is near; and therefore should affect
you the more. I confess, if it were never so far off, yet seeing it will come
at last, it should be carefully regarded: But when the Judge is at the Door,
James 5. 9. and we are almost at the Bar, and it is so short a time to this
Assize, what Soul that is not dead will be secure?

Alas Sirs! what is a little time when it is gone? how quickly shall you and I
be all in another World, and our Souls receive their particular Judgment, and
so wait till the Body be raised and judged to the same Condition? It is not 100
Years in all likelihood, till every Soul of us shall be in Heaven or Hell: and
it is like, not half or a quarter of that time, but it will be so with the
greater part of us; and what is a Year or two or 100? how speedily is it come?
how many a Soul that is now in Heaven or Hell, within 100 Years dwelt in the
Places that you now dwell in, and sat in the Seats you now sit in? And now
their time is past, what is it? Alas, how quickly will it be so with us! You
know not when you go to Bed, but you may be judged by the next Morning; or when
you rise, but you may be judged before Night: but certainly you know that
shortly it will be; and should not this then be laid to Heart? Yea the general
Judgment will not be long: For certainly we live in the End of the World.

Qu. 4. My next Question is, Whether are you ready for his dreadful Judgment
when it comes, or not? Seeing it your selves then must be tried, I think it
concerns you to see that you be prepared. How often has Christ warned us in
the Gospel, that we be always ready, because we know not the day or Hour of his
coming? Matthew. 24. 44, 42. and 25. 13 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. and told us hos sad a time
it will be to those that are unready, Mat. 25. 11, 12. Did Men but well know
what a Meeting and Greeting there will be between Christ and an unready Soul,
it would sure startle them, and make them look about them. What say you,
beloved Hearers, are you ready for Judgment, or are you not? Methinks a Man
that knows he shall be judged, should ask himself the question every day of
his Life; am I ready to give up my Account to God? Do not you use to ask this
of your own Hearts? unless you be careless whether you be saved or damned,
methinks you should, and ask it seriously.

Qu. But who be they that are ready? how shall I know whether I be ready or not?

Answ. There is a twofold Readiness. 1. When you are in a safe Cafe. 2. When
you are in a comfortable Cafe, in regard of that Day. The latter is very
desiraeble, but the frist is of absolute Necessity: this therefore is it that
you must principally enquire after.

In general, all those, and only those are ready for Judgment, who shall be
justified and saved, and not condemned when Judgment cor^es; they that have a
good Cause in a Gospel-sense. It may be known before hand who these are; for
Christ judges, as I told you, by his Law. And therefore find out whom it is
that the Law of Grace does justify or condemn, and you may certainly know whom
the Judge will justify or conemn; for he judges righteously.

If you further ask me who these are; remember that I told you before that
every Man that is personally righteous by fulfilling the Conditions of
Salvation in the Gospel, shall be saved; and he that is foun unrighteous, as
having not fulfilled them, shall perish at that Day.

Qu. Who are those?

Answ. I will tell you them in a few Words, lest you should forget, because it
is a Matter that your Salvation or Damnation depends upon.

1. The Soul that unfeignedly repents of his former sinful Course, and
turns from it in Heart and Life, and loves the Way of godliness which he
hated, and hates the Way of Sin which he loved, and is become thoroughly a new
Creature, being born again and sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, shall be
justified: but all others shall certainly be condemned.

Good News to repenting converted Sinners: but sad to impenitent, and him that
knows not what this means.

2. That Soul that feeling his Misery under Sin, and the Power of Satan, and
the Wrath of God, does believe what Christ has done and suffered for Man's
Res^auration and Salvation, and thankfully accepts him as his only Savior
and Lord, on the Terms that he is offered in the Gospel, and to those Ends,
event to justify him, and sanctify and guide him, and bring him at last to
everlasting Glory; that Soul shall be justified at Judgment: and he that does
not, shall be condemned.

Or in short, in Scripture Phrase, He that believes shall be saved, and he
that believes not shall be condemmd, Mar. 16. 16.

3. The Soul that has had so much Knowledge of the Goodness of God, and his
Love to Man in Creation, Redemption, and the following Mercies, and has had so
much Conviction of the Vanity of all Creatures, as thereupon to love God more
than all things below, so that he haththe chiefest room in the Hearts, and is
preferred before all Creatures ordinarily in a time of trial; that Soul shall
be justified at Judgment, and all others shall be condemned.

4. That Soul that is so apprehensive of the absolute Sovereignty of God as
Creator and Redeemer, and of the Righteousness of his Law and the Goodness of
his holy Way, as that he is firmly resolved to obey him before all others, and
does accordingly give up himself to study his Will, of purpose that he may obey
it, and does walk in these holy Ways, and has so far mortified the Flesh, and
subdued the World and the Devil, that the Authority and Word of God can do more
with him than any other, and does ordinarily prevail against all the Perwasion
and Interest of the Flesh, so that the main Scope and Bent of the Heart and
Life is still for God; and when he sins he rises again by true Repentance;
I say, that Soul, and the only, shall be justified in Judgment, and be saved.

5. That Soul that has such believing Thoughts of the life to come, that he
takes the promised Blessedness for his Portion, and is resolved to venture all
else upon it, and in hope of this Glory, does set light comparatively by all
things in this World, and waits for it as the End of the Life, choosing any
suffering that God shall call him to, rather than to lose his hopes of the
Felicity, and tus perservereth to the End: I say, that Soul, and none but that
shall be justified in Judgand escape Damnation.

In these five Marks I have told, you truly and briefly, who shall be justified
and saved, and who shall be condemned at the Day of Judgment. And if you would
have them all in five Words, they are but the Description of these five Graces,
Repentance, Faith, Love, Obedience, Hope.

But though I have laid these close together for your use, you left you should
think that in so weighty a Case I am too short in the Proof of what I so
determine of; I will tell you in the express Words of many Scripture-Texts, who
shall be justified, and who shall be condemned.

[ John 3. 3. Except a Man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God. Heb. 12. 14. Without Holiness none shall see God. Luke 13. 3, 5. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Acts 26. 18. I send thee to open their
Eyes, and turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto
God, that they may receive forgiveness of Sins, and an Inheritance among the
sanctified by Faith that is in me. John 3. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Whoever
believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting Life: he that believes
on him, is not condemned; he that believes not, is condemned already, because
he has not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God; and this is
the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men loved Darkness
rather than Light, because their deeds were evil. John. 5. 28, 29. The Hout is
coming, in which that are in the Graves shall hear his Voice, and shall come
forth; they that have done good to the Resurrection of Life, and they that have
done evil to the Resurrection of Damnation. Mar. 25. 30. Cast the unprofitable
Servant into outer Darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Luke
19. 27. But those mine Enemies which would not that I should reign over them,
bring hither and slay them before me. Mat. 22. 12, 13. Friend, how came thou
in hither, not having on a Wedding-Gar^ent? And he was speechless. Then said
the King to the Se^^ants, bind him Hand and Foot, and take him away, and cast
him into outer Darkness, etc. Mat. 5. 20. For I say unto you, that except your
Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Mat. 7. 21. Not every one that
says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does the
Will of my Father which is in Heaven. Heb. 5. 6. He is become the Author of
eternal Salvation to all them that obey him. Rev. 22. 14. Blessed are they that
do his Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of Life, and may
enter in by the Gate into the City. Romans 8. 1, 13. There is then no
Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, that walk not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit. For if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die: but if ye
through the Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live. Romans 8. 9.
If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Gal. 5. 18. But if
ye be led of the Spirit, ye are not under the Law. Gal. 6. 7, 8. Be not
deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a Man sows, that shall he also
reap: for he that sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption; but
he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life Everlasting. Mat.
6. 21. For where your Treasure is, there will your Heart be also.] Read Psalm.
1. and many other Texts to this purpose, of which some are cited in my
Directions for Peace of Conscience: Dir. 11. p. 115, 116.

And thus I have told you from God's Word, how you may know whether you are
ready for Judgment, which is the fourth thing that I would advise you to
enquire after.

O Sirs, what shift do you make to keep your Souls from continual Terrors, as
long as you remain unready for Judgment? How do you keep the Thoughts of it out
of your Mind, that they do not break your Sleep, and meet you in your Business,
and haunt you every way you go, while Judgment is so near, and you are so
unready? But I shall proceed to my next Question.

Qu. 5. And in the last place, to those of you that are not yet ready, nor in a
Condition wherein you may be safe at that Day; my Question is, How are you
reslved to prepare for Judgmet for the time to come? Will you do no more than
you have done hitherto? Or will you now set your selves with all your Might, to
prepare for so great a Day? methinks you should be now past all Demurs, Delays,
or farther Doubtings about such a Business; and by the Consideration of what I
have said already, you should be fully resolved to lose no more time, but
presently awake, and set upon the Work. Methinks you should all say, We will do
any thing that the Lord shall direct us to do, rather then we will be unready
for this final Doom. O that there were but such Hearts in you, that you were
truly willing to follow the gracious Guidance of the Lord, and to use but those
sweet and reasonable Means which he has prescribed you in his Word, that you
may be ready for that Day! Alas, it is no hard matter for me to tell you, or my
self, what it is that we must do if we will be happy; and it is no very hard*
matter to do it so far as we are truly willing; but the Difficulty is to be
truly and thoroughly willing to this Work. If I shall tell you what you must do
for Preparation, shall I not lose my Labor? Will you resolve and promise in
the Strength of Grace, that you will faithfully and speedily endeavor to
practice it, whoever shall gainsay it? Upon hope of this, I will set you down
some brief Directions, which you must follow, if ever you will with Comfort
look the Lord Jesus in the Face at the Hour of Death, or in the Day of Judgment.

The first Direction is this, See that your Souls be sincrely established in
the Belief of this Judgment and everlasting Life: For if you do not soundly
believe it, you will not seriously prepare for it. If you have the Judgment and
Belief of an Infidel, you cannot have the Heart or the Life of a Christian.
Unbelief shuts out the most of the World from Heaven: see that it do not so by
you. If you say you cannot believe what you would: I answer, Feed not your
Unbelief by Wilfulness or Unreasonableness; use God's Means to overcome it, and
shut not your Eyes against the Light, and then try the Issue, Heb. 3. 12, 13,
15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

The second Direction. Labor diligently to have a sound Understanding of the
Nature of the Laws and Judgment of God. On what Terms it is that he deals
with Mankind: and on what Terms he will judge them to Life or Death: and what
the Reward and Punishment is. For if you know not the Law by which you must be
judged, you cannot know how to prepare for the Judgment. Study the Scripture
therefore, and mark who they be the God promises to save, and who they be that
he threatens to condemn. For according to that Word will the Judgment pass.

The third Direction. See that you take it as the very Business of your Lives,
to make ready for that Day. Understand that you have no other Business in the
World, but what does necessarily depend on this. What else have you to do, but
to provide for everlasting, and to use Means to sustain your own Bodies and
others, of purpose for this Work, till it be happily done? Live therefore as
Men that make this the main Scope and Care of their Lives; and let all things
else come in but on the by. Remember every Morning when you awake, that you
must spend that Day in Preparation for your Account, and that God does give it
you for that end. When you go to Bed, examine your Hearts, what you have done
that Day in the Preparation for your last Day: And take that time as lost which
does nothing to this end.

The fourth Direction. Use frequently to think of the Certainty, Nearness and
Dreadfulness of that Day, to keep Life in your Affections and Endeavors, lest
by Inconsiderateness your Souls grow stupid and negligent. Otherwise, because
it is out of the sight, the Heart will be apt to grow hardened and secure. And
do not think of it slightly, as a common thing, but purposely set your selves
to think of it, that it may rouse you up to such Affections and Endeavors as
in some measure are answerable to the Nature of the thing.

The fifth Direction. Labor to have a lively Feeling on thy Heart, of the Evil
and Weight of that Sin which thou art guilty of, and of the Misery into which
it has brought thee, and would further bring thee if thou be not delivered,
and so to feel the Need of a Deliverer. This must prepare thee to partake of
Christ now; and if thou partake not of him now, thou can not be saved by him
then. It is these Souls that now make light of their Sin and Misery, that must
then (...) them so heavy, as to be pressed by them into the internal Flames.
And those that now feel little need of a Savior, they shall then have none to
save them, when they feel their Need.

The sixth Direction. Understand and believe the sufficiency of that Ransom and
Satisfaction to Justice, which Christ has made for thy Sins and for the World,
and how freely and universally it is offered in the Gospel. Thy Sin is not
uncurable or unpardonable, nor thy Misery remediless; God has provided a
Remedy in his Son Christ, and brought it so near thy Hands, that nothing but
thy neglecting, or wilful refusing it, can deprive thee of the Benefit. Settle
thy Soul in this Belief.

The seventh Direction. Understand and believe, that for all Christ's
Satisfaction, there is an absolute Necessity of ^ound Faith and Repentance to
be in thy own self, before thou can be a Member of him, or be pardoned,
adopted or justified by his Blood. He died not for final Infidelity and
Impenitency, as predominant in any-Soul. As the Law of his Father which
occasioned his Suffering, required perfect Obedience or Suffering: So his own
Law, which he has made for the Conveyance of his Benefits, does require yet
true Faith and Repentance of Men themselves, before they shall be pardoned by
him; and sincere Obedience and Perseverance, before they shall be glorified.

The eight Direction. Rest not therefore in an unrenewed, unsanctified State;
that is, till this Faith and Repentance be wrought on thy own Soul, and thou be
truly broken off from thy former sinsul Course, and from all things in this
World; and art dedicated, devoted and resigned unto God. Seeing this Change
must be made, and these Graces must be had, or thou must certainly perish: in
the Fear of God, see that thou give no ease to thy Mind till thou art thus
changed. Be content with nothing till this be done. Delay not another Day. How
can thou live merrily, or sleep quietly in such a Condition, as if thou
should die in it, thou should perish for ever? Especially when thou art
every Hour uncertain whether thou shall see another Hour, and not be presently
snatched away by Death. Methinks while thou art in so sad a Case, which way
ever thou art going, or whatever thou art doing, it should still come into thy
Thoughts, O what if I should die before I be regenerate, and have part in
Christ!

The ninth Direction. Let it be the daily Care of thy Soul, to mortify thy
fleshly Desires, and overcome this World; and live as in a continual Conflict
with Satan, which will not be ended till thy Life do end. If any thing destroy
thee by drawing away thy Heart from God, it will be thy carnal Self, thy
fleshly Desires, and the Allurements of this World, which is the Matter that
they feed upon. This therefore must be the earnest. Work of thy Life to subdue
this Flesh, and set light by this World, and resist the Devil, that by these
would destroy thee. It is the common Case of miserable Hypocrites, that at
first they list themselves under Christ as for a Fight, but they presently
forget their State and Work; and when they are once in their own Conceit
regenerate, they think themselves so safe, that there is no farther Danger; and
thereupon they do lay down their Arms, and take that which they miscall their
Christian Liberty, and indulge and please that Flesh whch they promised to
mortify, and close with the World which they promised to contemn, and so give
up themselves to the Devil, whom they promised to fight against. If once you
apprehend that all your Religion lies in mere Believing, that all shall go
well with you, and that the Bitterness of Death is past, and in a forbearance
of some disgraceful Sins, and being much in the Exercise of your Gifts, and in
external Ways of Duty, and giving God a cheap and plausible Obedience in those
things only which the Flesh can spare; you are then fallen into that deceitful
Hypocrisy, which will as surely condemn you, as open Profaneness, if you get
not out of it. You must live as in a Fight, or you cannot overcome. You must
live loose from all things in this World, if you will be ready for another. You
must not live after the Flesh, but mortify it by the Spirit, if you would not
die, but live for ever, Romans 8. 13. These things are not indifferent, but of
flat Necessity.

The tenth Direction. Do all your Works as Men that must be judged for them. It
is not enough (at least in point of Duty and Comfort) that you judge this
Preparation in general to be the main Business of your Lives, but you should
also order your particular Actions by these Thoughts, and measure them by their
Respects to this approaching Day. Before you venture on them, enquire whether
they will bear weight in Judgment, and be sweet or bitter when they are brought
to Trial; both for Matter and Manner, this must be observed. O that you would
remember this when Temptations are upon you, when you are tempted to give up
your Minds to the World, and drown your selves in earthly Cares: Will you
bethink you soberly whether you would hear of this at Judgment, and whether the
World will be then as sweet as now, and whether this be the best Preparation
for your Trial? When you are tempted to be drunk, or to spend your precious
time in Alehouses, or vain unprofitable Company, or at Cards or Dice, or any
sinful or needless Sports; bethink you then, whether this will be comfortable
at the reckoning? and whether time be no more worth to one that is so near
Eternity, and must make so strict an Account of his Hours? and whether there be
not many better Works before you, in which you might spend your time to your
greater Advantage, and to your greater Comfort when it comes to a review? When
you are tempted to Wantonness, Fernication, or any other fleshly Intemperance,
bethink you soberly, with what Face these Actions will appear at Judgment, and
whether they will be then pleasant or displeasant to you. So when you are
tempted to neglect the daily Worshipping of God in your Families, and the
catechizing and teaching of your Children or Servants, especially on the Lord's
Day, bethink your selves then, what account you will give of this to Christ,
when he that entrusted you with the Care of your Children and Servants, shall
call you to a reckoning for the Performance of that Trust?

The like must be remembered in the very manner of our Duties. How diligently
should a Minister study; how earnestly should he persuade; how unweariedly
should he bear all Oppositions and ungrateful Returns; and how carefully should
he watch over each particular Soul of his Charge (as far as is possible) when
he remember that he must shortly be accountable for all in Judgment? and how
importunate should we all be with Sinners for their Conversion, when we
consider that we our selves also must shortly be judged? Can a Man be cold and
dead in Prayer, that has any true Apprehension of that Judgment upon his Mind,
where he must be accountable for all his Prayers and Performances? O remember,
and seriously remember, when you stand before the Minister to hear the Word,
and when you are on your Knees to God in Prayer, in what a manner that same
Person, even your selves, must shortly stand at the Bar of the dreadful God!
Did these Thoughts get thoroughly to Men's Hearts, they would awaken them out of
their sleepy Devotions, and acquaint them that it is a serious Business to be a
Christian. How careful should we be of our Thoughts and Words, if we
believingly remembered that we must be accountable for them all! How carefully
should we consider what we do with our Riches, and with all that God gives us?
and how much more largely should we expend it for his Service in Works of Piety
and Charity, if we believingly remembered that we must be judged according to
what we have done, and give account of every Talent that we receive? Certainly
the believing Consideration of Judgment, might make us all better Christians
than we are, and keep our Lives in a more innocent and profitable Frame.

The eleventh Direction. As you will certainly renew your Failings in this
Life, so be sure that you daily renew your Repentance, and fly daily to Christ
for a renewed Pardon, that no Sin may leave its sting in your Souls. It is not
your first Pardon that will serve the turn for your latter Sins. Not that you
must purpose to sin, and purpose to repent when you have done, as a Remedy: for
that is an hypocritical and wicked Purpose of Repenting, which is made a Means
to maintain us in our Sins; but Sin must be avoided as far as we can; and
Repentance and Faith in the Blood of Christ must remedy that which we could not
avoid. The Righteousness of Pardon in Christ's Blood is useful to us only so
far as we are Sinners, and comes in where our imperfect inherent Righteousness
does come short; but must not be purposely chosen before Innocence: I mean, we
must rather choose as far as we can, to obey and be innocent, than to sin and
be pardoned, if we were sure of Pardon.

The twelfth Direction. In this vigilant, obedient, penitent Course, with
Confidence upon God as a Father, rest upon the Promise of Acceptance and
Remission, through the Merits and Intercession of him that redeemed you: Look
up in hope to the Glory that is before you, and believe that God will make good
his Word, and the patient Expectation of the Righteous shall not be in vain.
Cheerfully hold on in the Work that you have begun: and as you serve a better
Master than you did before your Change, so serve him with more Willingness,
Gladness and Delight. Do not entertain hard Thoughts of him, or of his Service,
but rejoice in your unspeakable Happiness of being admitted into his Family and
Favor through Christ. Do not serve him in drooping Dejection and
Discouragement, but with Love, and Joy, and filial Fear. Keep in the Communion
of his Saints, where he is cheerfully and faithfully praised and honored, and
where is the greatest visible Similitude of Heaven upon Earth; especially in
the Celebration of the Sacrament of Christ's Supper, where he seals up a
renewed Pardon in his Blood, and where unanimously we keep the Remembrance of
his Death until he come. Do not cast your selves out of the Communion of the
Saints, from whom to be cast out by just Censure and Exclusion, is a dreadful
Emblem and Forerunner of the Judgment to come, where the Ungodly shall be cast
out of the Presence of Christ and his Saints for ever.

I have now finished the Directions, which I tender to you for your Preparation
for the Day of the Lord; and withal my whole Discourse on this weighty Point.
What Effect all this shall have upon your Hearts, the Lord knows; it is not in
my Power to determine. If you are so far blinded and hardened by Sin and Satan,
as to make light of all this, or coldly to commend the Doctrine, while you go
on to the End in your carnal worldly Condition as before; I can say no more,
but tell thee again that Judgment is near, when thou will bitterly bewail all
this too late. And among all the rest of the Evidence that comes in against
thee, this Book will be one which shall testify to thy Face before Angels and
Men, that thou wast told of that Day, and entreated to prepare.

But if the Lord shall show thee so much Mercy as to open thy Eyes, and break
in upon thy Heart, and by sober Consideration turn it to himself, and cause
thee faithfully to take the Warning that has been give thee, and to obey these
Directions, I dare assure thee from the Word of the Lord, that this judgment
which will be so dreadful to the Ungodly, and the Beginning of their endless
Terror and Misery, will be as joyful to thee, and the Beginning of thy Glory.
The Savior that thou have believed in and sincerely obeyed, will not condemn
thee, Psalm. 1. 5, 6. Romans 8. 1. John 3. 16. It is part of his Business to
justify thee before the World, and to glorify his Merits, his Kingly Power, his
Holiness, and his rewarding Justice in thy Absolution and Salvation. He will
account it a righteous thing to recompense Tribulation to thy Troublers, and
Rest to thy self; when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his
Mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them that know not God, and
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with
everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of
his Power: Even then shall he come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be
admired in all them that believe in that Day; even because his Servants
Testimony, and his Spirits among them was believed, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
That Day will be the great Marriage of the Lamb, and the Reception of thee, and
all the Saints into the Glory of thy Beloved, to which they had a Right at
their first Consent and Contract upon Earth: And when the Bridegroom comes,
thou who art ready shall go into the Marriage, when the Door shall be shut
against the sleepy negligent World; and though they cry, Lord, Lord, open to
us, they shall be repulsed with a Verily I know you not, Mat. 25. 10, 11, 12,
13. For this Day which others fear, may thou long, and hope, and pray, and
wait, and comfort thy self in all Troubles with the Remembrance of it, 1 Cor.
15. 55, 56, 57, 58. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17, 18. If thou were ready to be offered to
Death for Christ, or when the time of thy Departing is at hand, thou may
look back on the good Fight which thou have fought, and on the Course which
thou have finished, and on the Faith which then have kept, and may
confidently conclude, that henceforth there is laid up for thee a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give thee at that Day;
and not to thee only, but unto all them also that love his Appearing, 2 Timothy 4.
6, 7, 8. Even so, come Lord Jesus, Rev. 22. 20.

FINIS.
The Danger of slighting Christ and his Gospel.
Mat. 22. 5. But they made light of it.
THE blessed Son of God, that thought not enough to die for the World, but
himself also be the Preacher of Grace and Salvation, does comprize in this
Parable the Sum of his Gospel. By the King that is here said to make the
Marriage, is meant God the Father that sent his Son into the World to cleanse
them from their Sins, and espouse them to himself. By his Son for whom the
Marriage is made, is meant the Lord Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God, who
took to his Godhead the Nature of Man, that he might be capable of being their
Redeemer when they had lost themselves in Sin. By the Marriage is meant the
Conjunction of Christ to the Soul of Sinners, when he gives up himself to them
to be their Savior, and they give up themselves to him as his redeemed Ones,
to be saved and ruled by him; the Perfection of which Marriage will be at the
Day of Judgment, when the Conjunction between the whole Church and Christ shall
be solemnized. The Word here translated Marriage, rather signifies the
Marriage Feast; and the meaning is, that the World is invited by the Gospel to
come in and partake of Christ and Salvation, which comprehends both Pardon,
Justification and Right to Salvation, and all other Privileges of the Members
of Christ. The Invitation is God's Offer of Christ and Salvation in the Gospel;
the Servants that invite them are the Preachers of the Gospel, who are sent
forth by God to that end; the Preparation for the Feast there mentioned, is the
Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and the enacting of a Law of Grace, and opening
(...) Way for revolting Sinners to return to God. There is a mention of sending
second Messengers, because Go^ uses not to take the first Denial, but to
exercise his Patience till Sinners are obstinate. The first Persons invited are
the Jews; upon their obstinate Refusal they are sentenced to Punishment; and
the Gentiles are invited, and not only invited, but by powerful Preaching, and
Miracles, and effectual Grace compelled, that is, infallibly prevailed with to
come in. The Number of them is so great, that the House is filled with the
Guests; many come sincerely, not only looking at the Pleasure of the Feast,
that is, at the Pardon of Sin, and Deliverance from the Wrath of God, but also
at the Honor of the Marriage, that is, of the Redeemer, and their Profession
by giving up themselves to an holy Conversation: but some come in only for the
Feast, that is, Justification by Christ, having not the Wedding Garment of
sound Resolution for Obedience in their Life, and looking only at themselves in
believing, and not to the Glory of their Redeemer: and these are sentenced to
everlasting Misery, and speed as ill as those that came not in at all; seeing a
Faith that will not work, is but like that of the Devil; and they that look to
be pardoned and saved by it, are mistaken, as James shows, chapter 2. 24.

The Words of my Text contain a Narration of the ill Entertainment that the
Gospel finds with many to whom it is sent, even after a first and second
Invitation They make light of it, and are taken up with other things. Though it
be the Jews that were first guilty they have too many followers among us
Gentiles to this Day.

Doct. For all the wonderful Love and Mercy that God has manifested in giving
his Son to be the Redeemer of the World, and which the Son has manifested in
redeeming them by his Blood; for all his full Preparation, by being a
sufficient Sacrifice for the Sins of all; for all his personal Excellencies,
and that full and glorious Salvation that he has procured; and for all his
free Offers of these, and frequent and earnest Invitation of Sinners: yet many
do make light of all this, and prefer their worldly Enjoyments before it. The
ordinary Entertainment of all is by Contempt.

Not that all do so, or that all continue to do so who were once guilty of it:
for God has his Chosen whom he will compel to come in. But till the Spirit of
Grace overpower the dead and obstinate Hearts of Men, they hear the Gospel as a
common Story, and the great Matters contained in it go not to the Heart.

The Method in which I shall handle this Doctrine is this.

1. I shall show you what it is that Men make light of.

2. What this Sin of making light of it is.

3. The Cause of the Sin.

4. The Use of the Doctrine.

1. The thing that carnal Hearers make light of, is, 1. The Doctrine of the
Gospel it self, which they hear regardlesly. 2. The Benefits offered them
therein: which are, 1. Christ himself. 2. The Benefits which he gives.

Concerning Christ himself, the Gospel, 1. Declares his Person and Nature, and
the great things that he has done and suffered for Man; his redeeming him from
the Wrath of God by his Blood, and procuring a Grant of Salvation with himself.
Furthermore, the same Gospel makes an Offer of Christ to Sinners, that if they
will accept him on his easy and reasonable Terms, he will be their Savior, the
Physician of their Souls, their Husband and their Head.

2. The Benefits that he offers them, are these. 1. That with these blessed
Relations to him, himself, and Interest in him, they shall have the Pardon of
all their Sins past, and be saved from God's Wrath, and be set in a sure way of
obtaining a Pardon for all the Sins that they shall commit hereafter, so they
do but obey sincerely, and turn not again unto the Rebellion of their
Unregeneracy. 2. They shall have the Spirit to become their Guide and
Sanctifier, and to dwell i^ their Souls, and help them against their Enemies
and conform them more and more to his Image, and heal their Diseases, and bring
them back to God. 3. They shall have Right to everlasting Glory when this Life
is ended, and shall be raised up thereto at the last; besides many excellent
Privileges in the Way, in Means, Preservation and Provision, and the Foretaste
of what they shall enjoy hereafter: all these Benefits the Gospel offers to
them that will have Christ on his reasonable Terms. The Sum of all is in 1 John
5. 11, 12. This is the Record that God has given us eternal Life, and this
Life is in his Son: He that has the Son has Life, and he that has not the
Son has not Life.

II. What this Sin of making light of the Gospel is? 1. To make light of the
Gospel, is to take no great heed to what is spoken, as if it were not a certain
Truth, or else were a Matter that little concerned them, or as if God had not
written these things for them. 2. When the Gospel does not affect Men, or go to
their Hearts* but though they seem to attend to what is said, yet Men are not
awakened by it from their Security, nor does it work in any measure such holy
Passion in their Souls, as Matters of such everlasting Consequence should do;
this is making light of the Gospel of Salvation. When we tell Men what Christ
has done and suffered for their Souls, and it scarce moves them* We tell them
of keen and cutting Truths, but nothing will pierce them; we can make them
hear, but we cannot make them feel; our Words take up in the Porch of their
Ears and Fancies, but will not enter into the inward Parts; as if we spoke to
Men that had ^o Hearts or Feeling; this is a making light of Christ and
Salvation. Acts 28. 26, 27. Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand;
seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive: For the Heart of this People is
waxen gross, and their Ears are dull of hearing, their Eyes ^re closed, etc.

3. When Men have no high Estimation of Christ and Salvation, but whatsoever
they may say with their Tongues, or dreamingly and speculatively believe, yet
^n their serious and practical Thoughts, they have a higher Estimation of the
Matters of this World, than ^hey have of Christ and the Salvation that he has
purchased; this is a making light of him. When Men ^ccount the Doctrine of
Christ to be but a Matter of Words and Names, as Gallio, Acts 18. 4. or as
Festus, Acts 25. 19. a superstitious Matter about one Jesus who was dead, and
Paul says is alive: or ask the Preachers of the Gospel as the Athenians, Acts
17. 18. What will ^^is Babbler say? This is a Contempt of Christ.

4. When Men are informed of the Truths of the Gospel, and on what Terms Christ
and his Benefits may be had, and how it is the Will of God that they should
^i^ve and accept the Offer; and that he commands them ^o do it upon Pain of
Damnation; and yet Men will ^ot consent, unless they could have Christ on Terms
of their own: they will not part with their worldly Con^ents, nor lay down
their Pleasures and Profits, and Ho^our at his Feet, as being content to take
so much of them only as he will give them back, and as is consistent with his
Will and Interest, but think it is a hard ^aying, that they must forsake all in
Resolution for Christ; this is a making light of him and their Salvation. When
Men might have part in him and all his Benefits (...) they would, and they will
not unless they may keep ^he World too; and are resolved to please their Flesh,
whatever comes of it; this is a high Contempt of Christ and everlasting Life.
Mat. 13. 21, 22. Luke 18. 23. you may find Examples of such as I here describe.

5. When Men will promise fair, and profess their Willingness to have Christ on
his Terms, and to forsake all for him; but yet do stick to the World and their
sinful Courses; and when it comes to Practice, will not be removed by all that
Christ has done and said: this is making light of Christ and Salvation. Jer.
4^. 5. compared with 43. 2.

III. The Causes of this Sin are the next thing to be enquired after. It may
seem a Wonder that ever Men that have the use of their Reason, should be so
sottish (...) to make light of Matters of such Consequence. But the Cause is;

1. Some Men understand not the very Sense of the Words of the Gospel when they
hear it, and how (...) they be taken with that which they understand not?
Though we speak to them in plain English, and study to speak it as plain as we
can; yet People have so estranged themselves from God, and the Matters of their
own Happiness, that they know not what we say; as if we spoke in another
Language, and as if they were under that Judgment, Isa. 28. 11. with stammering
Lips, and with another Tongue will he speak to the People.

2. Some that do understand the Words that we speak* yet because they are
carnal, understand not the Matt^ for the natural Man receives not the things
of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. They are earthly, and these things are heavenly, John
3. 12. The things of the Spirit are not well known by bare hearsay but by a
spiritual Taste, which none have but those the are taught by the Holy Ghost, 1
Cor. 2. 12. that we man know the things that are given us of God.

3. A carnal Mind apprehends not a Sutableness in these spiritual and
heavenly things to his Mind, and therefore he sets light by them, and has no
mind of them. When you tell him of everlasting Glory, he ^eareth you as if you
were persuading him to go play ^ith the Sun: they are Matters of another World,
and ^ut of his Element; and therefore he has no more De^ight in them than a
Fish would have to be in the fairest ^eadow, or than a Swine has in a Jewel,
or a Dog ^n a piece of Gold: They may be good to others, but ^e cannot
apprehend them as suitable to him, because ^e has a Nature that is otherwise
inclined: he savour^th not the things of the Spirit, Romans 8. 5.

4. The main Cause of the slighting of Christ and ^alvation, is a secret Root
of Unbelief in Men's Hearts. Whatsoever they may pretend, they do not soundly
and thoroughly believe the Word of God: they are ^aught in general to say, the
Gospel is true; but they never saw the Evidence of its Truth so far as
thoroughly to ^erswade them of it; nor have they got their Souls ^ttled on the
Infallibility of God's Testimony, nor con^dered of the Truth of the particular
Doctrines reveal^d in the Scripture, so far as soundly to believe them. (...)
did you all but soundly believe the Words of this Gospel, ^f the Evil of Sin,
of the Need of Christ, and what ^e has done for you, and what you must be and
do if ^ver you will be saved by him, and what will become of ^ou for ever if
you do it not; I dare say, it would ^re the Contempt of Christ, and you would
not make (...) light of the Matters of your Salvation. But Men do ^t believe
while they say they do, and would face us ^own that they do, and verily think
that they do them^^lves. There is a Root of Bitterness, and an evil Heart (...)
Unbelief, that makes them depart from the living ^od, Heb. 2. 12. and 4. 1, 2,
6. Tell any Man in this ^ngregation, that he shall have a Gift of 10000 pounds,
^he will but go to London for it; if he believe you, he ^ll go; but if he
believe not, he will not: and if he will not go, you may be sure he believes
not, supposing that he is able. I know a slight Belief may stand with a wicked
Life: Such as Men have of the Truth of a Prognostication, it may be true and it
may be false; but a true and sound Belief is not consistent with so great
Neglect of the things that are believed.

5. Christ and Salvation are made light of by the World because of their
desperate hardness of Hea^^. The Heart is hard naturally, and by Custom in
sinning made more hard, especially by long abuse of Mercy, and neglect of the
means of Grace, and resisting the Spirit of God. Hence it is that Men are
turned into such Stones: and till God cure them of the Stone of the Heart, no
wonder if they ^eel not what they know, or regard not what we say, but make
light of all; (...) hard preaching a Stone into tears, or making a Rock to
tremble. You may stand over a dead Body long enough, and say to it, O thou
Carcass, when thou have (...) rotting and mouldred to Dust till the
Resurrection, God will then call thee to account for thy Sin, and cast thee
into everlasting Fire, before you can make it feel what you say* or fear the
Misery that is never so truly threatened* When Men's Hearts are like the Highway
that is trodd^^ to hardness by long custom in Sinning, or like the Clay that is
hardened to a Stone by the heat of thos^ Mercies that should have melted them
into Repentance* when they have Consciences seared with an hot Iro^ as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 4. 2. no wonder then (...) they be past feeling, and
working all Uncleanness wi^ greediness, do make light of Christ and everlasting
Gl^^ry. O that this were not the Case of too many of (...) Hearers! Had we but
living Souls to speak to, the^ would hear, and feel, and not make light of what
(...) sa^. I know they are naturally alive, but they (...) spiritually dead, as
the Scripture witnesses, Ephesians. 2^ O if there were but one spark of the Life
of Grace them, the Doctrine of Salvation by Jesus Christ wo^ appear to them to
be the weightiest Business in (...) World. O how confident should I be
methinks, to prevail with Men, and to take them off this World, and bring them
to mind the Matter of another World, if I spoke but to Men that had Life and
Sense and Reason; but when we speak to Blocks and dead Men, how should we be
regarded? O how sad a Case are these Souls in, that are fallen under this
fearful Judgment of s^iritual Madness and Deadness! To have a blind (...), and
an hard Heart, to be sottish and senseless, (...) ^4. 12. John 12. 40. lest they
should be converted, and their Sins should be forgiven them.

6. Christ and Salvation are made light of ^y the World, because they are
wholly enslaved to their Sense, and taken up with lower things: the Matters of
another World are out of sight, and so far from their Senses, that they cannot
regard them; but present things are nearer them, in their Eyes, and in their
Hands: there must be a living Faith to prevail over Sense, before Men can be so
taken with things that are not seen, though they have the Word of God for their
Security, as to neglect and let go things that are still before their Eyes.
Sense works with great Advantage, and therefore does much in resisting Faith
where it is. No wonder then if it carry all before it, where there is no true
and lively Faith to resist, and to lead the Soul to higher things: this Cause
of making light of Christ and Sal^ation, is expressed here in my Text; One went
to his ^arm, and another to his Merchandise: Men have Hou^es and Lands to look
after: they have Wife and Children to mind, they have their Body and outward
Estate ^o regard; therefore they forget that they have a God, (...) Redeemer, a
Soul to mind; these Matters of the World are still with them. They see these,
but they (...) not God, nor Christ, nor their Souls, nor everlasting Glory.
These things are near at hand, and therefore work ^aturally, and so work
forcibly; but the other are thought ^n as a great way off, and therefore too
distant to work ^n their Affections, or be at the present so much regarded by
them. Their Body has Life and Sense; and therefore if they want Meat, or
Drink, or Clothes, will feel their Want, and tell them of it, and give them no
rest till their Wants be supplied; and therefore they cannot make light of
their bodily Necessities: but their Souls in spiritual Respects are dead, and
therefore ^eel not their Wants, but will let them alone in their greatest
Necessities; and be as quiet when they are starved and languishing to
Destruction, as if all were well and nothing ailed them. And hereupon poor
People are wholly taken up in providing for the Body, as if they had nothing
else to mind. They have their Trades and Callings to follow, and so much to do
from Morning to Night, that they can find no time for Matters of Salvation.
Christ would teach them, but they have no leisure to hear him: the Bible is
before them, but they cannot have while to read it: A Minister is in the Town
with them, but they cannot have while to go to enquire of him what they should
do to be saved: And when they do hear, their Hearts are so full of the World,
and carried away with these lower Matters, that they cannot mind the things
which they hear. They are so full of the Thoughts and Desires, and Cares of
this World, that there is no room to pour into them the Water of Life: The
Cares of the World do choke the Word, and make it become unfruitful, Matthew. 13.
22. Men cannot serve two Masters, God and Mammon, but they will lean to the
one, and despise the other, Matthew. 6. 24. He that loves the World, the Love of
the Father is not in him, 1 Je^^ 2. 15, 16. Men cannot choose but set light by
Christ and Salvation, while they set so much by any thing on Earth. It is that
which is highly esteemed among Men, is abominable in the Sight of God, Luke 16.
15. O this is the Ruin of many thousand Souls! It would grieve the Heart of
any honest Christian, to see how eagerly this vain World is followed
everywhere, and how little Men set by Christ, and the World to come; (...)
compare the Care that Men have for the World, ^ith the Care of their Souls; and
the time that they ^y out on the World, with that time they lay out ^r their
Salvation: To see how the World fills their ^ouths, their Hands, their Houses,
their Hearts; ^^d Christ has little more than a bare Title: to come (...)
their Company, and hear no Discourse but of the ^orld; to come into their
Houses, and hear and see no^^ing but for the World, as if this World would last
^r ever, or would purchase them another. When I ^k sometime the Ministers of
the Gospel how their ^^bours succeed, they tell me, People continue still the
(...), and give up themselves wholly to the World, so that (...) mind not what
Ministers say to them, nor will give any (...) Entertainment to the Word, and
all because of the delud^g World. And O that too many Ministers themselves ^d
not make light of that Christ whom they preach, ^eing drawn away with the Love
of this World! In a lord, Men of a worldly Disposition do judge of things,
^cording to worldly Advantages; therefore Christ (...) slighted, Isa. 53. 3. He
is despised and rejected of Men; (...) hide their faces from him, and esteem
him not, as see^g no Beauty or Comeliness in him, that they should desire, ^n.

7. Christ and Salvation are made light of, because ^en do not soberly consider
of the Truth and Weight of ^ese necessary things. They suffer not their Minds
(...) long to dwell upon them, till they procure a due ^steem, and deeply
affect their Heart; did they be^^eve them, and not consider of them, how should
they ^ork? O when Men have Reason given them to think and consider of the
things that most concern them, and yet they will not use it, this causes their
Con^^mpt.

8. Christ and Salvation are made light of, because ^en were never sensible of
their Sin and Misery, and ex^^am Necessity of Christ and his Salvation: Their
Eyes ^ere never opened to see themselves as they are; nor their Hearts soundly
humbled in the Sense of their Condition: if this were done, they would soon be
brough^ to value a Savior. A truly broken Heart can no mo^ make light of
Christ and Salvation, than a hungr^ Man of his Food, or a sick Man of the Means
the would give him case: but till then, our Wo^^ cannot have Access to their
Hearts. While (...) and Misery is made light of, Christ and Salvati^^ will be
made light of; but when these are perceiv^ an intolerable Burden, then nothing
will serve the (...) but Christ. Till Men be truly humbled, they (...) venture
Christ and Salvation for a Lust, for a lit^ worldly Gain, even for less than
nothing: but wh^ God has illuminated them, and broken their Hea^ then they
would give a World for a Christ; then the must have Christ, or they die; all
things then are Loss (...) Dung to them in regard of the excellent Knowledge of
(...) Phil. 3. 8. When they are once pricked in their Hear^ for Sin and Misery,
then they cry out, Men and Breth^ what shall we do? Acts 2. 37. When they are
awake^^ed by God's Judgments, as the poor Jailer, (...) 16. 29. then they cry
out, Sirs, what shall I do to (...) saved? This is the Reason why God will
bring Men (...) low by Humiliation, before he bring them to Salvat^^^.

9. Men take occasion to make light of Christ, (...) the Commonness of the
Gospel; because they do hear (...) it every Day, the frequency is an Occasion
to dull the Affections; I say, an Occasion, for it is no just Cau^ Were it a
Rarity, it might take more with them; (...) now, if they hear a Minister preach
nothing but the saving Truths, they say, We have these every Day; the make not
light of their Bread or Drink, their Hea^ or Life, because they possess them
every day; they man not light of the Sun, because it shines every day; least
they should not, for the Mercy is the greater: (...) Christ and Salvation are
made light of, because the hea^ of them often; This is, say they, a good plain
(...) Se^mon: Pea^ls are trod in the dirt where they are (...); they loath this
dry Manna, Prove. 27. 7. The ^ull Soul loathes the Honeycomb; but to the Hungry
Soul ^very bitter thing is sweet.

10. Christ and Salvation are made light of, because of this disjunctive
Presumption, either that he is sure enough theirs already, and God that is so
merciful, and christ that has suff^red so much for them, is surely resolved to
save them, or else it may easily be obtained at any time, if it be not yet so.
A conceited Facility to ^ave a part in Christ and Salvation at any time, does
occasion Men to make light of them. It is true, that Grace is free, and the
Offer is universal, according to ^he extent of the preaching of the Gospel; and
it is ^rue that Men may have Christ when they will; that is, when they are
willing to have him on his Terms: but he that has promised thee Christ, if
thou be willing, has not promised to make thee willing; and if thou art not
willing now, how can thou think thou shall be willing hereafter? If thou
can make thine own Heart willing, why is it not done now? Can you do it
better when Sin has more hardened it, and God may have given thee over to thy
felf? O Sinners, you might do much, though you are not able of your selves to
come in, if you would now subject your selves to the working of the Spirit, and
set in while the Gales of Grace continue! But did you know what a hard and
impossible thing it is to be so much as willing to have Christ and Grace, when
the Heart is given over to it self, and the Spirit has withdrawn its former
Invitations, you would not be so confident of your own Strength to believe and
repent; nor would you make light of Christ upon such foolish Confidence. If
indeed it be so easy a Matter as you imagine for a Sinner to believe and repent
at any time; how comes it to pass that it is done by so few, but most of the
World do perish in their Impenitency, when they have all the Helps and Means
that we can afford them? It is true, the thing is very reasonable and easy in
it self to a pure Nature; but while Man is blind and dead, these things are in
a sort impossible to him, which are never so easy to others. It is the easiest
and sweetest Life in the World to a gracious Soul to live in the Love of God,
and the delightful Thoughts of the Life to come, where all their Hope and
Happiness lies: But to worldly carnal Hearts it is as easy to remove a
Mountain, as to bring them to this. However, these Men are their own
Condemners: for (...) they think it so easy a Matter to repent and believe, and
so to have Christ and Right to Salvation, then have they no excuse for
neglecting this which they thought so easy. O wretched impenitent Soul! what
mean you to say, when God shall ask you, Why did you not repent and love your
Redeemer above the World, when you thought it (...) easy that you could do it
at any time?

IV. Use 1. We come now to the Application. And hence you may be informed of
the Blindness and Folly of all carnal Men: how contemptible are their Judgments
that think Christ and Salvation contemptible: and how little Reason there is
why any should be moved by them, or discouraged by any of their Scorns or
Contradictions.

How shall we sooner know a Man to be a Fool, than if he knows no difference
between Dung and Gold? Is there such a thing as madness in the Word, if that
Man be not mad, that sets light by Christ and his own Salvation, while he daily
toils for the Dung of the Earth* And yet what pity is it to see that a Company
of poor ignorant Souls will be ashamed of Godliness, if such Men as these do
but deride them! Or will think hardly of a holy Life, if such as these do speak
against it! Hearers, if you see any set light by Christ and Salvation, do you
set light by that Man's Wit, and by his Words, and hear the Reproaches of a
holy Life, as you would hear the Words of a Madman; not with regard, but with
a Compassion of his Misery.

Use 2. What wonder if we and our preaching be despised, and the best Ministers
complain of ill success, when the Ministry of the Apostles themselves did
succeed no better? What wonder if for all that we can say or do, our Hearers
still set light by Christ and their own Salvation, when the Apostles Hearers
did the same? They that did second their Doctrines by Miracles. If any Men
could have shaken and torn in pieces the Hearts of Sinners, they could have
done it: If any could have laid them at their Feet, and made them all cry out
as some, What shall we do? it would have been they. You may see then that it is
not merely for want of good Preachers that Men make light of Christ and
Salvation: the first News of such a thing as the Pardon of Sin, and the Hopes
of Glory, and the Danger of everlasting Misery, would turn the Hearts of Men
within them, if they were as tractable in spiritual Matters as in temporal: But
alas, it is far otherwise. It must not seem any strange thing, nor must it too
much discourage the Preachers of the Gospel, if when they have said all that
they can devise to say to win the Hearts of Men to Christ, the most do still
slight him; and while they bow the Knee to him, and honor him with their Lips,
do yet set so light by him in their Hearts, as to prefer every fleshly Pleasure
or Commodity before him. It will be thus with many: let us be glad that it is
not thus with all.

Use 3. But for closer Application. Seeing this is the great condemning Sin,
before we enquire after it into the Hearts of our Hearers, it beseems us to
begin at home, and see that we who are Preachers of the Gospel be not guilty of
it our selves. The Lord forbid that they that have undertaken the sacred Office
of revealing the Excellencies of Christ to the World, should make light of him
themselves, and slight that Salvation which they do daily preach. The Lord
knows we are all of us so low in our Estimation of Christ, and do this great
Work so negligently, that we have cause to be ashamed of our best Sermons; but
should this Sin prevail in us, we were the most miserable of all Men. Brethren,
I love not Censoriousness; yet dare not befriend so vile a Sin in my self or
others under pretense of avoiding it, especially when there is so great
Necessity that it should be healed first in them that make it their Work to
heal it in others. O that there were no cause to complain that Christ and
Salvation are made light of by the Preachers of it! But, 1. Do not the
negligent Studies of some speak it out? 2. Does not their dead and drowsy
Preaching declare it? Do not they make light of the Doctrine they preach, that
do it as if they were half asleep, and feel not what they speak themselves?

3. Does not the Carelessness of some Men's private Endeavors discover it? What
do they for Souls? how slightly do they reprove Sin? how little do they when
they are out of the Pulpit for the saving of Men's Souls?

4. Does not the continued Neglect of those things wherein the Interest of
Christ consists discover it? 1. The Churches Purity and Reformation; 2. Its
Unity.

5. Does not the covetous and worldly Lives of too many discover it, losing
Advantages for Men's Souls for a little Gain to themselves? and most of this is
because Men are Preachers before they are Christians, and tell Men of that
which they never felt themselves. Of all Men on Earth, there are few that are
in so sad a Condition as such Ministers: and if indeed they do believe that
Scripture which they preach, methinks it should be terrible to them in their
studying and preaching it.

Use 4. Beloved Hearers; the Office that God has called us to, is, by
declaring the Glory of his Grace, to help under Christ to the saving of Men's
Souls. I hope you think not that I come hither to Day on any other Errand. The
Lord knows I had not set a Foot out of Doors, but in hope to succeed in this
Work for your Souls. I have considered and often considered, what is the matter
that so many thousands should perish when God has done so much for their
Salvation; and I find this that is mentioned in my Text is the Cause. It is one
of the Wonders of the World, that when God hathso loved the World as to send
his Son, and Christ has made a Satisfaction by his Death sufficient for them
all, and offers the Benefits of it so freely to them, even without Money or
Price, that yet the most of the World should perish; yea the most of those that
are thus called by his Word! Why here is the Reason, when Christ has done all
this, Men make light of it. God has showed that he is not unwilling; and
Christ has showed that he is not unwilling that Men should be restored to
God's Favor and be saved; but Men are actually unwilling themselves. God takes
not pleasure in the Death of Sinners, but rather that they return and live,
Ezekiel. 33. 11. But Men take such pleasure in Sin, that they will die before they
will return. The Lord Jesus was content to be their Physician, and has
provided them a sufficient Plaster of his own Blood: but if Men make light of
it, and will not apply it, what wonder if they perish after all? This Scripture
gives us the Reason of their Perdition. This sad Experience tells us the most
of the World is guilty of. It is a most lamentable thing to see how most Men do
spend their Care, their Time, their Pains for known Vanities, while God and
Glory are cast aside: That he who is all, should seem to them as nothing; and
that which is nothing, should seem to them as good as all; that God should set
Mankind in such a Race where Heaven or Hell is their certain End, and that they
should sit down, and loiter, or run after the childish Toys of the World, and
so much forget the Prize that they should run for. Were it but possible for one
of us to see the whole of this Business, as the All-seeing God does; to see at
one View both Heaven and Hell which Men are so near, and see what most Men in
the World are minding, and what they are doing every Day, it would be the
saddest sight that could be imagined. O how should we marvel at their Madness,
and lament their Self-delusion! O poor distracted World! what is it that you
run after? and what is it that you neglect? If God had never told them what
they were sent into the Word to do, or whither they were going, or what was
before them in another World, then they had been excusable; but he has told
them over and over, till they were weary of it. Had he left it doubtful, there
had been some excuse; but it is his sealed Word, and they profess to believe
it, and would take it ill of us if we should question whether they do believe
it or not.

Beloved, I come not to accuse any of you particularly of this Crime: but
seeing it is the commonest Cause of Men's Destruction, I suppose you will judge
it the fittest Matter for our Enquiry, and deserving our greatest Care for the
Cure. To which end I shall, 1. Endeavor the Conviction of the Guilty. 2. Shall
give them such Considerations as may tend to humble and reform them. 3. I shall
conclude with such Direction as may help them that are willing to escape the
destroying Power of this Sin. And for the first, consider,

1. It is the Case of most Sinners to think themselves freest from those Sins
that they are most enslaved to; and one reason why we cannot reform them, is,
because we cannot convince them of their Guilt. It is the Nature of Sin so far
to blind and besool the Sinner, that he knows not what he does, but thinks
he is free from it when it reigns in him, or when he is committing it: it
brings Men to be so much unacquainted with themselves, that they know not
what they think, or what they mean and intend, nor what they love or hate, much
less what they are habituated and disposed to. They are alive to Sin, and dead
to all the Reason, Consideration and Resolution that should recover them, as if
it were only by their sinning that we must know they are alive. May I hope that
you that hear me to Day, are but willing to know the Truth of your Case, and
then I shall be encouraged to proceed to an enquiry. God will judge impartially;
why should not we do so? Let me therefore by these following Questions, try
whether none of you are Slighters of Christ and your own Salvation. And follow
me, I beseech you, by putting them close to your own Hearts, and faithfully
answering them.

1. Things that Men highly value will be remembered, they will be matter of
their freest and sweetest thoughts; this a known Case.

Do not those then make light of Christ and Salvation, that think of them so
seldom and coldly in comparison of other things? Follow thy own Heart Man, and
observe what it daily runs out after; and then judge whether it make not
light of Christ.

We cannot persuade Men to one Hour's sober Consideration what they should do
for an Interest in Christ, or in Thankfulness for his Love, and yet they will
not believe that they make light of him.

2. Things that we highly value will be Matter of our Discourse: The Judgment
and Heart will command the Tongue: Freely and delightfully will our Speech run
after them: this also is a known Case.

Do not those then make light of Christ and Salvation, that shun the mention of
his Name, unless it be in a vain or sinful Use? Those that love not the Company
where Christ and Salvation is much talked of, but think it troublesome precise
Discourse; that had rather hear some merry Jests, or idle Tales, or talk of
their Riches or Business in the World: When you may follow them from Morning to
Night, and scarce have a savoury Word of Christ, but perhaps some slight and
weary mention of him sometimes; judge whether these make not light of Christ and
Salvation. How seriously do they talk of the World, Psalm. 144. 8, 11. and speak
Vanity! but how heartlesly do they make mention of Christ and Salvation?

3. The things that we highly value, we would secure the Possession of, and
therefore would take any convenient Course to have all Doubts and Fears about
them well resolved. Do not those Men then make light of Christ and Salvation,
that have lived 20 or 30 Years in Uncertainty whether they have any part in
these or not, and yet never seek out for the right Resolution of their Doubts?
Are all that hear me this Day certain they shall be saved? O that they were! O
had you not made light of Salvation, you could not so easily bear such
Doubtings of it; you could not rest till you had made it sure, or done your
best to make it sure. Have you no Body to enquire of, that might help you in
such a Work? Why you have Ministers that are purposely appointed to that
Office. Have you gone to them, and told them the Doubtfulness of your Case, and
asked their Help in the judging of your Condition? Alas, Ministers may sit in
their Studies from one Year to another, before ten Persons among 1000 will come
to them on such an Errand! Do not these make light of Christ and Salvation?
When the Gospel pierces the Heart indeed, they cry out, Men and Brethren, what
shall we do to be saved? Acts 16. 30. and ^. 6. trembling and astonished Paul
cries out, Lord, what will thou have me to do? And so did the convinced Jews to
Peter, Acts 2. 37. But when hear we such Questions?

4. The things that we value, do deeply affect us, and some Motions will be in
the Heart according to our Estimation of them. O Sirs, if Men made not light of
these things, what working would there be in the Hearts of all our Hearers?
what strange Affections would it raise in them to hear of the Matters of the
World to come! How would their Hearts melt before the Power of the Gospel! what
Sorrow would be wrought in the Discovery of their Sin! what Astonishment at the
Consideration of their Misery! what unspeakable Joy at the glad Tidings of
Salvation by the Blood of Christ! what Resolution would be raised in them upon
the Discovery of their Duty! O what Hearers should we have if it were not for
this Sin! Whereas now we are liker to weary them, or preach them asleep with
Matters of this unspeakable Moment. We talk to them of Christ and Salvation,
till we make their Heads ache: Little would one think by their careless
Carriage, that they heard and regarded what we said, or thought we spoke at all
to them.

5. Our Estimation of things will be seen in the diligence of our Endeavors.
That which we highliest value, we shall think no pains too great to obtain. Do
not those Men then make light of Christ and Salvation, that think all too much
that they do for them, that murmur at his Service, and think it too grievous
for them to endure? that ask of his Service, as Judas of the Ointment, What
need this waste? cannot Men be saved without so much ado? this is more ado than
needs. For the World they will labor all the Day, and all their Lives; but for
Christ and Salvation they are afraid of doing too much. Let us preach to them
as long as we will, we cannot bring them to relish or resolve upon a Life of
Holiness. Follow them to their Houses, and you shall not hear them read a
Chapter, nor call upon God with their Families once a Day; nor will they allow
him that one Day in seven which he has separated to his Service. But Pleasure,
or worldly Business, or Idleness must have a part. And many of them are so far
hardened, as to reproach them that will not be as mad as themselves. And is not
Christ worth the seeking? Is not everlasting Salvation worth more than all
this? Does not that Soul make light of all these, that thinks his Ease more
worth than they? Let but common Sense judge.

6. That which we most highly value, we think we cannot buy too dear: Christ
and Salvation are freely given, and yet the most of Men go without them,
because they cannot enjoy the World and them together. They are called but to
part with that which would hinder them from Christ, and they will not do it.
They are called but to give God his own, and to resign all to his Will, and let
go the Profits and Pleasures of this World, when they must let go either Christ
or them; and they will not. They think this too dear a Bargain, and say they
cannot spare these things; they must hold their Credit with Men; they must look
to their Estates, how shall they live else? they must have their Pleasure,
whatsoever becomes of Christ and Salvation: As if they could live without
Christ better than without these: as if they were afraid of being Losers by
Christ, or could make a saving Match by losing their Souls to gain the World.
Christ has told us over and over, that if we will not forsake all for him, we
cannot be his Disciples, Luke 14. 33. Far are these Men from forsaking all, and
yet will needs think that they are his Disciples indeed.

7. That which Men highly esteem, they would help their Friend's to as well as
themselves. Do not those Men make light of Christ and Salvation, that can take
so much care to leave their Children Portions in the World, and do so little to
help them to Heaven? that provide outward Necessaries so carefully for their
Families, but do so little to the saving of their Souls? Their neglected
Children and Friends will witness, that either Christ, or their Childrens
Souls, or both were made light of.

8. That which Men highly esteem, they will so diligently seek after, that you
may see it in the success, if it be a Matter within their reach. You may see
how many make light of Christ, by the little Knowledge they have of him, and the
little Communion with him, and Communication from him; and the little, yea,
none of his special Graces in them. Alas, how many Ministers can speak it to
the Sorrow of their Hearts, that many of their People know almost nothing of
Christ, though they hear of him daily, nor know they what they must do to be
saved! If we ask them an account of these things; they answer as if they
understood not what we say to them, and tell us they are no Scholars, and
therefore think they are excusable for their Ignorance. O if these Men had not
made light of Christ and their Salvation, but had bestowed but half so much
Pains to know and enjoy him, as they have done to understand the Matters of
their Trades and Callings in the World, they would not have been so ignorant as
they are: they make light of these things, and therefore will not be at the
Pains to study or learn them. When Men that can learn the hardest Trade in a
few Years, have not learned a Catechism, nor how to understand their Creed,
under twenty or thirty Years Preaching, nor cannot abide to be questioned about
such things; does not this show that they have slighted them in their Hearts?
How will these Despisers of Christ and Salvation be able one Day to look him in
the Face, and to give an account of these Neglects?

Thus much I have spoken in order to your Conviction. Do not some of your
Consciences by this time smite you, and say, I am the Man that have made light
of my Salvation? If they do not, it is because you make light of it still for
all that is said to you. But because, if it be the Will of the Lord, I would
fain have this damning Distemper cured, and am loath to leave you in such a
desperate Condition, if I knew how to remedy ^it, I will give you some
Considerations, which may ^^move you, if you be Men of Reason and
Understanding, to look better about you; and I beseech you weigh them, and make
use of them as we go, and lay open your Hearts to the Work of Grace, and sadly
bethink you what a Case you are in, if you prove such as make light of Christ.

Consider, 1. Thou make light of him that made not light of thee who did
deserve it. Thou was^ worthy of nothing but Contempt. As a Man, what art thou
but a Worm to God? As a Sinner, thou art far viler than a Toad: yet Christ was
so far from making light of thee and the Happiness, that he came down into the
Flesh, and lived a ^ife of Suffering, and offered himself a Sacrifice to the
Justice which thou had provoked, that thy miserable Soul might have a Remedy.
It is no less than Miracles of Love and Mercy that he has showed to us: and
yet shall we slight them after all?

Angels admire them, whom they less concern, 1 Pet. 1. 12. and shall redeemed
Sinners make light of them? What barbarous, yea devilish, yea worse than
devilish Ingratitude is this? the Devils never had a Savior offered them, but
thou have, and do thou yet make light of him?

2. Consider the Work of Man's Salvation by Jesus Christ is the Masterpiece of
all the Works of God, wherein he would have his Love and Mercy to be magnified.
As the Creation declares his Goodness and Power, so does Redemption his
Goodness and Mercy; he has contrived the very Frame of his Worship so, that it
shall much consist in the magnifying of this Work; and after all this, will you
make light of it? His Name is Wonderful, Isa. 9. 6. He did the Work that none
could do, John 15. 24. Greater Love could none show than this, John 15. 13. How
great was the Evil and Misery that he delivered us from! the Good procured for
us! all are Wonders from his Birth to his Ascension; from our new Birth to our
Glorification, all are Wonders of matchless Mercy. And yet do you make light of
them!

3 You make light of Matters of greatest Excellency and Moment in the World:
you know not what it is that you slight; had you well known, you could not have
done it. As Christ said to the Woman of Samaria, John 4. 10. had thou known
who it is that speaks to thee, thou would have asked of him the Waters of
Life: had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor.
2. 8. So had you known what Christ is, you would not have made light of him;
Had you been one Day in Heaven, and but seen what they possess, and seen also
what miserable Souls must endure that are shut out, you would never sure have
made so light of Christ again.

O Sirs, it is no Trifles or jesting Matters that the Gospel speaks of. I must
needs profess to you, that when I have the most serious Thoughts of these
things my self, I am ready to marvel that such amazing Matters do not overwhelm
the Souls of Men: that the Greatness of the Subject does not so overmatch our
Understandings and Affections, as even to drive Men beside themselves, but that
God has always somewhat allayed it by the distance; much more that Men should
be so blockish as to make light of them. O Lord, that Men did but know what
everlasting Glory, and everlasting Torments are; would they then hear us as
they do? would they read and think of these things as they do? I profess I have
been ready to wonder when I have heard such weighty things delivered, how
People can forbear crying out in the Congregation; much more, how they can rest
till they have gone to their Ministers and learned what they should do to be
saved, that this great Business might be put out of doubt. O that Heaven and
Hell should work no more on Men! O that Everlastingness should work no more! O
how can you forbear when you are alone, to think with your selves what it is to
be everlastingly in Joy or in Torment! I wonder that such Thoughts do not break
your Sleep; and that they come not in your mind when you are about your Labor!
I wonder how you can almost do any thing else! How you can have any Quietness
in your Minds! How you can eat, or drink, or rest, till you have got some
Ground of everlasting Consolations! Is that a Man or a Corpse that is not
affected with Matters of this Moment? that can be readier to sleep, than to
tremble, when he hears how he must stand at the Bar of God! Is that a Man, or
a Clod of Clay, that can rise and lie down without being deeply affected with
his everlasting Estate? that can follow his worldly Business, and make nothing
of the great Business of Salvation or Damnation; and that when they know it is
hard at hand. Truly Sirs, when I think of the Weight of the Matter, I wonder at
the very best of God's Saints upon Earth, that they are no better, and do no
more in so weighty a Case. I wonder at those whom the World accounts more
holy than needs, and scorns for making too much ado; that they can put off
Christ and their Souls with so little; that they pour not out their Souls in
every Supplication; that they are not more taken up with God; that their
Thoughts be not more serious in preparation for their Account. I wonder that
they be not an hundred times more strict in their Lives, and more laborious and
unwearied in striving for the Crown, than they are. And for my self, as I am
ashamed of my dull and careless Heart, and of my slow and unprofitable Course
of Life; so the Lord knows, I am ashamed of every Sermon that I preach: when I
think what I have been speaking of, and who sent me; and that Men's Salvation or
Damnation is so much concerned in it. I am ready to tremble, lest God should
judge me as a Slighter of his Truth, and the Souls of Men, and lest in the best
Sermon I should be guilty of their Blood. Methinks we should not speak a Word
to Men in Matters of such Consequence, without Tears, or the greatest
Earnestness that possibly we can: were not we too much guilty of the Sin which
we reprove, it would be so. Whether we are alone, or in Company, methinks our
End, and such an End, should still be in our Mind, and as before our Eyes; and
we should sooner forget any thing, and set light by any thing, or by all
things, than by this.

Consider, 4. Who is it that sends this weighty Message to you? Is it not God
himself? Shall the God of Heaven speak, and Men make light of it? You would not
slight the Voice of an Angel or a Prince.

5. Whose Salvation is it that you make light of? Is it not your own? Are you
no more near or dear to your selves, than to make light of your own Happiness
or Misery? Why Sirs, do you not care whether you be saved or damned? Is
Self-love lost? Are you turned your own Enemies? As he that slighteth his Meat
does slight his Life; so if you slight Christ, whatsoever you may think, you
will find it was your own Salvation that you slighted. Hear what he says,
Prove. 8. 36. All they that hate me, love Death.

6. Your Sin is greater, in that you profess to believe the Gospel which you
make so light of. For a professed Infidel to do it, that believes not that ever
Christ died, or rose again, or does not believe that there is an Heaven or
Hell, this were no such marvel; but for you that make it your Creed, and your
very Religion, and call your selves Christians, and have been baptized into
this Faith, and seemed to stand to it, this is the Wonder, and has no Excuse.
What! believe that you shall live in endless Joy or Torment, and yet make no
more of it, to escape Torment, and obtain that Joy. What! believe that God will
shortly judge you, and yet make no more Preparation for it. Either say plainly,
I am no Christian, I do not believe these wonderful things, I will believe
nothing but what I see; or else let your Hearts be affected with your Belief,
and live as you say you do believe. What do you think when you repeat the
Creed, and mention Christ's Judgment, and everlasting Life?

7. What are these things you set so much by* as to prefer them before Christ,
and the saving of your Souls? Have you found a better Friend, a greater and
surer Happiness than this? Good Lord! what Dung is it that Men make so much of,
while they set so light by everlasting Glory! What Toys are they that they are
daily taken up with, while Matters of Life and Death are neglected! Why Sirs,
if you had every one a Kingdom in your Hopes, what were it in comparison of the
everlasting Kingdom? I cannot but look upon all the Glory and Dignity of this
World, Lands and Lordships, Crowns and Kingdoms, even as on some brainsick
beggarly Fellow, that borrows fine Clothes, and plays the Part of a King or a
Lord for an Hour on a Stage, and then comes down, and the Sport is ended, and
they are Beggars again. Were it not for God's Interest in the Authority of
Magistrates, or for the Service they might do him, I should judge no better of
them. For as to their own Glory, it is but a Smoke: what matter is it whether
you live poor or rich, unless it were a greater Matter to die rich than it is?
You know well enough that Death levels all: what Matter is it at Judgment,
whether you be to answer for the Life of a rich Man, or a poor Man? Is Dives
then any better than Lazarus? O that Men knew what a poor deceiving Shadow they
grasp at, while they let go the everlasting Substance! The strongest and
richest, and most volup^uous Sinners, do but lay in fuel for their Sorrows,
while they think they are gathering together a Treasure. Alas, they are asleep,
and dream that they are happy; but when they awake, what a Change will they
find! Their Crown is made of Thorns: their Pleasure has such a Sting as will
stick in the Heart through all Eternity, except unfeigned Repentance do prevent
it. O how sadly will these Wretches be convinced ere long what a foolish
Bargain they made in ^elling Christ and their Salvation for these Trifles! Let
your Farms and Merchandise then save you if they can, and do that for you that
Christ would have done. Cry then to thy Baal to save thee. O what Though^s have
Drunkards and Adulterers, etc. of Christ, that will not part with the basest
Lust for him! For a piece of Bread, says Solomon, such Men do transgress,
Prove. 28. 21.

8. To set so light by Christ and Salvation is a certain Mark that thou have no
part in them, and if thou so continue, that Christ will set as light by thee:
those that honor him he will honor, and those that despise him shall be
lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Thou will feel one Day that thou can not live
without him. Thou will confess then thy need of him: and then thou may go
look for a Savior where thou will, for he will be no Savior for thee
hereafter, that would not value him, and submit to him here. Then who will
prove the Loser by thy Contempt? O what a thing will it be for a poor miserable
Soul to cry to Christ for Help in the Day of Extremity, and to hear so sad an
Answer as this! Thou did set light by me and my Law in the Day of thy
Prosperity, and I will now set as light by thee in thy Adversity. Read Prove. 1.
24 to the end. Thou that, as Esau, did sell thy Birthright for a Mess of
Pottage, shall then find no Place for Repentance, though thou seek it with
Tears, Heb. 12. 17. Do you think that Christ shed his Blood to save them that
continue to make light of it? and to save them that value a Cup of Drink, or a
Lust, before his Salvation? I tell you Sirs, though you set so light by Christ
and Salvation, God does not so: He will not give them on such Terms as these:
He valueth the Blood of his Son, and the everlasting Glory; and he will make
you value them, if ever you have them. Nay, this will be thy Condemnation, and
leaves no Remedy. All the World cannot save him that sets light by Christ,
Heb. 2. 3. Luke 14. 24. None of them shall taste of his Supper, Mat. 10. 37.
Nor can you blame him to deny you what you made light of your selves. Can you
find fault if you miss of the Salvation which you slighted?

9. The time is near when Christ and Salvation will not be made light of, as
now they are. When God has shaken those careless Souls out of their Bodies,
and you must answer for all your Sins in your own Name; O then, what would you
give for a Savior! when a thousand Bills shall be brought in against you, and
none to relieve you, then you will consider, O Christ would now have stood
between me and the Wrath of God: had I not despised him, he would have answered
all. When you see the World has left you, and your Companions in Sin have
deceived themselves and you, and all your merry Days are gone; then what would
you give for that Christ and Salvation that now you account not worth your
Labor? Do you think when you see the Judgment set, and you are doomed to
everlasting Perdition for your Wickedness, that you should then make as light
of Christ as now? Why will you not judge now, as you know you shall judge then?
Will he then be worth ten thousand Worlds, and is he not now worth your highest
Estimation, and dearest Affection?

10. God will not only deny thee that Salvation thou made light of, but he
will take from thee all that which thou did value before it: He that most
highly esteems Christ, shall have him and the Creatures so far as they are good
here, and him without the Creature hereafter, because the Creature is not
useful; and he that sets more by the Creature than by Christ, shall have some
of the Creature without Christ here, and neither Christ nor it hereafter.

So much of these Considerations, which may show the true Face of this heinous
Sin.

What think you now, Friends, of this Business? Do you not see by this time
what a Case that Soul is in that makes light of Christ and Salvation? What
need then is there that you should take heed lest this should prove your own
Case? The Lord knows it is too common a Case. Whoever is found guilty at the
last of this Sin, it were better for that Man he had never been born. It were
better for him he had been a Turk or Indian, that never had heard the Name of a
Savior, and that never had Salvation offered to him: For such Men have no
cloak for their Sin, John 15. 22. Besides all the rest of their Sins, they have
this killing Sin to answer for, which will undo them. And this will aggravate
their Misery, That Christ whom they set light by, must be their Judge, and for
this Sin will he judge them. O that such would now consider how they will answer
that Question that Christ puts to their Predecessors, Matthew. 23. 33. How will
ye escape the Damnation of Hell? or Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape if we
neglect so great Salvation? Can you escape without a Christ? or will a despised
Christ save you then? If he be accursed that sets light by Father or Mother,
Deuteronomy. 27. 16. what then is he that sets light by Christ? It was the heinous Sin
of the Jews, that among them were found such as set light by Father and Mother,
Ezekiel. 22. 7. but among us, Men slight the Father of Spirits. In the Name of
God, Brethren, I beseech you to consider how you will then bear his Anger which
you now make light of? You that cannot make light of a little Sickness or Want,
or of natural Death, no not of a Toothache, but groan as if you were undone,
how will you then make light of the Fury of the Lord, which will burn against
the Contemners of his Grace? Does it not behove you beforehand to think of
these things?

Hitherto I have been convincing you of the Evil of the Sin, and the Danger
that follows: I come now to know your Resolution for the time to come. What
say you? Do you mean to set as light by Christ and Salvation as hitherto you
have done? and to be the same Men after all this? I hope not. O let not your
Ministers that would fain save you, be brought in as Witnesses against you to
condemn you. At least, I beseech you put not this upon me. Why Sirs, if the
Lord shall say to us at Judgment, Did you never tell these Men what Christ did
for their Souls, and what need they had of him, and how nearly it did concern
them to look to their Salvation, that they made not light of it? we must needs
say the Truth: Yea Lord, we told them of it as plainly as we could; we would
have gone on our Knees to them, if we had thought it would have prevailed; we
did entreat them as earnestly as we could to consider these things: they heard
of these things every day; but alas, we could never get 'em to their Hearts:
they gave us the hearing, but they made light of all that we could say to them.
O sad will it prove on your side, if you force us to such an Answer as this.

But if the Lord do move the Hearts of any of you, and you resolve to make
light of Christ no more: Or if any of you say, We do not make light of him; let
me tell you here in the Conclusion, what you must do, or else you shall be
judged as Slighters of Christ and Salvation.

And first, I will tell you what will not serve the turn.

1. You may have a notional Knowledge of Christ, and the Necessity of his Blood,
and of the Excellency of Salvation, and yet perish as Neglecters of him. This
is too common among professed Christians. You may say all that other Men do of
him. What Gospel-Passages had Balaam? Jesus I know, and Paul I know, the very
Devils could say, who believe and tremble, Jam. 2. 19.

2. You may weep at the History of his Passion, when you read how he was used
by the Jews; and yet make light of him, and perish for so doing.

3. You may come desirously to his Word and Ordinances. Herod heard gladly; so
do many that yet must perish as Neglecters of Salvation.

4. You may in a fit of Fear have strong Desires after a Christ to ease you,
and to save you from God's Wrath, as Saul had of David to play before him; and
yet you may perish for making light of Christ.

5. You may obey him in many things, so far as will not ruin you in the World,
and escape much of the Pollutions of the World by his Knowledge; and yet neglect
him.

6. You may suffer and lose much for him, so far as leaves you an earthly
Felicity; as Ananias, the young Man. Some Parcels of their Pleasures and
Profits many will part with in Hope of Salvation, that shall perish
everlastingly, for valuing it no more.

7. You may be esteemed by others a Man Zealous for Christ, and loved and
admired upon that account, and yet be one that shall perish for making light of
him.

8. You may verily think you selves, that you set more by Christ and Salvation
than any thing, and yet be mistaken, and be judged as Contemners of him: Christ
justifies not all that justify themselves.

9. You may be zealous Preachers of Christ and Salvation, and reprove others
for this neglect, and lament the Sin of the World in the like Expression as I
have done this Day; and yet if you or I have no better Evidence to prove our
hearty Esteem of Christ and Salvation, we are undone for all this.

You hear, Brethren, what will not serve the turn; will you now hear what
Persons you must be if you would not be condemned as Slighters of Christ? O
search whether it be thus with your Souls or no.

1. Your Esteem of Christ and Salvation, must be greater than your Esteem of
all the Honors, Profits or Pleasures of this World, or else you slight him: No
less will be accounted sincere, nor accepted to your Salvation: Think not this
hard, when there is no Comparison in the Matters esteemed. To esteem the
greatest Glory on Earth before Christ and everlasting Glory, is a greater
Folly, and Wrong to Christ, than to esteem a Dog before your Prince, would be
Folly in you, (...) a Wrong to him. Scripture is plain in this, Matthew. 10. 37.
He that loves Father or Mother, Wife, C^ildren, House, Land, or his own Life
more than me, is not worthy of me, and cannot be my Disciple, as Luke 14. 26.

2. You must manifest this Esteem of Christ and Salvation in your daily
Endeavors and seeking after him, and in parting with any thing that he shall
require of you. God is a Spirit, and will not take an hypocritical Profession
instead of the Heart and spiritual Service which he commands. He will have
the Heart or nothing; and the chief Room in the Heart too. These must be had.

If you say that you do not make light of Christ, or will not hereafter, let me
try you in these few Particulars^ whether indeed you mean as you say, and do
not dissem^ble.

1. Will you for the time to come make Christ and Salvation the chiefest Matter
of your Care and Study (...) Thrust them not out of your Thoughts, as a
needless o^ unprofitable Subject; nor allow it only some running sligh^
Thoughts, which will not affect you. But will yo^ make it your Business once a
Day to be think you soberly when you are alone, what Christ has done for you
and what he will do if you do not make light of it and what it is to be
everlastingly happy or miserable and what all things in this World are in
comparison o^ your Salvation? and how they will shortly leave you^ and what
mind you will be then of, and how you will esteem them? Will you promise me now
and then (...) make it your Business to withdraw your selves from the World,
and set your selves to such Consideration as these? If you will not, are not
you Slighters o^ Christ and Salvation, that will not be persuaded soberly to
think on them? This is my first Question to pu^ you to the Trial, whether you
will value Christ o^ not.

2. Will you for the time to come, set more by the Word of God, which contains
the Discovery of these excellent things, and is your Charter for Salvation, an^
your Guide thereunto? You cannot set by Christ, bu^ you must set by his Word:
Therefore the Despisers o^ it are threatened with Destruction, Prove. 13. 13.
Wi^^ you therefore attend to the public preaching of th^^ Word? will you read
it daily? will you resolve t^ obey it whatever it may cost you? If you will not
d^ this, but make light of the Word of God, you sha^ be judged such as make
light of Christ and Salvation, whatever you may fondly promise to you^ selves.

3. Will you for the time to come esteem more of the Officers of Christ, whom
he has purposely appointed to guide you to Salvation? and will you make ^se of
them for that end? Ala^, it is not to give the ^^^ster a good Word, and speak
well of him, and pay (...) his Tithes duly, that will serve the turn: It is for
(...) Necessity of your Souls that God has set them in (...) Church; that they
may be as Physicians under Christ, or his Apothecaries to apply his Remedies to
^our spiritual Diseases, not only in public, but also in ^^vate: That you may
have some to go to for the re^^ving of your Doubts, and for your Instruction
where you are ignorant, and for the help of their Ex^^rtations and Prayers.
Will you use hereafter to go (...) your Ministers privately, and solicit them
for Ad^ice? and if you have not such of your own as are fit, (...) Advice from
others; and ask them What you shall do (...) be saved? how to prepare for Death
and Judgment? and ^ill you obey the Word of God in their Mouths? If you will
not do this much, nor so much as enquire of those that should teach you, nor
use the Means which Christ has established in his Church for your help, ^our
own Consciences shall one Day witness, that you ^ere such as made light of
Christ and Salvation. If (...) of you doubt whether it be your Duty thus to ask
^ounsel of your Teachers, as sick Men do of their Phy^^cians, let your own
Necessities resolve you; let God's ^^press Word resolve you: see what is said
of the ^icst^ of the Lord, even before Christ's coming, when ^uch of their Work
did lie in Ceremonials; Mal. 2. 5, (...). My Covenant was with him of Life and
Peace: and I (...) them to him (to Levi) for the fear wherewith he feared
(...), and was afraid before my Name. The Law of Truth was (...) his Mouth, and
Iniquity was not found in his Lips; he walked with me in Peace and Equity, and
did turn many ^way from Iniquity. For the Priests Lips should keep Know^^dg,
and they should seek the Law at his Mouth: for he is the Messenger of the Lord
of Hosts.

Nay, you must not only enquire, and submit to their Advice, but also to their
just Reprehensions and Church Censures: And without proud Repining submit to
the Discipline of Christ in their Hands, if it shall be used in the
Congregatio^s whereof you are Members.

4. Will you for the time to come make Conscience of daily and earnest Prayer
to God, that you may have a Part in Christ and Salvation? do not go out of
Doors till you have breathed out these Desires to God; do not lie down to rest
till you have breathed out these Desires: say not, God knows my Necessity
without so often praying; for though he do, yet he will have you to know them
and feel them, and exercise your D^sires, and all the Graces of his Spirit in
these Duties: It is he that has command^d to pray continually, though he know
your (...) without, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Christ himself spent whole Nights in
Prayer, and encourages us to this Course, (...) 18. 1. If you will not be
persuaded to this much, how can you say that you make not light of Christ and
Salvation?

5. Will you for the time to come resolvedly cast away your known Sins at the
Command of Christ? If you have been proud or contentious, or malicious and
revengeful, be so no more. If you have been Adulterers, or Swearers, or
Cursers, be so no more. You cannot hold these, and yet set by Christ and
Salvation.

What say you? Are you resolved to let them go? If not, when you know it is the
Will of Christ, and he has told you such shall not enter into his Kingdom, do
not you make light of him?

6. Will you for the time to come serve God in the dearest as well as the
cheapest Part of his Service; not only with your Tongues, but with your Purses
and your Deeds? shall the Poor find that you see more by Christ than this
World? shall it appear in any good Uses that God calls you to be liberal in,
according to your Abilities? Pure Religion and undefiled before God is this, to
visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction, Jam. 1. ult. Will you
resolve to stick to Christ, and make sure this Work of Salvation, though it
cost you all that you have in the World? If you think these Terms too dear, you
make light of Christ, and will be judged accordingly.

7. Will you for the time to come make much of all things that tend to your
Salvation; and take every help that God offers you, and gladly make use of
all his Ordinances? Attend upon his strengthening Sacraments, spend the Lord's
own Day in these holy Employments. Instruct your Children and Servants in these
things, Deuteronomy. 5. 6, 7. get into good Company that set their Faces Heavenward,
and will teach you the way, and help you thither: and take heed of the Company
of wicked Scorners, or foolish, voluptuous, fleshly Men, or any that would
hinder you in this Work. Will you do these things? Or will you show that you
are Slighters of Christ by neglecting them?

8. Will you do all this with Delight, not as your Toil, but as your Pleasure?
and take it for your highest Honor that you may be Christ's Disciples, and may
be admitted to serve and worship him; and rejoice with holy Confidence in the
sufficiency of that Sacrifice by which you may have Pardon of all your
Failings, and right to the Inheritance of the Saints in light? If you will do
these things sincerely, you will show that you set by Christ and Salvation;
else not.

Dearly Beloved in the Lord, I have now done that Work which I came upon; what
Effect it has, or will have upon your Hearts, I know not, nor is it any
further in my Power to accomplish that which my Soul desires for you. Were it
the Lord's Will that I might have my wish herein, the Words that you have this
Day heard should so stick by you, that the Secure should be awakened by them,
and none of you should perish by the slighting of your Salvation. I cannot now
follow you to your several Habitations, to apply this Word to your particular
Necessities: but O that I could make every Man's Conscience a Preacher to
himself, that it might do it, which is ever with you; that the next time you go
prayerless to Bed, or about your Business, Conscience might cry out, Do thou
set no more by Christ and by Salvation? that the next time you are tempted to
think hardly of an holy and diligent Life, (I will not say to deride it as more
ado th^^ needs) Conscience might cry out to thee, Do thou set so light by
Christ and thy Salvation? that the next time you are ready to rush upon known
Sin, and to please your fleshly Desires against the Command of God, Conscience
might cry out, Is Christ and Salvation no more worth, than to cast them away,
or venture them for thy Lasts? that when you are following the World with your
most eager ^esires, forgetting the World to come and the Change that is a
little before you, Conscience might ^ry ou^ to you* Is Christ and Salvation no
more worth than so? That when you are next spending the Lord's Day in Idleness
or vain Sp^rts, Conscience might tell you what you are doing. In a Word, that
in all your Neglects of Duty, your sti^^ing at the supposed Labor or Cost of a
godly Life, yea in all your cold and lazy Prayers and Performances, Conscience
might tell you how unsuitable such Endeavors are to the Reward; and that Christ
and Salvation should not be so slighted. I will say no more but this at t^is
time, it is a thousand Pities that when God has provided a Savior for the
World, and when Christ has suffered so much for their Sins, and made so full a
Satisfaction to Justice, and purchased so glorious a Kingdom for his Saints,
and all this is offered so freely to Sinners, to lost unworthy Sinners, even
for nothing, that yet so many Millions should everlastingly perish because they
make light of their Savior* and Salvation, and prefer the vain World an^ their
Lusts before them. I have delivered my Message the Lord open your Hearts to
receive it: I have perswa^ded you with the Word of Truth and Soberness; the
Lord persuade you more effectually, or else all this i^ lost.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
A Scriptural and Rational Account of the Christian Religion; particularly,
concerning Justification only by the Propitiation and Redemption of the Lord
Jesus Christ. By Sir Edward Harley, Knight of the Bath. Printed for J. Luntley
at the Bibles in Little Lincolns Inn-fields.




