ERRATA.
PAge 26. line 28. for Turrian read Pisanus. p. 76. l. 7. for in r. it. p. 97.
l. 21. r. Presbyters. p. 93. l. 20. r. Roman. p. 94. l. 2. for or r. of. p.
107. l. 1. for Goths r. Vandals. p. 110. l. 4. dele and. p. 115. l. 13. for
Com. r. Corn. p. 123. l. 11. r. Libraries. p. 156. l. 28. r. Greatreaks.

Errata, in Roman Tradition, etc.
Page 18. l. 1. for most real r. Moral. p. 20. l. 5. r. Georgians. p. 29. l.
16. r. Sirmium. p. 37. l. 5. for find r. said.

ROMAN TRADITION EXAMINED, As it is urged as INFALLIBLE AGAINST All Men's
SENSES, REASON, the Holy SCRIPTURE, the TRADITION and Present JUDGMENT of the
far greatest part of the Universal Church, IN THE POINT OF TRANSVBSTANTIATION.
In Answer to a Book called A Rational Discourse of Transubstantiation.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

ROMAN TRADITION EXAMINED, etc.
AMong many Books that lately came forth, of somewhat the like tendency, there
is one called [ A Rational Discourse concerning Transubstantiation, in a Letter
to a Person of Honor, from a Master of Arts of the University of Cambridge.]
Alas, for the unhappiness of those Persons of Honor that have such Teachers
and Counselors as this! Could they have no better? or would they not? If they
chose them their misery is just.

The Title Paraphrased is [ A Rational Discourse against Sense.] But the strain
of this, and abundance Written, by Men of the like ingeny, tell us
convincingly, that while they distrust all their Senses, and would have all the
World distrust them, and deny them, they are so confident of their Thinking,
Inventing, and Talking Faculties, that they dare set them in Battle against the
Senses of all Mankind, and cherish some hopes to get the Victory. And verily,
it is a wonderful victory that such Men's Tongues have got already, if all the
Princes, Lords, Doctors, and all other People that go for Papists, do really
believe Transubstantiation; and if some be not in the right, who think that
there is not one hearty and complete Papist in the World, unless implicit
Believers may be called such, who believe as the Church does, though they know
not what; but that the Masters of the Game are but the Makers or Predicants of
a Faith for others, which never was their own, and that they generate but their
like, even worldly dissemblers, and convert only Men's Tongues by the power of
the Sword, and not their Hearts by all their Oratory. And I must confess, that
when I have heard a profane Swearer, Curser, Railer, Drunkard, Whoremonger,
plead for Transubstantiation, I have thought of peaceable Melancthon's words [
You Italians maintain that Christ is in the Sacrament, when you believe not
that he is in Heaven.]

But the devout words and confidence of this Master of Arts makes me think
that he believes himself, and that dissembling is not the Art that he is
Master of; but though he be as he says [ Non ignara mali] yet he may be
Ignarus mali, ignorant of his Error and of the Mischief which he would do.
Indeed if Men will needs believe that Night is Day, and Day is Night, we might
satisfy our selves with our compassion for their weakness, without any
importunate public contradiction; but our case with such Men as this, is such
as prohibiteth such patient silence: For, the same Religion which teaches them
to deny the Senses of Mankind, does teach them to Exterminate, Burn,
Excommunicate, and Damn all those that will not do as they do, but will believe
their Senses; and also to depose those Temporal Lords that will not exterminate
such from their Dominions.

Two things yet I must note, that make me doubt whether the Author be so honest
in his dealing as I could wish him, and as a Man that talks of God and Jesus
Christ should be. 1. That he so blindly, or fraudulently stateth the Question.
2. That he takes so little notice of the Books and Arguments that are Written
against his Cause, as if they needed no Answer, when we suppose that they have
put the Error of Transubstantiation so far past all rational doubt, that it is
scarce possible for a Man that has understandingly, and seriously read them,
to believe it: It is but lately that a small Book, on that Subject, was
published by R. Baxter, Dedicated to the Duke of Lauderdale, called, [ Full and
easy satisfaction, which is the true Religion,] which all the Papists in the
World can never give a rational Answer to; and therefore this Man dare scarce
take notice of such, lest it should bring them to the notice of his Reader. But
does he think that we must not know that his Book is Answered before it was
Written, because he will take no notice of it? or must we therefore repeat the
same things again?

The Roman Article of Faith is, that [ There is a change made of the whole
substance of the Bread into the Body of Christ, and of the whole substance of
Wine into his Blood] so that our Controversy with them has two parts. 1.
Whether after Consecration there be no longer Bread or Wine? 2. Whether that
which was Bread and Wine is then turned into the very Flesh and Blood of
Christ? Now this Rational Discourser confounds these together, and in his
progress deals so little with the first part, as if he were afraid that it
should be taken notice of.

The Reader must farther note. 1. That it is none of our Controversy [ Whether
the whole substance of the Bread and Wine be Relatively changed into the
Representative Flesh and Blood of Christ Which he once had, and offered in
Sacrifice for us on the Cross, as the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the World; For, this is our Doctrine:] But it is, Whether there be a physical
change of the substance of the Bread and Wine into the natural substance of the
Flesh and Blood of Christ which is now glorified.

2. That the Controversy is not at all of the Real Presence of Christ's
glorified Body, whether it be in this or that place, or not? but whether the
Bread and Wine be changed into it? For, many Protestants (Lutherans, and
others) do profess that we have no certain clear Conception of the nature of a
glorified Body; and consequently as they cannot judge of the Locality and
Presence of a Spirit, so neither of the Locality and Presence of a Spiritual
Body: They know not whether the now prevailing Philosophy be not true, that
Light is a Body, and Solar Light is the emanant substance of the Sun it self,
whose Center is in the Heavens: And if its very substance be so extensive as to
fill all the Air betwixt Heaven and Earth, (and more,) and if the Light of an
hundred Candles can be all together in one Room, they are uncertain what are
the Limits of Christ's Spiritual Body, or whether it be either of a more ignoble
nature than the Sun, or of less extent: And most of the Greek Fathers thought
Spiritual Bodies (if not Spirits themselves) were Fire. And as our Sense or
Reason cannot tell us whether or no there be now an Angel in this Room, so
neither can either of them tell us whether Christ's Spiritual Body be here: This
therefore they leave to God that knows it, and will have to be no no part of
the Controversy.

1. For the first part, Whether there be true Bread and Wine after
Consecration, as many others have fully proved the affirmative, so particularly
the foresaid Author briefly has proved it past all rational denial. 1. From
the Senses of all Mankind; an Argument fortified by twenty subordinate
convincing Arguments against the denyers of Sense; where the Papists Answers
are refuted. 2. He has proved the Coutradictions of the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. 3. He has showed that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation
asserteth one and thirty Miracles, with twenty miraculous aggravations; and
has fully proved from Scripture that these Miracles are fictitious. 4. He has
proved from many express Texts of Scripture, that it is Bread after the
Consecration. 5. And also that the Scripture it self does fully teach us to
expound This is my Body, as we do, and not as the Papists do. 6. He proves
that the very nature of a Sacrament, even as Aquinas defines it, is
inconsistent with Transubstantiation. 7. And Lastly, he proves the Novelty of
your Dostrine, and that the ancient Writers were against it; which Albertinus,
Pet. Molinaeus de Novil. Papismi, the late Morning Lectures of the
Nonconformists against Popery, and many others have proved at large. But these
things our Discourser Rationally dissembleth, lest if he should answer them it
would appear to be no Rational Discourse. But let us hear what the Rationality
is which he pretends to.

His Discourse consists of three Assertions, and their pretended Proof, and a
short Answer to some Scraps of Objection.

His first Assertion is, that [ It is possible to the Omnipotent Power of God,
to change the substance of Bread and Wine into the substance of our blessed
Savior's Body and Blood.] And he says, that [ This his Adversaries generally
grant.] And yet, if he know what they say, he knows that they maintain that
Transubstantiation is a Doctrine of Contradictions, and that God cannot make
two Contradictories true. They easily grant him that God can do every thing
which belongs to Power to do: Though we are not fond of his phrase [
Omnipotent Powers] no more than of [ wise Wisdom] or [ strong Strength] or
great Greatness,] yet taking his meaning, we grant that Omnipotency is never
stalled with difficulties: Though God cannot lie, nor cannot hate goodness, nor
love sin, nor make Contradictions true, that is not for want of Power, but
because he is perfect: He cannot be ignorant, or evil; and he cannot choose but
be God.

I suppose that he takes not Christ's Body, though spiritual, to be merely, or
properly Spirit, or (as they speak) immaterial; and so that it is none of his
meaning, that God can turn Bread into immaterial Spirit; which yet I would not
have said that he cannot do: But it is turning one Body into another which he
calls Possible. And that God can do this by Apposition, or Union, adding one
Body to another, I cannot deny: But these following Contradictions we take not
for Possibilities.

1. For one Body to be turned into another pre-existent, by apposition, (the
Form of the changed Body ceasing, but not the Matter;) and yet that the
pre-existent Body should not be increased by the apposition, this is a
Contradiction. As in Numbers, for two to be added to ten, and yet the Number be
still but ten, is a Contradiction: So for all the Bread that is Consecrated to
lose only its Form, and the Matter to be changed into the Body of Christ, by
apposition, and yet Christ's Body to be no bigger, is a Contradiction; unless
some pre-existent part of Christ's Body vanish, and it be diminished by loss, as
much as it receives by apposition.

You say, that by Concoction we our selves turn Bread and Wine into Flesh and
Blood daily: But note, that the Form only of the Bread and Wine cease, and
the Matter receives a new Form in us, and by apposition increases our Flesh
and Blood; and that our bulk increases not always, is because some parts
vanish, as others are added; and being in a continual Flux or Mutation, we have
little, if any, of the same Flesh and Blood this Year, that we had the last, or
a few Years ago. And does Christ's Body thus change, and receive addition and
diminution? or, does it grow bigger at the pleasure of the Priest?

2. If you say that this is not your ordinary belief, but that the very Matter,
as well as Form of the Bread and Wine cease; I add, that it is a
Contradiction, that the very Matter should cease to be, and yet be changed into
another Body. The ceasing of Matter is Annihilation: And to say that it is
annihilated, and yet changed into another thing, is a Contradiction: As Matter
is denominated from the Form, when the Form cease, the Matter cease to be
the Matter of that Form; but unless annihilated it is still the Matter of
another Form. For one Body to be annihilated, and another to take its place, is
not for the one to be changed into the other. Annihilating and
Transubstantiating are Contradictory.

3. It is a Contradiction for Bread and Wine to be turned into Christ's Flesh
and Blood, and made his Body, whose Body is not Flesh, or Blood; unless he have
two Bodies, or one consisting of marvelous dissimilar and heterogeneal parts.
That Christ's Body in Heaven is not Flesh and Blood at all, must be confessed by
all true Expositors of 1 (...) 15. 50. Flesh and Blood cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. The Context shows that it is not Sin, but natural proper
Flesh and Blood that is there meant: And who will believe that glorified Bodies
are Flesh and Blood, whoever well considered, 1. What Flesh and Blood is, and
for what use? 2. In what Region glorified Bodies dwell; and that the
Inhabitants are every where Connatural to their Region. 3. That the Text says
They are Spiritual Bodies.

And if Christ's Body in Heaven be no Flesh or Blood, and his Body on Earth be
both; then either he has two Bodies, or very heterogeneous parts of one.

4. It is a Contradiction to say that there are Accidents, which are not the
Accidents of any Substance, (either of Bread, Christ's Body, or any thing*
else:) For, Accidentis esse est in esse, it is relative: The foresaid Author p.
96. has told you, 1. For Quantity, a Pound, or Inch of nothing; a long, or
broad, or thick nothing; a Pint, or Quart of nothing, are Contradictions. 2.
For the Number of Wafers, or Cups of Wine, to put twenty, or forty, or an
hundred nothings, is a Contradiction. 3. For Figure, a round, or square
nothing, is a Contradiction. 4. A sweet nothing; a sharp, or austere nothing,
instead of Wine, is a Contradiction. So an odoriferous nothing; a rough, or
smooth nothing; a red, or a white nothing; a nothing seated on the Altar more
than another place, etc. all these are Contradictions.

5. And he has there showed you that it is a Contradiction for nothing to have
real effects: for nothing really to nourish, and become Flesh and Blood in him
that eats it: yea, for nothing to be eaten; for nothing to turn to real
excrements; for nothing to make a Man drunk, as Wine does: God can do all that
are works of Power, but to verify these Contradictories, is no work (...).

6. God cannot lie, says the Apostle, and Nature it self; else Faith had no
certainty at all, the formal Object failing. To lie, is to give false deceiving
signs of the Matter, and of the Authors mind: And if God's Natural Revelation
to Sense it self be false, yea to all Men's Senses; does not that make a lie as
well as a false Word, Prophecy, or Vision? God's Natural Revelations are known
by all Men certainly to be his own, and so are not the Prophetical: All know
that God made Man's Sense to be the Natural perceiver of sensible Objects, that
as sensed, they might be perceived naturally by the Intellect: And supposing
the Object, Sense, Intellect, and Medium duly qualified, if now we be deceived,
Natural Revelation fails, or is false, and we have no remedy: So that to make
God's Natural Revelation to Sense, and by Sense to the Intellect, to be false
to all the sound Senses in the World, is to make God, blasphemously, the
greatest Liar in the World; and this God cannot be, because he is God.

And now, I pray you what does the Doctrine of Rarefaction and Condensation
make against any of this that I have said? Apply it to any one of these
Contradictions, and try whether it will prove them no Contradictions? Though
your definitions of them are ridiculous, ( viz. that Rarefaction is a little*
Matter under a great Quantity, and Condensation is a great deal of Matter under
a little Quantity; and this you say is the ancient and commonly received
Definition) yet this, were it so, is nothing to our business. Rarefaction
makes the Quantity of Matter no more, but only more diffused, or extensive as
to Space; and Space and Quantity are not all one: And Condensation makes not
the Matter to be of less Quantity, but only to possess less Space: You show how
great a Philosopher you are. But does Rarefaction make Accidents without a
Subject, or Effects without a real Cause; or Matter to be added to Matter
without augmenting it; or the same Matter to be changed into other Matter, and
yet cease to be the same Matter it was; or any of the rest.

And what if a Spirit, which is circumscriptively in no place, may be said to
be definitively, or operatively, in many places at once? Will you say the same
of a Body, and so make Body and Spirit to be the same? A Spirit is indivisible,
and so is not Matter; but yet I make not this the Controversy. I know not how
near Christ's Body is to a Spirit, which is called spiritual; but if it be
material, and yet in many places at once, it must be by Parts; one Part in one
place, and another part in another place. For a material Body not to possess
its proper place according to its Quantity and Parts, is a Contradiction: And
whatever you will say of Christ's Heavenly Body, sure you will not say that his
supposed Flesh and Blood is not material, or a true Body: And therefore either
Christ has as many Bodies, or else as many Pieces, or Parts of one Body, as
there are Consecrated pieces of Bread, perhaps many Thousand Miles distant from
each other. Yet I will confess to you, that as if a Thousand visible Apples
could grow on one spiritual, or invisible Tree, they would be all Parts of that
one Tree; so if you could prove, that a Thousand material visible Hosts are
united by apposition to one spiritual invisible Body of Christ as Parts, they
would all be Parts of that one Body; but marvelously heterogeneal. But what is
all this to the foresaid Contradictions?

But you have recourse to the Miracle of Christ's Incarnation, to salve the
Objection fetched from Sense: But what mean you by that? Did you think that it
is Miracles that we object against? or that every Miracle is a Contradiction,
or contrary to well-qualified Sense? What is there in Christ's Incarnation,
Conception, or Birth, which is a Contradiction, or against Sense, or Reason?
There is indeed much that is above the reach of Reason without Revelation; but
nothing that is against Sense, or informed Reason: For, what should it be? Is
it impossible for God to impregnate a Virgin, any more than to make Eve? Or is
it impossible for God to take a humane Nature into Union with the Divine; when
as all things are so nearly dependant on him, that he is, as they say, intimior
intimo nostro? and it is harder to confute that Platonist, who takes God to be
the Soul of the Universe, and all things to be as it were his Body and
Accidents, than to prove it impossible for him to be united to one. What else
meant your Fanatics, Friar Benedict. Angl. in Regula perfect. to make it Man's
perfection to believe that there is nothing but God?

And for the Doctrine of the Trinity, it is no more a Contradiction, than to
hold that the Mental Nature or Spirit is informed by a Virtue or Faculty, which
is One essentially, and Three respectively, as to the Acts and Objects, viz.
The Facultas-vitalis-activa, Intellectiva and Volitiva; or, that the sensitive
Soul has a formal Faculty, which is One and Three, viz. Activa, Perceptiva,
Appetitiva; or, that Fire has a Trin-une power, Motive, Illuminative, and
Calefactive. When Trinity in Unity is imprinted on all Active Natures, will you
find out a Contradiction in it? If it were Three Essences, and yet but One
Essence; or Three Persons, and yet but One Person, in the same sense and
respect, it were a Contradiction. And is here any deception of our well
disposed Senses, or any Lie? Because God has many Works which surpass the
power of natural second Causes, in their ordinary way of working; and because
he has many which we cannot know without supernatural Revelation, will you
thence infer that he may be the great Deceiver of the World, and may deliver
Contradictions as his Truth? As if Miracles were all Lies and Contradictions.

You say that Christ appeared to S. Mary in the shape of a Gardner. And what of
that? Either distance, or want of light, or observation did hinder her from
discerning his proper Visage, and then its nothing to our Case; or else he
really assumed a Visage different from that which she had formerly seen: And if
so, here was no deception of Sense, any more than in the apparition of an
Angel; nor no more than a Masked person does deceive another Sense, because he
would not be known; nor any more than when one knows not his old Friend, when
Age or Sickness has changed him.

Page 4. You did with a necessary craft pass over your Doctors Explications of
the Mystery, as knowing that they do but detect the Contradictions.

You here tell us of [ some of the learnedest of the English Clergy (or
Church) that confess the holy Eucharist, after Consccration, to be really and
truly our Saviors Body, and therefore fall down before it, and adore it; and
for this cause disown the New Rubric of the Common Prayer Book, which says,
our Lords Body is in Heaven, and not on the Altar. These Doctors will tell you
that they acknowledge the thing, only they dare not be so bold as the Romanists
to determine the manner. And one of the learnedest of them, Mr. Thorndike,
asks, why cannot our Savior appear to us in what shape he pleases, in the
shape of a Gardner, or if it so please him, in the shape of Bread and Wine?]

To which I answer, 1. That New Rubric is but the Old restored: So you call
our Religion New. 2. Those may well pass with you for the most learned, who
please you best, while you confer Degrees. 3. Such as you teach men to refuse
Kneeling at the Receiving of the Sacrament, (as one of you that is mentioned in
the Life of Bishop Hall) by thus persuading men, that the English Clergy
believe Transubstantiation, and adore accordingly. 4. Either you speak true or
false of the learneaest of the English Clergy: If false, it is an ill shelter
for your other Falsehoods: If true, what regard should we have of the judgment
of such Clergymen, as declare their Assent and Consent to all things contained
in and prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer, and Articles of Religion, and
yet disown the Rubric, and believe Transubstantiation, and adore the Eucharist
as Christ's Body? Why do you not call such the Roman Clergy, rather than the
English Clergy, if they differ from you but only in a want of boldness to
determine the manner, while they acknowledge the thing? What if a Bishop
Bramhall will have the Pope to be Principium Unitatis, and take Grotius to be
of the mind of the Church of England, (who would have Rome to be the Mistress
Church, and the Pope the Universal Governor, according to the Canons of
Councils, even the Council of Trent;) must we therefore stoop to such men's
judgment? Or might you not as well tell us, that Cassander, or Mileterius, yea
or Bellarmine, were of your mind? And what is that to us?

Your second Assertion is [ If our Savior would have left us his sacred Body
and Blood, instead of all the Sacrifices of Sheep and Oxen, under the Mosaical
Dispensations, to be offered up by Christian Priests, and to be fed upon by the
Christian People, it would have been a favor worthy of his excessive love to
mankind, by reason of the innumerable benefits, etc.

Answ. 1. If he had only left us his Body and Blood, he had not deceived all
men's Senses, nor imposed any Contradictions on our Faith.

2. If he had done so, his choice would have taught us to take it for a
benefit, because his Wisdom is fittest to discern, and to denominate it.

3. To leave us that Body which was true Flesh and Blood, capable of breaking,
shedding, pain, and death, is one thing; and to give us his glorified Body, is
another thing: This is not capable of breaking, shedding, pain, or death, being
a spiritual, immortal, incorruptible Body. Therefore indeed, the Eucharist is
Christ's Body and Blood representative, but not of such a Body as he has now
glorified, but such as was truly Flesh and Blood, which he once offered; the
benefits of which Sacrifice are really given us in and by the Eucharist. But to
have left us a Body to be broken and slain, which cannot be slain, and Flesh
and Blood which is not Flesh and Blood, but spiritual, is a Contradiction. But
if Christ have two Bodies, or one consisting of parts spiritual, glorified, and
of real Flesh and Blood, then indeed one part of this may be still a Sacrifice.

4. But taking it (as you here do) abstractedly from Gods Will, and as in it
self considered; what reason can you give us, why Christ's true offering of
himself in Sacrifice once for all, should not be as great a Benefit and
Love-Token, as our offering him daily? The holy Scripture ( Heb. 10. 14.
tells us, that [ by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified] and v. 10, 11, 12. that by the Will of God we are sanctified
through the once offering of the Body of Jesus Christ: and every Priest
stands daily ministering, and offering oftentimes the same Sacrifices, which
can never take away sins; but this Man after he had offered one Sacrifice for
sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of God.] But you will tell us what a
benefit it would be to offer Christ often? Do you really break, wound, hurt,
and kill him in your offering, or do you not? If not, how is it a Sacrifice?
and how is he the slain Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World? And
what Sacrificing, or satisfactory use can it have, to be offered without
breaking, hurt, or death? Is it a living, or dead Body of Christ that you
offer? If a living Body unhurt, it is none of the Sacrifice the Scripture
mentions of Christ: And how is it propitiatory for sin? If it be a dead Body,
was it ever alive? If not, it is not Christ's: If yea, who kills him? And if
it be his living, glorified, impassible Body that you offer, how unlike is that
to Christ's offering? And why calls he the Bread and Wine, his Body and
Blood, which a glorified Body is not? It Is most evident that Christ speaks of
his suffering Body, and not of his glorified Body that cannot suffer: And if
so, shall we tell God what a benefit it would be to us, if every Priest may
become as the Jews, the killer of Jesus Christ; that he may break his real
Flesh, and let out his real Blood? Christ did not this himself. He consented to
be killed, but he killed not himself. And what Man of Sense can doubt but he
speaks of a Representative Body, and Blood at his last Supper, when his real
Body was not broken, nor slain, nor his Blood, till after; unless Christ had
two Bodies, one first killed by himself, and eaten by his Disciples; and the
other killed after by the Jews.

I marvel whether any Papist believe in his Conscience, that Peter, and John,
and the rest, did believe at that Supper, that they did eat Christ's real
Flesh, and drink his Blood? What, they that did not understand before his
Resurrection that he was to dye as a Sacrifice for sin, and rise again, though
he often told it them? For so expressly says the Text, John 12. 16. Luke 18. 31,
32, 33, 34. and 24. 20, 21. If it had been believed by them, why is there no
mention of any of their wonder at such a Mystery, as that their Savior should
at once be in their Belly, and in their sight? I can scarce believe that Man
that says he believes that they believed that then they did eat Christ's very
Flesh and Blood. But perhaps some of you will take up a late start Conceit,
that Christ at his last Supper did not celebrate, but only institute that
Sacrament: which I am ashamed to stay to answer.

For our parts, we take it for a greater mercy that Christ does reconcile us to
God, and put away our sins, by once offering himself in Sacrifice, instead of
the old Sacrifices that must be often repeated, than if he had bid us kill, or
break, or offer his real Body and Blood often. And we take it for a greater
mercy that we may daily offer this Representative Body and Blood, and
Commemorative Sacramental Sacrifice, than to have broken the real Body of
Christ our selves daily, and shed his Blood. But I wonder not that they that
can believe, or take on them to do it in spite of all Men's Senses, can do it
also in spite of Scripture, Reason, and Conscience.

I confess there is something in what you say, p. 7. It would have been an
incentive to munificence in adorning Churches with the richest Gold and
precious Stones, and whatever else that is rare and splendid; and also to enrich
and magnify the Priest, that can instrumentally make God of Bread, and
Sacrifice him when he has done; or set him on the Altar, or keep him in a Box.
But to the entertaining of Christ into the heart by Faith and Love, a
Representative Sacrifice seems more meet for us to exercise: And Christ said
to Thomas, blessed are they that have not seen, and have believed.

Your third Assertion is, that [ The Bread and Wine in the holy Eucharist, are
by the Omnipotent Power of God actually, and indeed changed into the Body and
Blood of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ.

Answ. This is to the purpose if it be but proved. But, alas, where is the
Proof? Why you give us such as you have, and we can expect no better from you.
You say [ This was the Universal Belief of the Christian World in the ninth
Century.] How prove you that? Very easily in your own conceit; ziz. say you [
It is evident by the Testimony of all the Writings of that Age, and by the
Universal Testimony of the tenth Age; nor do our Adversaries deny it.]

Answ. 1. All these three are false: Neither all the Writings of the ninth Age,
nor the Universal Testimony of the tenth, says it; and your Adversaries do
deny it.

2. But was there not some sorry necessity that put you to begin your Proof so
low as nine, or ten hundred Years after Christ? Methinks you should have
feared, lest this have opened all the deceit.

3. Your Adversaries challenge you to name one Book that ever so much as named
Transubstantiation, before one Stephanus Aeduensis after the Year 1100, which
was neither in the ninth, nor tenth Century, and yet you have not done it to
this day; and yet go on to talk at this rate. And they challenge you to name
one General Council that ever determined for either Name or Thing, (that the
Bread and Wine are changed into the very Body and Blood of Christ, and are no
longer true Bread and Wine) before the Council at the Laterane in Rome, under
Innoc. 3. Anno, 1215. which sure was neither the ninth, nor tenth Century. Can
you give us no earlier proof that ever any Conncil mentioned it (when Councils
are your Religion) and yet deceitfully talk with confidence as you do?

4. But suppose the twelfth Century, or thirteenth, had been the tenth; let us
hear your Inference. You say, [ Then it must necessarily be taught in the first
Age by the Apostles, to their first Converts over all the World; and
consequently be most certainly true: For it cannot be doubted but that the
first Converts did understand what was taught them, believe and esteem it as
highly necessary to them and their Children.] -- Then none can doubt but that
they could and would and did teach the very same Doctrine which they so highly
esteemed, etc.

Answ. Thus some over-wise Persons can sit in their Closets, and tell from most
real Causes, what, no doubt, was done in all Ages of the World: And why can you
not as infallibly prophecy from such Causes, what will be done, and so get the
reputation of a wise Man indeed? As one that would infallibly foretell that his
Party should conquer in a certain Battle, because they were Men that loved
themselves and their Country, and therefore would not wilfully destroy, or
desert both; and therefore would not run away: For they know that more are
killed when they fly, than when they stand to it; and if they do not run, the
Enemy will, as ordinary Experience shows; ergo they must needs conquer. But
when he was asked why all the same things might not be said of the Enemies, and
when he shortly heard, de facto, that the Enemy had got the day, his great
Argument was unanswerably confuted. But let us come to the trial.

1. I will better argue from your Medium, against you: The far greatest part of
Christians in the World are against Transubstantiation at this day; therefore
so were their Forefathers, and their Forefathers, till you come up to the
Apostles.

That it is so at this day requires no better Proof than to have more
knowledge in the state of the World, or more honesty in reporting it than you
have. Page 16. you say [ The whole World formerly, in a manner, Pagan, except a
handful of Jews is now become Christian.] Reader, Is this Man like to tell you
what all the Christian World held, in former Ages, from such a Medium as their
latter Belief, that can no better tell what the Christian World is? Look over
the Globe, or Map of the World, and let this Man tell you which be the
Countries that are Christian; and then take the Measure there of their
Proportion your self. Or to save you the labor, read any credible Author that
reports it. Brierwood in his Enquiries, one of the best, tells us, after the
naming of the several Countries of each Religion, that if you divide the Known
World into Thirty Parts, nineteen are Pagan Idolaters, six are Mahometans, and
sive are Christians of all sorts: But this Man is not ashamed to say, that,
except a handful of Jews, the whole World in a manner Pagan, is now become
Christian. All the Pagans of Africa, and America, and Asia, and all the
Mahometans are nothing to him; even five sixth parts of the Known World. And,
alas, how little probability is there that the terrae incognitae, the vast
unknown Regions, should be Christian: sure if they were governed by the Pope,
he would know them. He that can Transubstantiate all the Pagans, and Mahometans
on Earth, into Christians; and make Men believe that five parts of six of
Mankind are now of a Religion which they partly know not, and partly abhor, may
not despair hence to prove Transustantiation. But how many of this sixth part
of the World are Papists? A Bishop Bromhall says, that about the fifth part of
the Christians of the World are Papists: Others think about a fourth part, not
measuring by the largeness of their Dominions (for few in the King of Spain's
West Indies are Christians) but by the Number of Professors. But the most that
ever I knew any understanding impartial reckoner allow them, is to be the third
part of Christians; comparing them with the Abasines, Copties, Syrians,
Armenians, Gregorians, the Greek-Church, and Muscovites, and all the
Protestants, etc. And when the Empire of Abastia was greater by many Kingdoms,
and the Kingdom of Nubia was not revolted, and many great Countries of the
Greek Religion were not yet turned Mahometans, the Papists were proportionably
much less a part than now. And though most of these will say, as we do, that
the Bread and Wine are Christ's Flesh and Blood (not which is in Glory, but
which was Sacrificed for us on Earth) yet few, if any, of all these do hold
real Transubstantiation. If he say the contrary of them, Travelers, and
Authors enough of their own can confute him: (How shamefully they have changed
the Aethiopick Liturgy, as to their sense, by the altering of one word Bishop
Uller has showed from the true Copies; and by such tricks they can, by a
Printer, make all the World Papists: and I would the Pope had no other sort of
Subjects to uphold his Monarchy, than such as are so made.)

I appeal now to any impartial reason, whether I may not better argue against
Transubstantiation, because two or three parts of the Christian World are
against it, than he can argue for it, because a third or fourth part are now
for it, or were so in the twelfth, or the tenth Century.

But perhaps he will say, that they are of the same Religion that they ever
were, but so are not the Protestants. I answer, 1. The Protestants will not
undertake that none of their Ancestors from the beginning were in this, or
other points, erroneous: If the Papists will, it is suitable to their other
undertakings: But that we are of the same Religion which all true Christians
were of from the beginning, the same Baptism, the same Creed, the same
Lords-Prayer and Decalogue, and the same Scriptures, owned, show: and the
Lord's Supper Administered in the same words as Christ and his Apostles and the
ancient Churches did. 2. But if the Protestants had not been of the same Faith
with their Ancestors, what is that to the rest that are more than all the
Papists? It Is notable to read in their Godignus de rebus Abassinorum, how an
old Woman (the Emperors Mother) confuted, or bassled the Learned papist that
came with Oviedo to pervert them to the Pope, by pleading the Tradition of
their Forefathers, that had delivered them their Religion, and never told them
of the Pope. And how tenacious the Greeks are of their Religion as received
from their Fathers, their very stiffness against the Roman Insertion of [
Filioque] into the Creed, sufficiently shows. 3. But that really the Papists
are Innovators, and have changed the old Religion in this Point, as we have often
fully proved out of Antiquity, so we need no other Proof than the express words
of Scripture; which (to pass by the rest) in one Chapter in the three next
Verses 1 Cor. 11. 26, 27, 28.) does three times call it [ Bread] after
Consecration. And I never met with a Writer so impudeut as dare deny but their
leaving out the Cup to the Laity in the Lord's Supper is a change from the
ancient Practice of the Church. And yet will this Medium serve our Rational
Discourser; The present Church leaves out the Cup, ergo so did their
Forefathers, and so did the Apostles? And let him tell me, with the Face of a
Man, if he can, whether he think in his Conscience that our Ancestors, or the
first Converts of the Apostles, were not more likely to understand and remember
whether the Bread and Cup were both delivered by the Apostles, or the Bread
alone, than to understand and remember in what sense it was that the Bread and
Wine was called Christ's Body and Blood.

In sum, 1. We believe that all true Christians have the same Religion which
was first received from the Apostles. 2. We are sure that they kept not all the
same Purity, and Integrity of that Religion; As some fell quite away to
Paganism, and Mahumatanism, and some to Arrianisme, and other Heresies; so some
that fell not so far, fell to lesser Errors. 3. And we do undertake to prove,
contrary to this Discourser, that the generality of the Churches for many Ages,
and the most of the Christian World to this day, held not, and hold not
Transubstantiation.

II. I farther use his own Argument against him; At this day, the greatest part
of the Church, by far, and in the fourth Century, that which they themselves
call the Universal Church, denied the Pope's Primacy (much more his
Sovereignty) to be of Divine Institution: Therefore so did the first Converts
of the Apostles. If the Consequence be good in your Case, it is much more in
this. 1. You falsely feign all the Church to have been for Transubstantiation,
but I shall undeniably prove what I urge them for, as being against the Divine
Institution of the Roman Primacy. 2. And this is a Point likelier to be
commonly understood and remembered, than the meaning of the words [Body and
Blood.] I prove the Antecedent.

1. That most Christians now are against it, is a matter of Fact commonly
known: Two or three parts of the Christian World being no Subjects of the Pope
at all, viz. Those before mentioned. 2. That in the fourth and fifth Century
the Church was of this judgment, appears by the most express words of one of
the four Great General Councils, even that at Calcedon, which says, [
Definitiones sanctorum Patrum sequentes ubique and Regulam, and que nunc
relecta sunt 150 Deo amantissimorum Episcoporum, qui Congregati sunt sub piae
memoriae Imperatore majore Theodosio in Regia Civitate Constantinop. nova Roma,
Cognoscentes and nos eadem definivimus de privilegio ejusdem sanctiss.
Constantinop. Ecclesiae, novae Romae: Etenim sedi senioris Romae, propter
Imperium Civitatis illius, Patres consequenter privilegia reddiderunt: and
eadem intention promoti 150 Deo amantiss. Episcopi aequa sanctissimae sedi
novae Romae privilegia tribuerunt, rationabiliter judicantes Imperio and senatu
urbem ornatam aequis senioris Regiae Romae privilegiis frui.] that is [We
following always the definitions of the holy Fathers and the Canon, and knowing
those things which now have been read of the 150 Bishops most beloved of God,
that were Congregated under the Emperor, of pious memory, Theodosius, the
greater, in the Royal City, Constantinople, New Rome, have our selves also
defined the same things concerning the Privileges of the same most holy Church
of Constantinople, New Rome: For, to the Seat of Old Rome, because of the
Empire of that City, the Fathers consequently gave the Privileges: And the 150
Bishops most beloved of God, being moved with the same intention, have given
equal Privileges to the most holy Seat of New Rome; reasonably judging that
the City, adorned with the Empire and Senate, shall enjoy equal Privileges
with Old Regal Rome.]

Here you see, 1. That two of the four greatest General Councils concur. 2.
That they profess herein to follow the old Definitions, and Rule. 3. That they
conclude that Romes Privileges were given it by the Fathers. 4. And that
because of the Imperial Seat. 5. And therefore they give equal privileges to
Constantinople.

The Testimony is such as nothing but impudent violence can put by: either they
speak true, or not: If not, then how come two of the greatest General Councils
so quickly to falsify the Tradition of the Apostles? Did they not understand
what their Fathers had delivered to them? or did they disesteem it, or forget
it?

If they spoke truth, (as they did) you see that Rome has no privileges, or
primacy, from God's Institution, but (like Canterbury) in our Empire by the
Princes and Fathers Gift.

Which is so sure, that he must put off common Ingenuity, that considerately
will deny it; having not only this Testimony of two Grand Councils, but the
continued opinion of all the Greek-Church, even before their division from the
Roman: For, let any Man rationally Answer me this Argument. [ The whole
Greek-Church knew that a Divine Institution was to be preferred before a
Humane: The whole Greek-Church knew that Constantinople was not by Divine, but
by Humane Institution, made Patriarchal or equal with Rome, and yet were for
its Patriarchate and equality, if not priority: Therefore the whole
Greek-Church judged Romes Patriarchate and Primacy to be of Humane, and not of
Divine Institution. I have larglier proved this elsewhere.

III. I give you another Argument with your own Medium. [ The Universal Church
in the time of the Councils of Constance and Basil, judged that a Pope might be
a wicked Heretic, and as such be deposed; and that it is de fide, that
Councils have power so to do: Ergo, this was the Doctrine of the Apostles to
their Converts.] And yet the Councils at the Laterane under Leo the Tenth, and
Florence, determine that the Pope is above a Council. What Self-contradictors
now do you make the Apostles to be? How could the Councils of Basil and
Constance believe that Councils are above the Pope, and that he may be a
fallible wicked Heretic, unless they had received it down from the Apostles?
And how could the Councils at the Laterane, and Florence, judge the contrary,
unless they had received it down from the Apostles? Will neither Reason nor
Experience make you ashamed of cheating the World by such silly Inferences?

IV. But yet I will come nearer you: The same General Council at the Laterane,
sub Innoc. ^. which first decreed for the Belief of Transubstantiation, did in
the very next Canon and words, decree, That all Temporal Lords should
exterminate from their Dominions all such, as Heretics, that denied this
Transubstantiation; and if they did not exterminate them, should be
excommunicate by the Pope; and if yet they did it not, the Pope should depose
them,, and absolve their Vassals from their Allegiance, and give their
Dominions to another. Now either they had this by Tradition from their
Ancestors, and so from the Apostles, or not: If not, why should you dream that
the Council had the second Canon from the Apostles, and not the third? If yea:
Then, 1. We see what we must expect from your Religion: The King must
exterminate all Protestants (and other Decrees say, Burn them) or else be
deposed himself. To exterminate us all, will be almost to depose himself. Kind
Sir, whither shall we all go? or who shall burn so many? It will be a greater
Incendium than that of London, or Southwark: And who shall be the Kings
Subjects? Who shall Plant England anew? The French, Spaniards, or Italians? But
what if in this fortunate Island they also should awaken and turn Protestants;
must the King be to seek for new Planters to be his Subjects?

As Benedictus Spinosa, who assaulted the Scripture, did at once also assault
all Civil Government; and taught men, that he that could get the Crown had best
right to it; and that a Man may kill any that stand in the way of his desires,
and break any Vows when they are against those desires (which are his
Interest,) God mercifully so ordering it, that he that will depose Christ,
shall with him be permitted to depose all Kings and Governors; Even so God in
mercy to preserve Princes, in theirwits, from turning Papists, has permitted
the same Men that first by Council condemned common Sense, and made God the
deceiver of Sense, and of the World, and new brought Transubstantiation into
the Faith, to make a Decree also (such as never Turks, or Canniballs made) That
all Men that will not renounce all their Senses (that is, their animality, and
their humanity) shall be exterminated; and all Princes deposed that will have
such (as renounce not humanity) for their Subjects.

Several things are said to this, by Men that think that if they do but open
their Mouths, and speak, though it be to prove that Murder is Mercy and Piety,
they have conquered.

1. Say some, You see the King of France, and others, do not so. Answ. 1. If
they may be good Catholics that rebel against the Pope and a General Council,
why may not we? 2. I speak not of what any of you do, but what your very
Religion binds you to do: Are not Councils your objective Religion? By the
same Law and Religion then that Transubstantiation was first decreed, if it
rule in England, we are all in Law exterminated, or dead Men (except the
Papists) or else the King must be no King. Can you say in Conscience that your
Ancestors had this from the Apostles? If you will, let Kings, that love your
Tradition, take it.

2. But some say, that these were no Decrees of the Council, because they were
but proposed in haste by Pope Innoc. and not passed by the Council. This help
Bishop Tailor, Bishop Gunning, and Bishop Pierson, in kindness, would give the
Papists; but unthankful Men will not accept it: And therefore the Answerers to
Bishop Gunning and Bishop Pierson prove the contrary, as Mr. Dodwell has
unanswerably done lately at large: And what ever it was in it self, it was a
General Council to the Papists, and is part of their Religion, who number it
with the approved ones. And Math. Paris says but this, that [ many Decrees
were proposed, or brought in by the Pope, which some liked, and some disliked]
and yet the Major Vote might pass them: See also Naucler, Genesis 41. an. 1215.
Godefrid ad an. 1215. Platin. in Vit. Innoc. 3.

3. Others say, that these were but Decrees of Practice and Discipline, and not
de fide; and therefore the Pope is not here Infallible, nor his Council
neither. But Men that will not take a sound of Words for their Estates, Lives,
and Souls, may soon answer this. 1. That though there be many things to be
believed, that are not to be done; yet there is nothing to be done but what we
must first believe that it may, or must be done. When it is said, Thou shall
love God and thy Neighbor; it is included, that, Thou must believe it thy Duty
to love God and thy Neighbor: So he that says [Hereticks shall be
exterminated, and Temporal Lords that will not do it shall be deposed, and
their Dominions given to others] does include, that [ To do so is a Duty, or
Lawful at least.] Sure it is not confessedly decreed that the Pope shall sin,
or that Temporal Lords shall be deposed by him for any thing but sin, in their
Assertion.

2. If you grant that a Pope and General Council are Fallible about Duty and
Sin, even in deposing Princes, and dissolving their Subjects Oaths of fidelity,
how shall we know that they are Infallible in matters of Faith? He that is
deceived in saying, Thou must obey the Ten Commandments, may be deceived in
saying, Thou shall believe the Creed: If we cannot be sure by the Churches
Proposal that God is to be loved; how shall we that way be sure that he is to
be believed, and that the Scripture is his Word. And if the Pope may
excommunicate and depose Princes, and change Dominions by error; how can I be
sure that he may not say by error, that this Bread is no Bread, and this Wine
is no Wine.

3. Is it only matter of Faith, and not matter of Fact that you have by sure
Tradition? Is not matter of Fact (as Christ's Birth, Death, Resurrection, and
Ascension) also matter of Faith? And is not this in question a matter of Fact,
viz. Whether, de facto, the Apostles told the first Converts, that Bread after
Consecration was no Bread, and that this was the meaning of Christ's words [
This is my Body] which you assert? And it is matter of Practice that Men must
receive it in this sense. But if the Council may be deceived in this, and make
such Laws for ruining Princes and Nations, which yet they were never taught by
their Forefathers; why may not the same Men say [ Bread is no Bread] without
being taught it by their Forefathers.

4. Will you give it us under your hand, that this Council and Pope did err in
this, and are not to be obeyed, that Princes may have so much notice of your
trustiness? But what Council has ever since declared that this Pope and
Council erred in this; name it me if you can? No, they will be guilty of no
such Contradictions as shall signify repentance and amendment.

5. In the mean time, is not the Pope and his Council by this Decree, declared
Enemies to all Protestant Princes, and People? What can any proclaimed
Hostility do more, than thus by your highest power to Decree Extermination of
all the People, and Deposition of their Lords? And is not he to be taken and
used as a Public Professed Enemy, who so professes himself? Are you not all
virtually in continual Arms against us, who make the Decrees of such Councils
your Religion?

V. And why might not an Arrian have argued as you do, when they had their
General Councils, and the World groaned to find it self turned Arrian, faith a
Father? Might they not at Ariminum and Firmium have said, How can we believe
it, unless our Fathers had it from the Apostles? And I suppose you know (else
Sondius will tell you) that the Arrians pretend as confidently to Tradition as
the Papists do. And your own Dionys. Petavius has cited so great a Number of
the antientest Fathers and Writers, who speak words too plainly savouring of,
or favoring Arrianism, as will tell any Man that their pretense is not without
such a color of proof, as is as plausible as any you can bring for the
Tradition of Transubstantiation at the least.

VI. I pray you tell us which way was Transubstantiation delivered down from
the Apostles? By Writing, or without-book, by Word alone? If by Writing, are
not those Writings yet extant? And cannot we read them as well as you? You tell
us that all the Writings of the ninth, or tenth Age show it (which is false.)
But if the Writings of the first eight hundred years showed not the same thing
to them, how did they know it? If by bare words, can you make your self believe
that bare words, and Memory, will as surely convey down from Age to Age, the
Mysteries of Faith, as Written Records will do? Do you not daily find, that if
Men are but to repeat a Sermon, yea a few Sentences, how apt they are to alter,
or omit, or add some words which alter the whole sense? I seldom hear a Sermon
reported, but somewhat of it is mis-reported! yea, we can searce have a matter
of Fact reported without great diversity and mis-reports; which makes the
common reports of Persons, and Things, in City and Country, to be so full of
falsehood, and uncertainty. Men's Memories are slippery, and the alteration of a
word, may make the matter another thing. Send but your Servant to do a message,
or business for you, by bare word and memory; and at another time Write him
down all that he shall say, or do; and try which way will occasion more
mistake! Why do you keep your Bonds, Bills, Covenants, Leases, Deeds, and
Testaments in Writing else, and do not trust them to Men's Memories? Why are our
Laws Written, and Court Records kept, if Memory will keep them better? Had we
no Books, or Records, one Lawyer would say one thing, and another, another
thing; and there would be nothing but uncertainty and confusion. Why do so many
Preachers use Sermon Notes? Why do you cause all your Mass, even the Hoc est
Corpus meum to be read out of a Book, and trust not your Mass-Priests to repeat
them by Memory? Besides, that Men Write more deliberately, and accurately, than
usually they speak; and their sense is easilier tried, and reviewed. Where Men's
Life and Death lies on it, Physicians will hardly trust their Memories with
all their Remedies, nor send one to the Apothecaries without a written Bill,
lest the mistake of a Word, or Dose, prove Death.

VII. And I ask you farther, Is all the rest of your Religion delivered only,
or most certainly, by word of Mouth and Memory, or rather by Books? Are not the
Decrees of all your approved General Councils for Faith and Practice your
Religion? And are not these written in Books? Have Caranza, Crab, Surius,
Nicolinus, Binius, the great and many Volumns of the French Edition, and all
the rest, been all written in vain? Do all your Lay-Papists, or all your
Priests, or any of them carry all these in their Memories to a word? Or are
they there as sure as in your Books? Does Verbal Tradition now deliver down
your Religion? Nay, do you not Write your very Confessions and Creeds? If all
your Books were burnt, would not your Religion be greatly changed, while much
of the Decrees of Councils would be forgotten? and O what contention and
confusion about them would there be?

VIII. But if all your Religion was so currantly delivered by word of Mouth by
Fathers to their Children, what made the ancient Doctors pass by the same
things in their Writings? when their Writings were purposely to tell their
Readers what was the Christian Religion, and the reasons of it; would they
leave out that in their deliberate Writings, which every Child was taught by
his Parents?

IX. But what mean you to talk of all Parents delivering it to their Children?
Do you mean all Priests, or all Laymen? If Priests had Children, it is like they
were Married; And had you then the Celibate of Priests by Tradition from the
Apostles? If you mean Laymen, would you make Men believe any Story you tell
them, contrary to the experienc of their daily Converse? Do we not see that the
far greatest part of Men, both among Papists, Greeks, and Protestants, have too
little sense, or understanding of Religion, to be accurate keepers of the sense
of Scripture? Try your own followers in Ireland, Spain, Italy, yea, or France,
whether the generality of the Common People teach their Children, or understand
themselves, what a Sacrament is; though your Industry may teach them to Cant
out such words as you would have them say in opposition to the Protestants.
When we have much ado to get most of the Vulgar to endure to be Catechized
themselves, and to understand the very Creed, and Principles of Christianity;
do you suppose them competent preservers of the mysterious sense of such words
as we are Controverting?

X. And if Tradition without Writing be so sure, how comes Tradition to be so
contrary? The Millenaries pretended to Tradition from St. John? Most of the
Writers of the first 300 Years seem for them. Yet I think you will scarce
confess that this was indeed the Doctrine of any Apostles.

XI. How long did the Opinion and Practice of Infants Communion prevail in the
Church? Does it follow therefore that they had it from the Apostles? Why then
do you disuse it?

XII. The Practice of not adoring, kneeling on any Lord's Day in the Year, or
any Weekday between Easter and Whitsontide, was indeed called the Practice of
the Universal Church, and an Apostolical Tradition; and was Decreed in the
first General Council at Nice, Can. 20. If they had not this from the Apostles,
how prove you that your Transubstantiation is from them? If they had, why have
you changed an Apostolical Universal Practice?

XIII. And if it was the Common Belief of the Church, why did never General
Council mention it till 1215 Years after Christ's Birth? Was it because it was
commonly known? So were the Articles of Faith which they do mention: And sure
it is the Common Faith which they are to preserve and deliver. Unless they were
negligent or forgetful, it was because no such thing was then believed.

XIV. The ancient Churches professed that their Creed contained all the
necessary Articles of the Christian Faith: And when Heretics obscured some of
them, they put the Exposition of them into their after Creeds. If
Transubstantiation then was a necessary Article of Faith, how came it to be
left out of all the Creeds?

XV. The second Council at Nice held Angels to be Corporeal, and that Images
were not to be worshipped with Latria: Yet Aquinas, and many others of you, as
to the Image of Christ and the Cross, dissent from them in the latter; and the
generality in the former: Had they these then from the Apostles, or not?

XVI. Does one of your General Councils, ( e. g. that at Trent,) signify all
the Christian World? 1. When they are often but a few Men (not fifty sometimes)
and when one County or Diocese with us has more Learned Men. 2. When they are
a Faction packt by the Pope, and his Agents. 3. When we know that it is usually
the Pope, Prince, or Archbishop, or Men of Power, that choose the Members,
though most of the Clergy be often for others, or have no choice. 4. When all the
Papists that send to your Councils are not past the third part of Christians,
and the far greatest part have no Delegates there. 5. When we know that a few
Men's Interest, and Speeches in such Assemblies use to carry away the most. 6.
When we know that they use to differ among themselves, and sometime carry a
Cause but by a few Votes: And how shall we be sure that if ninety say one
thing, and one hundred say the contrary, that the ninety did not as well
understand the Tradition of their Forefathers as the hundred? 7. And when we
know that Men are often in Council born down by fears, or hopes, or fair words,
and repent when they come home, as the Greeks did after the Council at
Florence. 8. Yea, when we know that they sometime fall into inhumane Fewds,
yea, and fight it out to Blood; as the Case of Dioscorus against Flavianus
proves. And is this a certain Tradition of what was delivered by the Apostles?

Indeed Baptism, the Creed, Lords-Prayer, Decalogue, and the Eucharist have
been delivered down by certain Tradition; But so has not every Controversy
about them, nor in particular, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

XVII. Read but Pet. Molineus de Novitate Papismi, or but the Non-conformists
late Morning Lectures on that Point; and you will see how the Papists have
innovated in Religion, and all their Errors proved Novelties: And shall we
think that such changers have kept Transubstantiation as from the Apostles,
that could not keep one half the Sacrament it self which they delivered them?

XVIII. How shall the ignorant know whether this Man say true? that most Books,
and most Men were for Transubstantiation in the ninth and tenth Centuries? The
time is past, and the Men are dead: Must he know it by the Books of those Ages,
or by the Testimony of this Age? If by their Books, 1. How shall he that has
read their Index expurgatorius, and known their corrupting of Authors, be sure
that those are not corrupted? or many of them as very Forgeries, as Mercators
Decretals, and abundance of Spurious Writings? so proved by Cook, Blondell,
Rivet, Usher, and many more. Is it necessary to Salvation that the Vulgar (yea,
or the Priests) have so much skill in History as to know which way most Men
went for so many Ages past* in the Exposition of such a Text of Scripture? What
Man can tell now what mind most of the World are of in several Mysteries* and
controversies between you and us? Who can tell how to take their Votes? Much
less can every illiterate Man know what mind most Men were of in former Ages;
and least of all to be able critically to judge of the Evidence, and what
Authors are spurious and corrupted, and what sound. 2. Nay, who ever put so
much Cosmography into the Creed before you, or made it necessary to Salvation,
to know that there is such a Place as Rome in the World? 3. If Books must
decide that Case for the ninth and tenth century, why not for the former also?
And have not we all those Books as well as you? And yet we are confident that
they are against you. 4. But if it must be by the Testimony of the present
Generation, whose Testimony must it be that must tell us what our Forefathers
held? Must it be by the Testimony of a Council? 1. There is no General to
enquire of, nor has been long; nor know we whether ever there will be? 2. If
it must be by the last Council, 1. How shall the Vulgar know that it was a true
General Council, any more than that of Ephesians. 2. Basil, Constance, etc. 2. How
know they what they did Decree? They never saw, or heard them. If it must be by
the Printed Books, 1. They cannot read them. 2. They know not whether they are
forged, or falsified. 3. They know not the meaning of them. If it must be by
Reports, by whose Report? Father Paul Servit^ makes them a pack of Fellows
that abuse the World, under the show of a General Council: He was a Papist. We
cannot look for another Council to tell us what this Council said. Must men
take the word of particular men? Some accuse that Council; some own it: Whom
shall we believe? must it be every single Priest? Then Father Paul must be
believed against them: And some that turn from the Pope say more against them
than he: And how shall the People know that the Priest says true? Perhaps he
knows the Priest to be a common Liar, or perjured; at least, he knows him
not to be infallible. If the Pope be infallible, none of you says that each
Priest is so: And we never saw or heard the Pope. If you say that we must
believe the Priests where they all consent: How shall ordinary men know that,
who never see a Council, nor many of them? If the major Vote must be believed:
who shall gather the Votes, and how shall the People know them? In a word, I
see no way that you have to give men any assurance what to believe to
salvation, (for the generality that cannot travel over the World, nor get skill
in History and Cosmography) but only to believe that Priest that speaks to
him; when perhaps he knows him to be a man that has forfeited belief; or at
least is neither the Pope, Council, Church, nor pretends to infallibility.

But suppose that the person be so learned, as to be versed in the Councils,
How shall he know by them what the former Ages held? 1. What Councils be they
that he must believe, and how shall he be sure of it? Is it the Councils
aforesaid of Ephesians. 2. Basil, Constance, and such other? These you reject, and
many more. 2. Do any Councils tell him by Decrees, which former Councils were
current, and which not? Sure they do not; no, not the last at Trent: So that it
is not, de fide, with your selves, which are the true Councils, and which not.
3. How does a later Council know which former Councils were true? Not because
they find so themselves; for then all would be true: If it be by any
Characters, what be they, and why may we not know them? 4. How do Councils know
which way most Writers went, or what they wrote? As it cannot be expected that
the Bishops that met at Trent should remember by Tradition what all the
Christians in the world said or thought in every Age; so neither were all
Writers words known to them without Book, by verbal Tradition. I pray you tell
me truly, whether ever any General Council took that way to prove what Justin,
Tertullian, Cyprian, Basil, Gregory's, Hierom, Augustine, Chrysostom, etc. said
and held, by showing that they had it by Tradition from other Councils Decrees,
or their Fathers telling them so, rather than by looking into the Writings of
the Authors themselves? And your own Doctors commonly tell us what the Fathers
held, by citing the Fathers words, and not by telling us, that either Councils,
or their Fathers, or Mothers, or Nurses told them what they said or held,
[except in the common Essentials of Christianity, the Sacramental Covenant,
Creed, Lords-Prayer, Decalogue, and that the Scripture is Gods Word] which all
Christians acknowledge are delivered to us, as by two hands, viz. by verbal and
practical Tradition, and by the Scripture it self.

But if it be the Present Church real, (that is, the consent of Christians)
which must tell us what was held in the former Ages (which for ought I find is
it that you fly to;) though the ignorant cannot try this, all knowing men can
tell that this way you are utterly condemned: For at this day, as is said
before, at least two third parts of the Christian World are against your very
Papacy it self; and believe the ancient Churches to have been against it: So
that Tradition does depose the Pope. So that you have no way left, but to say,
It is our own judgment or Tradition alone that we will stand to.

So much to your dull cheat, about your pretended Universal Tradition.

Page 11. You notably say, [ Suppose a Book fully written as to all points to
be believed by Christians, by the first Teachers of Christianity: Let them
together with this Book give charge to their first Converts, not to add to it,
or diminish it, and to believe as in their Consciences they shall think that
Book shall teach them. Though Generation after Generation be never so faithful
to such a Charge, yet they may in after Ages come to lose or change their
Faith, because the Book may seem to one Generation to bear one sense, and to
another Generation to bear another -- As these words, This is my Body, may seem
to one Age to bear this sense, This is the Sign of my Body, etc.]

1. But you must suppose also, that they that will learn this Book must have
Teachers: Else how will they so much as read it? We are for Teachers as well as
you, though not for Judges that may judge in partem utra^^libet. The Pastors
may teach the People that there is a God, a Christ, a Life to come; but cannot
judge that there is none. And Teachers make known that same Evidence of Truth
to the Learner, by which they received it themselves; but do not say, you must
believe that there is a God, a Christ, a Heaven, merely because wesay so.

2. And you must put into your Supposition, that (as is said) the Essentials
are delivered both ways, by Writing and by word of mouth.

3. And now suppose, that the Apostles had put the same expository words of [
This is my Body] into a Book, which they spoke by word of mouth? Had that been
the less intelligible because they were in the Book? Or the harder to be
remembered? Or could that Age have delivered to the next any more, as from the
Apostles, than what they received? And if that be the same written as spoken,
sure writing makes it not the less or worse? If it do, all your Religion is in
danger, now it is written in your Volumns of Councils. Have you more yet that's
necessary, besides all those Volumns, which you whisper or deliver by word of
mouth? If not, you profess your Religion unsafe, because you have written it.

4. And indeed you here profess, that the fidelity of successive Generation
cannot preserve Religion, by preserving and delivering any Books. And if so,
then your preservation of Fathers, and written Councils, and Decretals, is no
sufficient Tradition of the sense of [ This is my Body.] Could you show us your
sense in them, it is an insufficient Tradition; for one may take your Councils
in one sense, and another in another.

5. But do you indeed think that any Person or Country is secured from changing
their Religion by your verbal way? Why then did the Reformers when they were of
your way forsake it? Why did the Greek Churches disown you? Nay, why did so
many ancient Churches apostatize to Mahometanism? Was it for want of Verbal
Tradition? Had they not the same as you? Sure no Law will secure it self from
being broken by sinners, and no Tradition is enough to prevent Apostasy. But
why the same words should be less sufficient written by the Apostles, than
spoken by them; or why Gods Writings should not be as sure and clear in things
of necessity, as your Councils; or why your Councils should be insufficient,
because written, no impartial man can tell.

But you say further, [ But no ten Families who have been taught by their
Parents, either to believe that our Saviors Body is in the Eucharist, or that
it is not there, (you should have said, in what sense it is there) can possibly
mistake, etc.]

Dreams may seem something to men that are asleep: If God had written the same
words that my Mother spoke to me, why could not I have as well understood them?
Does my Mother, or Father, or Priest speak so much more wisely than God? Sure
not, if the words were the same. But alas, can you keep us from knowing, that
you and we have ten thousand and ten thousand Families near together, where the
Parents never talk much to their Children about any such matters, nor catechize
them, nor themselves understand them: When we ask many of the ignorant Papists,
whether they believe that there is no true Bread and Wine at all after
consecration, they tell us that they do hold that there is, though yet Christ's
Body and Blood be there; which is but the Lutherans Consubstantiation: And do
you not know what Durandus taught in this? and yet they that chide him excuse
him from Heresy. And had Durandus never heard what ten Parents teach their
Children?

You presently stab your Papacy to the heart, when you say [ Seeing God
Almighty is resolved not to teach every Age by immediate infallible Missionants
from himself, but to send inspired Ambassadors to one particular generation
only, and to leave that generation to teach their Children successively till
the day of judgment, what they learnt, etc. Thus much is just the Protestant
Religion. But then what is become of the inspired Infallibility of your Church?
who though they understood not the matter when they came to the Council, (or
though the Pope were an unlearned Lad) yet presently can infallibly expound
Scripture, and deside Controversies. As you praise Mr. Thorndike, you might
have accepted of the kindness of one Mr. Warley of Cambridge, in a Book lately
dedicated to the Lord Chancellor, called, The Natural Fanatic, who will allow
the Church and Councils a higher way of certain determination, than by Reason;
and will tell you how doubtful its left to Reason, whether there be a God, or
the Soul be immortal, and will curb men that will set their Reason against
Councils or the Church. But to remember and rehearse only the words that the
Apostles delivered, is a work that Reason may perform, without any inspired
infallibility.

But if Tradition by immediate Parents, yea and Pastors be so sure, the
Abassines, the Greeks, and many others, are sure that the Papacy is an
Usurpation: And so were the old Britains, and the Scots, a little before Beda's
time, who would neither conform to the Church of Rome, nor so much as eat with
them.

Page 42. You say [ If God Almighty will oblige me to believe what was taught
1600 years before I was born, how should he expect I should come to the
knowledge of this, but by such Books as were written in those times, and near
those times, and by the testimony of all Christian Countries, what has been
immemorially believed by them, ever since they were Christians.]

Answ. Well contradicted: This is our very Religion: We stand to Vincent.
Lerniens. Rule, Quod semper, ubique, ab omnibus. But, 1. Here then Books be not
made so unserviceable as before. 2. God Almighty obliges us first to believe
his own Book before any others: And how shall we more certainly know what
Christ did and commanded, than by those that purposely Wrote so many Gospels,
or Histories of it, that we might believe and have Life by his Name. Sure the
four Evangelists and the Apostles Wrote what they Wrote (even to the ignorant)
to be understood and read. 3. We also know by the Books written near those
times what then was received by the Churches. And your Councils cannot know it
(nor your Pope neither) by any other means than are known to others: for their
extraordinary Inspiration we never saw cause to believe. 4. And I remember no
one thing at all, which I do not receive, which has the Testimony of all
Christian Countries that it has immemorially been believed by them ever since
they were Christians; nor shall I reject such when you prove it. But that is,
because, de facto, I think there is no error that has such a kind of
Testimony; and not because I think it impossible: For as your part of the World
is deceived, e. g. to think that the Roman Supremacy was instituted by God,
contrary to the judgment of all the Greek Church, and of the two forementioned
General Councils at Constantinople and Calcedon; so I know not but it had been
possible to have brought all Countries to the same deceit, or to have believed
that Christ's Blood might be denied the People in the Sacrament, as a thing
received by Tradition.

We believe that the true Church infallibly believes what ever it believes
upon true Divine Revelation, and that it can never fall from the Essentials of
Christianity; that is, that Christ will still have a true Church in the World
till the end. But we know that in many things we offend all, and if every Man's
Will and Life is imperfect and culpable, then so is every Man's judgment; and
there is no Man living without many errors, who has the Exercise of Reason;
and the Church is Composed of such erring Individuals: And why it is not
possible for them all to have thought that some of their errors came down from
the Apostles (as the Millinaries thought) I cannot tell. But whatever is truly
proved to be delivered by the Apostles as the Will of Christ, by Writing, or
Word, we will readily receive: And the Essentials of Christianity we believe,
and can prove to have been both ways so delivered; and some things more, (as
the Lord's Day, etc).

But you say, page 15. Can any imagine that they who exposed their Lives for
their Religion, would, if they could, agree together, so notoriously to change
it, as to make themselves most gross Idolaters, by adoring Bread and Wine, as
the true Body and Blood of their Creator, and God?] Answ. No, but we may well
imagine that good Fathers may have bad Children, and that Children are not born
with a Church History, or Councils written in their minds; and that worldly
Clergymen may deceive, and be deceived; and that even pious Men might concur in
the deceit: that is, That the name of Christ's Body and Blood being justly from
the beginning applied to the Eucharist, as the Clergy grew formal, ceremonious,
selfish, and worldly, they neglected the explication of the sense and spiritual
part of the Sacrament; and grew to over-magnifie the external signs in a way
that tended to that advantage and honor to themselves, which for want of
Learning and Grace they could not by their worth attain: That the ninth and
tenth Ages which you choose for instance were as a Night of darkness, having few
Learned Men, in which he that was but skilled in Greek and Hebrew was taken for
a Conjurer, or a Heretic, other of your own Writers besides Bellarmine do
acquaint you. That the Popes were some Boys, many Murderers, Simonists, and
most horrid, wicked, and ignorant Men, many by one Woman brought in, and
poisoned after; and that for forty Years there were diverse Popes at once
contending for their several Titles, almost all Histories agree; That hence the
World was filled with Treasons, Rebellions, Perjuries, and all wickedness, how
many Historians testify; when the Pope has been judged by a Council for a
Heretic, and Adulterer, deflowering Women at his Doors. And is it incredible
that such Men should degenerate from their Forefathers? Or shall a Friar now
come out of a Cell, and tell the World, that because, the first Bishops of Rome
were holy Martyrs, it was not possible for Pope John to be such a blasphemous
filthy Villain; nor for Pope Eugenius to be damned as a Heretic and wicked Man
by a General Council, and yet continue Pope after deposition: or for Sergius to
use Formosus as he did? I speak not of rarities, or doubtful things: The Popes
greatest flatterers lament them. Baronius ad an. 912 says [What then was the
Face of the holy Roman Church? How exceeding filthy, when the most potent, and
yet the most sordid Whores did Rule at Rome? by whose pleasure Sees were
changed, Bishops were given, and which is a thing horrid to be heard, and not
to be spoken, their Lovers (or Mates) were thrust into Peter's Chair, being
false Popes, who are not to be written in the Catalogue of the Roman Popes, but
only for the marking out of such times: And what kind of Cardinals, Priests and
Deacons think you we must imagine these Monsters did choose, when nothing is so
rooted in Nature, as for every thing to beget his like?] 1. Is not here a
Succession fit to prove the Church of Rome to be the true Church? O happy
Succession! 2. And is it impossible that such Men as these should err? and such
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons should change one word that was delivered orally
from their Fathers? Is not here a sure Foundation for a Man to build his Faith
and Salvation on?

Genebrard another furious Papist ( li. 4. Sect. 10.) says [ In this one thing
this Age was unhappy, that for near an hundred and fifty Years, about fifty
Popes did wholly fall away from the virtue of their Ancestors, being rather
irregular and Apostatical, than Apostolical.] Apostates make an Apostolical
Succession of Infallible wicked Men. Reader, did not our Rational Discourser
wisely choose the ninth and tenth Ages for his groundwork? These are the very
Ages whose Testimony he appealeth to.

Pope Adrian (after) himself, ( de Sacram. Confirm. Art. 4. says, that there
have many Popes of Rome been Heretics. And as I said, Pope John 13 alias 12
was in Council Convict of Ravishing Maids, Wives, and Widows, at the
Apostolic Doors, and of committing many Murders, and he drank a health to the
Devil; and at Dice called for help to Jupiter and Venus, and at last was killed
in the Act of Adultery.

Says their Platina [ He was from his Youth a Man contaminated with all
dishonesty, and filthiness; and if he had any time to spare from his Lusts, he
spent it in hunting, and not in praying. -- He says, he was a most wicked man,
or rather a Monster. -- And says, [ that the Life of this wicked Man being
judged in a Council of Italian Bishops, for fear of them he fled, and lived
like a wild Beast in the Woods.]

Pope John 23 was accused and deposed by the General Council at Constance, upon
about seventy Articles, which you may see in Binnius in about thirteen Columns,
viz. of Murders, Adulteries, Witchcraft, Simony, a Heretic, obstinately
maintained that there is no Life after this; called commonly, The Devil
incarnate; said the Soul was extinst with the Body, as a Beasts; denied the
Resurrection, etc. And for these the Council deposed him.

So the great Council at Basil deposed Eugenius the 4th as [ a Rebel against
the holy Canons, a notorious disturber and scandalizer of the Peace and Unity
of the Church; a Simonist; a perjured wretch; incorigible; a Schismatic, and
an obstinate Heretick] Yet is their Churches Succession continued from this
condemned Heretic, who staid in spite of the Council that deposed him.

But you will say, Though the Pope may so err, yet General Councils cannot.
Answ. These very Councils that condemned him, are now rejected by you, as is
Ephesians. 2. and many others: yea accused as being another Church; says the
Learned Cardinal Cajetan in his Oration at the Council at the Laterane sub.
Leon. 10. ( Bin. p. 552.) [ This Novelty of Pisa (Mark Councils are Novelists)
sprung up at Constance, and vanished: At Basil it sprung up again, and is
exploded. And if you be Men it will now also be repressed as it was under
Eugen. 4. for it comes not from Heaven, nor does it embrace the Principality
of that One who is in the Church-Triumphant, and preserves the
Church-Militant; and which the Synod of Pisa ought to embrace if it came from
Heaven, and not as it does to rely on the Government of a Multitude. The Church
of the Pisans therefore does far differ from this Church of Christ: For one is
the Church of Believers, the other of Cavillers; One of the Household of God,
the other of the Erroneous: One of Christian-men, the other of such as fear not
to tear the Coat of Christ; and divide the Mystical Members of Christ from his
Mystical Body.

See here to what Novelty and Apostasy, even to be another Church: You think
that General Councils have fallen, as those Councils say the Pope has done. O
but these Men can corrupt nothing, because the Martyrs would not have corrupted
it! And yet even good Men's pious credulity, believing ignorant Men's Dreams and
Visions (such as Gregory's Dialogues and Beda show to any rational Man) may do
much to introduce Changes.

But if Changes be so impossible, because Forefathers were pious Men and of
another mind, how come the Greek-Churches to be Apostatized so far to
Mahometanisme? and why do you accuse the Protestants, or Greeks of changing, if
it was impossible (for ten Families) to do it? Sure then the Abassines,
Syrians, Armenians, Greeks, etc. have their old Faith still unchanged, if it be
impossible. Sure never such Villainy was charged on their Bishops as on your
Popes. If they may change, notwithstanding their Forefathers Piety, why not
you?

In the last place I should speak to your Testimonies out of some Ancients. But
1. Why should we put it to the trial of Fathers, when you dare not stand to it,
but fly to the Authority and Judgment of your present Church; that is, your
Pope. 2. Can any Fathers speak plainer than St. Paul himself does, who calls
it Bread after Consecration thrice in the three next Verses? Or did the Fathers
contradict him? If they delivered what they received, we see what that was. Is
oral Tradition contrary to the Scripture? Is not this a certain Argument? Paul
in 1 Cor. 11. says often that it is Bread after Consecration; ergo, that
Speaker, or Writer is deceived, or a Deceiver, who says, that he or any other
Apostle delivered the contrary by word of Mouth.

3. Does this Discourser mean sincerly in talking of Tradition and the Fathers
Testimonies, and yet never once attempt any answer to all those Testimonies to
the contrary, out of their plain words, which our Writers have copiously and
often cited. How many, and many more, plain Testimonies of the Fathers against
Transubstantiation does one Edmundus Albertinus give you? to which, instead of
answers, a few mere* words, or cavils are returned: But all these are
overlooked by this Discourser.

But come, let us briefly try all his great proof of the Tradition of the
Fathers.

I. He begins with excellent Augustine (who in a Carthage Council did help to
quell the Pope's Usurpation) And out of many great Volumns he has found, 1.
That Austin said, that [ now it is no longer called Bread, but the Body of
Christ:] The same will the Presbyterians say: Do they not in their Directory
say, [ Take, eat, this is the Body of Christ*] when they deliver the Sacrament?
Are they therefore for Transubstantiation? Is it all one to say, [ It is not
called Bread, and, It is not Bread?] If the King's Statue be made in Marble or
Brass, you may well say, This is not now to be called Marble and Brass, but the
King.

2. That Austin said [ that Christ gave us his very Flesh to be eaten to our
Salvation; but no body eats that Flesh, unless he have first adored it.]
Answ. Any Protestant will say the same. For Christ himself has said, Except ye
eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no life in you.
Do not your own sacrilegious Popes and Clergy expound this of something else
than the Eucharist? when they deny the Cup to the People? If it be that Wine
Consecrated that is here meant, what bloody wretches are you to damn all your
Peoples Souls, by denying them all that Blood of Christ, without drinking which
they have no life? But it is certain by 1 Cor. 15. that Christ has not Flesh
and Blood in Heaven, and therefore it is not the Heavenly Body, that, as such,
is here meant; but the true sense of Christ and Austin is, that as the
Sacrifices are eaten by such, by, and for whom they are offered; so his Flesh
and Blood offered on the Cross is the true Sacrifice for Sin, which must be
eaten in its Commemorative Representation orally in the Sacrament, and really
in it self by Faith, that the benefits of that Sacrifice may be ours. And who
does not adore that Christ whom we thus eat and live upon? This is the sum of
all that the Fathers say.

But let the Reader judge of Austin's mind by plainer words, De Doctr. Christ.
cap. 7. [ Let no Man look to what they are (mentioning the Bread and Wine) but
to what they signify: For our Lord was pleased to say, This is my Body when he
gave the sign of his Body.]

And Cont. Max. l. 3. cap. 22. [ We note in the Sacraments, not what they are,
but what they show: For they are signs, which are one thing, and signify
another.]

And Epist. 23. ad Bonif. [ If Sacraments had not some likeness (or
resemblance) to those things whereof they are Sacraments, they could not be
Sacraments at all. From this likeness (or resemblance) they often take the
names of what they represent: Therefore as the Sacrament of Christ's Body is in
some sort his Body, so the Sacrament of Faith is Faith also.]

You need no more than this of Austin to Interpret other Fathers, that call the
Sacrament Christ's Body.

II. His next is Ambrose, who says that [ That when Consecration has been
made of Bread, it is made the Flesh of Christ] and [ Christ makes this
Sacrament] and [ the Body of Christ was not before Consecration, but after,
etc.] Answ. 1. All this the Presbyterians say. Even as we say, It is not a Law
till the King give the fiat, or it is not his Coin till his Authority and Stamp
so make it; And are they therefore of your mind? 2. Ambrose expressly expounds
his negation of ordinary Bread; no doubt it is not ordinary Bread. 3. You would
deceive the Reader by hiding Ambrose, who says there, de Sacram. l. 4. c. 4. [
This we assert, how that which is Bread (mark that) can yet be the Body of
Christ] -- [ And if Christ's Speech had so much that it made that to begin to
be which was not; how much more is it operative that the things that were, both
Be, and be changed into something else -- ] And [ As thou have drunk the
similitude of Death, so thou drinkest the similitude of precious Blood.] So
Ambrose, and so the Protestants.

III. His next is Hierome; out of many Volumns he has gathered thus much, that
Priests [ make the Body of Christ with their sacred Mouth and Prayers.] Answ.
And any Protestant will say the like: He that says [ This is the Body of
Christ] that is, Sacramentally, will say that, under Christ, his Minister
makes it such. And is this the Tradition?

2. Let Hierome speak for himself, Contr. Jovin. l. 2. [ The Lord as a Type (or
Figure) of his Blood, offered not Water, but Wine.] Are not these words plain,
till the Pope expound them?

IV. His next is Cyprian, de Coena Dom. And, 1. Let the Reader note, that even
Bellarmine de script. Eccl. in Cyprian says, that the Book which this Man
cites as St. Cyprians, [was neither Cyprians, nor any Learned Man's; and had
neither Words nor Sentences worthy a Learned Man, but foolish and ridiculous
Narations, and Fables.]

2. The words cited out of it are [ Panis iste quem Dominus discipulis
porrigebat, non effigy sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia verbi factus est Caro]
But by [ Natura] the Author plainly means [ the Relative Nature] and not the
Substance. And it was not for nothing that Bellarmine contemns him, who ever
he was; for he is downright against Transubstantiation. Cap 2. He makes the
difference between this and common Meat to be, that, Corporalis substantiae
retinens speciem, sed virtutis divinae invisibili efficientia probans ad esse
praesentiam: It is but the presence of Divine Virtue that he affirms to be with
the Species of corporeal substance. And plainer, cap. 3. [ When the Lord had
said, Do this in my remembrance, This is my Body, and this my Blood] as often as
by these words and this faith it is done, that supersubstantial Bread and Cup,
by solemn blessing hallowed, profits to the life and health of the whole Man;
being both a Medicine and a Sacrifice, to heal our infirmities and purge our
iniquities. And showing the difference between the Common part of Christ's last
Supper, and this Spiritual Food, he adds, that, [ when the perfideous mind of
Judas touched this holy Meat, and the sanctified Bread entered his wicked Mouth,
etc.] So that he calls it sanctified Bread after the Consecration.

And Cap. -- telling why Christ calls the same both Bread, Blood, Flesh, and
his Body, he says, [ Panis est esca, etc. Bread is Meat, Blood is Life, Flesh
is Substance, his Body the Church. And cap. 4. This Sacrament Christ calls
sometime his Body, sometime Flesh and Blood, sometime Bread; a Portion of Life
eternally, which he Communicates according to these visible things to corporal
Nature. That common Bread being turned into Flesh and Blood, procures Life and
increase to bodies (that is, our common Concoction turns common Bread into
our Flesh and Blood;) Therefore the Infirmity of our Faith being helped by the
usual effect of things, by a sensible Argument is taught, that the effect of
Life eternal is in Visible Sacraments; and that we are united to Christ, non
tam Corporali quam spirituali transitione, not so much by a Corporal as by a
Spiritual Transition. And cap. 6. His Conjunction and ours neither mingleth
Person, nor uniteth Substances; but Consociateth Affections, and Confederateth
Wills.

And the same Author, or another, in Cyprian's Works, de Unctione Chrysm. cap.
7. Says [ Our Lord at the Table where he last feasted with his Disciples, gave
them with his own hands, Bread and Wine; but on the Cross he gave his Body to
be wounded by the hands of Soldiers, that the sincere truth, and true
sincerity, secretly imprinted in the Apostles, might expound to the Nations how
the Wine and Bread was Flesh and Blood; and by what Reasons the Causes agreed
to the Effects, and diverse Names and Species were reduced to one Essence; and
the Things signifying, and the things signified were called by the same Names,
(or known by the same Words) By these Privileges of supernatural Grace, by the
eating of sanctified Bread, being refreshed, washed, and anointed, etc.]
Reader, here you see what Tradition says.

Next out of Cyprian de Lapsis, he cites words against them, that [ with
defiled hands and mouths receive the Body, and drink the Blood of the Lord.]
Words which Protestants have more frequently than Cyprian; and are they on your
side too?

But shall Cyprian have leave to speak indeed? Epist. ad Magn. cap. 4. [ When
our Lord calls his Body Bread, congested by the adunation of many Grains, he
shows the Union of the People whom he bare: and when he called his blood
wine, expressed out of many bunches of Grapes and Kernels, and made up into
one, he signified one Flock united, etc.]

And Epist. 63. Ad Caecilium de Sacram. Proving that the Sacrament should not
have Water alone without Wine, he says cap. 2. [ That the Cup which is offered
in commemoration of him be offered mixed with Wine. For when Christ says, I am
the true Vine, his blood is not water, but wine. Nor can his blood, by which we
are redeemed and sanctified, be seen to be in the cup, if wine be not in the
cup, by which Christ's blood is showed, etc.

And c. 6. We find the cup mixed which Christ offered, and that it was wine
which he called his blood. Whence it is apparent that the blood of Christ is
not offered, if wine be wanting to the cup; nor is the Lords Sacrifice
celebrated by due sanctification, unless our Oblation and Sacrifice answer his
Passion.

And cap. 9. In the wine is showed the blood of Christ, as in the water is
understood the People. (Is the water turned into the People?)

And cap. 10. So the cup of the Lord is not water alone, nor wine alone, but
must both be mixed; even as the body of the Lord cannot be meal (or flower)
alone, or water alone, but both must be united, conjoined, and be bread by
composition solidated.

And cap. 12. [ As often as we offer the cup in commemoration of the Lord and his
Passion, let us do that which is manifest the Lord did.] So much of Cyprian.

V. The next cited by him is Tertullian, saying, [ The flesh is fed with the
body and blood of Christ, that the Soul may be made fat with God.]

Answ. 1. The same we all say, even when we Administer the Sacrament: See the
like in the English Liturgy, and the Directory: Are we therefore for
Transubstantiation? 2. It is the Representative body of Christ, and not real
flesh and blood: For he says, that he that eats his flesh, and drinks his
blood, has eternal life; and dwells in Christ, and Christ in him, John 6.
54, 56. But the wicked, that eat the body of Christ Representative, have not
eternal life, nor dwell in Christ.

Another citation from Tertullian is lib. de Idololat. [ To touch the body of
our Lord with those hands which give bodies to Devils, etc.]

Answ. Here is no more than we commonly say: This Man sure would prove that the
Liturgy and Directory are both for his opinion. Is this the Proof of Universal
Tradition?

Reader, Tertullian calls it The body of Christ, and so do we. Will you hear
him speaking his own Sense, which this Man concealeth?

Cont. Marcion, l. 3. c. 19. [ Sic enim Deus in Evangelio quoque vestro
revelavit, panem corpus suum appellans, ut and hinc jam eum intelligas corporis
sui figuram pani dedisse, cujus retro corpus in panem Prophets figuravit, ipso
Domino hic sacramentum postea interpretaturo.] That is [ For so God even in
your Gospel revealed, calling bread his body, that so hence you may understand,
that he gave to bread the figure of his body; whose body the Prophet formerly
figured into bread, the Lord himself being afterward to interpret this
Sacrament.] Here it is often called bread, and this bread is called Christ's
body, and the figure of the body given to bread it self, as was prefigured by
the Prophets before Christ had a body.

And Cont. Marc. l. 1. 14. [ Nec panem ( reprobavit) quo ipsum corpus suum
representat,] [ He reprobated not bread, by which he represented his own very
body.] Pamelius has no shift, but to say, that by representing he means
making present, such deceit will seem to prove to them Universal Tradition: And
he cites many other places, as for him, out of Tertullian, which have no more
but his naming the Sacrament Christ's body and blood, as we all do.

Cont. Marc. l. 4. c. 40. He is yet plainer, saying [ The bread which he took
and distributed to his Disciples, that he made his body, saying, This is
mybody; that is, the FIGURE of my body: But it had not been the Figure of it,
if he had not had a true Body. For an empty thing which is a phantasm, can have
no Figure; or if he therefore seigned (or made) bread to be his body, because
he wanted (or had not) a true body, then it was bread that he must deliver up
for us: It made for Marcion' s Vanity th^^ bread should be Crucified. (All this
is to prove against Marcion that Christ had a true body.) But why does he call
bread his body, and not a Pumpion, which Marcion has instead of a heart, not
understanding that this was the old figure of Christ's body, ( N. B. had Christ
flesh then?) who said by Jeremy [ They have devised a Device against me,
saying, Come, let us cast wood upon his bread; that is, the Cross upon his body
-- so also making his Testament in the mention of the Cup, etc. And that you
may know the old figure of his blood in wine, Esaias says, etc. so now he
consecrated his blood in wine, who then figured wine in blood.]

Let any thing but ignorance and impudence judge, whether here be not over and
over, bread and wine after Consecration, being the representative and
figurative body and blood of Christ, or representing and figuring them fullier,
as the Prophets had partly, or darkly done before. But nothing will convince
some that rage, and are confident.

I repeat Tertullian's reproof of the denyers of the certainty of Sense, Lib de
Annim. c. 17. [ Therefore if Causes are freed from the infamy (of fallacy) how
much more Sense, which Causes freely go before, etc. What do thou procacious
Accademick? Thou overturnest the whole State of Life; thou troublest the whole
Order of Nature; thou blindest the Providence of God himself, as if he had made
deceitful and lying Senses the Lords of all his works, as they are to be known,
inhabited, dispersed, and enjoyed. -- It is not lawful for us to call those
senses into doubt, lest in Christ we deliberate of the belief of them; Lest
perhaps it be said that he falsely saw Satan cast down from Heaven, or falsely
heard his Father's Voice testifying of him; or was deceived when he touched
Peter' s Mother-in-Law; or after felt some other Spirit of the Ointment, which
he received as to his Burial; and some other relish of the Wine which he
CONSECRATED for the MEMORIAL (or to be the Memorial) of his blood.] So much for
Tertullian.

VI. He next cites Chrysostom, saying that Christ [ makes us his Body, not
only in belief, but in very deed; and that we eat and touch his Body.] Answ.
And does he not see how in citing these, he confuteth himself. 1. Christ does
really make Us his Body; that is, his Political and Mistical Body: But is it We
that this Man would prove Transubstantiate into Christ's Body? I thought it had
been the Bread, and not Us.

2. If we touch Christ's Body it must be his Representative Body; for the
Papists hold that we touch not the real Flesh and Blood of Christ, but only
certain Accidents, which now are not the Accidents of Christ's Body, nor of any
other Substance.

It would be tedious to cite out of Chrysostom all that makes against them.
Let these plain words serve to notify his mind [ Epist. ad Caesar. The Bread is
made worthy to be honored with the Name of the Flesh of Christ, by the
Priest's Consecration; yet the Flesh retains the properties of its
incorruptible Nature, as the Bread does its Natural Substance. Before the Bread
is sanctified we call it Bread; but when it is Consecrated by the Divine Grace,
it deserves to be called the Lords Body, though the Substance of the Bread
still remains.]

Reader, This is the Tradition of the Church.

As to some Men's Cavil, that this Epistle is Spurious, it is fully confuted by
Learned Men from sufficient Testimony.

VII. The next cited is a word that seems, in sound, to be for them, in Cyril
(or some think John) of Jerusale'ms Catechism. Read the words Translated by
himself; It is that Sentence which above all in the Ancients they most boast
of, [ viz. Do not look on it as bare bread, and bare wine; for it is the body
and blood of Christ: -- For though thy Sense suggest this to thee, yet let
Faith confirm thee: Do not judge of the thing by the taste, but rather from
Faith hold for certain, so that thou have no doubt that the body and blood are
given thee; knowing and accounting for certain, that this bread which is seen
by us, is not bread, though our taste judge it to be bread; but that it is the
body of Christ: And the wine which is seen by us is not wine, but the blood of
Christ.]

Answ. Here I desire the Reader to note, 1. That this one Sentence is all that
has any Words that sound like his Sentence (that there is no true bread and
wine) of all that he brings to prove Universal Tradition. 2. That this Book
called Cyri^'s Cat. Mystagog. is questioned. 3. That the Auther plainly
declares himself against Transubstantiation.

Which I prove, 1. The Assertion which he stateth is, that the bread and wine
(for so he calls them) are not [ bare, or mere bread and wine] but Christ's
body and blood; which we all assert: As the King's Statue in Brass is not bare
Brass. 2. He next bids us not judge by our taste, that it is bare bread. And
after when he says it is not bread and wine, and appealeth to Faith from
Sense, it is but his repeating of what he before asserted; meaning that though
Sense perceives nothing but bare bread and wine, yet Faith perceives Christ's
body and blood; and so it is not to be called bread and wine, for all proper
denomination is from the Form; and the Form of a Sacrament is Relative, (as of
a Statue, Image, Symbol, Sign, etc.) and it is Relatively Christ's body and
blood: So that it is but, that it is bare bread, that he denies; as we do.

3, Most fully, he tells us his mind, Cat. 3. p. 235. [ For as the bread of the
Eucharist after the Invocation of the Holy Ghost, is no more COMMON bread, but
is the body of Christ; so also this holy Ointment is no more mere Ointment, nor
(if any one had rather so speak) Common, now it is Consecrated; but it is a
Grace (or Gift) which causes the presence of Christ, and the Holy Ghost; that
is, of his Divinity:] So that if you take him to assert the Transubstantiation
of bread, you must say that he takes Oil also to be Transubstantiate into
Grace, or the Holy Ghost. For he says, that one is so as the other is changed.
That is, they are no more mere or common bread, or Oil.

VIII. His last is out of Justin Martyr, who says [ We do not take these
things as Common and ordinary bread, etc.

Answ. 1. There is not one word in Justin Martyr here that we do not own, and
say; (nor do we desire to worship God by any other Liturgy, or Order of
Worship, than that which he describes as then the Practice of the Christian
Church. O that we might all unite in that described Order!

2. And if any may be yet unsatisfied what Tradition says, hear Justin
farther, Apol. 2. (Truly the first) [ When the President has given thanks, and
all the People acclaimed, those that with us are called Deacons, distribute to
every one present BREAD and WINE and Water, and bring them to those that are
absent.] It is bread and wine when distributed.

And Dial. Cum Tryph. [ The Offering of Flower delivered to be offered for them
that were cleansed of the Leprosy, was a Type of the BREAD of the Eucharist,
which our Lord Jesus Christ commanded us to make in remembrance of his Passion.]

Thus you see to what his boast of Universal Tradition is come.

Read but Dallaeus de Cultu Latinorum, and you will see that there Universal
Tradition was against them.

The foresaid Author of the Dialogue, called, [ Full and easy satisfaction
which is the true Religion,] to these forementioned adds more, which you may
read, page 140, etc. viz. Irenaeus saying, [ For as the bread which is of the
Earth, receiving the Divine Invocation, is not now common bread, but the
Eucharist, consisting of two things, the Terrene and the Celestial, etc. Lib.
4. c. 34.

Origin in Mat. 25. calling it [ Bread, and a typical and symbolical body,
which profits none but the worthy Receivers, and that according to the
proportion of their Faith; which no wicked man eats, etc.

Eusebius. Caesar. Demonstr. Evang. l. 1. c. 10. [ Celebrating duly the Memorial
of the body and blood of Christ -- Seeing we receive the Memorial of this
Sacrifice, to be perfected on the Table, by the Symbols of his body and most
precious blood -- Lib. 8. He delivered us to use bread as the Symbol of his own
body.

Ephr. (in Biblioth Photii, p. 415. Ed. August.) The body of Christ which
Believers receive, loses not his sensible substance, and is not separated from
the intelligible grace.

And ad eos qui filii Dei, etc. [ Take notice diligently, how taking bread in
his hands he blessed it, and brake it, for a FIGURE of his immaculate Body; and
he blessed the Cup, and gave it to his Disciples, as a Figure of his precious
blood.

Theodoret in Dialog. de Immutab. against an Eutychian, who pleaded, that Bread
in the Eucharist was turned into Christ's Body, says, [ The Lord who called
that meat and bread, which naturally was his body, and who again called himself
a Vine, did honor the Visible Signs with the Names of his Body and Blood; not
having changed their Nature, but added Grace to Nature.] Can any Protestant
speak plainer than this?

And Dial. 2. [ The Divine Mysteries are Signs of the true Body.

And further, answering the Eutychian, he says, [ By the Net which thou have
made art thou taken: For even after the Consecration the mystical Signs change
not their Nature, for they remain in all their first SUBSTANCE, Figure, and
Form, and are visible, and to be handled as before.] This is not plain enough
for a Papist.

Nor Gelasius cont. Nestor. and Eutych. [ Verily the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ which we take is a Divine thing, for which and by which we are
made partakers of the Divine Nature; and yet it cease not to be the SUBSTANCE
and NATURE of bread and wine: And certainly the Image and similitude of the
Body and Blood of Christ are celebrated in the action of the Mysteries.] O dark
sayings!

[ Cyril, Alex. in John 4. c. 14. [ He gave to his believing Disciples
fragments of bread, saying, Take, eat, this is my body.]

Facundus is there cited as from Molinaeus ( l. 9. c. 5. p. 404. though I have
not the Author) saying [ We call that the body and blood of Christ, which is
the Sacrament of his body in the Consecrated bread and cup. Not that the bread
is properly his body, and the cup his blood, but because they contain the
Mystery of his body and blood.]

To these I might add plain Testimonies out of most of the Ancients, who write
on this subject: Such, e. g. as these words of Gregor. Nyssen Orat. de Baptis.
As the Altar naturally is but common Stone, but being consecrated becomes a
holy Table, an unspotted Altar; so the bread of the Eucharist is at first
ordinary, but being mysteriously sacrificed, it is, and is called, The body of
Christ, and is effectual to great things: And as the Priest who was yesterday a
Layman, by the blessing of Ordination is made a Teacher of Godliness, and a
Steward of the Mysteries, and though not changed in body or shape, yet is
changed and made better as to his soul, by an invisible power and grace; so
also by the same consequence Water, being nothing but Water of it self, yet
blessed by the heavenly grace, renews man by working in him the spiritual
regeneration.

Is Stone in the Altar, or the Priest ordained, or Water in Baptism
transubstantiated?

If Charles the Great was a Heretic, the Pope is greatly beholden to a
Heretic. In his Epist. to Alcunius he says, [ Christ at his Supper did break
the Bread to his Disciples, and likewise gave them the Cup, in Figure of his
body and blood; and so left to us this great Sacrament for our benefit.] This
was his Tradition.

Amalarius Praef. de Offic. Eccles. [ I am swayed in all that I write by the
judgment of holy men and godly Fathers; yet what I judge my self I speak: Those
things which are done in the celebration of Divine Service, are done in the
Sacrament of the Passion of our Lord, as he himself commanded. Therefore the
Priest offering the bread with the wine and water in the Sacrament, does it in
the stead of Christ; and the bread and wine and water in the Sacrament
represent the flesh and blood of Christ. For Sacraments are somewhat to
resemble those things whereof they are Sacraments. Therefore let the Priest be
like to Christ, as the bread and liquors are like the body and blood of Christ.]

[ The Sacrament of the body of Christ is in some manner the body of Christ:
For Sacraments should not be Sacraments, if in some things they had not the
likeness of that whereof they are Sacraments. Now by reason of this mutual
likeness, they are often called by that which they represent, -- Sacraments
have the virtue to bring us to those things, of which they are Sacraments.]

Walafridus Strabo de reb. Eccl. cap. 16., says, [ Christ gave to his
Disciples the Sacrament of his body and blood in the substance of bread and
wine.]

Bernard an. 1120. Sermon. de Purific. Mar. says, [ The Body of Chrisi in the
Sacrament is the food of the Soul, not of the Belly; therefore we eat him not
corporally, but in the manner that Christ is meat, in that same manner we
understand that he is eaten. And Sermon. de S. Martin. The same Flesh is given us
to this day, but Spiritually not Corporally.]

To conclude, If the words This is my Body are to be taken literally, then so
are the rest; [ This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood.] And then the Cup is
Transubstantiated into the New Testament.

And he that at once does believe that Christ has a Glorified Spiritual Body,
that Flesh and Blood does not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, that the Bread
and Wine cease to be Bread and Wine, and are turned substantially into the very
Flesh and Blood of Christ, and yet that the Pope and his Clergy are not Enemies
of Christ and Souls, who deny this Blood to the People, and give them but a
half Christ and a half Sacrifice, when he is praised by all Saints for washing
them from their sins in his Blood; this Man and his Leaders seem to be Educated
in such an Academy, as Festus thought Paul had been, and to be made by Satan
the Stumbling Block of the unbelieving World, to persuade them to laugh at
Christianity as we do at the Fopperies of Mahomet's Alcoran; and to make all
the Nations of Heathens and Infidels believe that they cannot be Christians,
unless they will be mad and senseless too: While Senses, Reason, Scripture, the
History of the Church, and Writings of the Ancients, the Tradition and
Judgment of the far greatest part of the Church, together with Charity,
Humanity, and Peace, are all denied in obedience to one Man, that, because one
Prince and his Clergy made him the first Bishop in his Empire and Councils,
feigneth himself to be the Universal Monarch of the World; and undertaketh an
Apostleship and Government at the Antipodes (when his zealousest Bishops
formerly some of them thought there was no such place;) and obliges himself to
the care of Souls farther than Drake and Candish Sailed, even in abundance of
unknown Lands; and (as his Agents confessed to the Abassines) where his
Missioners have no access.

The sum of all the History of this Matter is, The Fathers called it as we do,
sometime Christ's Body, and sometime the Figure, or representation of his Body,
and often Bread: And from the Name, in the dark Age, the Thing grew
controvated, and France was the chief Seat of the Contention: Bellarmine
himself says, that an. 820. [Paschasius Ratbertus, an Abbot. was the first Man
that seriously and copiously Wrote of the truth of the Body and Blood of the
Lord in the Eucharist against, Bertram,] who he thinks was one of the first
that Wrote against it. Bell. de script. Eccl. Johan. Parisiensis and the
Sorbonists concluded that neither Opinion was de fide: But the Pope chanced to
be on the other, and the Council of Trent has now made it de fide. Qu. Whether
the Sorbonists knew not that Tradition which Parents teach their Children? nor
any of those that were against Rathertus?

But the Discourser pretends in the end to Answer Objections: But he first
made them himself so thin, that he might not despair of saying something, which
a Man deep in his Cups, or one that is little used to the Exercise of his
Brain, might possibly take for a Rational Answer. But if the Reader be a Man
that will be at so much pains to escape delusion, as to Read over the Arguments
against Transubstantiation in the forementioned (little) Book of R. B. and then
try whether he can here find them Answered; I may conjecture that he will not
boast of the Discourser's performances.

He begins the Objection with a [ Why does not this marvelous Change appear to
our Senses, as well as other marvelous works: as the Water turned into Wine,
etc.]

I confess it is strange Flesh and Blood, that no sense can perceive: But a
spiritual Body may be out of the perception of our Sense. But did not the
Discourser know, that it is another kind of Objection that we make? Not [ Why
does not God show us the Miracle to our Sense?] but [ whether God deceive all
our Senses and Intellect, which there perceive Bread and Wine, when there is
none?] It is not, whether Sense perceive Christ? but, [ whether Sense perceive
Bread and Wine?] It is not, whether Sense do privatively not perceive; but,
whether it here positively err, and the first Intellective perception of the
sensate Object be an Error?

But under the Coats of this first part, he brings in a little of the true
Objection at last, [ It would follow, that we might call in question the whole
Mystery of Christianity, etc.]

His Answer to all is, By a distinction of Miracles; some are to convince
Unbelievers; some to sanctify and save Believers: And these are not to be the
Object of our Senses. He instanceth in Baptism, by which, as an outward and
visible Sign, is wrought an invisible Grace in the Soul of the baptized; though
view the Child as much as you will, you can by none of your Senses perceive any
mutation wrought.

Answ. As your Transubstantiation seems devised to make Infidels, so does
your Doctrine of Baptism seem made to make Anabaptists. Is it by a Miracle that
Baptism gives Grace to the Adult, or not? If not, will not Men rather turn
Anabaptists, than believe that Infants can have no Grace by Baptism, but by
Miracle; when that Sacrament was instituted to give Grace to the Adult without
a Miracle, and Scripture mentions no such difference of the Effects? But if
it be by Miracle to the Adult, is it not also by Miracle, that Men receive
Grace by Reading, Preaching, or other means? You Will never prove one a Miracle,
and not the other. And before we come to the Dispute between the Jusuites and
some Friars, the Arminians against some Calvinists, Whether all Grace infused
be a Miracle, we must bestow more time to agree of the definition of a Miracle,
than is congruous to our present business. Overdoing is undoing: They that will
make Men believe, that all Grace and Christianity is a Miracle, I doubt, do but
drive men from the belief of all.

But this Discourser tells us, that you see no change on a Child. Answ. And is
all a Miracle that is unseen? Is God a Miracle? Are Angels and all Spirits
Miracles? Is the Soul of a Man, or of a Beast, or the Life of a Plant a
Miracle, because unseen? Then all Grace however wrought is a Miracle; yea, and
every thought of a man's heart both good and evil.

Is all a Miracle that is done by God alone, without second Causes? Then his
moving the first created Motor were a Miracle. And yet who can say, that no
second Cause is used in the conveyance of Grace?

But if you could prove that Word and Sacraments work Grace by miracle, you
would make us less wonder that it is no more common: And here the Priest cannot
do this Miracle when he will, for it must be on a disposed Subject: But your
Priests can make Bread to be no Bread, by miracle, when they will. But S. Paul
says, Are all works of miracles? But how much greater Miracles your Priests
are feigned to work, than the raising of Lazarus, or any such like; and how
your feigned Miracles are confused, is showed fully by the foresaid Author.

But the Question, whether the Sacrament work by miracle, is one; and that,
whether it be it self a miracle, is another. Gods workings are secret to us, as
the wind whose course we cannot describe, Joh. 3. But is the Sacrament it self
a Miracle? The Word is not so: Baptism is not so: You feign not your
Confirmation to be so: (though Cyril aforesaid make the change of the Bread and
of the Oil to be alike.) And is only this one Ordinance a Miracle?

But if it were, what is that to the positive deception of all our Senses?

He tells us of the Hypostatical Union, answered before: What Senses are
deceived by that? Does Sense judge that Christ was not God? Or that there is no
Trinity? Or that a Virgin may not conceive? Not at all: Sense neither tells us
that it is so, or that it is not. Therefore to tell us of things hidden from
Sense, is impertinent. All the spiritual and noblest parts of Nature are out of
the reach of our bodily Senses: But Sense is our only first perceiver of all
its own proper Objects, and the Intellects first perception of them, is only as
they are sensate.

But the only pertinent Answer given, is, [ We may always trust our Senses about
their own Objects, and in due circumstances, and when we have not positive
grounds to think, either God Almighty by himself, or by an Angel, or
permissively by a Devil, represents things otherwise than they are.]

Answ. When things are represented otherwise than they are, it is either in
other sensible qualities than they have, or else something else is under those
qualities, than what they naturally signify; or else it is by altering the
Sense, Organ, or Medium. The first is a mere contradiction: To make an Object
to be what it was not, is usual; but to make it at the same instant to be what
it is not, is a contradiction. Therefore by representing you cannot rationally
mean this; e. g. To represent a rough thing as smooth, a little thing as great,
a white thing as black, by real alterations of those qualities making them to
be so.

But to make them seem so, when really they are not so, must be by the failing
of the Medium, Organ, Sense, Fantasy, or Intellect.

1. And for the Medium, no doubt but God can so alter it easily, as to deceive
all men's Senses: And in our present case, where all the five Senses of all the
sound men in the World, that try, are pretended to be deceived, God is able to
do it, by altering the Medium of every Sense that has a Medium: (For whether
tactus have any distinct from the Organ is undetermined.)

2. And the same is to be said of the Organ, Sense, Fantasy, and Intellect:
Quoad potentiam, no doubt but that God that can annihilate them can deprave
them when he please, and make a man senseless, deceived, doting, melancholy, or
mad; either privatively, by withholding his necessary natural aids; or
positively, by overcoming contraries.

But the Question is not, Whether God can do this per potentiam; but, Whether
he will do it, or can will to do it in such case as ours, in consistence with
his Governing Wisdom and Goodness, and that Truth and Constancy which he
manifests in the Government of the World. That he may and does penally make
men senseless, mad, and dead, we doubt not; and that those that would not
receive the love of the Truth, that they might be saved, may permissively be
given up to strong delusions to believe a Lie: That all they might be damned
that believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
11, 12.

But that God does thus (not penally, but) as a blessing, and not upon men's
forsaking him and his Truth, but while he is communicating Himself and his
Truth to them, and to make a Deceit or Lie the ordinary Means of Truth and
Holiness, and that he should do this ordinarily as the Govornour, Benefactor,
and Savior of Mankind, and so make Falsehood (not of his permitting, but of his
own effecting) to be the ordinary way of saving men; all this is contradiction;
contrary to his Will revealed in Nature and Scripture, and contrary to his
Perfection, who needed not to Govern the World by Deceit or Lies, as wanting
neither Power, Wisdom, or Goodness to do otherwise. Grace consists in the
illumination of the Mind, which reveals Truth, and not in the Error or
Deception of the Mind, by deceiving the Senses. Gods Works of Nature discerned
or perceived by our Natural Sense and Fantasy, and so by Natural Apprehension
of the Intellect, are his first-way of Revelation, in which he is most clear
and constant. And we are Men and Animals before we are Believers, and Faith is
graffed into the Stock of Nature, and rectifieth, illuminateth, elevateth,
perfecteth it, but does not destroy it, deprave it, deceive men, and make them
mad or senseless.

But you tell us of many excepted Cases, in which God may deceive our Senses,
or we may not trust them: No doubt, we may never trust them for that which
belongs not to them, but is beyond them, (as to know whether God can assume
Flesh, whether he can impregnate a Virgin; whether there be Trinity in Unity:
There be many things that Sense is no Judge of, one way or other. But when
there is an Object near us, duly situate, which Sense was made to perceive,
(as a quantitative, sapid, odoriferous, etc. substance) and there is [no
natural defect in Medium, Organ, Sense, Fantasy, or Natural Intellect, to
tell us of such excepted Cases, is, 1. To deface or slander the Providence of
God, who Governs by truth and order: 2. To make Mercy to consist in the
subversion of Nature, and Penal Acts to be gracious. 3. To leave man utterly
uncertain of every Article of Faith, yea, to bring in Skepticism, and leave us
no certainty in the world. For if God may and do, in so many Cases as you name,
deceive all the Senses and Perceptions of all men, even his faithfullest
Servants in the World, by Himself, by Angels, by Devils permitted, how shall
any man know when he does otherwise? You say, [' till we have positive grounds
to think these.] But, if God can do thus, how can you tell that he does it not
without telling us, or giving us positive grounds? And who knows what those
positive grounds are? Or that ever he read or heard a word, or saw a thing
which you may call a ground? For if you know not first that the perception of
Sense, and things sensate is true, you know not that ever you heard any thing
to suspend your belief of them: Or that what you hear is true. And how will you
prove against the Infidels, that God cannot Lie, or deceive us by a Prophet, an
Angel, or a Voice from Heaven, or a Writing, if he can and do daily deceive all
our Senses, about such Objects as they are made to perceive?

And what a War do you raise against the life of Faith, as if it had not
difficulties enough without such? If you should set a Candle before Infidels or
doubting persons, and say, [ If this be Light, the Gospel is false,] would you
be a Preacher of Christ or Satan? And if you set the Consecrated Bread and Wine
before them, and say, [ See them, smell, taste, feel them; if this be Bread and
Wine the Gospel is false;] would you not be the Preachers of Infidelity?

But I must consider, that so much being said already in the foresaid Dialogue,
which you give no Answer to, I must rather stay till that be answered, than
repeat it here.

But, at the least, you satisfy us, when you grant, that we must trust our
Senses 'till we have positive grounds for the contrary; and so the Case before
us is this: You say, [ They that will be saved, must believe that God in mercy
to illuminate men's minds, deceives all the sound men's Senses in the world
(that try) about those things which naturally are the proper Objects of Sense,
and duly qualified; and they must believe that there is no Bread or Wine, when
all their Senses present them as such to the Intellect, which necessarily
perceives them is such as sensate; and they must believe, that to govern,
illuminate, and sanctify us by such deceit, God enableth every Priest, how
ignorant and wicked soever, to verefie all the Contradictions before opened,
and to work, as often as he pleases, in every Mass above thirty Miracles, with
many miraculous aggravations.] And the proof of all this is, 1. That the same
Christ that said [ I am the Door, the true Vine, the Shepherd, a Sower, a
Husbandman, the Bridegroom, and spoke ordinarily by Parables, and said in this
same Sacrifice or Sacrament [This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood;] and in
all these is to be understood parabolically; yet saying at the same time [This
is my Body] is to be understood literally, though S. Paul over and over call it
Bread.] 2. And this Exposition is delivered to us by the Roman Pope and his
Clergy, and by some Priests in the Ninth and Tenth Ages, when their own
Writers say, that their Popes were Monsters not to be named, and the Ages were
for horrid Ignorance the shame of the Church. And after that, 1215. a General
Council Decreed it first, which also Decreed the extermination of all
Christians as Heretics, that will believe man's Senses herein, and the
Excommunication and Deposition of all Temporal Lords, that will not exterminate
all such Subjects, and the disobliging their Vassals from their Allegiance, and
giving their Dominions to others: While yet the Judgment and Tradition of the
far greatest part of the Christian World is against them, and the Writings of
the ancient Doctors of the Church; and the Pope and his Clergy dare not
pretend to have received by Memory and Tradition an Exposition of the Bible,
nor do give us any proof of their pretended Tradition of this one Text, that is
considerable, besides their own bare word. This is the true Case.

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the Writing of this I first saw Larrogues French Discourse, and therein
the Citation of Joh. Parisiensis Opinion about Transubstantiation, and the
Sorbonists determination, that neither Opinion was de fide, and determined: And
did they not then know Tradition?

Since that I have seen Bishop Cousin's History of Transubstantiation, which so
fully proves the Novelty of it, as against the Tradition and Judgment of the
Church, and that by Fathers and many Councils, in all Ages till Innoc. 3. and
even after Petrus Blesensis, and Steph. Aedunensis (who first name it) and
Innoc. 3. who first established it, few believed it in most Countries, as their
own Authors confess; that I repented that I had needlessly meddled with the
Citation of Authors, which is done by him so much better: And indeed such
unanswerable Testimony is produced by him, (and that briefly in a small Volumn)
to prove that the constant Judgment of the Church has been against
Transubstantiation, that I need not refer the doubting Reader to any other
Book, nor provoke the Papists to try their strength upon any other: (Though
Hospinian, Usher, Chamier, Spalatensis, Albertinus, and abundance more, have
done it beyond all reasonable contradiction.)

FINIS.

