THE Successive Visibility OF THE CHURCH OF Which the PROTESTANTS are the
soundest Members.

I. Defended against the Opposition of Mr. William Johnson.

II. Proved by many Arguments.

By Richard Baxter.

Whereto is added, 1. An account of my judgment to Mr. J. how far Heretics
are or are not in the Church.

2. Mr. Js. Explication of the most used terms; with my Quere's thereupon, and
his Answer, and my Reply.

3. An Appendix about successive Ordination.

4. Letters between me, and T. S. a Papist, with a Narrative of the success.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Nevil Simmons Bookseller in Kederminster, and are
to be sold by Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in Fleet Street. 1660.

The Preface.
Reader,
IF thou meet me at the threshold with a [ What need any more against Popery
then is written?] I must answer thee, [No need, if all that is already written,
were improved. Nor were there need of any writings, if men would not renounce
their common senses. We cannot hope or pretend, by any writings, to bring any
controversy to a plainer, better issue, then to resolve it by the judgment of
the common senses of all the world: and yet this does not end the controversies
between us and the Papists; whether Bread be Bread, and Wine be Wine, when they
are seen, felt, tasted, etc. But some writings are useful to awake men to the
use of Reason, and to help them to improve their other helps. And, as Seneca
says, Multum egerunt qui ante nos suerunt; sed non peregerunt: suscipiendi
tamen sunt] Though I thought I had said enough before in three or four former
writings, yet the weight of the Question here debated, and the common use that's
made of it by the Papists, have persuaded me, that this also will be useful to
the Church.

And I must confess the moderation and ingenuity of the Gentleman that I
contend with, did not only tempt me into the undertaking at the first, but also
did incline my thoughts to a publication; there being here no stinking breath
to annoy and drive away the Reader. I have learned by experience, that its only
prudent, charitable, self-denying, humble men, that are fit to be engaged in
controversies. We bring fire to Gunpowder, when we deal with proud malignant
wretches, (such as I have lately had to do with,) that have souls so forsaken,
and consciences so seared, as that they seem to make malicious lies, their
glory and delight. Some think that the contending with such, is a needful,
though an unsavory work: I confess, a Liar is not to be encouraged, nor our
just reputation to be prodigally cast away, or contemptuously neglected. Duo
sunt necessaria, says Augustine, Conscientia and fama: Conscientia propter
Deum; fama propter proximum. But for our selves, Gods approbation is enough;
and for others, if Duty satisfy them not, contending will not.

Bacchae bacchanti si velis adversarier,
Ex insana insaniorem facies; feriet saepius, says Plaut.
If Truth make blinded men our enemies, and the performance of our duty be our
greatest crime, and no purgation be left us, but by becoming erroneous or
ungodly, its not worth our labor to word it with such men. Pride and Malice
hearken not to Reason: Apologies will not cure the envy of a Cain, or the pride
of a Diotrephes, or the hypocrisy and persecuting fury of a Pharisee. But (as
August.) Conscientiam malam laudantis praeconium non sanat; ne^ bonam vulnerat
convitium.] Praise heals not an ill Conscience; and reproach cannot wound a
good one. Conscience respects a higher tribunal. Could a Calumniator be
believed, it were a small thing to be judgeed by man: and Conscia men's recti
famae n^e^dacia ridet.


But when they make themselves the objects of the common compassion or
derision, they spare me the labor of a confutation: Its enough to say with the
Philosopher, [ Ego sic vivam, ut nemo illi credat] [I will so live, that no man
shall believe him;] when they themselves will so lie that no man (or next to
none) shall believe them. Its a far more necessary and profitable employment,
to oppose our sins then our accusers; and to see that we are blameless, then
that we are so reputed: and to escape the temptations of Satan, rather then the
calumnies of his instruments. Its better this wind offend our ears, then guilt
should wound our hearts. Penalty is heavier then injurious persecution, because
of its relation to guilt: but culpability it self is worse then both. Poena
potest demi, culpa perennis erit.
Mors faciet certe, ne sim, cum venerit, exul.
Ne non peccarem, mors quoque non faciet.


And even when God has fully pardoned us, Litura tamen extat. A soul that
knows the evil of sin, and sees by faith the dreadful Majesty, and the
judgment to which he must stand or fall, is taken up with greater cares, then
the defense of his reputation with men; except as Gods honor, or the good of
souls may be concerned in it.

Another thing that encouraged me to this engagement was, that my Antagonist
seemed exceeding desirous of a close syllogistical way of arguing, which put me
in hope of a speedier and better issue, then with wordy wandering Sophisters I
could expect. I never liked, either the feasts that consist of sauce and
ceremony with little meat; or the bawling rooks, that will not receive a bit
without a troublesome noise.

Sed tacitus pasci si posset corvus, haberet
Plus depis, and rixa multo minus, invidiaeque
Nor the prodigal covetousness that turns the Cock when none requires it; and
plucks up the floodgates, and sets the mill a going when there is no grist;
and omnia vult dicere, and nihil audire.

When words are too cheap, it either proves them worthless, or makes them so
esteemed. The sentence of an Orator, and the very syllables of a Disputant
should be short. There should be no more dishes then are necessary for the
meat: nor no more straw then is necessary to sustain the grain. Frugality of
speech, and sermonem habere rebus parem, do show and make our speeches
valuable. Truth would be adorned, but not covered: attended, but not crowded;
proclaimed, but not buried in an heap of words. Arguments are like money, that
is valuable according to the metal and the weight, and not according to the
number of pieces, or curiosity of the stamp.

And a third thing that made me the willinger to this task, was; that the
assaults of Juglers, that thought to catch me under the names and mask of
Seekers, Behmenists, and such other sects, had possessed me with so much
indignation and distaste, that I was glad to meet with a bare-fac't Papist,
that was not ashamed of his Religion, but would profess himself to be what he
is. I could never hear that the Papists won so many, and so considerable
persons this threescore years, by open dealing, as I have cause to think they
have won by fraud under the vizor of Se^kers, and Sectaries, within a few years
past. I fear no Papists, but Protestant Papists, that come to Church, and take
the oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, as many did the engagement but a while
ago; or that wear some other vizor of dissimulation. Hypocrisy is nowhere so
odious as in Religion, where men have to do with a heart searching God, and
deal in matters of everlasting consequence. He has no Religion, that thinks it
his duty to lie for his Religion. For he has no Religion that believes not in
God. And he that believes him to be a Lover of Lies, believes not that he is
God. Verba (inq. August.) propterea instituta sunt, non ut per ea se invicem
homines fallant, sed ut eis quisque in alterius noticiam cogitationes suas
proferat.] Verbis ergo uti ad fallaciam, non ad quod sunt instituta, peccatum
est. -- Long tamen tolerabilius est, in his quae a religione fidei sejuncta
sunt mentiri, quam in his, etc. -- ] Truth is great, (and the greatest
advantage to a Disputant:) and will at last prevail. Lying is a remedy that
needs a remedy; easing for the time by palliation, but much increasing the
disease. [ Magna est viis Veritatis quae contra omnium ingenia, calliditatem,
solertiam, contra fictas hominum insidias, facile se per ipsam defendit, says
Seneca.

Three Questions about Popery have put the world to much dispute. Qu. 1.
Whether it be the right and safe Religion? 2. Whether it may be tolerated? 3.
Whether it be our duty to enter into reconciliation and communion with the
Papist, (though not subjection) and on what terms?

The first I have debated in this and diverse other writings, (viz. three
Disputations, called the safe Religion, a Key for Catholics, etc. a
winding sheet for Popery, and the true Catholic, and Catholic Church
discribed.) It is one of the reproaches of humane nature, that ever it could be
corrupted into so senseless, unreasonable, impious, uncharitable a thing as
Popery: And one of the prodigies of misery, in the world, that any save one
that Inguinis and capitis quae sunt discrimina nescit, should be fully, and
seriously a Papist.

But four things I find are the pillars of their Church, and propagates their
corruptions: 1. One is the love of themselves and of the world in unsanctified
hearts: which makes them be of the Religion of their Rulers; and resolve to be
of no Religion that shall undo them in the world: And therefore to escape
reproach, and torment, and death, they will do any thing, and as they speak,
will trust God with their souls, rather then men with their bodies: The meaning
is, they will rather venture on the wrath of God, then of man; and save their
bodies, then their souls; and secure this life (as long as they can) then life
everlasting.

2. Another is Custom and Education, possessing men with blinding stupifying
prejudice, together with a contempt of truth and happiness, that keeps
sluggish souls from that diligent search and trial that is necessary to a
conquest of that temptation, and to a saving entertainment of the truth. And
the name and reverence of their forefathers, emboldeneth them against the name
and reverence of God. Adeo a teneris assuescere multum est. Says Seneca, Inter
causas malorum est quod vivimus ad exempla, nec ratione componimur, sed
consuetudine abducimur. Quod si pauci facerent, nolumus imitari; quum plures
facere caeperunt, quasi honestius fit, quia frequentius sequimur, and recti
apud nos locum tenet error, ubi publicus factus est. Not what God says, but
what man does, is made the rule of this humane apish kind of Religion. And so
the Tyrant Custom rules them: Et gravissimum est imperium consuetudinis,
Senec. Educatio and disciplina mores facit: and id sapit unusquisque quod
didicit: Id.

3. Another cause is superstitious fears which the false doctrins of Purgatory,
and no salvation out of their Church, etc. have cast into men's minds. The
Priests rule their subjects, as one of their Captains ruled the Thracians, by
making ladders, and making them believe he would climb up to Juno to complain
of them.

4. And it is not the least support of Popery, that it makes light of heinous
sins, as ^ornication, drunkenness, swearing, forswearing, lying, equivocation,
etc. and provideth for them the easy remedies of confession, and such gentle
penance as the sagacious tractable Priest shall impose. But holy water will
not wash out their spots. God judges not as the Pope or Mass Priest. Let no
man deceive you with vain words: for such things (as fornication, uncleanness,
filthiness, foolish talking, etc.) comes the wrath of God on the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 5.3, 5, 6. For all the flatteries of indulgences, and
pardons, and the name of Venial sin, yet conscience has not pardoned all that
is pardoned by the Pope. And, Prima est haec ultio, quod se
Iudice nemo nocens absolvitur --


And its no great ease to have an external pardon, and neither an Eternal, nor
Internal; but Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem. How many must be
damned by Christ, that were pardoned by the Vicechrist.

Qu. 2. And for the second Question, about the Toleration of Popery, let him
that desires it, but procure a Toleration of the Protestant Profession in
Spain, Italy, Bavaria, Austria, etc. and then I undertake to give him a
satisfactory answer of this question. In the mean time, I shall only say as
Seneca, Nemo ex imprudentibus est qui relinqui sibi debeat: especially men that
renounce all their senses and reason* so far, as not to believe that bread is
bread, and wine is wine, should not be left without a guardian. But in general,
we must on one hand avoid inhumane cruelty (and leave them those means that are
suited to their cause:) and on the other hand we must take heed that we betray
not the Gospel and the souls of men, to the subtilty and pernicious fraud of
trained deceivers. We must vigilantly and strenuously defend, though we must
tenderly and sparingly offend, any further then is necessary to such defense.

Qu. 3. And for the third question, about Reconciliation, I have spoken to it,
and offered the terms in other writings (especially my Key for Catholics) I
only add now, that the Peacemakers no doubt are blessed; and if it be
possible, as much as in us lies, we must live peaceably with all men. But for
the terms, we cannot possibly meet every corrupted party half way in their sins
and errors, that we may be friends. Let us hold to the immutable sufficient
Rule, indicted by the Holy Ghost, and judge of all that swerve from it,
according to the degree of their deviation, and unite in the ancient simplicity
of Doctrine, Worship, and Government, and lay our unity only on things
necessary: For whosoever devises any other Rule and terms of unity then these,
shall never attain it, but raise up a new Sect, and increase our wounds. I am
as much for unity as ever was Cassander, Erasmus, Grotius, or any of the
Reconcilers: But I am certain that to subscribe to the Trent Decrees and Creed,
and to turn Papist, or Semi-Papist, or participate of any sin for peace, is not
the way. Let some plead for all the Greek corruptions, and some for the Popes
supremacy regulated by Canons; and some for his mere Primacy as principium
unitatis, and his Government of all the West as Patriark; let them digladiate
about a Pope and Council, as wisely as Greece and Troy did fight ten years for
a beautiful whore; I am sure that none of these are the way to the Churches
Unity and Peace (as I have opened in my description of the true Catholic
Church) Nor will their design be more successeful, that would so discordantly
agree us all with the first three hundred years, as to deny the first hundred,
or two hundred to be our pattern, and to make all the forms and ceremonies to
be necessary to our concord, which the third or fourth Century used but as
things indifferent, with diversity and mutation, and mutual forbearance.

But of the terms of Catholic Unity, I have spoken, as in the forecited
papers, so in a Pacificatory Letter of the Worcestershire Ministers to Mr. J.
Dury: and if God will, shall do it yet more ^ully.

And of the evils in Popery, that move me to distaste it, having given a
Breviate in an Epistle before another man's Book, which I perceive is seen of
very few, I shall here annex so much of that Epistle, as is pertinent to the
present business.

Readers,
WEre not the Judgments of God so dreadful, and infatuation so lamentable in
matters of everlasting consequence, and sin so odious, and the calamities of
the Church, the dishonor of God, and the Damnation of Souls such deplorable
things, as tolerate not a laughter in the standers by, it would seem one of the
most ridiculous things in the World, that a man of seeming wisdom should be a
Papist; and that so many Princes, and learned men, with the vulgar multitude,
should be able so far to renounce or intoxicate their Reason while they are
awake: And a Papist would be described, to be one that sets up his
understanding to be the laughingstock of the sober rational World. There are
abundance of Controversies among Physicians that concern men's lives; and yet I
have heard of none so vain, as to step forth and challenge the Authority of
being the universal Decider of them, or to charge God with solly or oversight,
if he have not appointed some such universal Judge in the World, to end all
Controversies in matters of such weight. But if in Physick's, Law, or any of
the Sciences, the Controversies should be never so many or so great, if yet you
could resolve them into sense it self, and bring all to the judgment of men's
eyes, and ears, and taste, and feeling, who would not laugh or hiss at him that
would still make them the matters of serious doubts?

The Papists finding that man is (...)perfect, and knows but in part, and
(...) the Scripture there are some things are hard to be understood, and that
Earth has not so much Light as Heaven, imagine that hereby they have a fair
advantage to plead for an universal terrestrial Judge, and to reproach God, if
he have appointed none such, and next to plead that their Pope or his approved
Councils must needs have this Authority. And when they come to the Decision,
they are not ashamed to see after so many hundred years pretentions, that the
World is but basfled with the empty name of a Judge of Controversies, and that
Difficulties are no less Difficulties still, and Controversies are nowhere so
voluminous as with them. But this is a small matter with them. Their Judge
s^^ms much wiser when he is silent, then when he speaks. When he comes to a
Decision, and forms up thereby the Hodge-podge of Popery, they seem not to
smile at, nor be ashamed of the Picture which they have drawn, which is, of an
Harlot showing her nakedness, and committing her lewdness in the open
Assemblies, in the sight of the Sun. They openly proclaim their shame against
the light of all the acknowledged Principles in the World, their own or others,
and in opposition to all, or almost all that is commendable among men. The
charge seems high, but (in a few words) take the proof.

1. They confess the Scripture to be the Word of God: and yet when we would
appeal to that as the Rule of Faith and Life, or as a divine Revelation, in our
Disputes, they fly off, and tell us of its obscurity, and the necessity of a
Judge. If they meet with a Hoc est corpus meum, they seem for a while to be
zealous for the Scripture: But tell them that Paul in 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28.
does call it Bread after the Consecration, no less than three times in the
three next Verses, and then Scripture is nonsense to them till the Pope make
sense of it. It is one of their principal labors against us, to argue against
the Scriptures sufficiency to this use. By no means can we prevail with them to
stand to the Decision of the Scripture.

2. They excessively cry up the Church, and appeal to its Decision: and
therefore we might hope, that here if anywhere, we might have some hold of
them. But when it comes to the Point, they not only disown the judgment of the
Church, but impudently call Christ's Spouse a Strumpet, and cut off (in their
uncharitable imagination) two or three parts of the universal Church as
Heretics or Schismatics. The judgment of the Churches in Armenia, Ethiopia,
Egypt, Syria, the Greeks, and many more besides the Reformed Churches in the
West, is against their Popes universal Vicarship or Sovereignty, and many of
their Errors that depend thereon: And yet their judgment is not regarded by
this Faction. And if a third or fourth part (such as it is) of the Universal
Church, may cry up themselves as the Church to be appealed to, and condemn the
far greater part, why may not a tenth or a twentieth part do the like? Why may
not the Donatists, the Novatians, or the Greeks (much more) do so as well as
Papists?

3. They cry up Tradition. And when we ask them, How we shall know it, and
where it is to be found, they tell us, principally in the profession and
practice of the present Church. And yet when two or three parts of the
universal Church profess that Tradition is against the Papal* Monarchy, and
other Points depending on it, they cast Tradition behind their backs.

4. They cry up the Fathers: and when we bring their judgments against the
substance of Popery, they sometime vilify or accuse them as erroneous, and
sometime tell us, that Fathers as well as Scripture must be no otherwise
understood, than their Church expounds them.

5. They plead for an appeal to Councils; and (though we easily prove that none
of them were universal, yet such as they were) they call them all Reprobate,
which were not approved by their Pope, let the number of Bishops there be never
so great. And those that were approved, if they speak against them, they reject
also, either with lying shifts denying the approbation, or saying, the acts are
not de fide, or not conciliariter facta, or the sense must be given by their
present Church, or one such contemptible shift or other.

6. At least one would think they should stand to the judgment of the Pope,
which yet they will not: for shame forbids them to own the Doctrine of those
Popes that were Heretics or Infidels (and by Councils so judged:) And others
they are forced to disown, because they contradict their Predecessors. And at
Rome the Cardinals are the Pope, while he that has the name is often made light
of. And how infallible he is judged by the French and the Venetians; how Sixtus
the fifth was valued by the Spaniards, and by Bellarmine, is commonly known.

7. But all this is nothing to their renunciation of humanity, even of the
common senses and reason of the world. When the matter is brought to the
Decision of their eyes, and taste, and feeling, whether Bread be Bread, and
Wine be Wine; and yet all Italy, Spain, Austria, Bravaria, etc. cannot resolve
it; yea, generally (unless some latent Protestant) do pass their judgment
against their senses, and the senses of all sound men in the World; and that
not in a matter beyond the reach of sense (as whether Christ be there
spiritually) but in a matter belonging to sense, if any thing belong to it, as
whether Bread be Bread, etc. Kings and Nobles, Prelates and Priests, do all
give their judgment, that all their senses are deceived. And is it possible
for these men then to know any thing? or any controversy between us and them
to be decided? If we say that the Sun is light, or that the Pope is a man, and
Scripture legible, or that there are the Writings of Councils and Fathers
extant in the World, they may as well concur in a denial of all this, or any
thing else that sense should judge of. If they tell us that Scripture requires
them to contradict all their senses in this point; I answer,

1. Not that Scripture before mentioned, that calls it [Bread] after the
Consecration, thrice in the three next Verses.

2. And how know they that there is such a Scripture, if all their senses be so
fallible? If the certainty of sense be not supposed, a little learning or wit
might satisfy them, that Faith can have no certainty. But is it not a most
dreadful judgment of God, that Princes and Nations, Learned men, and some that
in their way are conscientious, should be given over to so much inhumanity, and
to make a Religion of this brutishness, (and worse) and to persecute those with
Fire and Sword, that are not so far forsaken by God, and by their reason? and
that they should so solicitously labor the perversion of States and Kingdoms
for the promoting of stupidity or stark madness?

8. And (if we go from their Principles to their Ends, or Ways, we shall soon
see that) they are also against the Unity of the Church, while they pretend
this as their chiefest Argugument, to draw men to their way. They set up a
corrupted Faction, and condemn the far greater part of the Church; and will
have no unity with any but those of their own Faction and Subjection: and fix
this as an essential part of their Religion, creating thereby an impossibility
of universal concord.

9. They also contradict the Experience of many thousand Saints; asserting that
they are all void of the Love of God and saving Grace, till they become subject
to the Pope of Rome; when as the Souls of these Believers have Experience of
the Love of God within them, and feel that Grace that proves their
Justification. I wonder what kind of thing it is that is called Love or
Holiness in a Papist, which Protestants and other Christians have not, and what
is the difference.

10. They are most notorious Enemies to Charity, condemning most of the
Christian world to Hell, for being out of their subjection.

11. They are notorious Enemies to Knowledge under pretense of Obedience and
Unity, and avoiding Heresy. They celebrate their Worship in a Language not
understood by the vulgar Worshippers. They hinder the People from Reading the
holy Scriptures, (which the ancient Fathers exhorted men and women to, as an
ordinary thing.) The quality of their Priests and People, testifies this.

12. They oppose the Purity of divine Worship, setting up a multitude of humane
Inventions instead thereof, and idolatrously (for no less can be said of it)
adoring a piece of conserated Bread as their God.

13. They are Opposers of Holiness, both by the foresaid enmity to Knowledge,
Charity, and purity of Worship, and by many unholy Doctrines, and by deluding
Souls with an outside histrionicall way of Religion, never required by the
Lord, consisting in a multitude of Ceremonies, and worshipping of Angels, and
the Souls of Saints, and Images, and Crosses, etc. Let experience speak how
much the Life of Holiness is promoted by them.

14. They are Enemies to common Honesty, teaching the Doctrines of
Equivocations and Mental Reservations, and making many heinous sins venial, and
many of the most odious sins to be Duties, as killing Kings that are
excommunicated by the Pope, taking Oaths with the foresaid Reservations, and
breaking them, etc. For the Jesuits Doctrine, Montaltus the Jansenist, and many
of the French Clergy have pretty well opened it: And the Pope himself has
lately been fain to publish a condemnation of their Apology. And yet the power
and interest of the Jesuits and their followers among them, is not altogether
unknown to the World.

15. They are Enemies to Civil Peace and Government, (if there be any such in
the World) as their Doctrine and Practice of killing and deposing excommunicate
Princes, breaking Oaths, etc. shows. Bellarmine that will go a middle way,
gives the Pope power in ordine ad spiritualia, and indirectly, to dispose of
Kingdoms, and tells us, that it is unlawful to tolerate Heretical Kings that
propagate their Heresy, (that is, the ancient Faith.) How well Doctor Heylin
has vindicated their Council of Laterane in this, (whose Decrees stand as a
Monument of the horrid treasonable Doctrine of the Papists) I shall, if God
will, hereafter manifest: In the mean time, let any man read the words of the
Council, and Judge.

And now whether a Religion that is at such open enmity with 1. Scripture, 2.
The Church, 3. Tradition, 4. Fathers, 5. Councils, 6. Some Popes, 7. The common
senses and Reason of all the World, even their own, 8. Unity of Christians, 9.
Knowledge, 10. Experience of Believers, 11. Charity, 12. Purity of Worship, 13.
Holiness, 14. Common Honesty, 15. and to Civil Government and Peace (which
might all easily be fully proved, though here but touched) I say, whether such
a Religion should be embraced and advanced with such diligence and violence,
and men's souls laid upon it, is the controversy before us. And whether is
should be tolerated (even the propagation of it, to the damnation of the
peoples souls) is now the Question which the juggling Papists have set a foot
among those that have made themselves our Rulers: and there are found men among
us, that call themselves Protestants and godly, that plead for the said
Toleration; (and consequently for the delivering up of these Nations to Popery,
if not to Spanish, or other foreign Powers) which if they effect, and after
their contrary Professions, prove such Traitors to Christ, his Gospel and their
posterity, as they leave the Land of their Nativity in misery, they shall leave
their stinking names for a reproach and curse to future Generations; and on
such Pillars shall be written, [This pride, selfseeking, uncharitableness, and
schism has done.]

This was written and printed under the late Usurpers.)

Postscript.
Reader,
THough the Papists have seemed to be the most discountenanced party under the
late Usurpers, and to have no interest or power, yet I have still found, that
those sped worst from men, that were most against them; and that I never wrote
any book against them, but it brought a sharper storm upon me, then any thing
that I wrote against any other Sect that was more visibly in power. And yet it
was not openly professed to be for my opposition to Popery, but on some other
account: and though the fountain by the taste of the waters, might be known yet
it self and secret conducts were all underground and undiscernable. The Jesuits
that are the spring of these and greater things then these, are latent, and
their motion is not seen, while we see the motions which are caused by their
secret force. So that by this means its only those few inquisitive discerning
persons, that can see a cause in its effect, that find them out: and those few
are unable to make full proof, even of the things they know; and thereby are
prohibited from appearing openly in the cause, lest coming short in legal
proof, they leave the guilty triumphing over the innocent as calumniators. For
the last book that I wrote against them ( My Key for Catholics) the
Parliament House it self, and all the land did ring of my accusations; and the
menaces were so high, that my intended ruin was the common talk. And I know
their indignation is not abated. My crime is, that their zeal to proselyte me,
has acquainted me with some of their secrets, and let me know what the Jesuits
are doing, and how great a party that are masked under the name of Seekers,
Familists, etc. they have in the land. I have therefore Reader, this double
request to thee: First, arm thy self diligently against Popery, if thou
would preserve thy Religion and thy soul. Whatever Sects assault thee
openly, suspect and avoid the disease that is endeavoring with greatest
advantages to be Epidemical. To this end, be well studied in the writings that
have opened their vanity and shame: I hope, what I have written on that
subject, will not be useless to them that are not at leisure to read the larger
volumes. Read Dr. Challoners Credo sanctam Ecclesia^ Catholicam. Peter Moulins
Answer to Cottons Questions. And for larger Volumes, Usher, Chillingworth,
Field, Whittakers, especially de Pontif. Roman* may be numbered with the most
solid, judicious and useful: And Dr. Mouline of the Novelty of Popery now in
the press, with River, and Chamier, to add no more.

And if ever thou fall in company with Seekers, or Familists, that are
questioning all things, and endeavoring to disparage the holy Scriptures, and
the Ministry, and Church, and Ordinances, though but in a questioning way, look
then to thy Religion, and suspect a Papist: Secondly, because experience has
taught me to expect that my renewed assault of Popery should raise some storm,
and renew my dangers, (though I know not which way it will come, and expect it
should be upon pretense of something that is no kin to the real cause,) let him
that has been so exceedingly beholden to the servants of Christ for prayers,
have thy prayers in particular for this, that he may be satisfied in Gods
approbation, and count it a small matter to be censured by man, or to suffer
those soft and harmless strokes, that the impotent arm of flesh can inflict;
and may live and dye in the Army of believers, described Heb. 11, and 12. and
be so far preserved from the contrivances of malice, as is needful to his
appointed work: in which it is the top of his ambition: to be found

A faithful though unworthy servant of Christ for his Church, Rich. Baxter.
S^p. 3. 1660.
The CONTENTS.
The first Part.
Mr. Johnsons Argument prosecuted, to page 6 My Answer. 7 to 26 Mr. Johnsons
second Paper. 27 His attempt to prove the succession of the Roman Sovereignty.
49 to the end. My letter to the sender of his. 68 My Reply to the second Paper.
77 On which of us the Proof is incumbent. 87 Of the Eastern and Southern
Churches. 94, 95, etc. Whether we are one Church with them of Rome. 107, etc.
Of our separation. 107 Whether the Armenians, Ethiopians, Syrians, etc. are
excluded as Heretics? 113 The instance of an Appeal of John of Antioch
refuted. 127 The instance of Flavianus Appeal refuted. 129 Of Leo's pretended
restoring Theodoret upon Appeal. 132 Of Cyprians desire that Stephen would
depose Martian Bishop of Arles. 133 A pretended Decree of the Council of Sardis
examined. 135 Basils words Epist. 74. examined. 138 Chrysostoms words to
Innocent. 140 A pretended Proof from the Council of Ephesus confuted. 141 Of
the addresses to Pope Julius by Athanasius and the Arrians. 143 Chamiers words
hereabout. 146 Of Chrysostoms case. 147 Of Theodosius and the Council. Ephesians.
152 Of the Council of Calcedon. 154 Of Pope Agapet deposing Anthymius of
Constantinople. 159 Of Gregory's words. 160 Of Cyril and Celestine against
Nestorius. 161 Of Juvenals words. 163 Of Valentinians and Theodosius words. 164
Of Vincentius Lirinensis words. 169 Of Philip and Arcadius at Council. Ephesus.
170 The nullity of all these pretended Proofs. 174 Whether Papists give, and
Popes accept the Title of Vice-Christ, Monarch, etc. 175 to 188 Of the Contest
of Councils for the Rule. 188 Mr. Johnsons work to which his cause engages
him. 191
The Contents of the second Part.
Qu. WHether the Church of which the Protestants are members have been visible
ever since the days of Christ on earth? Aff. The Church what. 197 Protestants
what. 198 Of Membership, and Visibility. 201 The first Argument, to prove the
successive Visibility. 204 The second Argument. 209 Papists Testimonies for the
sufficiency of Scripture as the Rule. 219 Some of the Fathers of the same. 221
Where was our Church. 225 The true Catholic Church, how described by
Augustine. 227 Optatus. 231 Tertullian. 232 The third Argument. 238 The fourth
Argument. 241, 242 Arguments proving the Visibility of a Church without the
Papacy, since Christ. Argument first, from the Council of Calcedon. 242
Argument 2. From the silence of the Ancients in cases where the allegation of
the Papal power would have been most pertinent and necessary. 244 Argument 3.
From the Tradition and Testimony of the greatest part of the Church. 248
Argument 4. From the Churches without the verge of the Empire, not subject to
the Pope. 249 Argument 5. From the Eastern Churches within the Empire, not
subjects of the Pope. 251 Argument 6. From the full Testimony of Gre^ory the
first, p. 252, etc. defended against Bellarmine. Argument 7. From the
Confession of ^^ie^ Papists. (...) Sylvius, Melchio^ C^nus, Reynerius. 267
Argument 8. From Historical Testimony about the Original of Universal H^^dship.
269 Argument 9. The generality of Christians in the first ages, and most in the
latter, free from owning the Papacy. 271 Argument 10. Most Christians in all
ages ignorant of Popery. 275 Object. The Armenians, Greeks, etc. differ from
Protestants: Answered. 280 Misce^^any considerable Testimonies. 288 Mr.
Johnsons exception. 292 My Answer to his exception, showing in what sense
Heretics are, or are not in the Church, applied to the Eastern and Southern
Churches. 293, etc. Mr. Johnsons Explication of the most used terms, with my
Quere's thereupon, and his Answer, and my Reply. 1. Of the Church. 311 2. Of
Heresy. 324, etc. 3. Of the Pope. 330, etc. 4. Of Bishops. 337 5. Of
Tradition. 342 Of General Councils. 345 6. Of Schism. 350 An Appendix about
successive Ordination. 355 Letters between me and T. S. a Papist; with a
Narrative of the success, written by his friend. 363
ERRATA.
PAge 176. l. 24. for it r. that. p. 179. l. 14. r. Freheri. p. 217. l. 26. r.
necessitate. p. 271. l. 6. r. Ecclesia Romana. p. 355. l. 2. for here r. hear.

Mr. Iohnsons first PAPER.
THe Church of Christ, wherein only Salvation is to be had, never was nor is
any other then those Assemblies of Christians who were united in communion and
obedience to S. Peter in the beginning since the Ascension of Christ. And ever
since to his lawful successors, the Bishops of Rome, as to their chief Pastor.

Proof.
Whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the true Church of Christ,
acknowledges S. Peter and his lawful successors the Bishops of Rome, ever since
the Ascension of Christ to have been; and now to be by the Institution of
Christ, their chief Head and Governor on earth in matters belonging to the
soul next under Christ.

But there is no salvation to be had out of that Congregation of Christians,
which is now the true Church of Christ.

Ergo, there is no salvation to be had out of that Congregation of Christians
which acknowledges S. Peter and his lawful successors the Bishops of Rome ever
to have been since the Ascension of Christ; and now to be by the Institution of
Christ their chief Head and Governor on earth in matters belonging to the soul
next under Christ.

The Minor is clear; For all Christians agree in this, that to be saved, it is
necessary to be in the true Church of Christ; that only being his mystical
Body, Spouse and Mother of the faithful, to which must belong all those who
ever have been, are, or shall be saved.

The Major I prove thus.

Whatsoever Congregation of Christians as now the true Church of Christ, has
been always visible since the time of Christ, either under persecution, or in
peace and flourishing.

But no Congregation of Christians has been always visible since the time of
Christ, either under persecution or in peace and flourishing, save that only
which acknowledges S. Peter and his lawful successors the Bishops of Rome, ever
to have been since the Ascension of Christ; and now to be by Christ's
Institution, their chief Head and Governor on earth, in matters belonging to
the soul next under Christ.

Ergo, whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the true Church of Christ,
acknowledges St. Peter, and his lawful successors the Bishops of Rome, ever to
have been since the Ascension of Christ; and now to be by Christ's Institution
their chief Head and Governor on earth, in matters belonging to the soul, next
under Christ.

The Major is proved thus.

Whatsoever Congregation of Christians has always had visible Pastors and
People united, has always been visible, either under persecution, or in peace
and flourishing.

But whatsoever, Congregation of Christians is now the true Church of Christ,
has always had visible Pastors and People united.

Ergo, whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the true Church of Christ,
has always been visible, either under persecution, or in peace and
flourishing.

The Major of this last Sylogism is evident, for seeing a visible Church is
nothing but a visible Pastor and people united: where there have always been
visible Pastors and people united, there has always been a visible Church.

The Minor I prove from Ephesians, cap. 4. ver. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, etc.

Where S. Paul says, that Christ had Instituted, that there should be Pastors
and Teachers in the Church for the work of the Ministry, and preserving the
people under their respective charges from being carried away with every wind
of doctrine, etc. which evidently shows, those Pastors must be visible, seeing
the work of the Ministry, which Preaching, and Administration of Sacraments,
and Governing their flocks, are all external and visible actions. And this
shows likewise, that those Pastors and People must be always visible, because
they are to continue from Christ's Ascension, until we all meet together in the
unity of faith, etc. which cannot be before the day of judgment.

Neither can it be said (as some say) that this promise of Christ is only
conditional, since to put it to be so without evident Reason, gives scope to
every one at his pleasure, to make every other promise of Christ to be
conditional. And so we shall be certain of nothing that Christ has promised,
neither that shall always be a visible or invisible Church, nor any Church at
all; no nor of Judgment, nor of Eternal life, or of the Resurrection of the
dead, etc. for one may say with as much ground, as this is said, that some
conditions were included in all those promises, which being not fulfilled,
hinders the execution of them.

There remains only, to prove the Minor of the second Sylogism, viz. That no
Congregation of Christians has been always visible, etc. save that which
acknowledges S. Peter, and his lawful successors, etc. to be their chief Head
and Governor, etc. next under Christ.

This Minor I prove, by obliging the answerers to nominate any Congregation of
Christians, which always till this present time, since Christ, has been
visible, either under persecution, or in peace and flourishing, save that only
which acknowledges S. Peter, etc. ut supra.

Sir,
To comply with your desires of brevity, and of confining my self to half a
sheet of paper; I send you at present only one Argument, which being fully
discussed, shall be followed by others God willing. To this as to all the rest
of my Arguments, which may hereafter be urged: I require a Categorical and
strict Sylogistical Answer in Form, by Concedo, Nego, Distinguo, Omitto,
Transeat. And the particular Propositions specified, to which the Respondents
apply any of them; and no more then precisely thus, neither adding
Amplifications, Reasons, Proofs, etc. of their own out of form, and that this
may be done with all convenient speed. To the place of Scripture, Ephesians. 4.
etc. is also required a Categorical answer, to what is precisely pressed in it,
without directing the discourse to other things: And what is answered
otherwise, I shall not esteem an answer, but an Effugium, or declining of the
difficulty. By this method exactly observed, Truth will easily and speedily be
made manifest; and your desires of Brevity will be punctually complied with. I
also desire, that the Respondent or Respondents will (as I do to this)
subscribe his, or their name or names to their answers, so often as any are by
him or them returned, with the day of the month when returned.

William Johnson.
December. 9. 1658

The Answer to the first PAPER.
I received yours, and writ this Answer, Ian. 4. 1658.
Sir,
WHoever you are, a serious debate with so sober a Disputant, is to me an
exceeding acceptable employment: I shall not, I hope, give you any cause to
say, that I decline any difficulties, or halk your strength, or transgress the
part of a Respondent. But because, 1. You have not (as you ought to have done)
explained the terms of your Thesis. 2. And have made your Propositions so long.
3. And have so cunningly lapped up your fallacies; your Respondent is
necessitated to be the larger in distinction and explication. And seeing you
are so instant with me for strictness, you thereby oblige your self, if you
will be ingenuous, to make only the learned, and not any ignorant men the
Judges of our dispute: because you know that to the unlearned a bare Nego
signifies nothing; but when such have read your Arguments at length, they will
expect as plain and large a confutation, or judge you to be in the right for
speaking most.


TO your Argument. 1. Your conclusion contains not your Thesis, or Question.
And so you give up your cause the first step, and make a new one. It should
have contained your Question in terms, and it does not so much as contain it in
the plain sense: so much difference is there between [Assemblies of Christians
united, etc.] and [Congregation of Christians] and between [Salvation or the
Church, never was in any other then those Assemblies] and [no Salvation out of
that Congregation]; as I shall show you: besides other differences which you
may see.

Ad Majorem. Resp. 1. By [Congregation] you mean, either the whole Catholic
Church united in Christ, or some particular Congregation, which is but part of
that whole. In the latter sense, your Subject has a false supposition, viz.
that a part is the whole, and your Minor will be false. And your [whatsoever
Congregation of Christians] seems to distinguish that from some other excluded
Congregation of Christians that is not part of the Catholic Church, which is a
supposing the chief part of the Question granted you, which we deny. We know no
universal Congregation of Christians but one, which contains all particular
Congregations and Christians, the univocally deserve that name.

2. Either you mean that [this whole Congregation or true Church acknowledgeth]
the Popes Sovereignty, or else [that some part of it does acknowledge it.] The
former I deny, and challenge any man living to prove: If it be [part only] that
you mean, then either [the greater part] or [the lesser]: that it is the
greater, I as confidently almost deny: for it is against the common knowledge
of men acquainted with the world, etc. If you mean [the lesser part] you shall
see anon that it destroys your cause.

3. Either you speak de Ecclesia quae talis, or de Ecclesia qua talis: and mean
that this [acknowledgement] is essential to it, or at least an inseparable
property, or else that it is separable accident. The latter will do you no
good: the former I deny. In sum: I grant that a small corrupt part of the
Catholic Church does now acknowledge the Pope to be Christ's Vicar, (or the
Vice-christ); but I deny, 1. That the whole does so (which is your great
cause.) 2. Or the major part. 3. Or any Congregation through all ages (though
if they had, it would do you no good.) 4. Or that it is done by any upon just
ground, but is their corruption.

Ad minorem. Resp. 1. If you mean any [part] of the Universal Church by [that
Congregation which is now the true Church] I deny your Minor: If [the whole] I
grant it. 2. You say [all Christians agree] in it, etc. Resp. I think all
Protestants, or near all, do: but Franciscus a sancta Clara has copiously told
us (in Artic. Anglic.) that most of your own Doctors are for the salvation of
Infidels; and then either you take Infidels for your Church members, or your
Doctors for no Christians, or you play not fair play to tell us so gross an
untruth, that all Christians are agreed in it.

To your conclusion. Resp. 1. Either you mean that [there is no Salvation to be
had out of that Universal Church, whose part (a minor corrupt part)
acknowledges the Popes Soveraignty] or else [that there is no Salvation to be
had out of that Universal Church which wholly acknowledges it] or else [that
there is no Salvation to be had out of that part of the Universal Church which
acknowledges it.] In the first sense I grant your conclusion (if really you
are part of the Church.) There is no Salvation to be had out of Christ's
Universal Church, of which you are small corrupted part. In the second sense I
told you we deny the supposition in the subject. In the third sense I deny the
sequel; non sequitur, because your Major Proposition being false de Ecclesia
universali, the conclusion must be false de part ista, as excluding the rest.

But to the unskilful or unwary reader your conclusion seems to import, that
[the being in such a Church which acknowledges the Popes Sovereignty, as it is
such a Church, is necessary to Salvation] and so [that the persons
acknowledgement is necessary.] But it is a fallacia accidentis cunningly lapt
up, that is the life of your imported cause. That part of the Universal Church
does hold to the Popes Sovereignty, is per accidens; and could you prove that
the whole Church does so (which you are unlike to do) I would say the like. And
that your fallacy may the better appear; I give you some examples of such like
sophisms.

[Whatsoever Nation is the true Kingdom of Spain is proud and cruel against
Protestants: But there is no protection there due to any that are not of that
Kingdom: therefore there is no protection due to any that are not proud and
cruel.] Or [whatsoever Nation is the true Kingdom of France acknowledges the
Pope: but no protection is due from the Governors to any that are not of that
Kingdom: therefore no protection is due to any that acknowledge not the Pope.]
Or [what ever Nation is the Kingdom of Ireland in the days of Queen Elizabeth,
was for the Earl of Tyrone: but there was no right of Inheritance for any that
were not of that Nation: therefore there was no right of Inheritance for any
that was not for the Earl of Tyrone.] Or suppose that you could have proved it
of all the Church. If you had lived four hundred years after Christ, you might
as well have argued thus. [Whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the
true Church of Christ, is against kneeling in Adoration on the Lords days. But
there is no Salvation to be had out of that Congregation of Christians, which
is now the true Church of Christ: therefore there is no Salvation to be had out
of that Congregation which is against kneeling on the Lords day. etc.] But yet,
1. There was Salvation to be had in that Congregation without being of that
opinion. 2. And there is now Salvation to be had in a Congregation that is not
of that opinion, as you will confess.

Or [whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the true Church of Christ,
does hold the Canticles and the Epistle to Philemon to be Canonical Scripture,
(and so have done, etc.) But there is no Salvation to be had out of the true
Church: therefore there is no Salvation to be had out of that Congregation
which holds the Canticles and Epistle to Philemon to be Canonical Scripture.]
But yet, 1. Salvation is to be had in that Church without holding it. 2. and
its possible hereafter a Church may deny those two books, and yet you will
think Salvation not thereby overthrown. This is but to show your fallacy from a
corrupt accident, and indeed but of a part of the Church, and a small part.

Now to your proof of the Major. Resp. ad Major. The present matter of the
Church was not visible in the last Generation, for we were not then born: but
the same form of the Church was then existent in a visible Matter, and their
Profession was visible or audible, though their faith it self was invisible. I
will do more then you shall do, in maintaining the constant visibility of the
Chruch.

Ad minorem. 1. If you mean that no Congregation has been always visible [but
that Universal Church whose lesser corrupt part acknowledges] the Popes
Sovereignty, I grant it. For besides [the whole containing all Christians as
the parts] there can be no other. If you mean [save that part which
acknowledgeth] you contradict your self, because a part implies other parts.
If you mean [save that Universal Church, all whose members (or the most)
acknowledge it], there is no such subject existent. 2. I distinguish of
Visibility: Its one thing to be a visible Church, that is, visible in its
essentials; and another thing to be visible quoad hoc, as to some separable
accident. [The Universal Church was ever visible; because their Profession of
Christianity was so, and the persons professing: But [the acknowledgement of
the Vice-christ] was not always visible, no not in any part, much less in the
whole. And if it had, it was but a separable accident (if your disease be not
incurable) that was visible: and therefore, 1. It was not necessary to
Salvation, nor a proper mark of the Church. 2. Nor can it be so for the time to
come.

I need to say no more to your conclusion. Your Argument is no better then
this, [whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the true Church of Christ,
has been always visible since the time of Christ: But no Congregation of
Christians has been so visible, save only that which condemns the Greeks,
which has a College of Cardinals to choose the Popes, which denies the cup
to the laity, which forbids the reading of Scripture in a known tongue
without license, etc. Therefore whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now
the true Church of Christ, has all these]; 1. In a corrupt part it has. 2.
But it had not always. 3. And may be cured hereafter.

To your proof of the Major: 1. I grant your Major.

2. Ad minorem. 1. Either you mean [Universal Pastors] each one, or someone
having charge and Government of the [whole Church,] or you mean, [unfixed
Pastors having an indefinite charge of Preaching and Guiding when they come and
have particular calls and opportunities] or you mean [the fixed Pastors of
particular Churches] In the first sense your Minor is false, the Catholic
Church was never so united to any Universal Head but Christ: no one of the
Apostles governed the rest and the whole Church, much less any since their
time. In the second sense, I grant that the Church has ever had Pastors since
the Ascension. In the third sense, I grant that some parts or other of the
Catholic Church, have ever had fixed Pastors of Congregations since the first
settling of such Pastors. But any one particular Congregation may cease to have
such Pastors, and may cease it self: and Rome has been long without any true
Pastors; and therefore was then no such visible Church.

2. If by [Congregation] you mean not the Universal Church, but [a part], or if
you mean it of [all the parts of the Universal Church] I deny your Minor:
Communities of Christians, and particular persons have been and may be without
any Pastors, to whom they are united or subject. The Indians that died in the
faith while Frumentius and Edesius were there preaching, before they had any
Pastor, were yet Christians and saved: If a Layman Convert one, or a thousand,
(and you will say that he may baptize them) and they die before they can have a
Pastor, or ever hear of any to whom they owe subjection, they are nevertheless
saved, as members of the Church; And if all the Pastors in a Nation were
murdered or banished, the people would not cease to be Christians and members
of the Church. Much less if the Pope were dead or deposed, or a vacancy befell
his seat, would all the Catholic Church be annihilated, or cease.

To your Confirmation of the Major [that a visible Church is nothing but a
Visible Pastor, and people united] I answer: 1. Its true of the universal
Church, as united in Christ, the great Pastor, but not as united in a
Vice-Christ or humane head. 2. It is true of a particular Political or
organized Church, as united to their proper Pastors 3. But it is not true of
every Community of Christians who are a part of the Universal Church. A company
converted to Christ, are members of the Universal Church, (though they never
heard of a Pope at Rome) before they are United to Pastors of their own.

The Proof of the Minor from Ephesians. 4. I grant as aforesaid: The text proves
that Pastors the Church shall have: I disclaim the vain objection [of
Conditionality in the promise] which you mention. But it proves not, 1. That
the Church shall have an Universal Monarch or Vice-Christ, under Christ. 2. Nor
that every member of the Universal Church, shall certainly be a member of a
particular Church, or ever see the face of a Pastor, or be subject to him.

You say next [There remains only to prove the Minor of the second Syllogism,
viz. that no Congregation of Christians has been always visible but that
which acknowledges, etc.] This is the great point which all lies on: The rest
has been all nothing, but a cunning shooing horn to this. Prove this, and
prove all: Prove not this, and you have lost your time.

You say [The Minor I prove, by obliging the answerers to nominate any
Congregation of Christians which always till this present time since Christ
has been visible -- save that only which acknowledges etc.] And have I waited
all this while for this? You prove it by obliging me to prove the contrary.
Ridiculous! sed quo jure? 1. Your undertaken form of arguing obliges you to
prove your Minor: You cannot cast your Respondent upon proving and so arguing,
and doing the Opponents part. 2. And in your Postscript you presently forbid it
me; You require me to hold to a Concedo, Nego, Distingno, Omitto, Transeat;
threatening that else you will take it for an Effugium. And I pray you tell me
in your next, to which of these does the nomination or proof of such a Church
as you describe belong? Plainly, you first slip away when you should prove your
Minor, and then oblige me to prove the Contrary, and then tell me, if I attempt
it, you will take it for an Effugium. A good cause needs not such dealing as this:
which me thinks you should be loath a learned man should hear of. 3. Your
interest also in the Matter (as well as your office as Opponent) does oblige
you to the proof. For though you make a Negative of it, you may put it in other
terms at your pleasure. It is your main work to prove [that All the members of
the Universal Church have in all ages held the Popes Sovereignty or Universal
Head-ship.] Or [the whole Visible Church has held it] Prove this, and I will
be a Papist; you have my promise. You affirm, and you must prove. Prove a
Catholic Church, at least that in the Major part was of that mind: (though
that would be nothing to prove the condemnation of the rest.) If you are an
impartial enquirer after truth, fly not when you come to the setting too. I
give you this further evident reason why you cannot oblige me to what you here
impose; 1. Because you require me to prove the Visibility of a Church which
held not your point of Papacy; and so put an unreasonable task upon me, about a
Negative: or else, I must prove that they held the contrary, before your
opinion was started: And it is the Catholic Church that we are disputing
about; so that I must prove this Negative of the Catholic Church. 2. It is you
that lay the great stress of Necessity on your Affirmative, more then we do on
the Negative; you say that no man can be saved without your Affirmative [that
the Pope is the universal Head and Governor] But we say not that no man can be
saved that holds not our Negative, [that he is not the Vice-Christ] For one
that has the plague or leprosy may live. Therefore it is you that must prove
that all the Catholic Church was still of your mind. 3. And it is an Accident,
and but an Accident of a small^r corrupted part of the Catholic Church that
you would oblige me to prove the Negation of; and therefore it is utterly
needless to my proof of a Visible Catholic Church. For I will without it prove
to you a successive Visibility of the Catholic Church, from the Visibility of
its Essential or Constitutive parts (of which your Pope is none.) I will prove
a successive visible Church that has still professed faith in God the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, and been united to the Universal Head, and had particular
Pastors, some fixed, some unfixed, and held all essential to a Christian. And
proving this, I have proved the Church of which I am a member. To prove that
England has been so long a Kingdom, requires no more but to prove the two
Essential parts, King and Subjects, to have so long continued united. It
requires not that I prove that if ever either h^^d, or opposed a Vice-King.
This is our plain case. If a man have a botch on one of his hands; it is not
needful in order to my proving him a man heretofore, that I prove he was born
and bred without it: so be it I prove that he was born a man, it suffices. Nor
is it needful that I prove the other hand always to have been free, in order
to prove it a member of the body: It suffices that I prove it to have been
still a hand.

I do therefore desire you to perform your work, and prove that [no
Congregation has been still visible, but such as yours] or that [the whole
Catholic Church has ever since the ascension held a Humane Universal
Governor under Christ,] or else I shall take it as a giving up your cause as
indefensible. And observe, if you shall prove only that a part of the Catholic
Church still held this (which you can never do) then, 1. You will make the
Contrary opinion as Consistent with salvation as yours. For the rest of the
Catholic Church is savable. 2. And then you will allow me to turn your
Argument against your self as much as it is against us (and so cast it away.)
e. g. [what ever Congregation of Christians is now the true Church of Christ,
has been always Visible: But no Congregation of Christians has been always
Visible, but that which quoad partem denies the Popes universal Headship;
therefore whatever Congregation of Christians is the true Church, denies the
Popes universal Headship.

Well! but for all this (supposing you will do your part) I will fail you in
nothing that is reasonable, which I can perform. A Catholic Church in all ages
that was against the Pope, in every member of it, I hope I cannot show you;
because I hope that you are members, though corrupt. But you shall have more
then a particular Congregation, or a hundred.

1. At this present, two or three parts of the Catholic Church is known to be
against your Universal Monarchy. The Greeks, Armenians, Ethiopians, etc.
besides the Protestants. 2. In the last age there were as many or more. 3. In
the former ages till An. D. 1000. there were near as many, or rather many more.
For more be saln off the Tendue, Nubia, and other parts then the Protestants
that came in. 4. About the year 600. there were many more, incomparably; and I
think then, but at least of 400. years after Christ I never yet saw valid proof
of one Papist in all the world, that is, one that was for the Popes Universal
Monarchy or Vice-Christ-ship. So that most of the Catholic Church (about three
parts to one) has been against you to this day; and all against you for many
hundred years. Could I name but a Nation against you, I should think I had done
nothing; much less if I cited a few men in an age. 5. And all those of
Ethiopia, India, etc. that are without the verge and awe of the Ancient Roman
Empire, never so much as gave the Pope that Primacy of dignity, which those
within the Empire gave him, when he was chief, as the Earl of Arundel is of the
Earls of England that governs none of them, and as the Lord Chancellor may be
the chief judge, that has no power in alieno foro: or as the Eldest Justice is
chief in the County and on the b^nch, that rules not the rest. Mistake not
this Primacy for Monarchy, nor the Roman Empire for the world, and you can say
nothing.

At present, ad hominem, I give you sufficient proof of this succession. As you
use to say that the present Church best knew the Judgment of the former age,
and so on to the he^d, and so Tradition bears you out: I turn this
unresistibly against you. The far greatest part of Christians in the world that
now are in possession of the doctrine contrary to your Monarchy, tell us that
they had it from their Fathers, and so on. And as in Councils, so with the
Church Real, the Major part (three to one) is more to be credited then the
Minor part; especially when it is a visible self-advancement that the Minor
part insisteth on. 6. And were not this enough, I might add, that your western
Church it self in its Representative Body at Constance and Basil, has
determined that not the Pope but a General Council is the chief Governor under
Christ; and that this ha^h been still the judgment of the Church, and that its
Heresy in whoever that hold the Contrary. 7. And no man can prove that one
half or tenth part of your people ca^^ed Papists are of your opinion: For they
are not called to profess it by words: and their obedience is partly forced,
and partly upon other principles; some obeying the Pope as their western
Patriarch of chief dignity; and some and most doing all for their own peace and
safety: Their outward acts will prove no more.

And now Sir, I have told you what Church of which we are members, has been
visible; yea and what part of it has opposed the Vice-Christ of Rome. This I
delayed not an hour after I received yours, because you desired speed.
Accordingly I crave your speedy return; and entreat you to advise with the most
learned men (whether Jesuits or others) of your party in London that think it
worth their thoughts and time: not that I have any thoughts of being their
Equal in learning, but partly because the case seems to me so exceeding
palpable, that I think it will suffice me to supply all my defects against the
ablest men on earth, or all of them together, of your way; and principally
because I would see your strength, and know the most that can be said, that I
may be rectified if Jerr (which I suspect not) or confirmed the more if you
cannot evince it, and so may be true to Gods Truth and my own soul.

Rich. Baxter.

Mr. Iohnsons second PAPER.
Sir,
IT was my happiness to have this Argument transmitted into your learned and
quiet hands; which gratefully returns as fair a measure as it received from
you: that Animosities on both sides seposed, Truth may appear in its full
splendor, and seat it self in the Center of both our hearts.

To your first Exception.
My Thesis was sufficiently made clear to my friend, who was concerned in it;
and needed no explication in its address to the learned.

To your second Exception.
My Propositions were long, that my Argument (as was required) might be very
short, and not exceed the quantity of half a sheet: which enforced me to
penetrate many Syllogisms into one; and by that means in the first not to be so
precise in form, as otherwise I should have been.

To your third Exception.
Seeing I required nothing but Logical form in Answering, I conceive that
regard was more to be had amongst the learned to that, then to the errors of
the vulgar: that whilst ignorance attends to most words, learning might attend
to most reason.

To your fourth Exception.
My Argument contains not precisely the terms of my Thesis: because, when I was
called upon to hasten my Argu^ent, I had not then at hand my Thesis. Had I put
more in my Thesis, then I prove in my Argument, I had been faulty; but proving
more then my Thesis contained (as I clearly do) no body has reason to find
fault with me, save my self. The real difference betwixt Assemblies of
Christians, and Congregation of Christians, and betwixt Salvation is only to be
had in those Assemblies, and Salvation is not to be had out of that
Congregation, I understand not: seeing all particular assemblies of true
Christians, must make one Congregation.

To your Answer to my first Syllogism.

He who distinguishes Logically the terms of any proposition, must not apply
his distinction to some one part of the term only, but to the whole term, as it
stands in the proposition distinguished. Now in my proposition I affirm, that
the Congregation of Christians I speak of there, is such a Congregation, that
it is the true Church of Christ, that is, (as all know) the whole Catholic
Church: and you distinguish thus, That I either mean by Congregation the whole
Catholic Church, or only some part of it as, if one should say, Whatsoever
Congregation of men is the Commonwealth of England, and another in answer to
it should distinguish, either by Congregation of men you mean the whole
Commonwealth, or some part of it, when all men know, that by the Commonwealth
of England must be meant the whole Commonwealth: for no part of it is the
Commonwealth of England.

Again you distinguish, that some things are Essentials, or Necessaries, and
others Accidents, which are acknowledged or practiced in the Church. Now to
apply this distinction to my Proposition, you must distinguish that which I say
is acknowledged to have been ever in the Church by the Institution of Christ,
either to be meant of an Essential, or an Accident; when all the world knows
that whatsoever is acknowledged to have have been ever in the Church by Christ's
Institution, cannot be meant of any Accidental thing, but of a necessary,
unchangeable and Essential thing, in Christ's true Church. If one should advance
this proposition, Whatsoever Congregation is the true Church of Christ,
acknowledges the Eucharist ever to have been by Christ's Institution a proper
Sacrament of the new Law: and another should distinguish (as you do my
proposition) This may be meant either of an Essential or Accidental thing to
Christ's true Church: Seeing whatsoever is acknowledged to have been always in
Christ's Church and instituted by Christ, cannot be acknowledged but as
necessary and essential to his Church. If therefore my Major, as the terms lie
expressed in it, be true, it should have been granted: if false, it should have
been denied. But no Logic allows that it should be distinguished into such
different members, whereof one is expressly excluded in the very terms of the
proposition. These distinctions therefore, though learned and substantial in
themselves, yet were they here unseasonable, and too illogical to ground an
answer in form (as you ground yours) still insisting upon them in your address
almost to every proposition. Hence appears first, that I used no fa^lacy at all
ex Accidente: seeing my proposition could not be verified of an Accident.
Secondly that all your instances of Spain, France, etc. which include
Accidents, are not apposite; because your propositions, as they lie, have no
term which excludes Accidental Adjuncts, as mine has.

To the Proof of my Major. Syll. 2.

You seem to grant the Major of my second Syllogism; not excepting any thing
material against it.

To my Minor.
You fall again into the former distinctions, now disproved and excluded, of
the meaning of Congregation, etc. in my proposition, and would have me to
understand determinately either the whole Catholic Church, or some part of it,
(and so make four terms in my Syllogism:) whereas in my Minor, Congregation of
Christians is taken generically, and abstracts, as an universal, from all
particulars. I say no Congregation, which is an universal negative; and when I
say, none, Say that Congregation which acknowledges Saint Peter, etc. the term
Congregation supposes for the same whole Catholic Church mentioned in my
former Syllogism, but expresses it under a general term of Congregation in
confuso; as I express Homo, when I say he is Animal, a man, when I say he is a
living creature, but only generically, or in confuso. Now should I have
intended determinately either the whole Catholic Church, or any part of it, I
should have made an inept Syllogism, which would have run thus. Whatsoever true
Church of Christ is now the true Church of Christ, has been always visible,
etc. But no true Church of Christ has been always visible, save the true
Church of Christ, which acknowledges Saint Peter, etc. Ergo whatsoever true
Churh of Christ is now the true Church, acknowledges Saint Peter, etc. which
would have been idem per idem; for every one knows, that the true Church of
Christ, is now the true Church of Christ. But speaking, as I do in abstractive
and generical terms, I avoid this absurdity, and frame a true Syllogism.

Now my meaning in this Minor could be no other then this, which my words
express; That the Congregation, that is, the whole Congregation acknowledges
Saint Peter, etc. and is visible, etc. and not any part, great or small of it.
For when I say, the Parliament of these Nations does, or has enacted a
Statute, who would demand of me, whether I meant the whole Parliament, or some
determinate part of it? You should therefore have denied, not thus
distinguished my Minor quite against the express words of it. What you say
again of Essentials and Accidents, is already refuted; and by that also your
Syllogism, brought by way of instance. For your proposition does not say, that
the Church of Rome acknowledges those things were always done, and that by
Christ's Institution, as my proposition says she acknowledges Saint Peter and
his successors.

To my third Syllogism.
Granting my Major, you distinguish the term Pastors in my Minor, into
particular and universal, fixed and unfixed, etc. I answer, that the term
Pastors (as before Congregation) signifies determinately no one of these, but
generically and in confuse all; and so abstracts from each of them in
particular, as the word Animal abstracts from homo and brutum. Neither can I
mean some parts of the Church only had Pastors; for I say, whatsoever
Congregation of Christians is now the true Church of Christ, has always had
visible Pastors and People united. Now the Church is not a part but the whole
Church, that is, both the whole body of the Church, and all particular Churches
the parts of it. And hence is solved your argument of the Indians, of people
converted by laymen, when particular Pastors are dead, etc. For those were
subjects of the chief Bishop alone, till some inferior Pastors were sent to
them. For when they were taught the Christian Doctrine, in the explication of
that Article, I believe the Holy Catholic Church, they were also taught, that
they being people of Christ's Church, must subject themselves to their lawful
Pastors, this being a part of the Christian doctrine. Heb. 13. who though
absent in body, may yet be present in spirit with them, as Saint Paul says of
himself, 1 Cor. 5.3.

Your Answer to the confirmation of my Major seems strange. For I speak of
visible Pastors, and you say it is true of an Invisible Pastor, that is, Christ
our Savior, who is now in heaven, invisible to men on earth. The rest is a
repetition of what is immediately before answered.

Ephesians. 4. proves not only that some particular Churches, or parts of the whole
Church, must always have Pastors, but that the whole Church it self must have
Pastors, and every particular Church in it; for it speaks of that Church which
is the Body of Christ; which can be no less then the whole Church. For no
particular Church alone is his mystical Body, but only a part of it.

Ephesians. 4. is not directly alleged to prove an universal Monarch, (as you say)
but to prove an uninterrupted continuance of visible Pastors; that being only
affirmed in the proposition, which I prove by it. 2. This is already Answered.

I stand to the judgment of any true Logitian, nay or expert Lawyer, or
rational person, whether a Negative proposition be to be proved otherwise then
by obliging him who denies it, to give an instance to infringe it. Should you
say, no man has right to my Benefice and Function in my parish, save my self,
and another should deny what you said; would not you, or any rational man in
your case, answer him, that by denying your proposition he affirmed that some
other had right to them, and to make good that affirmation was obliged to
produce who that was: which till he did, you still remained the sole just
possessour of your Benefice as before; and every one will judge, that he had no
reason to deny your assertion, when he brought no proof against it. This is our
case.

The Contradiction, which you would draw from this, against my Nego, Concedo,
etc. exacted from the Respondent, and nothing else, follows not. For that
prescription is to be understood, that the Respondent of himself, without scope
given him by the opponent, was not to use any other forms in Answering; But if
the opponent should require that the respondent give reasons, or instances, or
proofs, of what he denies, that then the Respondent is to proceed to them. And
this is most ordinary in all Logical Disputations, where strict form is
observed, and known to every young Logitian. Instances therefore demanded by the
opponent, were not excluded, but only such excursions out of form, as should
proceed from the respondent, with out being exacted by the opponent.

You say, though I make a Negative of it, I may put it in other terms at my
pleasure. But the question is not what I may do, but what I did: I required not
an Answer to an Argument, which I may frame, but to that which I had then
framed, which was expressed in a negative proposition.

You tell me if I prove the Popes universal Supremacy, you will be a Papist:
And I tell you, I have proved it by this very Argument, That either He has
that supremacy, or some other Church; denying that he has always had it, has
been always visible; and that Church I require should be named, if any such
be, and whilst you refuse to name that Church (as here you do) you neither
answer the Argument, nor become a Papist.

You say I affirm, and I must prove. I say in the proposition, about which we
now speak, I affirm not, and so must not prove; and you by denying it, must
affirm, and so must prove.

You prove it is not your part here to prove, because the Popes supremacy could
not be denied, before it was affirmed; and you must be obliged to prove that
denial. I oblige you not to prove a continued visible Church formally and
expressly denying it, but that it was of such a Constitution as was inconsistent
with any such supremacy, or could and did subsist without it; which is an
Affirmative.

You affirm, that because I say you cannot be saved if you deny that Supremacy,
and you say that I may be saved though I hold it, therefore you are not bound
to prove what I reprove, but I to prove my negative proposition. But this would
prove as well, that a Mahumetan is not bound to prove his religion to you, but
you to prove yours to him, because you say he cannot be saved being a
Mahumetan; and he says, that you may be saved being a Christian. See you not,
that the obligation of proof in Logical form depends not of the first
position, or Thesis, but must be drawn from the immediate proposition,
affirmative or negative, which is or ought to be proposed?

To what you say of an Accident and a corrupt part, I have already answered.

To what you say of a vice-king, not being necessary to the Constitution of a
kingdom, but a king and subjects only, is true, if a vice-king be not
instituted by the Full power of an Absolute Authority over that kingdom, to be
an ingredient into the essence of the Kingdom, in the Kings absence: But if so
constituted, it will be essential; now my proposition says, and my Argument
proves, that by the Absolute Authority of Christ, Saint Peter and his
Successors were instituted Governors in Christ's place of his whole visible
Church; and whatsoever Government Christ institutes of his Church, must be
essential to his Church. You see now the Disparity.

You insist to have me prove a Negative; and I insist to have you prove that
Affirmative, which you fall into by denying my Negative, and leave it to
judgment, whose exaction is the more conform to reason, and logical form.

But if I prove not here, say you, the whole Catholic Churches holding ever
the Popes Supremacy, you shall take it as a giveing up my cause. I tell you
again, that I have proved it by this very Argument, by force of Syllogistical
form: and it is not reasonable to judge that I have given up my cause, if I
prove not again, what I have already proved.

Your taking upon you the part of an opponent now is, you know, out of Season;
when that is yours, mine shall be the Respondent.

AT length you give fair attempt to satisfy your obligation, and to return
such an instance as I demanded of you. But you are too free by much in your
offer. I demand one Congregation, and you promise to produce more then an
hundred. But as they abound in the number, so are they deficient in the quality
which I require. I demand, that the Answerer nominate any Congregation of
Christians, which always till this present time since Christ has been
visible, etc. and you tell me of more then an hundred Congregations, besides
that which acknowledges Saint Peter, etc. whereof not any one has been all
that designed time visible: which is as if I had demanded an Answerer to
nominate any Family of Gentry, which has successively continued ever since
William the Conqueror till this present time; and he who undertakes to
satisfy my demand, should nominate more then a hundred Families, whereof not
so much as one continued half that time. You nominate first all these present,
the Greeks, Armenians, Ethiopians, besides the Protestants. These you begin
with. Now to satisfy my demand, you must assert, that these, whom you first
name, are both one Congregation, and have been visible ever since Christ's time.
This you do not in the pursuit of your Allegations. For Numb. 2. you nominate
none at all, but tell me, that in the last age there were as many or more. What
were these as many or more? were they the same which you nominated first, or
others? I required some determinate Congregation to be nominated all the while,
and you tell me of as many or more, but say not of what determinate
congregation they were. In your Number. 3. you tell me, in the former ages, till
one thousand, there were near as many, or rather many more. A fair account! But
in the mean time you nominate none, much less prosecute you those with whom you
begun. Number. 4. You say, in the year six hundred there were many more
incomparably. What many? what more? were they the same which you nominated in
the beginning, and made one Congregation with them? or were they quite
different Congregations? what am I the wiser by your saying many more
incomparably, when you tell me not what, or who they were? Then you say, But at
least for four hundred years after Christ, I never yet saw valid proof of one
Papist in all the world, that is, one that was for the Popes universal
Monarchy, or vice-Christship. What then? are there no proofs in the world, but
what you have seen? or may not many of those proofs be valid which you have
seen, though you esteem them not so? and can you think it reasonable, upon your
single not-seeing, or not-judging only, to conclude absolutely, as you here do,
that all have been against us for many hundred years? In your Number. 5. You name
Ethiopia and India, as having been without the limits of the Roman Empire, whom
you deny to have acknowledged any supremacy of power and authority above all
other Bishops. You might have done well to have cited at least one ancient
Author for this Assertion. Were those primitive Christians of another kind of
Church Order and Government, then were those under the Roman Empire But how far
from truth this is, appears from St. Leo, in his Sermons de natali suo, where
he says, Seeds Roma Petri, quicquid non possidet almis, Religione tenet; and
by this, that the Abyssines of Ethiopia were under the Patriarch of Alexandria
anciently, which Patriarch was under the Authority of the Roman Bishop, as we
shall presently see.
? When the Roman Emperors were yet Heathens, had not the Bishop of Rome the
Supremacy over all other Bishops through the whole Church? and did those
Heathen Emperors give it him? How came St. Cyprian, in time of the Heathen
Empire to request Stephen the Pope to punish and depose the Bishop of Arles, as
we shall see hereafter? Had he that authority (think you) from an Heathen
Emperor? See now how little your Allegations are to the purpose, where you
nominate any determinate Congregations to satisfy my demand.

I had no reason to demand of you different congregations, of all sorts and
Sects opposing the Supremacy, to have been shown visible in all ages. I was not
so ignorant, as not to know, that the Nicolaitans, Valentinians, Gnostics,
Manichees, Montanists, Arians, Donatists, Nestorians, Eutychians, Pelagians,
Iconoclasts, Berengarians, Waldensians, Albigenses, Wicleffists, Hussits,
Lutherans, Calvinists, etc. each following others had some kind of visibility,
divided and distracted each to his own respective age, from our time to the
Apostles, in joining their heads and hands together against the Popes
Supremacy. But because these could not be called one successive Congregation of
Christians, being all together by the ears amongst themselves; I should not
have thought it a demand beseeming a Scholar, to have required such a
visibility as this. Seeing therefore all you determinately nominate, are as
much different as these; pardon me, if I take it not for any satisfaction at
all to my demand, or acquittance of your obligation. Bring me a visible
succession of any one Congregation of Christians, of the same belief,
profession, and communion, for the designed time, opposing that Supremacy, and
you will have satisfied: but till that be done, I leave it to any equal
judgment, whether my demand be satisfied or no. You answer to this, That all
those, who are nominated by you, are parts of the Catholic Church, and so one
Congregation. But Sir, give me leave to tell you, that in your principles, you
put both the Church of Rome and your selves, to be parts of the Catholic
Church: and yet sure you account them not one Congregation of Christians,
seeing by separation one from another they are made two: or if you account them
one, why did you separate your selves, and still remain separate from communion
with the Roman Church? why possessed you your selves of the Bishoprics and
Cures of your own Prelates and Pastors, they yet living in Queen Elizabeth's
time? and drew both your selves and their other subjects from all subjection to
them, and communion with them? Is this disunion, think you, fit to make one and
the same Congregation of you and them? is not charity, subordination, and
obedience to the same state and government required as well to make one
Congregation of Christians, as it is required to make one Congregation of
Commonwealths men? Though therefore you do account them all parts of the
Catholic Church, yet you cannot make them in your principles one Congregation
of Christians. Secondly, your position is not true; the particulars named by
you neither are, nor can be parts of the Catholic Church, unless you make
Arians, and Pelagians, and Donatists, parts of the Catholic Church: which were
either to deny them to be Heretics and Schismatics; or to affirm, that
Heretics and Schismatics, separating themselves from the communion of the
Catholic Church, notwithstanding that separation, do continue parts of the
Catholic Church. For who knows not that the Ethiopians to this day are See
Rosse his view of Religions, p. 99. 489, 492, etc. Where he says that they
circumcise their children the eighth day, they use Mosaical ceremonies. They
mention not the council of Calcedon, because (says he) they are Eutychians and
Jacobites, and confesses that their Patriarch is in subjection to the Patriarch
of Alexandria, etc. See more of the Chofti, Jacobites, Maronites, etc. p. 493,
494. where he confesses that many of them are now subject to the Pope, and have
renounced their old errors.
Eutychian Heretics. And a great part of those Greeks and Armenians, who deny
the Popes Supremacy, are infected with the Heresy of Nestorius, and all of
them profess generally all those points of faith with us against you, wherein
you differ from us; and deny to communicate with you, or to esteem you other
then Heretics and Schismatics, unless you both agree with them in those
differences of faith, and subject your selves to the obedience of the Patriarch
of Constantinople, as to the chief Head and Governor of all Christian Churches
next under Christ; and consequently as much a vice-Christ, in your account, as
the Pope can be conceived to be. See, if you please, Hieremias Patriarch of
Constantinople, his Answer to the Lutherans, especially in the beginning and
end of the book; Acta Theologorum Wittebergensium, etc. and Sir Edwyn Sands, of
this subject, in his Survey, p. 232, 233, 242, etc.

Either therefore you must make the Eutychians and Nestorians no Heretics, and
so contradict the Ecumenical Councils of Ephesus, and Chalcedon, which
condemned them as such; and the consent of all Orthodox Christians, who ever
since esteemed them no others; or you must make condemned Heretics parts of
the Catholic Church, against all antiquity and Christianity. And for those
Greeks near Constantinople, who are not infected with Nestorianism and
Eutychianism, yet in the Procession of the Holy Ghost, against both us and you,
they must be thought to maintain manifest Heresy; it being a point in a
fundamental matter of faith, the Trinity: and the difference betwixt those
Greeks and the Western Church, now for many hundred of years, and in many
General Councils esteemed and defined to be real and great; yea so great, that
the Greeks left the Communion of the Roman Church upon that difference alone,
and ever esteemed the Bishop of Rome and his party to have fallen from the true
faith, See Nilus on this subject.
and lost his ancient authority by that sole pretended error; and the Latins
always esteemed the Greeks to be in a damnable error, in maintaining the
contrary to the doctrine of the Western or Roman Church in that particular. And
yet sure they understood what they held, and how far they differed one from
another, much better then some Novel writers of yours, who pressed by force of
Argument, have no other way left them to maintain a perpetual visibility, then
by extenuating that difference of Procession betwixt the Greek and Latin
Church, which so many ages before Protestancy sprung up, was esteemed a main
fundamental error by* both parts, caused the Greeks to abandon all subjection
and Communion to the Bishops of Rome; made them so divided the one from the
other, that they held each other Heretics, Schismatics, and desertors of the
true faith, as they continue still to do to this day, and yet you will have
them both to be parts of the Catholic Church.

But when you have made the best you can of these Greeks, Armenians,
Ethiopians, Protestants, whom you first name, you neither have deduced, nor can
deduce them successively in all ages till Christ, as a different Congregation
of Christians, from that which holds the Popes Supremacy; which was my
proposition. For in the year 1500. those who became the first Protestants, were
not a Congregation different from those who held that supremacy; nor in the
year 500. were the Greeks a visible Congregation different from it; nor in the
year 300. were the Nestorians; nor in the year 200. the Eutychians a different
Congregation from those who held the said Supremacy: But in those respective
years, those who first begun those Heresies, were involved within that
Congregation, which held it, as a part of it, and assenting therein with it:
who after in their several ages and beginnings fell off from it, as dead
branches from the tree; that, still remaining what it ever was, and only
continuing in a perpetual visibility of succession.

Though therefore you profess never to have seen convincing proof of this in
the first 400 years, and labor to infringe it in the next ages, yet I will
make an essay to give you a taste of those innumerable proofs of this visible
Consent in the Bishop of Rome's Supremacy, not of Order only, but of Power,
Authority, and Jurisdiction over all other Bishops, in the ensuing instances,
which happened within the first 400, or 500, or 600, years.

Liberatus in Brev. c. 16.
John Bishop of Antioch makes an Appeal to Pope Simplicius. And Flavianus
Epist. praeambula. Council. Chalcedon.
Bishop of Constantinople, being deposed in the false Council of Ephesus,
immediately appeals to the Pope, as to his judge. Council. Chalcedon. Act. 1.
Theodoret was by Pope Leo restored, and that by an Council. Chalcedon. Act. 8.
appeal unto a just judgment. St. Cyprian. Epist. 67.
Saint Cyprian desir^^ Pope Stephen to depose Marcian Bishop of Arles, that
another might be substituted in his place. And to evince the supreme Authority
of the Bishops of Rome, it is determined in the Council. Sard. cap. 4. cited by
St. Athan. Apol. 2. page 753.
Council of Sardis, That no Bishop deposed by other neighboring Bishops,
pretending to be heard again, was to have any successor appointed, until the
case were defined by the Pope. Eustathius St. Basil. Epist. 74.
Bishop of Sebast in Armenia was restored by Pope Liberius his Letters read and
received in the Council of Tyana; and St. Chrysostom. Epist. 2. ad. Innocent.
Saint Chrysostom expressly desires Pope Innocent not to punish his
Adversaries, if they do repent. Which evinces that Saint Chrysostom thought
that the Pope had power to punish them. And the like is written to the Pope by
the Council. Ephesians. p. 2. Act. 5.
Council of Ephesus in the case of John Bishop of Antioch.

St. Athanas. ad Solit. Epist. Julius in lit. ad Arian. ap. Athan. Apolog. 1.
page 753.
The Bishops of the Greek, or Eastern Church, who sided with Arius, before they
declared themselves to be Arians, sent their Legates to Julius Bishop of Rome
to have their cause heard before him against Saint Athanasius: Theodoret. lib.
2. cap. 4. Athanas* Apol. 2. Zozom. lib. 3. cap. 7.
the same did Saint Athanasius to defend himself against them: which Arian
Bishops having understood from Julius, that their Accusations against Saint
Athanasius, upon due examination of both parties, were found groundless and
false, required (rather fraudulently, then seriously) to have a fuller Trial
before a General Council at Rome: which (to take away all show of excuse from
them) Pope Julius assembled. Saint Athanasius was summoned by the Pope to
appear before him and the Council in Judgment: The Appeal of Theodoret from
that Council as to his judge, is so undeniable that Chamier is forced to
acknowledge it. Tom. 2. l. 13. c. g. p. 498. and the whole Council of Calcedon,
acknowledged the right of that Appeal, restoring Theodoret to his Bishopric,
by force of an order given upon that Appeal by Leo Pope to restore him.

Concerning Saint Athanasius being judged and righted by Julius Pope, Chamier.
cit. p. 497. acknowledges the matter of fact to be so, but against all
antiquity, pretends that judgment to have been unjust. Which, had it been so,
yet it shows a true power of judging in the Pope, though then unduly executed;
otherwise Saint Athanasius, would never have made use of it* neither can it be
condemned of injustice, unless Saint Athanasius be also condemed as unjust, in
consenting to it.


which he presently did, (and many other Eastern Bishops unjustly accused by
the Arians aforesaid, had recourse to Rome with him,) and expected there a year
and a half: All which time his Accusers (though also summoned) appeared not,
fearing they should be condemned by the Pope and his Council. Yet they
pretended not (as Protestants have done in these last ages of the Kings of
England) That Constantius, the Arian Emperor of the East, was Head, or chief
Governor over their Church in all Causes Ecclesiastical^; and consequently
that the Pope had nothing to do with them, but only pretended certain frivolous
excuses to delay their appearance from one time to another. Where it is worth
the noting, that Julius, reprehending the said Arian Bishops (before they
published their Heresy, and so taking them to be Catholics) for condemning
Saint Athanasius in an Eastern Council, gathered by them before they had
acquainted the Bishop of Rome with so important a cause, uses these words, An
ignari ^stis hanc consuetudin^m esse, ut primum nobis scribatur; ut ^inc quod
justum est, a^finiri possit, etc. Are you ignorant, says he, that this is the
custom, to write to us first, That hence that which is just may be defined,
etc. where most clearly it appears, that it belonged particularly to the Bishop
of Rome to pass a definitive sentence even against the Bishops of the Eastern,
or Greek Church; which yet is more confirmed by the proceedings of Pope
Innocent the first, about 12. hundred years since, Niceph. lib. 13. cap. 34.
in the Case of Saint Chrysostom: Where first Saint Chrysostom appears to
Innocentius from the Council assembled at Constantinople, Chamier. cit. p.
498. says, other Bishops restored those who were wrongfully deposed, as well
as the Pope Which though it were so, yet never was there any single Bishop save
the Pope, who restored any, who were out of their respective Diocese, or
Patriarchates, but always collected together in a Synod, by common voice, and
that in regard only of their neighboring Bishops, whereas the Bishop of Rome
his sole and single authority, restored Bishops wrongfully deposed all the
Church over.
wherein he was condemned. Secondly Innocentius annulls this condemnation, and
declares him innocent. Thridly, he Excommunicates Atticus Bishop of
Constantinople, and Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria for persecuting Saint
Chrysostom. Fourthly, after Saint Chrysostom was dead in Banishment, Pope
Innocentius Excommunicates Arcadius the Emperor of the East, and Eudoxia his
wife. Fifthly, the Emperor and Empress humble themselves, crave pardon of him,
and were obsolved by him. The same is evident in those matters, which passed
about the year 450. where Theodosius the Emperor of the East having too much
favored the Eutychian Heretics by the instigation of Chrysaphius the Eunuch,
and Pulcheria his Empress, and so intermedled too far in Ecclesiastical
causes, yet he ever bore that respect to the Sea of Rome, (which doubtless in
those circumstances he would not have done, had he not believed it an
Obligation) that he would not permit the Eutychian Council at Ephesus to be
assembled, without the knowledge and Authority of the Roman Bishop Leo the
first; and so wrote to him to have his presence in it, who sent his Legates*
unto them. And though both Leo's letters were dissembled, and his Legates
affronted, and himself excommunicated by wicked Dioscorus, Patriarch of
Alexandria, and president of that Coventicle, who also was the chief upholder
of the Eutychians, yet Theodosius repented before his death, banished his wife
Pulcheria and Chrysaphius the Eunuch, the chief favorers of the Eutychians,
and reconciled himself to the Chruch with great evidences of Sorrow and
Penance.

Council. Chalced. Action. 1.
Presently after, Anno. 451. follows the Fourth General Council of Chalcedon:
concerning which these particulars occur to our present purpose. First
Martianus the Eastern Emperor wrote to Pope Leo, That by the Popes Authority a
General Council might be gathered in what City of the Eastern Church he should
please to choose. Secondly, both Anatolius Patriarch of Constantinople, and the
rest of the Eastern Bishops, sent to the legates of Pope Leo, by his order, the
profession of their Faith. Thirdly, the Popes Legates sat in the first place of
the Council before all the Patriarchs. Council. Chalced. Action. 3.
Fourthly, they prohibited (by his order given them) That Dioscorus Patriarch
of Alexandria, and chief upholder of the Eutychians, should sit in the
Council; but be presented as a guilty person to be judged* becuase he had
celebrated a Council in the Eastern Church without the consent of the Bishop
of Rome; which (said the Legates) never was done before, nor could be done
lawfully. This order of Pope Leo was presently put in execution by consent of
the whole Council, and Dioscorus was judged and condemned; his condemnation
and deposition being pronounced by the Popes Legates, and after subscribred by
the Council. Fifthly* the Popes Legates pronounced the Church of Rome to be
Which could not be by reason of the Sanctity and truth which was then in it;
for the Church of Milan and many others in France, Africa, and Greece were also
then pure and holy, and yet none have this title save the Church of Rome.

In the time of Justinian the Emperor, Agapet Pope, even in Constantinople,
against the will both of the Emperor and Empress, deposed Anthymus, and
ordained Mennas in his place. Libera^. in Breviario. cap. 21. Marcellinus.
Comes in Chronico. Council. Constantin. sub Menna act. 4. And the same St. Greg.
C. 7. Ep. 63. declares that both the Emperor and Bishop of Constantinople
acknowledged that the Church of Constantinople was subject to the Sea of Rome.
And l. 7. Ep. 37. Et alibi pronounces, that in case of falling into offenses he
knew no Bishop which was not subject to the Bishop of Rome.


Caput omnium Ecclesiarum, the Head of all Churches, before the whole Council,
and none contradicted them. Sixthly, all the Fathers assembled in that Holy
Council, in their Letter to Pope Leo, acknowledged themselves to be his
children, and wrote to him as to their Father. Seventhly, they humbly begged of
him, that he would grant, that the Patriarch of Constantinople might have the
first place among the Patriarchs, after that of Rome: which notwithstanding
that the Council had consented to (as had also the Third General Council of
Ephesus done before) yet they esteemed their grants to be of no sufficient
force, until they were confirmed by the Pope. And Leo thought not fit to yield
to their petition, against the express ordination of the First Council of
Nice; where Alexandria had the pre-eminence, as also Antioch and Jerusalem,
before that of Constantinople.

Saint Cyril of Alexandria, though he wholly disallowed Nestorius his doctrine,
yet he would not break off Communion with him, till Celestinus the Pope had
condemned him: whose Censure he required and expected. Nestorius also wrote to
Celestine, acknowledging his Authority, and expecting from him the Censure of
his doctrine. Celestinus condemned Nestorius, and gave him the space of ten
days to repent, after he had received his condemnation. All which had effect
in the Eastern Church, where Nestorius was Patriarch of Constantinople. St.
Augustine. Tom 1 Epist. Romans Pontif. post Epist. 2. ad Celestinum.
After this Saint Cyrill having received Pope Leo's Letters, wherein he gave
power to Saint Cyrill to execute his condemnation against Nestorius, and to
send his condemnatory letters to him, gathered a Council of his next Bishops,
and sent Letters and Articles to be subscribed, with the Letters of Celestine
to Nestorius: which when Nestorius had received, he was so far from repentance,
that he accused St. Cyril in those Articles, to be guilty of the Heresy of
Apollinaris: so that St. Cyril being also accused of Heresy, was barred from
pronouncing sentence against Nestorius, so long as he stood charged with that
Accusation. Theodosius the Emperor, seeing the Eastern Church embroyled in
these difficulties, writes to Pope Celestine about the assembling of a general
Council at Ephesus, by Petronius afterward Bishop of Bononia (as is manifest
in his life written by Sigonius) Pope Celestine in his Letters to Theodosius,
not only professes his consent to the calling of that Council, but also
prescribes in what form it was to be celebrated; as Firmus Bishop of Caesarea
in Cappadocia testified in the Council of Ephesus. Hereupon Theodosius sent his
Letters to assemble the Bishops both of the East and West to that Council. And
Celestine sent his Legates thither, with order not to examine again in the
Council the cause of Nestorius, but rather to put Celestines condemnation of
him, given the year before, into execution. St. Cyril Bishop of Alexandria,
being constituted by Celestine his chief Legate ordinary in the East, by reason
of that preheminency, and primacy of his See after that of Rome, presided in
the Council: yet so, that Philip, who was only a Priest and no Bishop, by
reason that he was sent Legatus a Latere from Celestine, and so supplied his
place as he was chief Bishop of the Church, subscribed the first, even before
St. Cyril, and all the other Legates and Patriarchs. In the sixth Action of this
holy Council, Iuvenalis Patriarch of Jerusalem, having understood the
contempt, which John Patriarch of Antioch, who was cited before the Council,
showed of the Bishops and the Popes Legates there assembled, expressed himself
against him in these words, Quod Apostolica ordinatione and Antiqua Traditione
(which were no way opposed by the Fathers there present) Antiochena seeds
perpetuo a Romana dirigeretur judicareturque, That by Apostolical ordination
and ancient Tradition the Sea of Antioch was perpetually directed and judged by
the Sea of Rome: which words not only evidence the precedence of place, as Dr.
Hammond would have it, but of power and judicature in the Bishop of Rome over a
Patriarch of the Eastern Church; and that derived from the time and ordination
of the Apostles. The Council therefore sent their decrees, with their
condemnation of Nestorius, to Pope Celestine, who presently ratified and
confirmed them.

Not long after this, in the year 445. Valentinian the Emperor makes this
manifesto of the most high Ecclesiastical authority of the Sea of Rome, in
these words: Seeing that the merit of St. Peter, who is the Prince of the
Episcopal Crown, and the Dignity of the City of Rome, and no less the authority
of the holy Synod, has established the primacy of the Apostolical See, lest
presumption should attempt any unlawful thing against the authority of that
See, (for then finally will the peace of the Churches be preserved every where,
if the whole universality acknowledge their Governor) when these things had
been hitherto inviolably observed, etc. Where he makes the succession from St.
Peter to be the first foundation of the Roman Churches primacy; and his
authority to be, not only in place, but in power and Government over the whole
visible Church: And adds presently, that the definitive sentence of the Bishop
of Rome, given against any French Bishop, was to be of force through France,
even without the Emperors Letters Pattents. For what shall not be lawful for
the authority of so great a Bishop to exercise upon the Churches? And then adds
his Imperial precept, in these words. But this occasion has provoked also our
command, that hereafter it shall not be lawful, neither for Hilarious (whom to
be still entitled a Bishop, the sole humanity of the meek Prelate ( id est,
the Bishop of Rome) permits) neither for any other to mingle arms with
Ecclesiastical matters, or to resist the commands of the Bishop of Rome, etc.
We define by this our perpetual decree, that it shall neither be lawful for the
French Bishops, nor for those of other Provinces, against the ancient custom,
to attempt any thing without the authority of the venerable Pope of the eternal
City: But let it be for a law to them and to all, whatsoever the authority of
the Apostolic See has determined, or shall determine. So that what Bishop
soever, being called to the Tribunal of the Roman Bishop, shall neglect to
come, is to be compelled by the Governor of the same Province, to present
himself before him. Which evidently proves, that the highest, Universal,
Ecclesiastical Judge and Governor was, and ever is to be the Bishop of Rome:
which the Council of Chalcedon before mentioned, plainly owned, when writing to
Pope Leo they say, Thou Governest us, as the head does the members, Epist.
Council. ad. I. con. Pap. Act. 1. and sequ.
contributing thy good will by those which hold thy place. Behold a Primacy,
not only of Precedence, but of Government and Authority; which Lerinensis
confirms, contr. Haeres. cap. 9. where speaking of Stephen Pope, he says,
Dignum, ut opinor, existimans, si reliquos omnes tantum fidei devotione,
quantum loci^ authoritate, superabat: esteeming it (as I think) a thing worthy
of himself, if he overcame all others as much in the devotion of faith, as he
did in the Authority of his place. And to confirm what this universal Authority
was; he affirms, that he sent a Law, Decree, or Command into Africa, ( Sanxit,)
That in matter of rebaptization or Heretics nothing should be innovated* which
was a manifest argument of his Spiritual Authority over those of Africa; and a
paritate rationis, over all others. I will shut up all with that which was
publicly pronounced, and no way contradicted, and consequently assented to in
the Council of Ephesus, (one of the four first general Councils) in this
matter, Tom. 2. Council. page 327. Act. 1. where Philip, Priest and Legate of
Pope Celestine, says thus, Gratias agimus sanctae venerandaeque synodo, quod
literis sancti beatique Papae nostri vobis recitatis, sanctas chartas, sanctis
vestris vocibus, sancto capiti vestro, sanctis vestris exclamationibus,
exhibueritis. Non enim ignorant vestra beatitudo, totius fidei, vel etiam
Apostolorum, caput esse beatum Apostolum Petrum. And the same Philip, Act. 3.
p. 330. proceeds in this manner, Nulli dubium, imo saeculis omnibus notum est,
quod sanctus beatissimusque Petrus, Apostolorum Princeps and caput, Fideique
columna, Ecclesiae Catholicae Fundamentum, a Domino nostro Jesu Christo,
Salvatore generis humani ac redemptore nostro claves regni accepit, solvendique
ac ligandi peccata potestas ipsi data est; qui ad hoc usque tempus ac semper in
suis successoribus vivit and judicium exercet: -- Hujus itaque secundum ordinem
successor and locum-tenens, sanctus beatissimusque Papa noster Celestinus, nos
ipsius praesentiam supplentes huc misit. And Arcadius another of the Popes
Legates enveighing against the Heretic Nestorius, accuses him, (though he was
Patriarch of Constantinople, which this Council requires to be next in dignity
after Rome) as of a great crime, For the age 600. See St. Gregory Pope, l. 10.
ep. 30. where Heretics and Shismaticks repenting were received then into the
Church, upon solemn promise, and public protestation, that they would never
any more separate from, but always remain in the unity of the Catholic
Church, and communion in all things with the Bishop of Rome.
that he contemned the command of the Apostolic See, that is, of Pope
Celestine. Now had Pope Celestine had no power to command him (and by the like
reason to command all other Bishops) he had committed no fault in transgressing
and contemning his command. By these testimonies it will appear, that what you
are pleased to say, That the most part of the Catholic Church has been
against us to this day, and all for many hundred of years, is far from truth:
seeing in the time of the holy Ecumenical Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon,
the universal consent of the whole Catholic Church was for us in this point.

As to what you say of Congregation of Christians in the beginning, I answer, I
took the word Christians in a large sense, comprehending in it all those (as it
is vulgarly taken) who are Baptized and profess to believe in Christ, and are
distinguished from Jews, Mahumetans and Heathens, under the denomination of
Christians.

What you often say of an universal Monarch, etc. if you take Monarch for an
Imperious sole Commander, as temporal Kings are, we acknowledge no such Monarch
in the Church: if only for one who has received power from Christ, in
meekness, charity, and humility to govern all the rest, for their own eternal
good, as brethren or children, we grant it.

What also you often repeat of a Vice-Christ, we much dislike that title, as
proud and insolent, and utterly disclaim from it; neither was it ever given by
any sufficient Authority to our Popes, or did they ever accept of it.

As to the Council of Constance, they never questioned the Supremacy of the
Pope, as ordinary chief Governor of all Bishops and people in the whole
Church: nay they expressly give it to Martinus Quintus, when he was chosen.

But in extraordinary cases, especially when it is doubtful who is true Pope,
as it was in the beginning of this Council, till Martinus Quintus was chosen:
Whether any extraordinary power be in a general Council, above that ordinary
power of the Pope: which is a question disputed by some amongst our selves, but
touches not the matter in hand; which proceeds only of the ordinary and
constant Supreme Pastor of all Christians, abstracting from extraordinary
tribunals and powers, which are seldom found in the Church, and collected only
occasionally, and upon extraordinary accidents.

Thus honored Sir, I have as much as my occasions would permit me, hastened a
reply to your answer; and if more be requisite, it shall not be denied. Only
please to give me leave to tell you, that I cannot conceive my Argument yet
answered by all you have said to it.

William Johnson.
Feb. 3. 1658.
Sir,
It was the 21. of January, before your Answer came to my hands; and though my
Reply was made ready by me the third instant, yet I have found so great
difficulties to get it transcribed, that it was not possible to transmit it to
you before now. But I hope hereafter I shall find Scribes more at leisure. I
must desire you to excuse what errors you find in the Copy which I send; As
also, that being unwilling to make a farther delay, I am enforced to send a
Copy which has in it more interlineations then would otherwise become me to
send to a person of your worth. Yet I cannot doubt, but your Candor will pass
by all things of this nature. I am Sir,

Your very humble servant, William Johnson.
Feb. 15. 1658.
Worthy Sir,
I have now expected near three months for your rejoinder to the Reply which I
made to that answer which you were pleased to send, and return to my Argument
concerning the Church of Christ, but as yet nothing has appeared. I must
confess, I have wondered at it, considering the earnestness which appeared in
you at the first, to proceed with speed in a business of this nature: what the
impediment has been, I am only left to guess: but certainly truth is strong,
and it will not be found an easy thing to oppose her while we keep close to
form. I am now necessitated to go out of London; so that if your Papers come in
my absence, I shall hope you will have the patience to expect until they can
be sent from London to me, and my Answers returned by the way of London: but I
do engage not to make a delay longer then the circumstances of the place and
times shall enforce.

Sir, I do highly honor and esteem your parts and person; and shall be very
glad to bring that business to an handsome issue which has been so calmly and
soberly prosecuted. I am an enemy to passion; and as I have hitherto found you
sweet and gentle in your proceedings toward me, so shall you always find me,

Worthy Sir, Your friend to serve you, William Johnson.
May 2. 1659.
Sir,
Be pleased to return your Answer, Papers or Letters which you intend for me,
to the same place to which you directed your former; by which means, I shall be
secure to receive them at my house, which is fourscore miles from London.

To Mr. T. L. (who called me to this work.)
Sir,
THough I am a stranger to you, I thought meet to take notice of the Letters
which you sent your friend here ( T. H.) It seems you urge hard for a Reply,
and intimate somewhat of triumph in my delay: you speak as an incompetent
Judge. God is the Master of my time and work; and him I must serve: and not
neglect his greater work, for such trivial objections as your friend has sent
me, which are answered over and over by many so long ago. Had you read Blondel,
Molineus de novitate Papismi, Whitaker, Sibrandus, Lubbertus, Chamier, Abbots,
Crakenthorp, Spalatensis, or one of many that have confuted them, you would
sure call for no more: Or if in English you had read Dr. Field, Dr. White; yea,
or but Sir Humphery Lind (to pass by multitudes) you might have seen their
vanity. Yea plainly read impartially my two books against Popery, and be a
Papist if you can. But it seems you take it for a poor answer to be referred to
books. Do not fear it. But yet let me tell you, that my hand is not more
legible then my printed books: and if I had sent you this in print, would that
have made it a poor answer? Or rather, is not this a poor exception, and shows
that it is not truth that is look after: for truth may be printed as well as
written. If you be deceived by the men of the Papal way, let me yet entreat
you, but to read over those two books (The safe Religion, and the Key for
Catholics): If your soul be not worth so much labor, take your course: I did
my duty.

But I must say, that it is doleful case that professors are so ungrounded,
that such vanities should carry them away from Catholic verity and unity, to a
faction that usurps the name of Catholics. To be free with you, I think it is
that pride and levity that brings them first to separation from our Churches
into Sects, and the guilt which they there incur, that prepares professors to
be so far forsaken of God, as to be given up to believe a lie, and to turn
Papists.

O dreadful case! that one Bishop cannot swell in pride, but men must make a
Religion of his pride! yea and make a Catholic Church of it! yea and plead for
it, and make the sin their own; yea condemn all Christians that list not
themselves under this Prince of pride. He is culpably, if not wilfully blind,
that has read Scripture and Church history, and knows not, that the Pope for
three hundred years after Christ, was not the creature that now he is; nor had
for most of that time any more Government over other Bishops, then I have over
neighbor Pastors: and after that time, he was no more an universal Head, or
Governor, or Vicar of Christ, then the Archbishop of Canterbury was* having
indeed a far larger Diocese then he, but never was more then the swelled
Primate of one National (Imperial) Church. When Synods began to be gathered out
of a Principality (the Emperors desiring that means of unity within their
Empire), the pride of the Prelates set them presently a striving for
superiority, who should sit highest, and write his name first, and have the
largest Diocese, etc! And now men make a Religion of the fruits of this
abominable pride. What are all their disputings for, and all this stir that
they make in the world, but to set up one man over all the earth? and that to
do a spiritual work, which consists not with force, but is managed on
conscience: One wretched man must govern the Antipodes on the other side of the
earth, that is indeed incapable of truly and justly Governing the City of Rome
it self. Popes, that their own Councils have condemned for ravishing maids and
wives at their doors, for Murders, Simony, Drunkenness, Heresy, denying the
Resurrection and the life to come (that is, being no Christians) these forsooth
must be the universal Governors, or we are all undone; and we are damned if we
believe it not: O how dreadful are the effects of sin; and how great a
judgment is a blinded mind! This comes of falling into Sects and parties,
which leads men into the gulf of the most odious Schism (even Popery) in the
world.

But if you are engaged in this party, its two to one but you are presently
made partial, and will not so much as read what is against them; or will
believe them if they do but tell you that we write lies; when they are things
done in the open sun, and which they cannot confute, nor dare attempt, le^t
they manifest their shame. Take from them their Clergies vast Dominions,
Principalities, Lands and Lordships, Riches and worldly Honors, with which
they so much abound, and then try how many will plead for the Pope: then they will
say, If Ba^l be a God, let him plead for himself. But I confess, I have little
hopes of turning any of them, though I could show it them written by an Angel
from heaven that Popery is a deceit: for the Scripture that is above Angelical
authority declares it; and by making it a nose of wax, they take it as if it
were not sense, nor intelligible without the Popes interpretation (which in
difficult cases he dare not give). They cry up the Church, and when we would
have them stand to the Church, they shamefully turn their backs; and when two
or three parts of the Churches through the world are against the Papal
Sovereignty, they refuse them as Heretics or Schismatics. They cry up
Tradition, and when we offer them in the main point to be tried by it, they
disclaim the Tradition of two or three parts of the universal Church as being
all Heretics. And may not any Sect do so too as honestly as they? yea among
the ignorant that know not Chafe from Corn, ^hey have some of them the faces
to persuade them that their Church is the greater half of the Christian world!
when they know they speak notoriously falsely, or else they are unworthy to
speak of such things that they understand not.

But to what purpose should any words be used with men, that have taught so
great a part of the world, not to believe their eyes and other senses! Can any
writing make any matter plainer to you, then that Bread is Bread, and Wine is
Wine, when you see them, and taste, and eat, and drink them? And yet their
general Councils approved by the Pope, have made it an Article of their faith,
that the whole substance of the Bread and Wine is turned into the Body and
Blood of Christ, so that there is left no Bread or Wine, but only that color,
quantity and taste that before belonged to it. And if you know not Bread when
you eat it, or Wine when you drink it, and when the senses of all the sound men
in the world concur with yours, is it not vain for me, or any man to dispute
with you? Can you have any thing brought to a surer judgment then to all your
senses? And yet no doubt but your seducers can say something to prove that
Bread is not Bread when you see and eat it: No wonder then if they can confute
me. But do they indeed believe themselves? how is it possible? there is no
exercise of reason, and belief that supposes not the certainty of sense. If I
cannot know Bread and Wine when I see, touch, ^ast them; then cannot I know the
Pope, the Councils, the Scripture, the Priest, or any thing else. If you think
to let go this point of Popery and hold the rest, you know not what Popery is:
for a Pope and Council having determined it, you are damned by them for denying
the faith: and if you depart from the infallibility of their Rule and judge in
points of faith, or at least from the obligation of it, in one thing, they will
confess to you that you may as well do it in more; False in this, and certain
in nothing, is their own conclusion. Sir, I have not been unwilling to know the
truth, having a soul to save or lose as well as you, and having as much reason
to be loath to perish. If you have so far forfeited the Grace of God, as merely
to follow the pride of a pretended Vice-Christ (that has turned doctrine into
error, worship into superstition and dead formality, light into darkness,
discipline into confusion mixed with tyranny); if merely to set up one Tyrant
over the consciences (and bodies too) of all believers in the world, you can
fall into a Sect, deny Scripture, Reason, the Judgment and Tradition of most
of the Church, and your own and all men's eyesight, taste and other senses, the
Lord have mercy on you, if you be not past it: I have done with you, yet
remaining

An unfeigned desirer of your welfare, and lamenter of the Apostacies and
giddiness of these times, Richard Baxter.
May. 18. 1659. Did you know what it is, by loose and false allegations, to be
put to read so many Volumes (in great part) in folio, to try whether the
alledger say true or false, you would not expect that I should return an
answer, and read so much of so many folios in any less then ten or eleven
days, which I think has been all that I have had to write and read so much.

The Reader must take notice that I wrote the former Letter to the person that
sent Mr. Johnsons Letters, with a charitable jealousy, that if he were himself
in doubt, he might be resolved: But in his return he fully disclaimed Popery,
and assured me, that it is for the sake of some friends that he desired my
labor, and not for his own.

R. B.



The Reply to Mr. Johnsons second PAPER.
Sir,
THE multitude and urgency of my employments gave me not leave till this day (
May 2.) so much as to read over all your Papers; But I shall be as loath to
break off our Disputation, as you can be, though perhaps necessity may sometime
cause some weeks delay. And again, I profess, my indignation against the
Hypocrital Juggling of this age, does provoke me to welcome so ingenuous and
candid a disputant as your self, with great content. But I must confess also,
that I was the less hasty in sending you this Reply, because I desired you
might have leisure to peruse a Book which I published since your last, (A Key
for Catholics;) seeing that I have there answered you already, and that more
largely then I am like to do in this Reply. For the sharpness of that I must
crave your patience; the persons and cause I thought required it.

Ad 1m. What explications were made to your Friend of your Thesis, I could not
take notice of, who had nothing but your writing to Answer.

2. If you will not be precise in Arguing, you had little reason to expect
(much less so strictly to exact) a precise Answer; which cannot be made as you
prescribed, to an Argument not precise.

3. I therefore expect accordingly that the unlearned be not made the Judges of
a dispute which they are not fit to judge of; seeing you desire us to avoid
their road.

4. Again I say, if you will not be precise in arguing, I can hardly be so in
answering. And by [ a Congregation of Christians] you may mean [ Christians
politically related to one Head,] whether Christ, or the Pope: But the word [
Assemblies] expresses their actual Assembling together, and so excludes all
Christians that are or were Members of no particular assemblies, from having
Relation as Members of Christ (our Head) or the Pope (your Head,) and so from
being of the Congregation, as you Call, The Church universal.

5. I had great reason to avoid the snare of an equivocation, or ambiguity, of
which you gave me cause of jealousy by your [ whatsoever] as I told you: as
seeming to intimate a false supposition: To your Like, I answer, it is unlike,
and still more intimates the false supposition. [ Whatsoever Congregation of
men is the Commonwealth of England] is a phrase that imports that [ There is
a Congregation of men which is not the Commonwealth of England.] Which is
true, there being more men in the world. So [ whatsoever Congregation of
Christians is now the true Church] does seem to import, that you suppose [
there is a Congregation of Christians (univocally so called) that are not the
true Church] which you would distinguish from the other: Which I only let you
know at the entrance, that I deny, that you may not think it granted.

Yet I must tell you that nothing is more ordinary then for the Body to be said
to do that which a part of it only does; As that [ the Church administreth
Sacraments, Discipline, Teatheth, etc. the Church is assembled in such a
Council etc.] when yet it is but a small part of the Church that does these
things. And when Bellarmine, Gretser, etc. say [ the Church is the infallible
judge of Controversies of faith,] they mean not [ the whole Church] which
contains every Christian, when they tell you that It is the Pope they mean.
and therefore I had reason to enquire into your sense, unless I would wilfully
be over-reacht.

You now satisfy me that you mean it universally, viz. [ ^ll that Congregation
(or Church) of Christians which is now the true Church of Christ, does
acknowledge, etc.] which I told you I deny.

6. To my following distinction you say [ that all the world knows that
whatsoever is acknowledged to have been ever in the Church by Christ's
instiution, cannot be meant of any accidental thing, but of a necessary
unchangeable and essential thing, in Christ's true Church,] To which I Reply,
Either you see the gross fallacy of this defense, or you do not: If you do not,
then never more call for an exact Disputant, nor look to be delivered from your
errors by argumentation, though never so convincing. If you do, then you are
not faithful to the truth. In your Major proposition the words being many (as
you say, you penetrated diverse arguments together,) ambiguities were the easier
hidden in the heap. That which I told you is Accidental to the Church (and that
but to a corrupted part) was [the Acknowledging of the Papacy as of Christ's
Institution,] and therefore if it were granted that a thing [ of Christ's
Institution] could not be Accidental, yet [the Acknowledgment] that is, the
Opinion or asserting of it may. If the Church by mistake should think that to
be Essential to it which is not, though it will not thence follow that its
Essence is but an Accident, yet it will follow that both the false opinion, and
the thing it self so falsely conceited to be essential, are but accidents, or
not essential. You say [ It cannot be meant of any Accidental thing] But 1.
That Meaning it self of theirs may be an Accident. 2. And the question is not
what they [ Mean, that is, Imagine or affirm] it to be; But what it is in deed
and truth. That may be an Accident, which they think to be none.

2. But that which you say [ all the world knows] is a thing that [ all the
world of Christians except your selves,] that ever I heard of, do know, or
acknowledge to be false. What! does all the world know that Christ has
instituted in his Church nothing but what is essential to it? I should hope
that few in the Christian world would be so ignorant as ever to have such a
thought, if they had the means of knowledge that Protestants would have them
have. There is no natural body but has natural Accidents as well as Essence:
Nor is there any other society under heaven (Community or Policy) that has not
its Accidents as well as Essence: And yet has Christ instituted, a Church that
has nothing but Essence without Accidents? Do you build upon such foundations?
What! upon the denial of common principles and sense? But if you did, you
should not have feigned all the world to do so too. Were your asseriton true,
then every soul were cut off from the Church, and so from salvation, that
wanted any thing of Christ's Institution, yea for a moment. And then what would
become of you. You give me an instance in [ the Eucharist] But 1. Will it
follow that if the Eucharist be not Accidental or integral, but Essential, that
therefore every thing Instituted by Christ is Essential? surely no? 2. The
Question being not whether the Being of the Eucharist in the Church be
Essential to the Universal Church: But whether the Belief or Acknowledgment of
it by All and every one of the members, be Essential to the Members? I would
crave your answer but to this Question (though it be nothing to my cause.) Was
not a Baptized person in the primitive and ancient Churches a true
Churchmember, presently upon Baptism? And then tell me also, Did not the
ancient Fathers and Churches unanimously hide from their Catechumens, even
purposely hide, the mystery of the Eucharist, as proper to the Church of
understand? and never opened it to the auditors, till they were Baptized? This
is most undeniable in the concurrent vote of the ancients. I think therefore
that it follows that in the Judgment of the ancient Churches the Eucharist was
but of the Integrity, and not the Essence of a member of the Church; and the
acknowledgement of it by all the members, a thing that never was existent.

Where you say, your Major should have been granted or denied without these
distinctions: I Reply, 1. If you mean fairly, and not to abuse the truth by
Confusion, such distinctions as you your self call [ Learned and substantial]
can do you no wrong. They do but secure our true understanding of one another:
And a few lines in the beginning by way of distinction are not vain, that may
prevent much vain altercation afterward. When I once understand you, I have
done: And I beseech you, take it not for an injury to be understood.

As to your conclusion, that you used no fallacy ex Accidente, and that my
instances are not apposite; I Reply, that's the very life of the Controversy
between us: And our main Question is not so to be begged. On the grounds I have
showed you, I still averr, that [ the holding of the Papacy is as Accidental to
the universal Church, as a Cancer in the breast is to a woman;] And though you
say, It is Essential, and of Christ's Institution, that makes it neither
Essential, nor of Christ's Institution; nor does it make all his institutions to
be essentialls.

Now of your second Syllogism. 1. I shall never question the successive
Visibility of the Church.

Whereas I told you out of your Fransc. a S. Clara, that many or most of your
own Schoolmen agree not to that which you say [ All Christians agree to,] you
make no reply to it.

As to your Minor, I have given you the Reasons of the necessity and
harmlesness of my distinctions: we need say no more to that [ a Congregation of
Christians] and [ a Church] are Synonima: But the word [ true] was not added to
your first term by you or me; and therefore your instance here is delusory. But
to say [ whatsoever Congregation of Christians, is now the true Church] is all
one as to say whatsoever Church of Christians is now the true Church.] When I
know your meaning I have my end.

Though my syllogism say not that [ the Church of Rome acknowledges those
things always done, and that by Christ's institution] it nevertheless
explicateth the weakness of yours, as to the fallacy accidentis: For 1. The
holding it always done, and that of Christ's Institution, may be either an
Accident, or but of the Integrity, and ad been esse, yea possibly an error. 2.
And I might as easily have given you Instances of that kind.

To your 3. Syllogism I Reply. 1. When you say the Church [ had Pastors] as you
must speak of what existed, (and Universalls exist not of themselves) so it is
necessary that I tell you, How far I grant your Minor, and how far I deny it.

My argument from the Indians and others, is not solved by you. For 1. You can
never prove that the Pope was preached to the Iberians by the Captive maid, nor
to the Indians by Frumentius. 2. Thousands were made Christians and baptized by
the Apostles, without any preaching or profession of a papacy, Act. 2. and
passim. 3. The Indians now Converted in America by the English and Dutch, hear
nothing of the Pope, nor thousands in Ethiopia. 4. Your own do or may baptize
many without their owning the Pope, who yet would be Christians. And a Pastor
not known, or believed, or owned, is actually no Pastor to them.

To your confirmation, I Reply: You misread my words: I talk not of [
Invisible.] I say it is true that the Universal Church is united to Christ as
their universal Head: and is Visible 1. In the members. 2. In the Profession.
3. Christ himself is visible in the Heavens, and as much seen of most of the
Church as the Pope is, that is, not at all. As the Pope is not Invisible,
though one of a million see him not, no more is Christ, who is seen by most of
the Church, and by the best part, even by the glorified. You know my meaning:
Whether you will Call Christ visible or not, I leave to you: I think he is
visible: But that which I affirm, is, that the universal Church has no other
visible universal Head or Pastor: But particular Churches have their particular
Pastors all under Christ.

Of Ephesians. 4. I easily grant that the whole Church may be said to have Pastors,
in that all the particular Churches have Pastors. But I deny that the whole
have any one universal Pastor but Christ. Of that which is the point in
controversy, you bring no proof. If you mean no more then I grant, that the
whole Church has Pastors both in that each particular Church has Pastors, and
in that unfixed Pastors are to preach to all as they have opportunity, then
your Minor has no denial from me.

Instead of prosecuting your Argument, when you had cast the work of an
Opponent upon me, you here appeal [ to any true Logician or expert Lawyer]
Content; I admit of your Appeal. But why then did you at all put on the face of
an Opponent? could you not without this lost labor at first have called me to
prove the successive visibility of our Church? But to your Appeal, Ho all you
true Logicians, this Learned man and I refer it to your tribunal, whether it be
the part of an Opponent, to contrive his Argument so as that the Negative shall
be ^is, and then change places, and become Respondent, and make his adversary
Opponent at his Pleasure.] We leave this cause at your bar, and expect your
sentence.

But before we come to the Lawyers bar, I must have leave more plainly to state
our case.

We are all agreed that Christianity is the true Religion, and Christ the
Churches Universal Head; and the holy Scriptures the Word of God. Papists tell
us of another Head and Rule; the Pope and Tradition, and judgment of the
Church. Protestants deny these Additionals, and hold to Christianity and
Scripture only; Our Religion, being nothing but Christianity, we have no
Controversy about: Their Papal Religion, superadded, is that which is
Controverted: They affirm 1. the Right. 2. the Antiquity of it: We deny both:
The Right we disprove from Scripture, though it belongs to them to prove it.
The Antiquity is it that is now to be referred. Protestancy being the Denial
of Popery, it is we that Really have the Negative, and the Papists that have
the Affirmative. The Essence of our Church (which is Christian) is confessed to
have been successively visible: But we deny that theirs as Papal has been so;
and now they tell us, that it is Essential to ours to deny the succession of
theirs, and therefore require us to prove a succession of ours, as one that
still has denied theirs: Now we leave our case to the Lawyers, seeing to them
you make your appeal, 1. Whether the substance of all our cause lie not in this
Question, Whether the Papacy or universal Government by the Pope, be of heaven,
or of men? and so whether it has been from the beginning? which we deny, and
therefore are called Protestants; and they affirm, and are therefore called
Papists. 2. If they cannot first prove a successive visibility of their Papacy
and Papal Church, then what Law can bind us to prove that it was denied, before
it did arise in the world, or ever any pleaded for it? 3. And as to the point
of Possession, I know not what can be pretended on your side. 1. The Possession
of this or that particular Parish Church or Tithes, is not the thing in
question; but the universal Headship is the thing: But if it were, yet it is I
that am yet here in Possession; and Protestants before me for many ages
successively: And when possessed you the Headship of the Ethiopian, Indian, and
other extra-imperial Churches? never to this day. No nor of the Eastern
Churches, though you had communion with them. 2. If the Question be, who has
Possession of the universal Church; we pretend not to it; but only to be a
part, and the soundest safest part. 3. The case of Possession therefore is,
whether we have not been longer in Possession of our Religion, which is bare
Christianity, then you of your superadded Popery. Our Possession is not denied,
of Christianity. Yours of Popery we deny: (and our denial makes us called
Protestants): Let therefore the reason of Logicians, Lawyers, or any rational
sober man determine the case, whether it do not first and principally belong to
you, to prove the visible succession of a Vice-Christ over the universal Church.

As to your contradictory impositions I Reply, 1. Your exception was not
expressed, and your imposition was peremptory. 2. I told you I would be a Papist
if you prove [ that the whole visible Church in all ages has held the Popes
universal headship] you say that you [ have proved it by this argument, that
either he has that supremacy, or some other Church; denying that he has
always had it, has been always visible,] and that Church you require should
be named. I Reply, 1. Had not you despaired of making good your cause, you
should have gone on by Argumentation, till you had forced me to contradict some
common principle. 2. If you should show these Papers to the world, and tell
them that you have no better proof of the succession of your Papacy, then that
we prove not that it has always been denied by the visible Church, you would
sure turn thousands from Popery, if there be so many rational considering
impartial men that would peruse them, and believe you. For any man may know
that it could not be expected that the Churches should deny a Vice-Christ
before he was sprung up. Why did not all the precedent Roman Bishops disclaim
the title of universal Bishop or Patriarch, till Pelagius and Gregory? but
because there was none in the world that gave occasion for it. How should any
Heresy be opposed or condemned before it does arise?

But you fairly yield me somewhat here, and say that you [oblige me not to
prove a continued visible Church formally and expressly denying it; but that it
was of such a constitution as was inconsistent with any such supremacy, or
could and did subsist without it.] Reply, I confess your first part is very
ingenuous and fair. Remember it hereafter, that you have discharged me from
proving [ a Church that denied the Papacy formally and expressly.] But as to
what you yet demand. 1. I have here given it you, because you shall not say
^'le sail you: I have answered your desire. But 2. It is not as a thing
necessary, but ex abundanti, as an overplus. For you may now see plainly, that
to prove that the Church was without an universal Pastor, (which you require)
is to prove the Negative, viz. that then there was none such; whereas its you
that must prove that there was such. I prove our Religion: do you prove yours:
though I say to pleasure you, I Will disprove it, and have done it in two books
already.

My reason from the stress of necessity, which you lay on your Affirmative and
Additions, was but subservient to the foregoing Reasons, not first to prove you
bound, but to prove you the more bound to the proof of your Affirmative. And
therefore your instance of Mahumetans is impertinent. He that says, you shall
be damned if you believe not this or that, is more obliged to prove it, then he
that affirms a point as of no such moment.

To what I say of an accident and a corrupt part, you say you have answered,
and do but say so, having said nothing to it that is considerable.

Me thinks you that make Christ to be corporally present in every Church in the
Eucharist, should not say, that the King of the Church is absent. But when you
have proved, 1. That Christ is so absent from his Church, that there is need of
a Deputy to essentiate his Kingdom, and 2. That the Pope is so Deputed; you
will have done more then is yet done for your cause. And yet let me tell you,
that in the absence of a King, it is only the King and Subjects that are
essential to the Kingdom. The Deputy is but an officer, and not essential.

Your naked assertion, that whatsoever Government Christ instituteth, of his
Church, must be essential to his Church, is no proof, nor like the task of an
Opponent. The Government of inferior officers is not essential to the
universal Church, no more then Judges and Justices to a Kingdom. And yet we
must wait long before you will prove that Peter and the Pope of Rome are in
Christ's place, as Governors of the universal Church.

Sir, I desire open dealing, as between men that believe these matters are of
eternal consequence. I watch not for any advantage against you. Though it be
your part to prove the Affirmative which our Negative supposes; yet I have
begun the proof of our Negative; but it was on supposition that you will
equally now prove your Affirmative, better then you have here done. I have
proved a visible Church successively that h^ld not the Popes universal
Government do you now prove [ that the universal Church in all ages did hold
the Popes universal Government] which is your part; or I must say again, I
shall think you do but run away, and give up your cause as unable to defend it:
I have not failed you; do not you fail me.

You complain of a deficiency in quality, though you confess that I abound in
number. But where is the defect! you say, I must [assert both that these were
one Congregation, and ever visible since Christ's time] Reply, If by [ one
Congregation] you meant [ one assembly met for personal Communion] which is the
first sense of the word [ Congregation] it were ridiculous to feign the
universal Church to be such. If you mean, One as united in one visible humane
Head, that's it that we deny, and therefore may not be required to prove. But
that these Churches are One as united in Christ the Head, we easily prove; In
that from him the whole family is named; the body is Christ's body, 1 Cor.
12.12, 13. and one in him, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6, etc. All that are true Christians
are one Kingdom or Church of Christ; but these of whom I speak are true
Christians; therefore they are one Kingdom or Church of Christ. And that they
have been visible since Christ's time till now, all history, even your own
affirms: As in Iudaea, and from the Apostles times, in Ethiopia, Egypt and
other parts, ( Rome was no Church in the time of Christ's being on earth.) And
to what purpose talk you of determinate Congregations? Do you mean individual
assemblies? those cease when the persons die; or do you mean assemblies meeting
in the same place? so they have not done still at Rome. I told you, and tell
you still, that we hold not that God has secured the perpetual visibility of
his Church in any one City or Country: but if it cease in one place, it is
still in others. It may cease at Ephesus, at Philippi, Colosse, etc. in Tenduc,
Nubia, etc. and yet remain in other parts. I never said that the Church must
needs be visible still in one Town or Country. And yet it has been so de
facto, as in Asia, Ethiopia, etc. But you say, I nominate none. Are you
serious! must I nominate Christians of these Nations, to prove that there were
such? you require not this of the Church Historians. It suffices that they
tell you, that Ethiopia, Egypt, Armenia, Syria, etc. had Christians, without
naming them. When all history tells you that these Countries were Christians,
or had Churches, I must tell you [ what and who they were]! must you have their
names, sirnames, and Genealogies? I cannot name you one of a thousand in this
small Nation, in the age I live in: How then should I name you the people of
Armenia, Abassia, etc. so long ago? You can name but few of the Roman Church in
each age: And had they wanted learning and records as much as the Abassins and
Indians, and others, you might have been as much to seek for names as they. You
ask [were they different Congregations?] Answ. As united in Christ they were
one Church: but as assembling at one time, or in one place, or under the same
guide, so they were not one, but diverse Congregations.

That there were any Papists of 400. years after Christ, do you prove if you
are able.

My conclusion, that all have been against you for many hundred years, must
stand good, till you prove that some were for you: yet I have herewith proved
that there were none, at least that could deserve the name of the Church.

Do you think to satisfy any reasonable man by calling for positive proof from
Authors, of such Negatives? yet proof you shall not want, such as the nature of
the point requires, viz. That the said Churches; of Ethiopia, India, the outer
Armenia, and other extra-imperial Nations, were not under the jurisdiction of
the Bishop of Rome. 1. You find all these Churches, or most of them at this day
(that remain) from under your jurisdiction: and you cannot tell us when or how
they turned from you. If you could, it had been done. 2. These Nations profess
it to be their Tradition, that the Pope was never their Governor. 3. No
history or authority of the least regard, is brought by your own writers to
prove these Churches under your jurisdiction: no not by Baronius himself, that
is so copious, and so skilful in making much of nothing. No credible witnesses
mention your Acts of jurisdiction over them, or their Acts of subjection, which
Church history must needs have contained, if it had been true, that they were
your subjects. 4. Their absence from general Councils, and no invitation of
them thereunto, (that was ever proved, or is showed by you) is sufficient
evidence. 5. Their Liturgies, even the most ancient, bear no footsteps of any
subjection to you. Though your forgeries have corrupted them: as I shall here
(digressively) give one instance of: The Ethiopick Liturgy, because of a [ Hoc
est corpus meum] which we also use, is urged to prove that they are for the
corporal presence, or Transubstantiation: But says Usher, de success. Eccles.
In Ethiopicarum Ecclesiarum universali Canone, descriptum habebatur [Hic panis
est corpus meum]: In Latina translatione contra fidem Ethiopic. Exemplarium (ut
in prima operis editione confirmat Pontificius ipse Scholiastes) expunctum est
nomen [Panis.] 6. Constantines Letters of request to the King of Persia for the
Churches there (which Eusebius. in vit. Constant. mentions) do intimate that
then the Roman Bishop ruled not there. 7. Even at home, the Scots and Britains
obeyed not the Pope, nor conformed about the Easter observation, even in the
days of Gregory; but resisted his changes, and refused communion with his
Ministers. 8. I have already elsewhere given you the testimony of some of your
own writers: as Reynerius contra Waldens. Catal. in Biblioth. Patr. Tom. 4. p.
773. saying [ The Churches of the Armenians, and Ethiopians, and Indians, and
the rest which the Apostles converted, are not under the Church of Rome.] 9. I
have proved from the Council of Chalcedon, that it was the Fathers, that is,
the Councils that gave Rome its pre-eminence: But those Councils gave the Pope
no pre-eminence over the extra-imperial Nations: For 1. Those Nations being not
called to the Council, could not be bound by it. 2. The Emperors called and
enforced the Councils, who had no power out of their Empire. 3. The Diocese are
described and expressly confined within the verge of the Empire; see both the
description, and full proof in Blondel de Primatu in Ecclesia. Gall. And 10.
The Emperors themselves did sometime (giveing power to the Councils Acts) make
Rome the chief; and sometime (as the Councils did also) give Constantinople
equal privilege; and sometime set Constantinople highest, as I have showed in
my Key, p. 174, 175. But the Emperors had no power to do thus with respect to
those without the Empire.

But what say you now to the contrary? Why 1. You ask, [ Were those Primitive
Christians of another kind of Church order and Government then were those under
the Roman Empire?] Answ. When the whole body of Church history satisfies us
that they were not subject to the Pope, which is the thing in question, is it
any weakening of such evidence in a matter of such public fact, to put such a
question as this, Whether they were under another kind of Government? 1. We
know that they were under Bishops or Pastors of their own: and so far their
Government was of the same kind. 2. If any of them, or all, did suit their
Church associations to the several Commonwealths in which they lived, and so
held National Councils, and for order sake made one among them the Bishop
primae sedis, then was that Government of the same kind with that of the
Imperial Churches, and not of another kind. The Roman Government was no other,
but One, thus Ordered, in one Empire: And if there were also One, so ordered,
in England, one in Scotland, one in Ethiopia, etc. this was of the same kind
with the Roman. Every Church suited to the form of the Commonwealth, is even
(as to that humane mode) of the same kind (if a humane mode must be called a
Kind.) It may be of that same kind, and mode, without being part of the same
Individual.

But 2. You say that [ How far from truth this is, appears from St. Leo in
his Sermons de Natali suo, where he says, [Sedes Roma Perri; quicquid non
possidet armis, Religione tenet.] Reply, If you take your Religion on trust, as
you do your authorities that are made your ground of it, and bring others to it
when you are deceived your selves, how will you look Christ in the the face
when you must answer for such temerity? Leo has no Sermons de Natali suo, but
only one Sermon affixed to his Sermons, lately found in an oid book of Nicol.
Fabers. And in that Sermon there is no such words as you here allege. Neither
does he Poetize in his Sermons, nor there has any such words which might
occasion your mistake: and therefore doubtless you believed some body for this
that told you an untruth; and yet ventured to make it the ground of charging my
words with untruth. Yet let me tell you, that I will take Pope Leo for no
competent judge or witness, though you call him a Saint: as long as we know
what past between him and the Council of Chalcedon, and that he was one of the
first tumified Bishops of Rome, he shall not be judge in his own cause.

3. But you add that [ The Abassines of Ethiopia were under the Patriarch of
Alexandria anciently, and he under the authority of the Roman Bishop.] Reply.
1. Your bare word without proof shall not persuade us that the Abassines were
under the Patriarch of Alexandria for above three hundred, if not four hundred
years after Christ. Prove it, and then your words are regardable. 2. At the
Council of Nice the contrary is manifest by the sixth Can. [ Mos antiquus
perdurat in Aegypto, vel Lybia and Pentapoli, ut Alexandrinus Episcopus horum
omnium habeat potestatem, etc.] And the common descriptions of the Alexandrian
Patriarchate in those times confine it to the Empire, and leave out Aethiopia (
Pisanus new inventions we regard not.) 3. I deny that the Patriarch of
Alexandria was under the Government of the Bishop of Rome, any more then the
Jury are under the Foremen, or the junior Justices on the bench are under the
senior, or York is under London, or the other Earls of England are under the
Earl of Arundel. 4. But if both these were proved, that Ethiopia was under
Alexandria, and Alexandria under Rome, I deny the consequence, that Ethiopia
was under Rome: for Alexandria was under Rome but secundum quid, and so far as
it was within the Empire, and therefore those without the Empire that were
under Alexandria, were not therefore under Rome. 5. And if it could (as it
never can) be proved of Abassia, what is that to all the other Churches in
India, Persia, and the rest of the world? Sir, If you have impartially read the
ancient Church history, and yet can believe that all these Churches were then
under the Pope, despair not of bringing your self to believe any thing
imaginable that you would have to be true.

3. Your next question is [ When the Roman Emperors were yet Heathens, had not
the Bishops of Rome the supremacy over all other Bishops through the whole
Church?] Answ. No: they had not; nor in the Empire neither. Prove it, I beseech
you, better then by questioning. If you asked, Whether men rule not Angels? your
Question proves not the Affirmative.

4. But you ask again [Did those Heathen Emperors give it him?] Answ. 1. Power
over all Churches none ever gave him, till titularly his own Parasites of late.
2. Primacy of mere degree in the Empire, for the dignity and many advantages of
the Emperial seat, the Bishops of the Empire gave him by consent ( Blondel de
primatu, gives you the proof and reason at large:) yet so as that [ small
regard was had to the Church of Rome before the Nicene Council] as says your
Aeneas Sylvius, Pope Pius the second.

5. [ Whether the Bishop of Rome had power over the Bishop of Arles by Heathen
Emperors,] is a frivolous question. Arles was in the Roman Patriarchate, and
not out of the Empire. The Churches in the Empire, might by consent dispose
themselves into the Patriarchal orders, without the Emperors, and yet not
meddle out of the Empire. Yet indeed Cyprians words intimate no power Rome had
over Arles, more then Arles had over Rome: that is, to reject communion with
each other upon dissent. Nay it more confuteth you, that even under Heathen
Emperors, when Church associations were by voluntary consent of Pastors only;
and so if they had thought it necessary, they might have extended them to other
Principalities: yet de facto they did not do it, as all history of the Church
declares, mentioning their Councils and associations, without these taken in.

See now how little your objections are worth; and how groundlesly you bid me [
See now how little my allegations are to the purpose.]

As for the rabble of Heretics which you reckon up, (as you esteem them,) some
of them are no Christians univocally so called, and those cannot be of the
Christian Church. Others of them were better Christians then the Romanists, and
so were of the same Church with us: And it is not many reproachful names put
on them by malice that makes them no Christians, or of many Churches or
Religions. If an arrogant usurper will put nicknames on all that will not bow
to him as the Vice-Christ, and call them Iconoclasts, Berengarians,
Waldensians, Albigenses, Wicklefifts, Hussites, Lutherans, Calvinists (you may
as well give them a thousand more names) this makes them not of various
Religions, nor blots out their names from the book of life. I have in my most
retired thoughts perused the History of those men's lives, and of the lives of
many of your Popes, together with their several doctrines; and with death and
judgment in my eyes, as before the great God of Heaven. I humbly beg of him,
that I may rather have my everlasting portion with those holy men whom you
burned, as Waldenses, Albigenses, Hussites, etc. then with the Popes that
burned them, or those that follow them in that cruelty, unless reconciling
grace have given them repentance unto life. The Religion of all these men was
one, and they were all of one universal Church.

Where you again call for One Congregation, I tell you again that we know no
Unity essential, from whence the Church can be called one, but either Christ
or the Vice-Christ: the former only is asserted by us, and the latter also by
you, which we deny: And therefore we cannot call the universal Church One, in
any other formal respects, but as it is Christian, and so One in Christ. Yet
have I herewith satisfied your demand, but showed you the unreasonableness of
it, beyond all reasonable contradiction.

You next enquire whether [we account] Rome and us One Congregation of
Christians?] I answer, the Roman Church has two Heads, and ours but one, and
that's the difference. They are Christians, and so One Church as united in
Christ, with us and all other true Christians. If any so hold their Papacy and
other errors as effectively and practically to destroy their Christianity,
those are not Christians, and so not of the same Church as we. But those that
do not so, but are so Papists, as yet to be truly and practically Christians,
are and shall be of the same Church with us, whether they will or not: And your
modest style makes me hope that you and I are of one Church, though you never
so much renounce it. As Papal, we are not of your Church; that's a new Church
form; But as Christian, we are and will be of it, even when you are condemning,
torturing and burning us (if such persecution can stand with your Christianity.)

But you ask [ Why did you then separate your selves, and remain still
separate from the Communion of the Roman Church.] Answ. 1. We never separated
from you as you are Christians; We still remain of that Church as Christian,
and we know (or will know) no other form; because that Scripture and primitive
Churches knew no other. Either you have by Popery separated from the Church as
Christian, or not; If you have, its you that are the (damnable) Separatists. If
you have not, then we are not separated from you, in respect of the form of the
Christian Church. And for your other form (the Papacy) 1. Neither I, nor my
Grandfather, or great grandfather did separate from it: because they never
entertained it. 2. Those that did so, did but Repent of their sin, and that's no
sin. We still remain separated from you as Papists, even as we are separate
from such as we are commanded to avoid, for impenitency in some corrupting
doctrine or scandalous sin; Whether such men's sins or their professed
Christianity be most predominant at the heart, we know not: but till they show
Repentance we must avoid them; yet admonishing them as brethren, and not taking
them as men of another Church, but as finding them unfit for our Communion.

But O sir, what manner of dealing have we from you! must we be imprisoned,
rackt, hanged or burned, if we will not believe that bread and wine, are not
bread and wine, contrary to our own and all men's senses; and if we will not
worship them with Divine worship, and will not obey the Pope of Rome in all
such matters contrary to our Consciences: and then must we be chidden for
separating from you, if we (...) a while escape the strappado and the (...)?
What! will you blame us for not believing that all men's senses are deceived,
and the greater part of Christians and their Traditions (against you) are
false, when we read, and study, and suspect our selves, and pray for light, and
are willing to hear any of your reasons, but cannot force our own
understandings to believe all such things that you believe, and merely because
the Pope commands it: and when we cannot thus force our own understandings,
must we be burned, or else called Separatists? would you have the Communion of
our Ashes, or else say, We forsake your Communion? In your Churches we cannot
have leave to come, without lying against God and our consciences, and saying,
We believe what our senses contradict; and without committing that which our
consciences tell us are most heinous sins. We solemnly protest that we would do
as you do, and say as you say, were it not for the love of truth and holiness,
and for fear of the wrath of God, and the flames of hell: but we cannot, we
dare not rush upon these errors, and sell our souls to please the Pope. And
must we then either be murdered, or taken for uncha^^^^ble? will you say to so
many poor souls, that are ready to enter into another world [ Either sin
against your consciences, and so damn your souls, or else let us burn and
murder you, or else you do not love us; you are uncharitable if you deny us
leave to kill you, and you separate from the Communion of the Church.] We
appeal from the Pope and all unreasonable men, to the great God of heaven and
earth, to judge righteously between you and us concerning this dealing.

As for possessing our selves of your Bishoprics and Cures, if any particular
person had personal injury in the change, being cast out without cause, they
must answer for it that did it, and not I: though I never heard any thing to
make me believe it. But must the Prince and people let alone delinquent Pastors
for fear of being blamed for taking their Bishoprics? Ministers of the same
Religion with us may be cast out for their crimes: Princes have power over
Pastors as well as David, Solomon, and other Kings of Israel had. Guil. Barklay
and some few of your own knew this. The Popes treasonable exemption of the
Clergy from their Sovereigns judgment, will not warrant those Princes before
God, that neglect to punish offe^^ing Pastors. And I beseech you tell us, ^hen
our consciences (after the use of all means that we can use to be informed)
cannot renounce all our senses, nor our reason, nor the judgment of the most
of the Church, or of antiquity, or the Word of God, and yet we must do so, or
be no members of your Church, what wrong is it to you if we choose us Pastors
of our own, in the order that God has appointed? Had not the people in all
former ages the choice of their Pastors? we and our late forefathers here were
never under your oversight: but we know not why we may not now choose our
Pastors as well as formerly. We do it not by tumults: we kill not men, and
tread not in their blood, while we choose our Pastors, as Pope Damasus was
chosen. The tithes and other temporal maintenance we take from none, but the
Magistrate disposes of it as he sees meet for the Churches good. And the
maintenance is for the cure or work: and therefore they that are justly cast
out of the cure, are justly deprived of the maintenance. And surely when they
are dead, none of you can with any show of reason, stand up and say, These
Bishoprics are yours: or these Parsonages your^^ It is the Incumbent
personally that only ^an claim title; saving the supereminent title of Christ,
to whom they are devoted. But the successive Popes cannot have title to all the
tithes and Temples in the world; nor any of his Clergy that never were called
to the charges. If this be disunion, it is you that are the Separatists and
cause of all. If you will needs tell all the Christian world, that except they
will be ruled by the Pope of Rome, and be burned if they believe not as he bids
them in despite of all their senses, he will call them Separatists,
Schismatics, and say they disunite and are uncharitable: again, we appeal to
God and all wise men that are impartial, whether it be he or we that is the
divider?

You ask me [Is not charity, subordination, and obedience to the same state and
Government, required as well to make one Congregation of Christians, as it is
required to make a Congregation of Commonwealths men?] Answ. Yes, it is: But as
all the world is one Kingdom under God the universal King, but yet has no
universal Vice-King, but every Commonwealth only has its own Sovereign; even
so all the Christian world is one Church under Christ the universal King of the
Church, but ha^^ not one Vice-Christ, but every Church has its own Pastors, as
every School has its own Schoolmaster. But all the anger is because we are
loath to be ruled by a cruel usurper therefore we are uncharitable.

Your next reason against me, is, because [They cannot be parts of the
Catholic Church, unless Arrians, and Pelagians, and Donatists be parts] and so
Heretics and Schismatics be parts.] Reply 1. You know sure, that your own
Divines are not agreed whether Heretics and Schismatics are parts of the
Church. And if they were, yet it is not de fide with you, as not determined by
the Pope. If it be, then all yours are Heretics that are for the affirmative (
Bellarmine names you some of them) If it be not, then how can you be sure its
true, and so impose it on me, that they are no parts.

2. Arrians are no Christians, as denying that which is essential to Christ,
and so to Christianity. Pelagianism is a thing that you are not agreed among
your selves of the true nature of. Many of the Dominicans and Jansenists think
the Jesuits Pelagianize, or Semipelagianize at least. I hope you will not shut
them out. Donatists were ^chismaticks, because they divided in the Catholic
Church, and not absolutely from it* and because they divided from the
particular Churches about them that held the most universal external Communion.
I think they were still members of the universal Church: but I Will not contend
with any that will plead for his uncharitable denial. Its nothing to our case.

That the Aethiopians are Eutychian Heretics, I will see better proved before
I will believe it. Rosses words I so little regard, that I will not so much as
open his book to see whether he say so or not. I know that Heresy is a
personal crime, and cannot be charged on Nations, unless you have evidence that
the Nations consent to it: which here you have none: Some are called Heretics
for denying points essential to Christianity: these are no Christians, and so
not in the Church: but many also are called Heretics by you, and by the
Fathers, for lesser errors consistent with Christianity: and these may be in
the Church. The Abassines, and all the rest have not been yet tried, and
convicted before any competent Judge: and slanderers we regard not.

2. Many of your own writers acquit them of Heresy, and say, the difference is
now found to be but in words, or little more.

To what you say of their disclaiming us, unless we take the Patriarch of
Constantinople for the Vice-Christ; you many ways mistake. 1. If this were
true, that they rejected us, it were no proof that we are not of one universal
Church. 2. They do not claim to be Vice Christi, the universal Governors of
the Church: the title of universal Patriarch they extended but to the then
Roman Empire; and that not to an universal Government, but Primacy. And many of
them have been of brotherly charity to our Churches of late. Cyril I need not
name to you, whom your party procured Murdered for being a Protestant. Meletius
first Patriarch of Alexandria and then of Constantinople) was highly offended
with the fiction of a submission of the Alexandrian Church to Rome, (under a
counterfeit Patriarch- Gabriels name); and wrote thus of the Pope in his
Letters to Sigismund King of Poland An. 1600. [ Perspiceret Majestas tua, nos
cum majoribus nostris, non ignorare (quem precaris ut agnoscamus) Pontificem
scilicet Romanum veluti and Constantinopolitanum Pontificem, Pontificem
Constant. Caeterosque Apostolicarum sedium Pontifices. Qui non unus omnium, sed
inter omnes and ipse unus. -- Vnum universale Caput, quod sit D. N. Jesus
Christus; alius esse non possit, nisi biceps aliquod sit corpus, aut potius
monstrum corporis. Perspiceres, Rex serenissime, (ut interim de Concilio illo
Florentino, veluti de re silentio digna taceam) non Nos, e Patria, tum
Orientalium, tum Occidentalium dogmatibus traditionibusque quae per septem
universalia concilia nobis consignarunt atque obsignarunt, egressos: Illos
egressos, qui novitatibus in dies delectantur.] in the same Letters he
commends Cyril. And what can a Protestant say more against the
Vice-Christship, and your novelties?

And for Ieremias his predecessor, whom you mention, though they that disputed
with him by Letters ( Stephanus Gerlochius, and Martinus Crusius) did not agree
in all things with him, yet he still professed his desire of unity and concord
with us, and in the beginning of his second answer rejoices, that we agreed
with them in so many things. And Johan. Zygomalas in his Letters to Crusius
1576. May 15. says, [ Perspicuum tibi and omnibus futurum est, quod in
continuis, and causam fidei praecipue continentibus articulis, consentiamus:
quae autem videntur consensum inter vos and nos impedire, talia sunt, si velit
quis, ut facile ea corrigere possit. -- Gaudium in caelo and super terram erit,
si coibit in unitatem utraque Ecclesia, and idem sentiemus, and simul vivemus
in omni concordia and pace secundum Deum and in sincerae charitatis vinculo.]

But as it is not the Patriarch that is the whole Greek Church, so it is not
their errors in some lesser or tolerable points that prove us of two Churches
or Religions.

Whereas you say, It is against all Antiquity and Christianity to admit
condemned Heretics into the Church. I Reply, 1. I hate their condemnation,
rather then reverence it, that (even being non judices) dare condemn whole
Nations without hearing one man of them speak for himself, or hearing one
witness that ever heard them defend Heresy; and this merely because some few
Bishops have in the days of old maintained Heresy, and perhaps some may do so
still, or rather differ from you in words, while you misunderstand each other.
Did I find such errors with them as with you, yet I durst charge them on no one
man that I had not reason to hold guilty of them: I dare not accuse whole
Nations of your errors. But of all these things (and of Sandys words which you
cite) I have spoken already in two Books, and in the latter fully proved that
you differ in many points of faith, and greater things then you call Heresies
in others among your selves, even your Popes, Saints, and Councils, and yet
neither part is judged by you to be out of the Church. See my Key, p. 124, 125,
127, 128, 129. p. 52. ad 62.

When you say so much to prove the Greeks guilty of manifest Heresy, and
pretend that it is but some novel writers of ours that deny it, as forced by
your arguments.] I must say, that you prove but your own uncharitableness
instead of their Heresy: and you show your self a stranger to your own
writers, who frequently excuse the Greeks from Heresy, and say the difference
at the Council of Florence was found to be more about words then faith. Thomas
a Jesus de Convers. omn. gentium, lib. 6. cap. 8. p. 281. says, [ His tamen non
obstantibus alii opinantur Graecos tantum esse schismaticos: Ita ex junioribus
docet Pater Azorius 1. primae Institut. Moral. lib. 8. cap. 20. q. 10. Quare
merito ab Ecclesia Catholica non haeretici, sed schismatici censentur and
appellantur: Ita apert insinuat D. Bernardus (no Novel Protestant) in Epist. ad
Eugenium, lib. 3. [ Ego addo (inquit) de pertinacia Graecorum qui nobiscum
sunt, and non sunt: juncti fide, pace divisi; quanquam and in fide ipsa
claudicaverint a rectis semitis.] Idem aperte tenet D. Thomas Opuscul. 2. ubi
docet patres Graecos in Catholico sensu esse exponendos. Ratio hujus Opinionis
est quoniam ut praedictus author docet, in praedictis fidei articulis, de
quibus Graeci accusantur ab aliquibus ut haeretici, potius Nomine, quam Re ab
Ecclesia Romana dissident. Inprimis inficiantur illi Spiritum Sanctum a Patre
Filioque procedere ut in Bulla Vnionis Eugenii 4. dicitur, existimantes Latinos
sentire a Patre Filioque procedere tanquam a duobus principiis; cum tamen
Latina doceat Ecclesia procedere a duabus personis tanquam ab uno principio and
spiratore; quare Graeci ut unum principium significent, dicunt Spiritum Sanctum
a Patre per Filium procedere ab omni aeternitate.]

Your Paulus Veridicus ( Paul Harris Dean of your Academy lately in Dublin) in
his Confutation of Bishop Vshers Sermon, says that the Greeks Doctrine about
the Procession of the Holy Ghost a Patre per Filium, and not a Patre Filioque,
was such that [ When they had explicated it, they were found to believe very
Orthodoxly and Catholikely in the same matter, and for such were admitted] and
that [ He finds not any substantial point that they differ from you in, but
the Primacy] (So the Armenians were received in the same Council of Florence.)
Many more I have read of your own writers that all vindicate the Greeks (and
others that disown you) from Heresy, I think more then I have read of
Protestants that do it. And do you think now that it is not a disgrace to your
cause, that man of your learning, and one that I hear has the confidence to
draw others to your opinions, should yet be so unacquainted with the opinions
of your own Divines, and upon this mistake so confidently feign that it is our
Novel writers forced to it by your arguments that have been so charitable to
these Churches against antiquity that knew better? If the Greeks and Latins
tear the Church of Christ by their Condemnations of each other, they may both
be schismatical, as guilty of making divisions in the Church, though not as
dividing from the Church. And if they pretend the denial of the Christian faith
against each other as the cause, you shall not draw us into the guilt of the
uncharitableness, by telling us that they know better then we. If wise men fall
out and fight, I will not justify either side, because they are wise and
therefore likelier then I to know the cause. But what need we more to open your
strange mistake and unjust dealing, then the authority of your so much approved
Council of Florence, that received both Greeks and Armenians; and the very
words of the Popes Bull of the union, which declare that the Greeks and Latins
were found to mean Orthodoxly both? the words are these [ Convenientes Latini
and Graeci in hac sacrosancta Oecumenica synodo magno studio invicem usi sunt,
ut inter alia articulus etiam ille de Divina Spiritus Sancti processione summa
cum diligentia and assidua inquisitione discuteretur. Prolatis vero testimoniis
ex Divinis Scripturis, plurimisque authoritatibus sanctorum doctorum
orientalium and occidentelium, aliquibus quidem ex Patre and Filio, quibusdam
vero ex Patre per Filium procedere dicentibus Spiritu^ Sanctum, and ad eandem
intelligentiam aspicientibus omnibus sub diversis vocabulis: Graeci quidem
asseruerunt quod id quod dicunt Spiritum Sanctum ex Patre procedere, non hac
mente proferrent ut excludant Filiu^, sed quia eis videbatur, ut aiunt, Latinos
asserere spiritum Sanctum ex Patre Filioque procedere tanquam ex duobus
principiis and duabus Spirationibus, ideo abstinuerunt a dicendo quod Spiritus
Sanctus ex Patre procedat and Filio. Latini vero affirmaverunt non se hac mente
dicere Spiritum Sanctum ex Filioque procedere ut excludant Patrem, quin sit
fons ac principium totius Deitatis, Filii scilicet, and Spiritus Sancti, aut
quod id quod Spiritus Sanctu procedat ex Filio, Filius a Patre non habeat, sive
quod duo ponant esse principia, seu duas spirationes, sed ut unum tantum
asserunt esse principium, unicamque spirationem Spiritus Sancti, prout hactenus
asseruerunt; and cum ex his omnibus unus and idem eliciatur veritatis sensus,
tandem, etc. -- ]

I pray you now tell it to no more, that it is same Novel writers of ours,
pressed by force of argument, that have been the authors of this extenuation. May
heart even trembles to think that there should be a thing called Religion
among you, that can so far extinguish both Charity and Humanity, as to cause
you to pass so direful a doom (without authority or trial) on so great a part
of the Christian world, for such a word as this, about so exceeding high a
mystery, when your Pope and Council have pronounced a union of meanings!

And what mean you in your Margin to refer me to Nilus, as if he asserted [
That the Greeks left the Communion of the Roman Church upon that difference
alone.] Verily Sir, in the high matters of God, this dealing is scarce fair!
(pardon this plainness: consider of it your self.) The substance of Nilus book
is about the Primacy of the Pope: The very contents prefixed to the first book
are these [ Oration demonstrans non aliam, etc. An Oration demonstrating that
there is no other cause of the dissension between the Latin and Greek Churches,
then that the Pope refuses to defer the cognizance and judgment of that which
is controverted to a general Council: but he will sit the sole Master and Judge
of the Controversy; and will have the rest as Disciples to be hearers of (or
obey) his word, which is a thing aliene from the Laws and actions of the
Apostles and Fathers.]

And he begins his Book (after a few words) thus, [ Causa itaque hujus
dissidii, etc. The cause therefore of this difference, as I judge, is not the
sublimity of the point exceeding man's capacity: For other matters that have
diverse times troubled the Church, have been of the same kind: This therefore is
not the cause of the dissension; much less is it the speech of the Scripture it
self, which as being concise, does pronounce nothing openly of that which is
controverted. For to accuse the Scripture, is as much as to accuse God himself.
But God is without all fault. But who the fault is in, any one may easily tell,
that is well in his wits.] He next shows, that it is not for want of learned
men on both sides, nor is it because the Greeks do claim the Primacy, and then
concludes it as before. He maintains that your Pope succeeds Peter only as
a Bishop ordained by him, as many other Bishops that originally were ordained
by him in like manner do succeed him; and that his Primacy is no Governing
power, nor given him by Peter, but by Princes and Councils for order sale: and
this he proves at large, and makes this the main difference. Bellarmines
answering his so many Arguments might have told you this, if you had never read
Nilus himself. If you say that, This point was the first cause, I deny it; but
if it were true, yet was it not the only or chief cause afterward. The Munner
of bringing in the [ filioque] by Papal authority without a general Council,
was it that greatly offended the Greeks from the beginning.

But you say that when I have made the best of these Greeks, Armenians,
Ethiopians, Protestants, I cannot deduce them successively in all ages till
Christ as a different Congregation of Christians from that which holds the
Popes supremacy, which was your proposition. Reply. I have often told you we own
no universal informing Head but Christ. In respect to him I have proved to you,
that is not my interest or design to prove us or them [ a different
Congregation from you as you are Christians.] Nor shall you tempt me to be so
uncharitable, as to damn, or unchristen all Papists as far as you do others,
incomparably safer and better then your selves. But as you are Papal, and set
up a new informing head, I have proved that you differ from all the ancient
Churches, but yet that my cause requires me not to make this proof, but to
call you to prove your own universal succession.

You add your Reason, because these beforenamed were at first involved in your
Congregation, and then fell off as dead branches. Reply. This is but an untruth
in a most public matter of fact. All the truth is this. 1. Those Indians,
Ethiopians, Persians, etc. without the Empire, never fell from you, as to
subjection, as never being your subjects. Prove that they were, and you have
done a greater wonder then Baronius in all his Annals. 2 The Greeks, and all
the rest within the Empire, without the Roman Patriarchate, are fallen from
your Communion (if renouncing it be a fall) but not from your subjection,
having given you but a Primacy, as Nilus shows, and not a Governing pewer over
them. The withering therefore was in the Roman branches, if the corruptions of
either part may be called a withering. You that are the lesser part of the
Church may easily call your selves the Tree, and the greater part (two to one)
the Branches; but these beggings do but proclaim your necessities.

In good time you come to give me here at last some proof of an ancient Papacy,
as you think. But first, you quite forget (or worse) that it is not a man or
two in the whole world in an age, but the universal Church, whose judgment
(and form) we are now enquiring after. You are to prove [ That all the Church
in every age was for the Papal universal Government] and so that none can be
saved that is not.

2. But instead of this which you should prove, you prove not that those very
single persons named by you, had any opinion of the Papal Sovereignty.

1. Your first Testimony is from Liberatus, c. 16. [John Bishop of Antioch
makes an appeal to Pope Simplicius.] Reply. 1. I see you are deceived by going
upon trust: But its pity so to deceive others. There was no such man as John
Bishop of Antioch in Simplicus reign. John of Antioch was he that made the
stirs and divisions for Nestorius, against Cyril, and called the Schismatical
Council at Ephesus, and dyed, Anno 436. having reigned thirteen years, as
Baronius says, and eighteen as Nicephorus: He dyed in Sixtus the fifths time.
But its said indeed that John Bishop of Alexandria made some address to
Simplicius: of which Baronius cites Liberatus words (not c. 16. but c. 18.) ad
An. D. 483. that John being expelled by the Emperor Zeno's command, went first
to Calendion Bishop of Antioch, and so to Rome to Simplicius, (if Baronius were
to be believed, as his judge) Liberatus says, that he took from Calendion
Bishop of Antioch Letters to Simplicius, to whom he appealed as Athanasius had
done, and persuaded him to write for him to Acacius Bishop of Constantinople;
which Simplicius did: But Acacius upon the receipt of Simplicius Letters, writ
flatly to him, that he knew no John Bishop of Alexandria, but had taken Petrus
Mogus as Bishop of Alexandria, into his Communion, and that without Simplicius,
for the Churches unity, at the Emperors command] Here you see how little
regard Acacius made of your Pope: and that the appeal was but to procure his
Letters to Acacius, which did him no good. 2. But do you in good earnest think
that all such addresses, or appeals are ad superiorem judicem? What more common
then to appeal or make such addresses to any that have advantage of interest,
for the relief of the oppressed? Young men appeal to the aged in Controversies:
and the less learned to the more learned: and the poor to the rich, or to the
favorites of such as can relieve them. John's going first to Antioch was no
acknowledgement of superiority. 3. But of this I must refer you to a full
answer of Blondel against Perron, de Primatu in Eccles. cap. 25. sect. 76.
where you may be satisfied of the vanity of your instance. Whereas therefore
you infer (or you say nothing) that because this John thus appealed to Rome,
therefore he appealed thither as to the Universal Ruler of the Church.] The
story derideth your consequence. Much more that [ therefore the Universal
Church held the Pope then to be the Universal Head or Governor.] Here Is
nothing of Government but entreaty, and that but within the Empire, and that
but upon the seeking of one distressed man that would be apt to go to those of
most interest that might relieve him, and all this rejected by Acacius and the
Emperor. A fair proof!

2. Your 2. instance is, that Flavianus appeals to the Pope as to his Judge.
Epist. praeambul. Council. Chalced.] Reply. I have perused all the Council of
Chalcedon, as it is in Binnius, purposely to find the words you mention of
Flavians appeal, and I find not any such words. In Flavianus own Epistle to Leo
there are no such words, nor any other that I can find, but the word [ appeal]
once in one of the Emperors Epistles (as I remember) but without mentioning
any Judge. I will not use to turn over Volumes thus in vain for your citations,
while I see you take them on trust, and do not tell me in any narrow compass
of cap. sect. or page where to find them. But had you found such words, 1. An
appeal is often made from a partial to an impartial Judge, though of equal
power. 2. He might appeal to the Bishop of Rome as one of his Judges in the
Council where he was to be tried, and not as alone. And it is evident in the
History, that it was not the Pope, but the Council that was his Judge. 3. The
greatness of Rome, and Primacy of Order (not of Jurisdiction) made that Bishop
of special interest in the Empire: and distressed persecuted men will appeal
to those that may any whit relieve them. But this proves no Governing power,
nor so much as any Interest without the Empire.

It being the custom of the Churches in the Empire, to make the Votes of the
Patriarchs necessary in their general Councils, no wonder if appellations be
made from those Councils that wanted the Patriarchs consent to other Councils
where they cons^nted; in which as they gave Constantin^ple the second place,
without any pretense of a Divine Right, and frequent appeals were made to that
Seat; so also they gave Rome the first Seat. Of this whole matter Perron is
fully answered already by Blondell de primatu, cap. 25. sect. 63. to which I
refer you, it being as easy to read it in Print as Writing. Adding this only,
that as Flavian (in his necessity) seeking help from the Bishop of the prime
Seat in the Empire, did acknowledge no more but his Primacy of Order by the
Laws of the Empire and the Councils thereof, so the Empire was not all the
world, nor Flavian all the Church, nor any more then one man, and therefore if
he had held (as you will never prove he did) the Universal Government of the
Pope, if you would thence argue that it was held by all the Church, your
consequence must needs be marvelled at, by them that believe that One man is
not the Catholic Church, no more then seeking of help was an acknowledging an
Universal Headship or Governing power.

And it is undeniably evident, that the Church of Constantinople and all the
Greek Churches did believe that Universal Primacy which in the Empire was set
up, to be of humane right, and new, and changeable, as I prove not only by the
express testimony of the Council of Chalcedon, but by the stating of the
Primacy at last in Gregory's days on Constantinople it self, whose pretense
neither was nor could be any other then a humane late institution. And if the
Greek Churches judged so of it in Gregory's days, and at the Council of
Chalcedon in Leo's days, we have no reason to think that they ever judged
otherwise; at least not in Flavians days, that were the same as Leo's, and the
business done about 449. This Argument I here set against all your instances
at once; and it is unanswerable.

3. Your next instance is of Pope Leo's restoring Theodoret, upon an appeal to
just judgement] Reply. 1. Every Bishop has a power to discern who is fit for
his own Communion; and so Leo and the Bishops of the West perceiving Theodoret
to be Orthodox, received him as a Catholic into their Communion; and so might
the Bishop of Constantinople have done. But when this was done, the Council did
not hereupon receive him, and restore him to his Bishopric, no nor would hear
him read the passages between Pope Leo and him, no nor make a Confession of his
faith, but cried out against him as a Nestorian, till he had expressly
Anathematized Nestorius and Eutiches before the Council, and then they received
and restored him: so that the final judgment was not by Leo, but by the
Council: But if in his distress he appealed as you say, to a just judgment,
from an unjust, or sought to make Leo his friend, no wonder; but this is no
grant of an Universal Sovereignty in Leo: and if it had granted it in the
Empire, that's nothing to the Churches in other Empires: Or if he had granted it
as to all the world, he was but one man of the world, and not the Catholic
Church. The Council expressly take on them the determination after Leo, and they
slight the Legates of the Pope, and pronounce him a creature of the Fathers,
and give Constantinople equal privileges, though his Legates refuse to
consent. But of the frivolousnesse of this your instance, see Dr. Field of the
Church, lib. 5. cap. 35. page 537, 538. and more fully Blondell de primatu, ubi
sup. cap. 25. sect. 63, 65.

4. Your next instance is of Cyprians desire that Stephen would depose Martian
Bishop of Arles.] Reply 1. That Epistle cannot be proved to be Cyprians: for
the Reasons I refer you to M. de Lanny on that subject, and Rivets Critica
Sacra: only adding that there are eight copies of Cyprian, ancient M. S. S. in
the English Universities, that have none of them this Epistle to Stephen (of
which see Ierem. Stephens Edition of Cyprian de unitate Ecclesiae) 2. Could you
prove this Epistle to be Cyprians, it makes against you more then for you. Not
for you: for the distance of Cyprian, the nearness of Stephen might make it a
matter more concerning him, and fitter for him to transact: And it was within
his Patriarchate, and therefore no wonder if he were minded of it. And yet
Cyprian only writes to him to write to the Bishops of France to restrain
Martian: [. 2. Quapropter facere te oportet plenissimas literas ad coepiscopos
nostros in Gallia constitutos, ne ultra Maertianum pervicacem and superbum, and
divinae pietatis ac fraternae salutis inimicum, collegio nostro insultare
patiantur.] Cyprian did as much to Stephen, as he desired Stephen to do to the
Bishops of France: This therefore is against you, if any thing to the purpose:
Had you found but such words of a Pope to another Bishop as Cyprian uses to
your Pope, you would have taken it as an evidence of his superiority.. 3.
Dirigantur in provinciam and plebem in Arelate c^^xistentem a te literae, etc.
[ Let thy Letters be directed to the Province and people at Arles, etc.] And
its plainly an act of non-Communion common to all Bishops toward those unfit
for their Communion, that Cyprian speaks of [. 3. Idcirco enim, frater
charissime, copiosum corpus est sacerdotum concordiae mutuae glutino atque
unitatis vinculo copulatum, ut siquis ex collegio nostro haeresim facere, and
gregem Christi lacerare and vastare tentaverit, subveniant caeteri, and quasi
pastores utiles and misericordes oves dominicas in gregem colligant.] You see
it is a common duty of brotherhood, and not an act of jurisdiction that Cyprian
speaks of.

5. Your next instance is, that [ the Council of Sardis determined that no
Bishop deposed by other neighboring Bishops, pretending to be heard again, was
to have any successor appointed till the case were defined by the Pope: Conc.
Sard. cap. 4. cited by Athanas. Apol. 2. page 753.] Reply. It seems you are
well acquainted with the Council, that know not of what place it was! It was
the Council at Sardica, and not at Sardis, that you would mean. Sardis was a
City of Lydia, apud Tmolum montem, olim Regio Craesi, inter Thiatiram and
Philadelphiam. But this Sardica was a City of Thrace in the confines of the
higher Mysia, inter Naissum Myssiae and Philippopolim Thraciae. As to the
instance, 1. This Council was by Augustine rejected as heretical, though I
defend not his opinion. 2. It was of so little note and authority, that it was
not known to the Council of Carthage to have the next antecedent Canons (which
you would not have omitted if you had read them, its like) in which your
writers glory as their chiefest strength; and which Bellarmine thinks Pope
Zosimus called, the Nicene Canon: or rather is it not suspicious that this
Canon is but forged, when those Carthage Fathers plainly say, In nullo Patrum
concilio decretum invenimus; mentioning that antecedent Canon proposed by
Hosius, to which this mentioned by you proposed by Gaudentius is but an
addition or supplement. And it is not like that all these Africane Fathers
could be ignorant of those Canons of Sardica, when such abundance of Africane
Bishops were at the Council, and that but about 50 years before: you may see in
Binnius how hard a strait he is put to, to give any tolerable reason of this,
and only says, that its like some how the Canons were lost: sure Tradition was
then grown untrusty. Your Cardinal Cusanus de Concord. Cath. l. 2. c. 25. makes
a doubt whether the Canon of appeals be indeed a Canon of this Council. 3. But
grant it be, yet take these observations, and you shall find small cause of
confidence in that Canon.

1. It was made in a Case of the distress of Athanasius and other Orthodox
Oriental Bishops, merely in that strait, to save them and the Churrhes from
the Arrians. The Arrians withdrew from the Council being the minor part, and
excommunicated Julius with Athanasius, and other Occidentals; and the
Occidental Bishops excommunicated the Oriental. Athanasius himself was a chief
man in the Council, and had before been rescued by the help of Julius, and
therefore no wonder if they desired this safety to their Churches. 2. Note,
that this is a thing newly granted now by this Canon, and not any ancient
thing. 3. Note, that therefore it was of Humane Right, and not of Divine. 4.
Note, that yet this Canon was not received or practiced in the Church, but
after this the contrary maintained by Councils, and practiced, as I shall anon
prove. 5. That it is not any antecedent Governing Power that the Canon
acknowledges in the Pope; but in honor of the Memory of S. Peter, as they
say, (yet more for their present security) they give this much to Rome; it
being the vulgar opinion that Peter had been there Bishop. 6. That it is not a
Power of judging alone that they give, but of causing the re-examination of
Causes by the Council, and adding his assistants in the judgment, and so to
have the putting of another into the place forborne till it be done. 7. And I
hope still you will remember, that at this Council were no Bishops without the
Empire, and that the Roman world was narrower then the Christian world: and
therefore, if these Bishops in a part of the Empire had now given (not a
Ruling, but) a saving Power to the Pope, so far as is there expressed, this had
been far from proving that he had a Ruling Power, as the Vice-Christ over all
the world, and that by Divine right: Blame me not to call on you to prove this
consequence. 8. There is as much for Appeals to Constantinople, that never
claimed a Vice-Christship as Iure divino.

6. Your sixth instance out of Basils 74. Epistle I imagine you would have
suppressed, if ever you had read that Epistle, and had thought that any others
would be induced by your words to read it. I have given you out of this and
other Epistles of Basil, a sufficient proof of his enmity to Popery, in my Key,
cap. 26. page 170, 171, 172. and cap. 27. page 177. that very Epistle of Basils
was written to the Western Bishops, and not to the Bishop of Rome only, nor so
much as naming him: The help that he desires is either a Visit, or persuasive
Letters, never mentioning the least Power that the Pope had more then other
Bishops, but only the interest of Credit that the Western Bishops had more then
Basil and his Companions: says he [ For what we say is suspected by many, as
if for certain private contentions, we would strike a fear and pusillanimity
into their minds: But for you, the further you dwell from them, so much the
more credit you have with the common people: to which this is added, that the
grace of God is a help to you to care for the oppressed. And if many of you
unanimously decree the same things, it is manifest that the Multitude of you
decreeing the same things, will cause an undoubted reception of your opinion
with all.] You see here upon what terms Liberius his Letters might bestead
Eustathius: He having received him into his own Communion, and Eustathius being
Orthodox in words, no wonder that the Synod of Tiana receive him upon an
Orthodox confession, and their fellow-Bishops reception and Letters: No doubt
but the Letters of many another Bishop might have persuaded them to his
reception; though he had more advantages from Rome. Is it not now a fair
Argument that you offer? Liberius (sometime an Arrian Pope of Rome) by his
Letters prevailed with a Synod at Tyana to restore Eustathius (an Arrian) that
dissembled an Orthodox confession: What then? Ergo the Pope of Rome is the
Vice-Christ, or was then the Governor of all the Christian world. Soft and
fair. 1. Basil gives you other reasons of his interest. 2. He never mentions
his universal Government, when he had the greatest need to be helped by it, if
he had known of such a thing. 3. The Empire is not all the world: If Basil knew
the Roman Sovereignty, I am certain he was a wilful Rebel against it.

7. Your seventh proof is from Chrysostom, who, you say [ expressly desires
Pope Innocent not to punish his adversaries if they do repent: Chrysostom. Epist. 2.
ad Innoc.] Reply. You much wrong your soul in taking your Religion thus on
trust; some Book has told you this untruth, and you believe it, and its like
will persuade others of it as you would do me. There is no such word in the
Epist. of Chrysostom to Innocent, nor any thing like it.

8. Your eighth proof is this [ The like is written to the Pope by the Council
of Ephesus in the Case of John of Antioch: Council. Ephesians. p. 2. Act. 5.] Reply.
1. The first Council at Ephesus (which no doubt you mean) is in Binnius enough
to make a considerable Volume, and divided into six Tomes, and each of those
into Chapters, and not into Acts: And if you expect that I should exactly read
six Tomes in Folio before I can answer your several sentences or shreds, you
will put me on a twelve-moneths work to answer a few sheets of Paper. If you
mean by [p. 3.] [Tom. 2.] and by [Act. 5.] [Cap. 5.] then I must tell you there
is not a word of that you say, nor like it. Only there is reference to
Celestines and Cyrils Epistles; and Celestine in his Epistle recited Tom. 1.
cap. 17. threatens Nestorius, that if he repent not, he will excommunicate him,
and they will have no more communion with him, which others did as well as he;
but not a word of John Bishop of Antioch there. Nor can I find any such thing
in the 4. Tome, where John's cause is handled. Indeed the Notes of your
Historian divide the Council into Sessions: But in his fifth Session there is
nothing of John, but of Nestorius. And in the 4. Sess. John and his Party
excommunicate Cyril, Memnon, and theirs. And it was the Council that suspended
first, and after excommunicated John. And it is the Emperor to whom he
appeals. Indeed your Annotator in Sess. 6. mentions some words of Iuvenals;
that he should at least have regarded the Roman Legates, it being the custom
that his Church be directed by that: But I see no proof he brings of those
words; and it is known, that Cyril of Alexandria did preside, and subscribed
before the Roman Legates, even to the several Letters of the Synod, as you may
see in Tom. 2. cap. 23. and passim.

2. But if your words were there to be found, what are they to your purpose?
The Pope can punish the Bishop of Antioch: But how? Why by excommunicating him.
True, if he deserve it: that is, by pronouncing him unfit for Christian
Communion, and requiring his flock, and exhorting all others to avoid him. And
thus may another Bishop do: and thus did John by Cyril of Alexandria, though he
was himself of the inferior Seat: and thus has the Bishop of Constantinople
done by the Bishop of Rome, and so may others.

9. Your ninth proof is from the applications that the Arrians and Athanasius
made to Julius: Ex Athan. ad solit. Epist. Julius in Lit. ad Arian. apud Athan.
Apol. 1. p. 753. Theodoret. lib. 2. c. 4. Athan. Apol. 2. Zozom. l. 3. c. 7.]
Reply. I marvel you urge such rancid instances, to which you have been so fully
and so often answered: I refer you to Blondell de Primatu cap. 25. sect. 14,
15. Whittaker de Roman. Pontif. p. 150. and passim. Dr. Field of the Chapter l. 5.
c. 35, etc. Briefly, this may show the vanity of your proof. 1. Sozomen in that
place says, that though he alone wrote for them, yet he wrote in the Name and
by the consent of all the Bishops of the West. 2. The advantages of Rome by its
reputation and greatness, and the number and quality of the Western Bishops,
made their Judgment and Communion valuable to others: Basil before cited tells
you on what grounds when Churches disagree, those that are distant are supposed
to be impartial, especially when numerous. To which is added, which Basil
intimates, that some hope of help from the Secular powers, by the interposition
of the Western Bishops, made them the more sought to. 3. And the Primacy of
Rome (though it had no Sovereignty) made it seem irregular, that a Patriarch
should be deposed without the knowledge and judgment of the Patriarchs of the
precedent Seats. This was the custom that Julius spoke of, and the Patriarchs
of Constantinople and Alexandria might have said as much, if the Patriarch of
Jerusalem or Antioch had been deposed without them. 4. Every Patriarch might
absolve the Innocent, and hold communion with them in his own Patriarchate; and
if any be against it, (as the Arrians here were, and sent false accusations
against Athanasius to Julius) he may require them to prove their accusations,
if they will have him moved by them. Our own Communion with men, is to be
directed by the judgment of our own well informed consciences. Julius desired
not any more then to be one with a Council that should decide the case.
Councils then had the Rule, and Patriarchs were the most honorable Members of
those Councils, but no Rulers of them. 5. Yet Sozomen and others tell you, that
Julius, when he had done his best to befriend Athanasius and Paulus could do no
good, nor prevail with the Bishops of the East, till the Emperors commands
prevailed: yea the Eastern Bishops tell him that he should not meddle with
their proceedings no more then they did with his, when he dealt with the
Novatians; seeing the greatness of Cities makes not the power of one Bishop
greater then another: and so they took it ill that he interposed, though but to
call the matter to a Synod, when a Patriarch was deposed. Any Bishop might have
attempted to relieve the oppressed as far as Julius did: especially if he had
such advantages as aforesaid to encourage him. All your consequences here
therefore are denied. 1. It is denied, that because Julius made this attempt,
that therefore he was Universal Ruler in the Empire. 2. It is denied that it
will thence follow, if he were so, that it had been by Divine Right, any more
then Constantinople had equal privileges by Divine Right. 3. It is denied
that it hence follows, that either by Divine or humane right, he had any
Power to govern the rest of the world without the Empire. Had you all that you
would rack these testimonies to speak, it is but that he was made by Councils
and Emperors the chief Bishop or Patriarch in a National Church (I mean, a
Church in one Princes Dominion) as the Archbishop of Canterbury was in England.
But a National or Imperial Church is not the Universal. And withal,
oppressed men will seek relief from any that may help them.

In your Margin you add that [ Concerning S. Athanasius being judged, and
rightly, by P. Julius, Chamier acknowledges the matter of fact to be so: but
against all antiquity pretends that judgment to have been unjust.] Reply. Take
it not ill Sir I beseech you, if I awake your conscience, to tell me, how you
dare write so many untruths, which you knew, or might know, I could quickly
manifest. Both parts of your saying of Chamier p. 497, are untrue. 1. The
matter of fact is it that he denies: He proves to you from Sozomens words,
that Athanasius did make no appeal to a Judge, but only fled for help to a
friend: He shows you that Julius did not play the Judge, but the helper of the
spoiled, and that it was not an act of Judgment. 2. He therefore accuses him
not of wrong judgeing, but only mentions his not hearing the accused, to show
that he did not play the part of a Judge, but a friend, as Chrysostom did by
some that fled to him. I pray answer his reasons.

And for what you say again in your Margin of Theodoret; I say again, that he
appealeth to the Bishop of Rome for help; as a person who with the Western
Bishops might sway much against his adversaries, but not as to an Universal
Governor or Judge: no not as to the Universal Judge of the Church Imperial;
much less of all the Catholic Churches.

10. Your tenth proof is from Chrysostomes Case, where you say some things
untrue, and some impertinent. 1. That Chrysostom appeals to Innocent from the
Council of Constantinople is untrue, if you mean it of an Appeal to a superior
Court or Judge; much more if as to an Universal Judge: But indeed in his
banishment, when all other help failed, he wrote to him to interpose and help
him as far as he could. I need no other proof of the Negative then, 1. That
there is no proof of the Affirmative, that ever he made any such appeal. 2. In
his first Epistle to Innocent, he tells him over and over, that [ he appealed
to a Synod, and required Iudgement] and that he was cast into a ship for
banishment [ because he appealed to a Synod and a righteous judgement] never
mentioning a word of any such appeal to the Pope. Yea he urges the Pope to
befriend and help him, by that argument, that he was still ready to stand to
uncorrupted Judges, never mentioning the Pope as Judge. By all which it appears
it was but the assistance of his intercession that he requires: and withal,
perhaps the excommunicating of the wicked, which another Bishop might have
done. Yea, and it seems it was not to Innocent only, but to others with him
that he wrote; for he would scarce else have used the terms [(...)] But what
need we more then his own words to know his request: says he [ Let those that
are found to have done so wickedly, be subject to the penalty of the
Ecclesiastical Laws: but for us that are not convicted, nor found guilty,
grant us to enjoy your Letters, and your charity, and all others whose society
we did formerly enjoy.] The Ecclesiastical Laws enabled each Patriarch and
Bishop to sentence in his own Diocese; though the person sentenced lived out of
their Diocese, yet they might renounce all communion with him: Churches that
have no power over one another, may have communion with one another; and that
communion they may hold and renounce as there is cause. Now if a neighbor
Patriarch with so many Bishops of the West had renounced Communion with
Chrysostomes enemies, and also written their Letters on his behalf, and taken
him still as in their Communion, this he hoped would much further his
restoration: which yet he doubted, as he had cause. For in his second Epistle
he thanks him for doing his part, though it did no good, or did not avail.

And it is to be noted, that your Author Nicephorus tells you, lib. 13. cap.
31. that Chrysostomes Letters, and his fellow-Bishops also, and the Clergies of
Constantinople, were all written both to the Emperor Honorius and to Innocent:
And therefore you may see by that on what account it was, and what help they
did expect. The Emperor was not to excommunicate, but his Letters might do
much.

Well, but you allege Niceph. l. 13. c. 34. to prove 1. Chrysostomes appeal:
But you have better or worse eyes then I, for I can find there no such thing,
but a seeking for help as aforesaid. 2. You say [Innocentius nulls his
condemnation, and declares him innocent.] Ans. So might another Bishop have
declared him: But how far it should be regarded, was not in his power. 3. You
say he excommunicates Atticus and Theopilus, and 4. Arcadius the Emperor also,
and Eudoxia.] Reply. 1. If he did so and did well, another Bishop might as well
have done it. Mennas excommunicated Vigilius of Rome. Excommunicating is not
always an act of Jurisdiction, but a renouncing of Communion, with a
Ministerial binding, which any Pastor on a just occasion may exercise, even on
those that are not of his Diocese; examples in Church History are common. 2.
But I would have you answer Dr. Whittakers Reasons, by which he proves that
Nicephorus is a fabler in this relation, and that that Epistle is not Innocents
which cap. 34. he recites, Lib. de pontif. Romans Contr. 4. Qu. 4. page 454,
455. 1. Neither Socrates, Theodoret or Sozomen make any mention of this
excommunication, who yet write much of the Case of Chrysostom and Arcadius:
And would these men that lived so near that time have all silenced so great and
rare a thing, as the excommunication of the Emperor and Empress, which would
have made so great a noise and stir, that yet mention Ambrose his censure of
Theodosius? 2. This Bull of Innocents, (as Nicephorus would have us believe it)
has such falsehoods, contrary to more credible history, as bewray the forgery.
For Socrates lib. 6. c. 19. writes, that Eudoxia died the same year that
Chrysostom was banished, and that Chrysostom died the third year of his
banishment: And Sozomen says l. 8. c. 28. that Chrysostom was in banishment
three years after the death of Eudoxia: But, if Nicephorus were to be believed,
Eudoxia was alive and excommunicated by Innocent after Chrysostomes death. Nor
can it be said that Innocent knew not of her death; for his Legates were sent to
Constantinople in Atticus time, who succeeded Arsacius, who outlived Eudoxia.]
This is the sum of Dr. Whittakers confutation of Nicephorus. And withal, who
knows not how full of fictions Nicephorus is?

In your Margin you pretend to confute Chamier p. 498. as saying [ That other
Bishops restored those wrongfully deposed as well as the Pope,] to which you
say that [ never single Bishop restored any who were out of their respective
Diocese, etc. whereas the Bishop of Rome by his sole and single authority,
restored Bishops wrongfully deposed all the Church over.] Reply. 1. It seems
you took Chamiers words on trust: peruse that page, and see his words. 2.
Single Bishops have censured, and therefore might as well remit their own
censures. Ambrose censured Theodosius, who was no fixed Member of his charge,
and he remitted the Censure. Epiphanius presumed even at Constantinople to
excommunicate Dioscorus and his Brethren, Socrat. lib. 6. c. 14. And many
instances may be brought both of excommunicating, and again receiving to
communion by particular Bishops, even as to those that were not of their
charge. And if the fact were not proved, yet the forbearance proves not the
want of power. 3. I deny your unproved assertion, that the Bishop of Rome
singly restored all the Church over: It is a mere fiction. How many restored he
out of the Empire? Or in the Empire out of his Patriarchate, but suasorily or
Synodically.

Your next instance of Theodosius his not permitting the Council at Ephesus to
be assembled, and his reconciling himself to the Church, is merely impertinent:
We know that he and other Princes usually wrote to Rome, Constantinople,
Alexandria, etc. or spoke or sent to more then one of the Patriarchs before
they called a Council. You cannot but know that Councils have been called
without the Pope: and that neither this, nor an Emperors forsaking his error,
is a sign of the Popes Universal Government. That Emperor gave sufficient
testimony, and so did the Bishops that adhered to Dioscorus, that in those
days the Pope was taken for fallible and controlable, when they excommunicated
him: But when you cite out of any Author the words that you build on, I shall
take more particular notice of them. Till then this is enough, with this
addition, that the Emperors subjection, if he had been subject (not to an
Ambrose, or other Bishop, but) only to Rome, would have been no proof that any
without the Empire were his subjects: No more then the King of Englands
subjection to the Archbishop of Canterbury, would have proved that the King of
France was subject to him.

12. Your twelfth proof from the Council of Chalcedon, is from a witness alone
sufficient to overthrow your cause, as I have proved to you. This Synod
expressly determines, that your Primacy is a novel humane invention; that it
was given you by the Fathers, because Rome was the Imperial Seat. If you
believe this Synod, the Controversy is at end: If you do not, why do you cite
it? and why pretend you to believe General Councils?

But what have you from this Council against this Council? Why, 1. You say
Martian wrote to Leo, that by the Popes Authority a general Council might be
gathered, in what City of the Eastern Church he should please to choose.]
Reply. 1. Whereas for this you cite Act. Council. Chalcedon. 1. You tell me not
in what Author, whether Crabbe, Binnius, Surius, Nicolinus, or where I must
seek it. I have perused the Act. 1. in Binnius, which is 63 pages in Folio
(such tasks your citations set me) and find no such thing; and therefore take
it to be your mistake. But in the preambul. Epist. I find that Valentinian and
Martian desire Leo's prayers, and contrary to your words, that they say [ Hoc
ipsum nobis propriis liter is tua sanctitas manifestet, quatenus in omnem
Orientem and in ipsam Thraciam and Illyricum sacrae nostrae literae dirigantur,
ut ad quendam definitum locum qui nobis placuerit, omnes sanctissimi Episcopi
debeant convenire.] It is not [ qui vobis placuerit] but [ qui nobis.] But what
if you had spoke truth, does it follow that Leo was Christ's Vicar General
Governor of the world, because that the Sovereign of one Commonwealth did give
him leave to choose the place of a Council? Serious things should not be thus
jested with.

2. You say Anatolius and the rest of the Eastern Bishops sent to Pope Leo the
professions of their faith by his order.] Reply. 1. And what then? therefore
Pope Leo was both Governor of them and all the Christian world. You should not
provoke men to laughter about serious things, I tell you. Can you prove this
Consequence? Confessions were ordinarily sent in order to Communion, or to
satisfy the offended, without respect to superiority. 2. But I see not the
proof of your impertinent words. Pulcherius Epistle to Leo, expresses that Leo
had sent his Confession first to Anatolius, to which Anatolius consented. By
your Rule then Leo was subject to Anatolius.

3. You say the Popes Legates sat first in Council.] Reply. What then?
therefore the Pope was Governor of the Christian world, though not a man out
of the Empire were of the Council. Are you still in jest? But if it must be so,
then I can prove that others were the Universal Governors, because at Nice,
and other Councils they sat before the Legates of the Pope, and in many his
Legates had no place. Is this argument good think you? O unfaithful partiality
in the matters of salvation!

4. You say, they prohibited Dioscorus to sit by his order] Reply. 1. What
then? therefore he was Universal Governor of the Church. All alike. Any
accuser in a Parliament or Synod may require that the Accused may not sit as
judge, till he be tried. 2. But did you not know that Leo's Legates were not
obeyed; but that the Gloriosissimi judices and amplissimus senatus, required
that the cause should be first made known: and that it was not done till
Eusebius Episcop. Dorylaei had read his bill of complaint? Binnius Act 1. page
5.

5. You say the Popes Legates pronounced the Church of Rome to be Caput omnium
Ecclesiarum] Reply. 1. What then? therefore he was Governor of all the
Christian world? I deny the consequence. You do nothing but beg: not a word of
proof. Caput was but membrum principale, the Patriarch primae seeds, and that
but in the Empire. 2. The Popes Legates were not the Council, nor judges in
their own cause, and not opposing, signifies not always a consent. 3. But the
Council do as I said, expressly define the point, both what your Primacy is, and
of how long standing, and of whose institution, and that Constantinople on the
same grounds had equal privileges.

6. You say, all the Fathers acknowledged thtmselves Leo 's Children, and wrote
to him as their Father.] Reply. Of this you give me not any proof, but leave me
to read 190 pages in Folio, to see whether you say true or no. And what if you
do, (as I believe you do) can a man of any reading be ignorant how ordinarily
other Bishops were styled Fathers, even by their fellow-Bishops as well as the
Bishop of Rome?

7. You add, that they humbly begged of him that the Patriarch of
Constantinople might h^ve the first place next Rome, which notwithstanding the
Council had consented to, as had also the third general Council at Ephesus
before, yet they esteemed their grants of no sufficient force, till they were
confirmed by the Pope.] Reply. So far were the Council from what you falsely say
of them, that they put it into their Canons, that Constantinople should have
the second place, yea and equal privileges with Rome, and that they had this
on the same grounds as Rome had its Primacy, even because it was the Imperial
Seat: Vid. Bin. page 133, 124. col. 2. And not only Ephesus, but the second
general Council at Constantinople, they tell you had decreed the same before.
You see then (contrary to your fiction) that three general Councils (of the
greatest, likened by Gregory to the 4 Evangelists) not only judged without the
Pope, but by your own confession against him (for you say, he consented not)
yea so much did they slight the Popes consent, that when his Legates dissented,
they were not heard: See Bin. page 134, 136. They persisted in the Council to
maintain their Canon 38. notwithstanding the contradiction of Lucretius and
Paschasinus, and by the Judges it was accordingly pronounced, p 137. And
unanimously the whole Synod consented, never stopping at the Roman dissent.
Pergamius Bishop of Antioch says [ in omnibus sanctissimum Archiepiscopum
Regiae civitatis novae Romae in honor and cura sicut Patrem praecipuum habere
nos convenit.] No man contradicted this: And is not this as much or more, then
you allege as spoke to Leo? They call Leo (you say) Father: And the Bishop of
Constantinople is pronounced the Chief Father in all things, in honor and
Cure. And Eusebius Bishop of Doryl. the chief adversary of Dioscorus, witnessed
that he himself, in the presence of the Clergy of Constantinople, did read this
Canon to the Pope at Rome, and he received it. Upon which your Historian has
no better an observation, then that [ either Eusebius lied, or else at that
hour he deceived Leo.] Its true that the Synod writ to him for his consent: but
not as suspending any of their Decrees on it; but telling him over and over,
that the things were by them defined and confirmed already, page 140. that
which they desired of him was, what Synods ordinarily did of Bishops of their
Communion that were absent [ Haec, sicut propria, and amica, and ad decorem
convenientissima, dignare complecti, sanctissime and beatissime pater.]

13. In your Margin you tell me that Agapet in the time of Justinian depo^ed
Anthymius in Constantinople against the will of the Emperor and the Empress.]
Reply. 1. And does it follow, that because he did it, therefore he did it
justly, yea and as the Governor of that Church? when Menna Bishop of
Constantinople excommunicated Pope Vigilius, was he not even with him? and did
that prove that Rome was subject to Constantinople? Niceph. l. 17. c. 26. When
Dioscorus excommunicated Leo, and an Eastern Synod excommunicated Julius (
Sozom. l. 3. c. 11.) that proves not that they did it justly, or as his
Governors. Honorius the Emperor deposed Boniface 1. Oath with a Synod deposed
Johan. 13. Justinian deposed Sylverius and Vigilius: Will you confess it
therefore justly done? 2. As to the history I refer you to the full answer of
Blondel to Perron. cap. 25. sect. 84, 85. 3. Usurpation and deposing one
another by rash sentences was then no rare thing, Eusebius of Nicomedia
threatened the deposing of Alexander of Constantinople, who sure was not his
subject, Socrat. lib. 1. c. 37. ( vel. 25.) Acacius of Caesarea and his party
depose not only Eleusius, Basilius and many others, but with them also
Macedonius Bishop of Constantinople: Socrat. lib. 2. c. 33. ( vel. 42.) Did
this prove Acacius the Vice-Christ? What should I instance in Theophilus
actions against Chrysostom, or Cyrils against Johan. Antiochen. and many such
like? 4. Still you suppose one Empire to be all the Christian world: We must
grant you that in all your instances!

14. For what you allege from Gregory, I shall give you enough of him anon for
your satisfaction, if you will be indifferent. As to your citation what can I
say? A years time were little enough to search after your citations, if you
should thus write but many more sheets. (If a man had so much time and so
little wit as to attend you) You turn me to Greg. cap. 7. ep. 63. but what
Book, or what Indiction, you tell me not: But whatever it be, false it must
needs be, there being no one Book of his Epistles (according to all the
Editions that I have seen) where c. 7. and ep. 63. do agree or meet together.
But at last I found the words in lib. 7. c. 63. ep. 63. To which I say, that
either your great Gregory by [subject] meant that the Bishop of Constantinople
was of an inferior Order, as the Patriarch of Alexandria and Antioch were to
Constantinople, that yet had no Government of them; or else he could say and
unsay: But I doubt not but this was all his sense. But if it had been
otherwise, Constantinople and the Empire was not all the Christian world.

Your next citation is lib. 7. ep. 37. But its falsely cited: There is no such
word; and you are in so much haste for an answer, that I will not read over all
Gregory's Epistles.

15. You say Cyril would not break off Communion with Nestorius till Celestine
had condemned him; of this you give us no proof: But what if it be true? Did
you think that it proved the Pope to be the Vice-Christ? Prudence might well
make Cyril cautelous in excommunicating a Patriarch. And we still grant you,
that the Order of the Empire had given the Roman Bishop the Primacy therein:
and therefore no wonder if his consent were expected. But that Nestorius was
condemned by a Council needs no proof: And what if Celestine began and first
condemned him? I she therefore the Universal Bishop? But it was not Celestine
alone, but a Synod of the Western Bishops. And yet Cyril did not hereupon
reject him without further warning: And what was it that he threatened, but to
hold no Communion with him? Vid. Council. Ephesians. 1. Tom. 1. cap. 14. And though
Pride made excommunication an Engine to advance one Bishop above others, I can
easily prove that if I had then lived, it had been my duty to avoid Communion
with a notorious Heretic, though he had been Pope.

The long story that you next tell, is but to fill up Paper, that Cyril
received the Popes Letters, that Nestorius repented not, that he accused Cyril,
that Theodosius wrote to Celestine about a Council; and many such impertinent
words: But the proof is, that Cyril was the Popes chief Legate Ordinary!
Forsooth because in his absence he was the chief Patriarch; therefore he is
said Celestini locum tenere, which he desired. Well, let your Pope sit highest,
seeing he so troubles all the world for it. Christ will shortly bid him come
down lower, when he humbles them that exalt themselves. That Cyril subscribed
before Philip, you may see, Tom. 2. cap. 23. but where I may find that Philip
subscribed first, you tell me not. But what if the Archbishop of Canterbury
sat highest, and subscribed first in England? Does it follow that he was
Governor of all the world? no nor of York it self neither.

16. And here you tell us of Iuvenal, Act. 6. Repl. 1. The Council is not
divided into Acts in Binnius, but many Tomes and Chapters: but your words are
in the Notes added by your historian; but how to prove them Iuvenals words I
know no^, nor find in him or you. 2. But why were not the antecedent words of
the Bishop of Antioch and his Clergy as valid to the contrary, as Iuvenals for
this? 3. If these words were spoken, they only import a Iudgeing in Council as
a chief member of it, and not of himself. And his apostolica ordinatione is
expressly contrary to the ^orecited Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, and
therefore not to be believed. Yet some called things done Ordinatione
apostolica, which were ordained by the Seats which were held Apostolic. 4. But
still you resolve to forget that Antioch or the Empire extended not to the
Antipodes, nor contained all the Catholic Church.

17. You next tell me of Valentinians words A. D. 445. Reply. It is the most
plausible of all your testimonies, but worth nothing to your end. For 1. Though
Theodosius name pro forma were at it, yet it was only Valentinians act, and
done at Rome, where Leo prevailed with a raw unexperienced Prince to word the
Epistle as he desired; so that it is rather Leo's, then the Emperors
originally: And Leo was the first that attempted the excessive advancement of
his Seat above the rest of the Patriarchs. 2. It is known that the Emperors
sometime gave the Primacy to Rome, and sometime to Constantinople, as they were
pleased or displeased by each of them. So did Justinian, who A. D. 530.
Lampadio and Oreste Coss. C. de Episcopis lib. 1. lege 24. says [
Constantinopolitana Ecclesia omnium aliarum est Caput] [ The Church of
Constantinople is the Head of all other.] 3. It is your fiction, and not the
words of Valentinian (or Leo) that [ the succession from Peter was the
foundation of Romes Primacy.] It was then believed that Antioch and other
Churches had a succession from Peter. It is the Merit of Peter, and the Dignity
of the City of Rome, and the Authority of the Synod jointly that he ascribes
it to. The Merit of Peter was nothing but the Motive upon which Leo would have
men believe the Synod gave the Primacy to Rome: And Hosius in the Council of
Sardica indeed uses that as his motive, [Let us for the honor of Peter, etc.]
They had a conceit that where Peter last preached, and was martyred and buried,
and his relicts lay, there he should be most honored. 4. Here is not the least
intimation that this Primacy was by Gods appointment, or the Apostles, but the
Synods: Nor that it had continued so from Peter's days, but that jointly for
Peter's Merits (and honor) and the Cities dignity, it was given by the Synod.
5. And it was but Leo's fraud to persuade the raw Emperor of the authority of
a Synod, which he would not name, because the Synod of Sardica was in little or
no authority in those days. The rest of the reasons were fraudulent also;
which though they prevailed with this Emperor, yet they took not in the East.
And Leo himself it seems durst not pretend to a Divine Right and Institution,
nor to a succession of Primacy from the Apostles. 6. But nothing is more false
then your assertion, that he extends the power [ over the whole visible
Church.] The word [ Vniversitas] is all that you translate in your comment, [
the whole visible Church] As if you knew not that there was a Roman
Universality, and that Roman Councils were called Universal, when no Bishops
out of that one Commonwealth were present; and that the Church in the Empire is
often called [ the whole Church.] Yea [ the Roman world] was not an unusual
phrase. And I pray you tell me, what power Valentinian had out of the Empire?
who yet interpos^th his authority there, [ Nequid praeter authoritatem sedis
istiusilli^itum, etc.] [ and ut p^x ubique servetur.] And in the end, it is All
the Provinces, that is, the University that he extends his precepts to. 7. And
for that annexed [ that without the Emperors Letters, his authority was to be
of force through France; for what shall not be lawful, etc.] I Ans. No wonder:
^or France was part of his Patriarcha^e, and the Laws of the Empire had
confirmed his Patriarchal power: and those Laws might seem, with the reverence
of Synods, without new Letters, to do much: But yet it seems, that the rising
power needed this extraordinary secular help: Hilary it seems with his Bishops
thought, that even to his Patriarch he owed no such obedience as Leo here by
force exacteth. So that your highest witness ( Leo by the mouth of Valentinian)
is for no more then a Primacy, with a swelled power in the Roman Universality;
but they never meddled with the rest of the Christian world: It seems by all
their writings and attempts, this never came into their thoughts.

And its no credit to your cause, that this Hilary was (by Baronius confession)
a man of extraordinary holiness and knowledge, and is Sainted among you, and
has his Day in your Calendar. And yet Valentinian had great provocation to
interpose (if Leo told him no untruths, for his own advantage): For it was no
less then laying siege to Cities, to force Bishops on them without their
consent, that he is accused of; which shows to what odious pride and
usurpation, prosperity even then had raised the Clergy: fitter to be lamented
with floods of tears, then to be defended by any honest Christian: Leo himself
may be the principal instance.

18. You next return to the Council of Chalcedon, Act. 1. and seq. where 1. You
refer me to that Act. 1. where is no such matter: but you add [ and seq.] that
I may have an hundred and ninety pages in Folio to peruse, and then you call
for a speedy answer: But the Epistle to Leo is in the end of Act. 16. page (
Bin.) 139. 2. And there you do but falsely thrust in the word [ thou governst
us] and so you have made your self a witness, because you could find none: The
words are [ Quibus tu quidem sicut membris caput praeeras, in his qui tuum
tenebant ordinem benevolentiam praeferens: Imperatores vero adornandum
decentissime praesidebant.] Now [ to go before] with you must be [ to Govern]:
If so, then Aurelius at the Council of Carthage, and others in Councils that
presided, did govern them. It was but [ benevolentiam praetulisse] that they
acknowledged: And that the Magistrates not only presided indeed, but did the
work of Judges and Governors, is express in the Acts; its after wrote in that
Epistle [ Haec sunt, quae tecum, qui spiritu praesens eras, and complacere
tanquam fratribus deliberasti, and qui pene per tuorum vicariorum sapientiam
videbaris, a nobis effecimus] And [ haec a tua sanctitate fuerint inchoata] and
yet [ Qui enim locum vestrae sanctitatis obtinent, iis ita constitutis
vehementer resistere tentaverunt.] From all which it appears, that he only is
acknowledged to lead the way, and to please them as his brethren, and to help
them by the wisdom of his substitutes; and yet that the Council would not
yield to their vehement resistance of one particular.

But I have told you often enough that the Council shall be judge, not in a
complementall Epistle, but in Can. 28. where your Primacy is acknowledged; but
1. As a gift of the Fathers. 2. And therefore as new. 3. For the Cities
dignity. 4. And it can be of no further extent then the Empire; the Givers and
this Council being but the Members of that one Commonwealth: So that all is but
a novel Imperial Primacy.

19. And for the words of Vincentius Lirinensis, c. 9. what are they to your
purpose? [ quantum loci authoritate] signifies no more then we confess, viz.
that in those times the greatness of Rome, and humane Ordination thereupon, had
given them that precedence, by which their [ loci authoritas] had the advantage
of any other Seat: Or else they had never swelled to their impious Usurpation.

I have plainly proved to you in the End of my [ safe Religion] that Vincentius
was no Papist.

But you draw an argument from the word [ sanxit]. As if you were ignorant that
bigger words then that are applied to them that have no governing power;
Quantum in se sanxit, he charged them that they should not innovate: And what?
is it P. Stephen that is the Lawgiver of the Law against unjust innovation?
Did not Cyprian believe that this was a Law of Christ before Stephen meddled in
that business? What Stephens authority was in those days, we need no other
witnesses then Firmilian, Cyprian, and a Council of Carthage, who slighted the
Pope as much as I do.

I pray answer Cyprians testimony and arguments against Popery, cited by me in
the Disp. 3. of my [ safe Religion.]

20. You say you will conclude with the saying of your priest Philip, and
Arcadius at Ephesus: And 1. You take it for granted that all consented to what
they contradicted not: But your word is all the proof of the consequence.
Nothing more common, then in Senates and Synods to say nothing to many passages
in speeches, not consented to. If no word not consented to in any man's speech
must pass without contradiction, Senates and Synods would be no wiser Societies
then Billingsgate affords; nor more harmonious then a Fair or vulgar rout: What
confusion would contradictions make among them?

2. You turn me to Tom. 2. page 327. Act. 1. I began to hope of some expedition
here: But you tell me not at all what Author you use: And in Binnius which I
use, the Tomes are not divided into Acts, but Chapters, and p^g. 327. is long
before this Counc^l. So that I must believe you, or search paper enough for a
weeks reading to disprove you: This once I will believe you, to save me that
labor, and supposing all rightly cited, I reply: 1. Philip was not the
Council. You bear witness to your selves, therefore your witness is not
credible. Yet I have given you instances in my [ Key] (which I would transcribe
if I thought that you could not as well read Print as M. S.) of higher
expressions then Caput and fundamentum, given to Andrew by Isychius, and equal
expressions to others, as well as Rome and Peter. And who is ignorant that
knowe^h any thing of Church History, that others were called successors of
Peter as well as the Bishop of Rome? And that the Claves regni were given to
him, is no proof that they were not given also to all the rest of the Apostles.
And where you say [Arcadius condemns Nestorius for contemning the command of
the Apostolic Sea.] (You tell me not where to find it.) I answer you still,
that its long since your Sea begun to swell and rage, but if you must have us
grant you all these consequences, [Celestine commanded, therefore he justly
commanded, therefore another might not as well have commanded him: (as one
Pastor may do another, though equal, in the name of Christ): and therefore he
had power to command without the Empire, even over all the Catholic Church;
and therefore the Council was of this mind: yea, therefore the universal Church
was of this mind, that the Pope was its universal head.] You still are guilty
of sporting about serious things, and moving pity, instead of offering the
least proof.

Yet fear you not to say [ that in the time of the holy Ecumenical Councils of
Ephesus and Chalcedon, the universal consent of the whole Catholic Church was
for you in this point.] The Lord keep our consciences from being the servants
of our opinions or interests. 1. Was the Popes Legate the whole Catholic
Church? 2. Was there one man at either of these Councils but within the Empire,
yea a piece of the Empire? So that they were but such as we now call National
Councils, that is, consisting only of the subjects of one Republic. 3. Did the
Council speak a word for your power without the Empire? 4. Do they not
determine it so expressly to be of humane right, that Bellarmine has nothing
regardable to say against it ( Can. 28. Conc. Chalced.) but that they spoke
falsely? And yet your opinion or interest has tempted you to appeal. viz. to
the Sun that there is no such thing as light.

21. After the conclusion you have a supernumerary in your Margin, from Greg.
lib. 10. Epist. 30. But there is no such word in that Epistle, nor is it of any
such subject. But is the 31. Epistle its like that your leader meant. And
there is no more but that a Bishop not named (person or place) having fallen
into Schism voluntarily, swore never more to depart from the Unity of the
Catholic Church, or the sea of Rome. But 1. So may a Bishop of the Roman
Province do (or Patriarchate) without believing Rome to be the Universal Head.
So might one in any other Province have done: And yet it follows not that he
ought to do so, because he did so. You see now what all your proofs are come
to, and how shamefully naked you have left your cause.

In sum, of all the testimonies produced, 1. You have not named one man that
was a Papist (Pope Leo was the nearest of any man) nor one testimony that ever
a Pope of Rome had the Government of all the Church without the verge of the
Roman Empire; but only that he was to the Roman Church, as the Archbishop of
Canterbury to the English Church: And as between Canterbury and York, so
between Rome and Constantinople, there have been contentions for preheminency:
But if I can prove Canterbury to be before York, or Rome before Constantinople,
that will prove neither of them to be Ruler at the Antipodes, or of all the
Christian world. 2. Much less have you proved that ever any Church was of this
opinion, that the Pope was by Divine Right the Governor of all the world, when
you cannot prove one man of that opinion. 3. Much less have you proved a
succession of such a Church from the Apostles, having said as much as nothing
concerning the first 300 years. 4. And yet much less have you proved, that the
whole Catholic Church was of this opinion. 5. And least of all have you
proved, that the whole Church took this Primacy of Rome, to be of necessity to
the very Being of the Church, and to our salvation; and not only ad melius
esse, as a point of Order. So that you have left your Cause in shameful
nakedness, as if you had confessed, that you can prove nothing.

In the end you return to terms. To what you say about the word [ Christians] I
only say, that its but equivocally applied to any that profess not all the
Essentialls of Christianity, of which Popery is none, any more then Pride is.

About the word [ Monarch] in good sadness, do you deny the Pope to be [ an
imperious sole Commander.] Which of these is it that you deny? not that he is [
a Commander] not that he is [ imperious] not that he is [ sole] in his
Sovereignty! I would either you or we knew what you hold or deny. But perhaps
the next words show the difference [ as Temporal Kings.] But this says not a
word wherein they differ from [ Temporal Kings]: sure your following words show
not the difference. 1. Kings may [ receive power from Christ.] 2. Kings must
rule [ in meekness, charity and humility.] But I think the meekness, charity
and humility of Popes, has been far below even wicked Kings (if cruel
murdering Christians for Religion, and setting the world on fire may be
witness) as your own Histories assure us. 3. The Government of Kings also is
for [ men's eternal good] however Papists would make them but their executioners
in such things. 4. Brethren, as such, are no subjects: and therefore if the
Pope Rule men but as Brethren, he rules them not by Governing authority at all.
5. Children to him we are not: You must mean it but Metaphorically! And what
mean you then? Is it that he must do it in Love for their good? So also must
Kings: So that you have yet expressed no difference at all.

But our Question is not new, nor in unusual terms: What Sovereignty you
claim, you know or should know. Are you ignorant that Bellarmine, Boverius, and
ordinarily your Writers labor to prove that the Government of the Church is
Monarchical, and that the Pope is the Monarch? the supreme Head and Ruler,
which in English is the Sovereign. Are you ashamed of the very Cause or Title
of it, which you will have necessary to our salvation?

Next you say, that you [very much dislike the Title of Vice-Christ, as proud
and insolent, and utterly disclaim from it, neither was it ever given by any
sufficient authority to your Popes, or did they ever accept of it.] Reply. Now
blessed be God that makes sin a shame to it self, that the Patrons of it dare
scarce own it without some paint or vizard.

1. Is not the very life of the Cause between you and us, whether the Pope be
the Universal Head of the Church, vice Christi. and vicarius Christi? Are not
these the most common titles that Papists give them, and that they take unto
themselves? Nay look back into your own papers here page 6. whether you say not
that they are [ Instituted Governors in Christ's place of his whole Visible
Church.] 2. Does not Bellarmine (as I have cited elsewhere) labor to prove,
that it is not as an Apostle that the Pope succeeds Peter, but as a Head of the
Church in Christ's stead? Does not Boverius (cited in my Key) labor to prove
him the Vicar of Christ, and to be Vice Christi? And what fitter English have
we for the Kings deputy in a distant Kingdom, who is Vice Regis, then the
Vice-King? Or a Chancelors deputy, then [the Vicechancellor]: Vice Christi is
your own common word, and Vicarius Christi; none more common scarce then the
latter: And what English is there fitter for this, then the Vice-Christ, or
Vicar of Christ? It is indeed the very term that expresses properly as man can
speak, the true point and life of the Controversy between us. And how could
you suffer your pen to set down that the Popes did never accept of this, when
it is their own common phrase [ Vice Christi, and Vicarius Christi?] But here
again remember (and let it be a witness against you) that you dislike and
utterly disclaim the very name that signifies the Papal Power, as Proud and
Insolent. And if you abhor Popery while you tice men to it, let my soul abhor
it, and let all that regard their souls abhor it. Blessed be that Light that
has brought it to be numbered with the works of darkness.

Were it not more tedious then necessary, I would cite you the words [ Vice
Christi and Vicarius Christi] out of Popes and multitudes of your Writers. But
alas that's not the highest: The Vice-God is a Title that they have not thought
insolent, or words of the same signification. Would you have my proof? Pardon
it then for proving your pen so false and deceitful (that's not my fault.)

Pope Julius the second in his General Council at the Laterane, says ( Cont.
Pragmat. sanct. monitor. Binnius Vol. 4. page 560.) [ Though the institutions
of sacred Canons, holy fathers, and Popes of Rome -- and their Decrees be
judged immutable, as made by Divine inspiration; yet the Pope of Rome, who,
though of unequal Merits, holds the place of the eternal King, and the Maker
of all things, and all Laws on earth, may abrogate these decrees when they are
abused.] Here from your Judge of faith it self, you hear [ that the Pope holds
the place of the eternal King, the Maker of all things and Laws.]

Pope Sixtus Quartus in passagio sive Bulla contra Turcos, sent to Philip
Palatine Elector 1481. in Breheri Tom. 2. page 162. Vol. 2. says [ Vniversos
Christianos Principes, ac omnes Christi fid^les requirere, eisque mandare Vice
Dei, cujus loc^m, quamvi^ immeriti tenemus in terris -- ] that is, we are
constrained [ to require all Christian Princes, and all believers of Christ,
and to command them, in the stead of God, whose place on earth we hold, though
undeserving -- ] Here is a Vice-God, holding his place on earth, and commanding
all Princes and Christians to a War against the Turks in Gods stead

I know to a particular people Gods Ambassadors are said to speak in his name
and stead, as if God did beseech men by us, 2 Cor. 5.19. But this is only as to
a narrow and limited Embassage, not that they hold Gods place on earth, as
Rulers over the Universal Church, etc.

The same Pope Sixtus 4* says ibid. page 163. [ Sola superest Romana seeds:
seeds utique immaculati agni: seeds Viventis in secula seculorum: Haec quippe
praedictas Patriarchales genuit Ecclesias; quae quasi filiae in ejus gremio
residebant, and in circuitu tanquam famulae in ipsius adsistebant obsequio.]
that is, [ Only the Roman seat remains: even the seat of the Immaculate
Lamb: the seat of him that lives for ever (my flesh trembles to write these
things): This did beget the foresaid Patriarchal Churches (notorious falsehood!)
which rested as daughters in her bosom, and as servants stood about in her
obedience.] Here you see from the Pope himself, that the other Patriarchs are
his servants, and so to obey him; and that Rome begot them all (that were
before it, except Constantinople) and neither made Christians nor Patriarchs by
it, and that Rome is now become the seat of the Immaculate Lamb, and of him
that lives for ever.] Truly the reading of your own Historians, and the Popes
Bulls, etc. has more persuaded me, that the Pope is Antichrist, then the
Apocalypse has done (because I distrusted my understanding of it.)

Benedictus de Benedictis wrote a Book against Dr. Whittaker, to prove that its
as false that the Pope is Antichrist, as that Christ is Antichrist, and
dedicated it to Pope Paul. 5. with this inscription, Paul. 5. Vice Deo: To Paul
5. the Vice-God.] printed at Bononia 1608.

Caraffa's Theses printed at Naples 1609. had the same inscription [ Paulo 5.
Vice Deo] to Paul 5. the Vice-God.

Alcazar in Apocal. in carmine ad Johannem Apostolum, says of the same Pope
Paul. 5. [Q^em numinis instar, Vera colit pietas.] [whom as a God true piety
adores.]

Christopher Marcellus in his Oration before Pope Julius 2. in the approved
Council at Laterane, Sess. 4. (and you take not contradicting to be consenting;
and verily to such blasphemy in a Council, so it is) says thus [ Quum tantae
reipublicae unicus atque supremus Princeps fueris institutus, beatissime
pontifex, cui summa data potestas, ad divinum injunctum imperium, etc.] -- and
ante [sub tuo imperio] and [Vnus princeps qui summam in terris habeat
potestatem.] But these are small things [ Teque omnis aevi, omnium seculorum,
omnium gentium Principem and Caput appellant.] But yet [ the Prince and Head of
all ages and Nations] is too low [ Cura Pater beatissime ut sponsae tuae forma
decorque redeat.] But yet to make the Church [ his spouse] is nothing [ Cura
denique ut salutem quam dedisti nobis, and vitam and spiritum non amittamus: Tu
enim Pastor, tu medicus, tu gubernator, tu cultor, tu denique alter Deus in
terris.] That is, [ See that we l^se not the health that thou have given us,
and the life and spirit. For thou art the P^stor, the Physician -- to conclude,
thou art another God on earth.]

If you say that the Pope accepts not this; I answer it was in an oration
spoken in a General Council, in his presence, without contradiction, yea by
his own command, as the Orator professes [Iussisti tu, Pater sancte, and
parui] [you commanded me, Holy Father, and I obeyed,] Binnius page 562, 563,
564. you may find all this.

In Gl^ss extrav. g. Joan. 22. de Verb. signific. c^p. Cum inter, in Gl^ssa:
Credere Dominum n^strum D^um Papam conditorem dictae decretalis and istius, non
potuisse statuere prout statuit, haereti^um censeatur.] So that by your Law we
must believe the power of your Lord God the Pope, or be heretics. If you meet
with any Impressions that leave out [ Deum] take Rivets note [ haberi in
editione formata jussu Greg. 12. ^ corectoribus Pontificiis, nec in censuris
Gl^ssae j^ssu Pii 5. editis, quae in expurgatorio indice habintur, nomen Dei
erasum fuisse.

Pope Nicolas 3. de El^ct. cap. fundamenta in 6. says [ that Peter was ^ssumed
into the Society of the individual Trinity.

Angelus Polit. in Orat. ad Alex. 6. Pontificem ad Divinitatem ipsam subl^tum,
asserit: He says, the Pope was taken up to the Godhead it self.

At the foresaid Council at Laterane, Antonius Puccius in an Oration before Leo
the tenth in the Council, and after published by his favor, said [Divinae tuae
Majestatis conspectus, rutilante cujus fulgore imbecilles oculimei caligant.]
His eyes were darkened with beholding the Popes Divine Majesty.] None
contradicted this.

In the same Council, Simon B^gnius Modrusiensis Episcopus, in an O^acion S^ss.
6. calls Leo [ The Lion of the Tribe of Juda, the root of Jesse, him whom they
had looked for as the Savior.]

In the same Council, S^ss. 10 Stephanus Patracensis Archiop. says [ Reges in
compedibus magnitudinis magni Regis liga, and nobiles in manicis ferreis
censurarum constringe, quoniam tibi data est omnis potestas in coelo and in
terra -- ] and before [ qui totum dicit, nihil excludit.] So that all Power in
heaven and earth is given to the Pope.

Paulus Aemilius de gestis Francorum, lib. 7. says, that the Sicilian
Ambassadors lay prostrate at the Popes feet, and thrice repeated, [Thou that
take away the sins of the world, have mercy on us.]

And prove to me that ever any such man was reprehended for these things by the
Popes of late.

August. Triumphus in Praefat. sum. ad Joan. 22. says [ That the Popes power
is infinite: for great is the Lord, and great is his power, and of his
greatness there is no end.

And qu. 36. ad 6. he says that [ the Pope influenceth (or gives) the Motion
of direction, and the sense of cognition, into all the Members of the Church,
for in him we live and move and have our being.]

And a little after he says, [ The will of God, and consequently of the Pope,
who is his Vicar, is the first and highest cause of all corporal and spiritual
motions.]

Would you have any more witness of the falsehood of your words: says Zabarella
I.C. lib. de schism. Innocent. 7. and Bened. page 20. [ For this long time
past, and even to this day, those that would please the Popes, persuaded them
that they could do all things: and so that they might do what they pleased,
even things unlawful, and so more than God.]

Antonius part 3. tit. 21. cap. 5.. 4. says [ The Pope receives from the
faithful adorations, prostrations, and kisses of his feet, which Peter
permitted not from Cornelius, nor the Angel from John the Evangelist.]

Cardinalis Bertrandus Tract. de origin. jurisd. q. 4. number. 4. ( and in Glos.
extrag. com. l. 1. fol. 12.) says [ Because Jesus Christ the son of God while
he was in this world, and even from eternity, was a Natural Lord, and by
Natural right could pronounce the sentence of deposition on Emperors, or any
others, and the sentence of damnation, and any other, as upon the Persons which
he had created, and endowed with natural and free gifts, and also did
conserve; it is his will that on his account his Vicar may do the same things.
For the Lord should not seem discreet (that I may speak with his reverence)
unless he had left behind him one Vicar that can do all these things.]

Tell me now whether you said true in the Paragraph about the Title
Vice-Christ? yea, whether it be not much more that has been given and accepted?

But what name else is it that you agree on as proper to express the power
which is controverted? I know no name so fitted to the real controversy? And
therefore in disclaiming the Name, for ought I know, you disclaim your Cause,
and confess the shame of Popery. If he that seeks to be King of England, should
say he disclaimeth the Title of King as insolent and proud, does he not allow
me to conclude the like of the thing, which he concludes of the proper name?
The name [Papa] [Pope] you know (its like) was usually by the ancients given to
other Bishops as well as to him of Rome; and therefore that cannot distinguish
him from other men: The same I may say of the Titles [ Dominus, Pater
sanctissimus, beatissimus, Dei amantissimus, and many such like] -- And for
[summus Pontifex] Baronius tells you ( Martyrol. Romans April. 9.) that [ it was
the ancient custom of the Church to call all Bishops, not only Pontifices,
Popes, but the Highest or Chief Popes] citing Hierom. Ep. 99. And for the word
Head of the Church, or of all Bishops, it has been given to Constantinople,
that yet claims not (as Nilus tells you) neither a precedence to Rome, nor an
Universal Government, much less as the Vice-Christ. And that the Bishop of
Constantinople was called [ the Apostolic Universal Bishop] Baronius
testifies from an old Vaticane monument, which on the other side calls
Agapetus [Episcoporum Princeps.] The Title [ Apostolick] was usually given to
others. Jerusalem was called [ the mother of the Churches.] A Council gave
Constantinople the Title of [ Universal Patriarch] which though Gregory
pronounced so in pious and intolerable for any to use, yet the following Pop^s
made an agreement with Constantinople, that their Patriarch should keep his
Title of Universal Patriarch] and the Bishop of Rome be called [ the Universal
Pope;] which can signify nothing proper to him (the name Pope being common)
more then [ Universal Patriarch] does. The Foundations, and Pillars of the
Church, and the Apostles successors, yea Peter's successors, were Titles given
to others as well as him: and more then these. It being therefore the point in
controversy between us, whether the Bishop of Rome, be in the place of Christ
or as his Vicar, the Head, Monarch, or Governor of the Church universal; and
the terms [ Vice Christi and Vicarius Christi] being those that Popes and
Papists choose to signify their claim, what other should I use?

As to what you say of the Council of Constance (which you must say also of
Basil, and of the French Church, Venetians, etc.) you pretend the doubt to be
only between Ordinary and extraordinary Governors. But 1. of old the Councils
called General (indeed but of one Principality) were more ordinary, then now
the Pope has brought them to be: (and I blame him not, if he will hold his
greatness, to take heed of them.) 2. The way not to have been extraordinary, if
the Council of Const^nce had been infallible, or of sufficient power, who
decreed that there should be one every ten years. 3. The Councils that continue
so many years as that at Trent did, are then become an Ordinary Government. 4.
What is given to the Church Representative, is by many of you given to the
Church real or essential (as you call it) which is ordinarily existent, only
not capable of exerting the power it has: The singulis major, at universis
minor, is no rare doctrine with you. 5. But let it be as extraordinary as you
please, if while these Councils sit, the Pope lose his Headship, your Church is
then two Churches specifically distinct, and the form of it changes when a
Council sits: which is a two-headed, mutable Church, not like the Spouse of
Jesus Christ. 6. As your Popes are said to live in their constitutions, and
Laws, when the person dies; and your Church is not thought by you to die with
them; so why may not Councils do? The Laws of Councils live when they sit not,
and the French think that these Laws are above the Pope; though I showed you
even now that Julius 2. in Conc. Later. concluded otherwise of Decrees, and the
Council of the Popes power. 7. If a Nation be Governed by Trienniall (and so
Decenniall) Parliaments as the highest power, and Councils of State in the
intervalls, who shall be accountable to Parliaments; will you say that these
Parliaments are extraordinary, and not the ordinary Sovereign? No doubt they
are. And the Council of State is not the Sovereign, but the chief Officer or
Magistrate for execution in the intervals.

Having begun this Reply May 2. I was again taken off it about May 5. or 6. And
about May 11. I received a Letter from you, wherein you tell me of a quarter of
a years expectation. Be patient good Sir! These matters concern Eternity:
Believe it, I have somewhat else to do of greater have and moment. Even some of
your own friends find me more work. What if ten of you write to me at once, is
it fair for each one of you to call for an answer as hastily as if I had but
one in hand? This is not my case, but it is more then thus. Fear not lest I
give you over, till you first prove the deserter, and turn your back (if God
enable me:) Only I must tell you, that I take it for a flight already, and a
forsaking of your Cause, that you turn to these rambling impertinent citations
and discourses, in stead of a Syllogisticall arguing the case, and that when
you had spoken so much for it. I have here (that you may have no cause of
exception, nor pretense of cause) in this Paper replied to your last; and in
another proved the Visibility of our Church syllogistically; and (as overplus)
also disproved yours, and proved it to be an upstart, the sprout of Pride, upon
occasion of the greatness of the City of Rome, and of the forming the Church to
the Civil State, in that one Empire. If now you will deny to do the like, I
shall conclude you fly and forsake your Cause. Besides your Rejoinder to this
Reply, I principally expect that you syllogistically (in close and faithful
Arguing) do prove to us the Affirmative of these Questions following.

Qu. [Whether the Church, of which the subjects of the Pope are Members, has
been visible ever since the days of Christ on earth.] In which these three
Questions are involved, which you have to prove: 1. Whether the Papacy, that
is, the Universal Monarchy, or Sovereign Government, or Vice-Christship of the
Pope (take which term you like) has continued from Christ's days till now. 2
Whether all the Catholic Church did still submit to it, and were subjects of
the Pope. 3. Whether those that did submit to it, did take it to be necessary
to the Being of the Church, and the salvation of all believers, or only to the
more peaceable and better being.] If you call for Catalogues, or proof of
Visible succession, and pretend so high to it your selves, and yet will give us
none when we importune you to it, you tell us that you seek not to reveal the
truth and Church but to hide them. I urge you the harder (though it may seem
immodest) because as the Cause does lie upon your proof here, so I know you
cannot do it: Pardon my confidence: I know you can do no more then Baronius,
Bellarmine, Bullinger, etc. set together have done: and therefore I say, I know
you cannot do it. I know your Vice-Christ (I doubt the Antichrist) is of humane
introduction, springing out of a National (I mean Imperial) Primacy, which
also was of humane invention. It was but one Civil Government or Commonwealth,
in which your Bishop had his Primacy, and that long without a Governing power.
And this National Primacy, because of the greatness of the Empire, was at last
called Universal: And even this was long after the days of Christ (some
hundreds of years) a stranger in the Church, unless as the Greatness of the
Church of Rome, and advantages of the place, did give that Church such
authority as arises from magnitude, splendor, honor, and accidental
advantages from the populousness, wealth, and glory of the City of Rome.

The carnal Church is led by the Vice-Christ, the earthly Prince of Pride,
contending in the world for command and superiority; and prosecuting his Cause
with Strappados, fire, sword, and gunpowder, when Christ gave no Pastor a
Coercive power, to touch men's bodies or estates. The true spiritual Church is
Headed and commanded by Jesus Christ the Prince of Peace, and knows no other
Universal Head, because no other has either Capacity or Authority. It obeys
his Laws; and learneth of him to be charitable, patient, meek, and lowly; and
wonders not at errors and divisions on earth, nor therefore accuses the
providence of God: but knows by faith, that the Universal Judge of
Controversies is at the door, and that it is but a very little while, and we
shall see that the Church had an Universal Head, that was alone sufficient for
his work; for he that comes will come, and will not tarry: Amen, Even so come
Lord Jesus!

Sir, I desire you presently to send me word, whether you will by close
Syllogisticall arguing, prove the successive visibility of your Church as
Papal, or not, that I may know what to expect?

And once more I pray you take the help of the ablest of your party, both that
I may not be so troubled with wrong, or impertinent allegations, and that I may
be sure that your insufficient arguings are not from any imperfection of the
person, but of the Cause.

If you meet in these Papers with any passages which you think too confident
and earnest; I beseech you charge them not with uncharitableness or passion,
for I hope it proceeded not from either; but I confess I am inclined to speak
confidently where I am certain, and to speak seriously about the things of God,
which are of everlasting consequence.

May 18. 1659.

For Mr. William Johnson.

THE SECOND PART: Wherein the successive Visibility of the Church, of which the
Protestants are chief Members, is clearly proved: And the Papists exceptions
against it confuted.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1660.

Qu. Whether the Church, of which the Protestants are Members, have been
Visible ever since the days of Christ on earth? Aff.
THe terms explained.

1. [ The Church] sometime signifies a particular Congregation actually met,
or associated for such personal meeting, for Communion in Gods worship. 2.
Sometime it signifies an Association of Churches, and that either of sewer, or
of more, as they have opportunity of Communion or correspondency by their
Pastors; and also the Assemblies of the Pastors of the particular Churches so
associated. Scripture uses it in the first sense, and Later custom (whether
Scripture also I omit) in the later. 3. Both Scripture and Custom have used
the word to signify the Church Universal, of which all particular Churches are
Members. This is [ the Church] that we speak of in the Question.

Defin. The Universal Church, of which the Protestants profess themselves
Members, is, The Kingdom of Jesus Christ: or, The whole company of Believers
(or true Christians) upon earth, subjected to Jesus Christ their Head.] The
constitutive parts, or the Relate and Correlate are, (as in every Politic
Body) the Pars Imperans, and Pars subdita: which is Christ and Christians. The
form consists in the mutual Relation. The End is the common good of the
Church, and the glory of the Head, and the accomplishment of the will of God.

2. [The Protestants] Defin. [ Protestants are Christians protesting against,
or disowning Popery.] The word [ Protestant] expresses not the essence of our
Religion. And therefore it must not denominate the Universal Church, of which
we are Members: we are not to call it [A Protestant Universal Church.] Nor does
it signify an inseparable proper accident. For when the Catholic Church had
no Popery, there was none to protest against, and therefore there could be no
Protestants. And Ethiopia, India, and other Nations that never had Popery, or
those Nations that never heard of it, have no occasion to protest against it.
Nor does it signify any Positive part (directly) of our Religion: but only the
Negation, or Rejection of Popery: Even as when a man is called [ Homo purgatus,
sanatus, liberatus, a lepra, peste, tabe, etc.] a man purged, healed, freed
from the leprosy, plague, consumption, etc. it is no positive part, nor
inseparable proper accident, much less any essential part of the man, that is
signified by the word [ Healed, Purged, etc.] Nor is it necessary in order to
the proving him [a man] or [a healthful man,] to prove that he was ever [a
purged, or healed man.] We undertake not therefore to prove that there have
been always Protestants, that is, men Protesting against Popery: Nor have we
any need, in order to the proof of our Thesis, to prove that the Catholic
Church has all been free from Popery in all ages, or in any age since the
Apostles, no more then that it has been free from Pride, Ambition, or
Contention. (But yet we shall do it ex abundanti.) The Religion then of a
Protestant is Christianity, and he knows and owneth no other. Which is called
[the Protestant Religion] as cleansed from Popery.

[Members] that is, true integral parts.

[Of which -- are -- ] By Profession. We profess our selves to be of no other
Church. And before men, a man is to be taken to be of that Religion and Church
of which he professes himself to be, till he be proved false in that
Profession. If a Papist affirm himself a member of the Roman Church, in
disputing with him we will take it for granted that he is so; every man being
best acquainted with his own mind, and fittest to describe the Religion which
he owns. So that two things I here include. 1. It is only such a Catholic
Church that has been still visible, [that Protestants own.] 2. And only such
that really they are of, their Profession being valid.

Note also, that it is not directly the inexistency by internal invisible
faith, that is in question among us, or that I mean: but the inexistency by
external Visible Profession. Bellarmine thinks the bare Professors that are
wicked, are best termed [ Dead members] and [the true Professors, [Living
members] we will not stick needlessly on words: We take the Living members only
to be in strict propriety members; but Sincerity and Hypocrisy being known
only to God and the possessors, we speak of Professors as Professors
abstractively from their Sincerity or Hypocrisy.

[Hath been Visible.] 1. Not visible to man in its Internal faith; but in its
external Profession.

2. Not Visible at once to any one man: for no man can see all the Christian
world at once: But Visible in its parts, both in Congregations and individual
persons.

3. Not Visible in the soundness of its professed faith unto Infidels and
Heretics: For they cannot see that faith to be sound, which they take to be
fabulous and false: But Visible in the soundness of its professed faith to
themselves, that know the soundness of faith.

4. Not Visible in the excellent degree of soundness in the better parts, unto
the corrupter or infirmer parts: For though de facto they may know what
Doctrine the better part do hold (as Infidels know what Doctrine the Church
holds) yet they know it not to be true and sound in the points wherein they
differ.

And note again, that it is not the [ Visibility] of every accident of the
Church, nor of every Truth or duty that is but of the Integrity of Religion,
and necessary only ad melius esse Ecclesiae, to the Better being of the Church,
but it is the [ Visibility] of the Church that we speak of.

Lastly, it is the Body and not the Head, whose Visibility is in Question by
us. Though the Head also is truly Visible in Heaven; and Visus, or seen to the
most excellent Triumphant part of his Body, who are fittest to be his
Courtiers, and in his presence: (and as much seen on earth, as the Pope is to
most of the Church, which is not at all.)

[ Ever since the days of Christ on earth.] 1. But not still in one and the
same place on earth. It might be in one age much of it in Judea, at Ephesus,
Sardis, Laodicaea, Colosse, Philippi, and other parts of Asia; and in other
ages removed thence, either wholly or for the most part: It might be in one age
in Tendu^, N^bia, and other great Kingdoms, where it shall after cease to be:
But in some part or other of the earth it has been still.

2. Not equally visible in all Times and Places of the earth. In some Times (as
in the Arrians prevalency) it was so oppressed and obscured, that the world
groaned to find it self turned Arrian, and the Arrians in General Councils and
number of Bishops (to whom the true Christians were very few) did seem to carry
away the Name and glory of the Catholic Church; so that in their eyes, and in
the eyes of slanders by that were of neither party, the most Visible Catholic
Church was theirs: who yet had no part in it, because they were not Christians
(as denying that which is essential to Christ, the object of the Christian
faith) and therefore none of the Church, and therefore though most visible and
numerous, yet not the visible Church: And the Church, which to others was as
wheat hidden in this chafe, or rather a few ears among so many rares, was yet
Visible to it self in its Truth of faith, and visible to its Enemies in its
Profession and assemblies, though in number far below them.

So also in some places it may be Latent through persecution and the paucity of
believers, when in other places it is more Patent.

And its Degrees of soundness being various, are accordingly variously visible.
One part may be really and visibly more strong, and another more weak in the
faith: One part much more corrupt then others, and other parts retain their
purity: And the same Countries increase or decrease in that purity, as is
apparent in the case of the Churches of Galatia, Corinth, the seven Asian
Churches, Rev. 2. and 3. etc.

Lastly note, that it is only that part of the Church which is on earth whose
visibility we assert; though that in Heaven be also a true part of the Body of
Christ.

Nor is it in the same Individuals that the Church continues Visible, but in
successive Matter. So much for explication of the terms.

These. The Church of which the Protestants are Members, has been Visible ever
since the days of Christ on earth.

Arg. 1. The Body of Christians on earth subjected to Christ their Head, has
been (in its parts) Visible ever since the days of Christ on earth.

But the Body of Christians on earth subjected to Christ their Head, is the
Church of which the Protestants are Members:

Therefore the Church of which the Protestants are Members, has been visible
ever since the days of Christ on earth.

I have not sagacity enough to conjecture what any Papist can say against the
Major proposition.

The Minor is proved by our own Professions: As the profession of Popery,
proves a man a Papist, so the profession of Christianity as much proves us to
be Christians.

[a] Those that profess the true Christian Religion in all its essentials, are
Members of that Church which is the Body of Christians on earth subjected to
Christ the Head.

But the Protestants profess the true Christian Religion in all its
essentialls: therefore the Protestants are Members of that Church which is the
Body of Christians on earth subjected to Christ the Head.

The Major is undeniable. The Minor is thus proved. 1. Those that profess so
much as God has promised salvation upon in the Covenant of Grace, do profess
the Christian Religion in all its Essentials. (For God promises salvation in
that Covenant to none but Christians.) But the Protestants profess so much as
God has promised salvation upon, in the Covenant of Grace:

Therefore the Protestants do profess the Christian Religion in all its
essentials.

The Minor is thus proved. All that profess faith in God the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, our Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier, and love to him, and absolute
obedience to all his Laws of Nature and holy Scripture, with willingness and
diligence to know the true meaning of all these Laws as far as they are able,
and with Repentance for all known sin, do profess so much as God has promised
salvation upon, Ioh. 3.16, 17. Mark 16.16. Heb. 5.9 Romans 8.28. 1. Act 26.18.
But so do the Protestants: Therefore the Protestants profess so much as God
has promised salvation on.

2. Those that profess as much and much more of the Christian faith and
Religion, as the Catechumens were ordinarily taught in the ancient Churches,
and the Competentes at Baptism did profess, do profess the true Christian
Religion in all its essentials.

But so do the Protestants: Therefore, etc.

3. Those that explicitly profess the Belief of all that was contained in the
Churches Symbols, or Creeds, for six hundred years after Christ (and much more
holy truth) and implicitly to believe all that is contained in the holy
Scriptures, and to be willing and diligent for the explicit knowledge of all
the rest, with a Resolution to obey all the will of God which they know, do
profess the true Christian Religion in all its Essentials. But so do the
Protestants. Therefore, etc.

Ad hominem, I confirm the Major (and most that went before) from the
Testimonies of some most eminent Papists.

Bellarmine says, de Verbo Dei, lib. 4. c. 11. In the Christian doctrine both
of faith and manners, some things are simply necessary to salvation to all; as
the knowledge of the Articles of the Apostles Creed, of the ten Commandments,
and of some Sacraments: The rest are not so necessary that a man cannot be
saved without the explicit knowledge, belief, and profession of them -- These
things that are simply necessary, and are profitable to all, the Apostles
preached to all -- All things are written by the Apostles which are Necessary
to all, and which they openly preached to all --

Costerus Enchirid. c. 1. p. 49. [We deny not, that those chief heads of
Belief, which are necessary to all Christians to be known to salvation, are
perspicuously enough comprehended in the writings of the Apostles.]

But all this the Protestants profess to believe.

[^] If sincere Protestants are Members of the true Church, as intrinsecally
informed (or as Bellarmine speaks, Living Members) then professed Protestants
are Members of the true Church as extrinsecally denominated (or as it is
Visible, consisting of Professors.) But the Antecedent is true: Therefore so is
the Consequent.

The Reason of the Consequence is, because it is the same thing that is
professed by all Professors, and existent in all true Believers: and that as to
Profession is necessary to Visibility of Membership; and as to sincere
inexistence, is necessary to salvation.

The Antecedent or Minor I thus prove. All that by says in Christ are brought
to the unfeigned Love of God above all, and special Love to his servants, and
unfeigned willingness to obey him, are Members of the true Church as
intrinsecally informed. But such are all sincere Protestants: Therefore all
sincere Protestants are Members of the true Church as intrinsecally informed.

The Major is granted by the Papists, who affirm charity to be the form of
Grace, and all that have it to be justified. And the promises of Scripture
prove it to our Comfort.

The Minor 1. Is proved to others by our Professions: If this be in our
Profession, then the sincere are such indeed. But this is in our Profession:
Therefore, etc.

2. Its certainly known to our selves by the inward knowledge and sense of our
souls. I know that I Love God and his servants, and am willing to obey him;
Therefore all the Papists Sophisms shall never make me not know what I do know,
and not feel what I do feel. They reason in vain with me, when they reason
against the knowledge and experience of my soul. Your scope is to prove me in a
state of damnation. You confess that if I have charity I am in a state of
salvation. I know and feel that I have charity: Therefore I know that your
Reasonings are deceit.

Arg. 2. The Church whose faith is contained in the holy Scriptures as its Rule
in all points necessary to salvation, has been Visible ever since the days of
Christ on earth.

But the Church whose faith is contained in the holy Scriptures as its Rule in
all points necessary to salvation, is it of which the Protestants are Members.

Therefore the Church of which the Protestants are Members, has been visible
ever since the days of Christ on earth.

That the Catholic Church which has been Visible till now, has received the
Holy Scriptures which we receive, is confessed by all Papists that ever I heard
or read making mention of it. And no wonder, for it cannot be denied.

That this Church has taken these Scriptures for the Rule of faith in all
points necessary to salvation (allowing Church Governors to make Canons about
the circumstantials of Government and worship, which in the Universal Law are
not determined, but left to humane prudence to determine.) 1. I have proved in
my third Dispute of the safe Religion already. 2. It is confessed by the
Papists: the forecited passages of Bellarmine and Costerus are sufficient. But
in the great Council at Basil, Orat. Ragus. Bin. p. 299. it is most plainly and
with fuller authority asserted. [The holy Scripture in the Literal sense,
soundly and well understood, is the infallible and Most sufficient Rule of
faith.] See my vindication of this Testimony in my Catholic Key: and the like
from Card. Richlieu.

Gerson says, de exam. doctr. p. 2. cont. 1. Nihil audendum dicere de divinis,
nisi quae nobis a sacra Scriptura tradita sunt.

Durandus in his Preface is wholly for the excellency and sufficiency of the
Scriptures. Three ways, he says, God reveals himself and other things to
man: The lowest way is by the book of the creatures (so heathens may know him.)
The highest is by manifest Vision (as in heaven): and the middle way is in the
Book of holy Scripture, without which there is no coming to the highest way.]
And going on to extol the Scripture, he cites Ieromes words ad Paulinum, [Let
us learn on earth the knowledge of those things which will abide with us in
heaven:] But this is only (says he) in the holy Scripture.] And after ex
Hierom. ad Marcell. [If Reason be brought against the authority of the
Scriptures, how acute soever it is, it cannot be true:] And after [We must
speak of the mystery of Christ, and universally of those things that merely
concern faith, conformably to what the holy Scripture delivers: So Christ,
John 5. Search the Scriptures, It is they that testify of me. If any observe
not this, he speaks not of the mystery of Christ, and of other things directly
touching faith as he ought, but falls into that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8. If
any man think he knows any thing, he yet knows nothing as he ought to know.
For the measure is not to exceed the measure of faith: of which the Apostle
bids us, Romans 12. Not to be wiser then we ought to be, but to be wise to
sobriety, and as God has divided to every man the measure of faith. Which
Measure consists in two things; to wit, that we subtract not from faith that
which is of faith, nor (N.B.) attribute that to faith which is not of faith:
For by either of these ways, the measure of faith is exceeded, and men deviate
from the continence of the sacred Scripture, which expresses the measure of
faith.] (That is, from the full sufficiency of the Scripture measure:) [And
this measure, by Gods assistance, we will hold, that we may write or teach
nothing dissonant to the holy Scripture. But if by ignorance or inadvertency,
we should write any thing dissonant, let it be taken ipso facto as not
written.] This is a confession of the Religion of the Protestants. And though
he adjoyn a submission to the Roman Church, because he was bred in it, it is
only as to an interpreter of doubtful Texts of Scripture: So that the
sufficiency of our Rule and measure of faith is granted by him, and zealously
asserted; and that without Bellarmine and Costerus limitation, to points
necessary to the salvation of all; he extends it to all the faith.

Aquin. 22. q. 1. a. 10. ad 1. says, [That in the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles, the truth of the faith is sufficiently explicated:] even when he is
pleading for the Popes power to make new Creeds to obviate errors.

And in his sum. de Verit. disp. de fide q. 10. ad 11. he says, [That all the
means by which the faith comes to us are free from suspicion. The Prophets and
Apostles we believe, for this reason, because God bore them witness by working
Miracles: as Mar. 16. confirming their speech with following signs: But their
successors we believe not, but so far as they declare to us those things which
they have left us in the Scripture.] This is the Religion of the Protestants.

Scotus in Prolog. in sent. 1. makes it his second Question, Whether
supernatural knowledge necessary to us in the Way, be sufficiently delivered
in the holy Sc^ipture, which he proves (having first given ten arguments to
prove the Truth of Scripture.) And first he shows it contains the Doctrine of
the End, and 2. of the things necessary to that end, and the sufficiency of
them; summarily in the Decalogue, explained in the other Scriptures, as to
matter of faith, hope, and practice; and so concludes, that the holy Scripture
sufficiently contains the doctrine necessary viatori, to us in the way: And
he answers the objection, of Difficulties in it, (without flying to the
Church) that [no science explaineth all things to be known, but those things
from which the rest may conveniently be gathered: and so many needful truths
are not expressed in Scripture; though they are virtually there contained, as
conclusions in the Principles, about the investigation whereof the labor of
Expositors and Doctors has been profitable.] This is his doctrine out of
Origin.

Gregor. Ariminensis in Prol. q. 1. act. 2. Resp. ad act. fol. 3. and 4. says
[A discourse properly Theological, is that which consists of words or
propositions contained in the holy Scripture; or of those that are deduced from
them; or at least from one of these: This is proved 1. by the forealledged
authority of Dionys. For he will have it, that there can be no leading of that
man to Theological science, that assenteth not to the sayings of the holy
Scripture. -- It follows therefore that no discourse that proceeds not from
the words of holy Scripture, or of that which is deduced from them, is
Theological.] -- [2. The same is proved from the common conception of all men:
For all men judge that then only is any thing proved Theologically, when they
prove it from the words of the holy Scripture.]

This is more then the former say: For to extend the sufficiency and necessity
of Scripture to all that's Theological, is more then to extend it to matter of
faith. No Protestant goes higher then this that I know of. And note, that he
makes this the very common conception and judgment of all men. See then where
our Religion and Church was before Luther! even among all Christians.

Yet more fully he proceeds ( ibid.) [Hence it further appears, that
Principles of Theology thus taken, that is, which is acquired by Theological
discourse, are the very Truths themselves of the holy Canon, because the
ultimate Resolution of all Theological discourse does stand (or belong) to
them; and all Theological conclusions are deduced first from them. But
distinguishing the Conclusions Theological from the Principles, I say that all
truths are not in themselves formally contained in the holy Scripture: but of
necessity following from those that are contained in them: and this whether
they are Articles of faith, or not (N B); and whether they are knowable or
known by another science, or not: and whether they are determined by the Church
or not. But of other Truths, to wit, not following from the words of the holy
Scripture, I say there is no Theological conclusion: This is proved, etc. -- ]

When I read over the Schoolmen and Divines of all sorts, that wrote before the
Reformers fell so closely upon the Pope, and [find how generally even the
Papists themselves maintained the sufficiency of the holy Scripture, just as
the Protestants now do, I am convinced 1. of the succession of the Protestants
Religion in the Universal Visible Church; and 2. that it was the Reformers
Arguments from Scripture, that forced the Papists to oppose this holy Rule, as
to its sufficiency; and to invent the new doctrine of supplementall Tradition;
(for conservative, Ministerial Tradition of the holy Scriptures we are for as
much, at least, as they.)

The words of Guil. Parisie^sis, too large to be recited, in extolling the
fullness and perfection of the Scripture, even for all sorts of men, you may
read, de Legibus, cap. 16. page 46.

Bellarmine de Verbo Dei. lib. 3. cap. 10. ad Arg. 15. says [We must know that
a Proposition of faith is concluded in such a syllogism: Whatsoever God has
revealed in Scripture is true: But this God has revealed in Scripture:
Therefore it is true.] (Though he require another word of God by the Pope, or
Council, to prove that this is revealed in Scripture.) But if so, then
Scripture contains all that's true in points of faith.

2. And that all things that are revealed, and which we ought to believe, are
not Essential to the Christian faith, and therefore that all are of the Church
that hold these Essentialls, and that such a distinction must be maintained,
the Papists have still confessed, till lately, that disputing has increased
their novelties and errors.

Bellarmines and Costerus confession, I recited even now.

Guliel. Parisiensis in Operum page 9, 10, 11, 12. de fide, industriously
proves the necessity of distinguishing the fundamentalls or essentialls, from
the rest of the points of faith: and it is they that constitute the Catholic
faith, which he says is therefore called Catholic or Universal, because it is
the common faith, or the common foundation of Religion: And he proves that
hence it is that the Catholic faith is but One, and found in all Catholics,
these fundamentalls being found in all.] By many arguments he proves this.

And that there are some points, even these common Articles necessary to be
known of all, necessitati medii, the Schoolmen commonly grant: as Aquin. 22. q.
2. a. 5. c. Bannes in 22. q. 2. a. 8. etc. Of these says Espencaeus (in 2. Ti.
c. 3. dig. 17.) which are the objects of faith per se, and not the secondary
objects, the adult must have an explicit faith, and the Colliers faith at this
time decantate by the Catholics, will not serve the turn.]

And we have both the Scripture sufficiency to all points of faith, even the
lowest, and also the foresaid distinction given us together, by Tho. Aquinas
22. q. art. 5. c. [We must say, that the object of faith per se, is that by
which man is made blessed: But by accident and secondarily, all things are the
object of faith which are contained in the holy Scripture.]

See the judgment of Occham, Canus, Tolet, and many more cited by Dr. Potter;
and yet more for the sufficiency of the Symbol or Creed, as the test of
Christianity, page 89, 90, 91, 92, 93. Where you have the sense of the Ancients
upon the point, and p. 102, 103.

I conclude therefore with the Jesuit Azorius, par. 1. lib. 8. c. 6. [The
substance of the Article in which we believe One, holy, Catholic Church, is,
that no man can be saved out of the Congregation of men professing the
reception of the faith and Religion of Christ, and that salvation may be
obtained within this same Congregation of godly and faithful men.

And as to the Essence of the Christian faith and Church, we say with
Tertullian of the Symbol [ Fides in Regula posita est: habes legem, and
salutem ex observatione legis: exercitatio autem in curiositate consistit,
habens gloriam solam ex peritiae studio: Cedat curiositas fidei: Cedat gloria
saluti. Corte aut non obstrepant, aut quiescant adversus regulam: Nihil ultra
scire, est omnia scire.] That is, [Faith lies in the Rule: Here you have the
Law, and salvation in the observation of that Law; but it is exercise that
consists in curiosity, having only (a name or) glory by the study of skill;
Let curiosity give place to faith: Let glory give place to salvation. Let them
not prate, or let them be quiet, against the Rule. To know nothing further, is
to know all things.] De Praescript. cap. 13, 14.

So cap. 8. Nobis curiositate opus non est post Christum Iesum, nec
inquisitione post Evangelium. Cum credimus, nihil desideramus ultra credere;
hoc enim prius credimus, non esse quod ultra credere debeamus.] That is, [As
for us we need not curiosity after Jesus Christ, nor inquisition after the
Gospel: When we believe, we need to believe no further: For we first believe
this, that there is nothing further that we ought to believe.]

And here (on the by) for the right understanding of Tertullians Book de
Praescript. note, 1. That the Rule of Essentialls extracted from the whole
Scripture, is the Churches ancient Creed. 2. That the complete Rule of all
points of faith is the whole Scripture. And that Tertullian had to do with
Heretics that denied the Essentials, and desired the whole Scripture to
dispute their case from both, because they had questioned or rejected much of
it; and because it was a larger field to exercise their wits in, and whence
they might gather more matter of dispute to puzzle the weak: And therefore
Tertullian advises the ordinary Christians of his time, instead of long
puzzling disputes with them out of Scripture, to hold them to the Churches
prescription, of the simple doctrine of the Creed. But now come in the Papists;
and 3. will neither be content with Creed nor Scripture, but must have a Church
or faith partly made up of supplemental Traditions, of more then is in all the
Scripture, and so run further from Tertullian and the ancient simplicity, then
these Heretics, and yet are not ashamed to glory in this Book of Tertullian as
for them.

Of the Fathers judgment of the Scripture sufficiency, see the third part of
my [ safe Religion] where I have produced Testimonies enough to prove the
Antiquity of the Protestants Religion, and the Novelty of Popery. But nothing
can be so plain and full, which pre-engaged men dare not deny. Let me instance
but in one or two passages of Augustine, so plain as might put an end to the
whole Controversy.

Aug. de Doctr. Christian. lib. 2. c. 9. [ In his omnibus libris timentes Deum
and pietate mansueti, quaerunt voluntatem Dei. Cujus operis and laboris prima
observatio est, ut diximus, nosse istos libros, and si nondum ad intellectum
legendo tamen vel mandare memoriae, (He was not against the Vulgars reading
Scripture) vel omnino incognitos non habere. Deinde illa quae in eis aperte
pofita sunt, vel praecepta vivendi vel regulae credendi, solertius
diligentiusque investiganda sunt: Quae tanto quisque plura invenit, quanto est
intelligentia capacior: In iis enim quae aperte in Scriptura posita sunt,
inveniuntur illa omnia quae continent fidem moresque vivendi, (N. B.) spem
scilicet atque charitatem, de quibus libro superiore tractavimus. Tum vero
facta quadam familiaritate cum ipsa lingua divinarum scripturarum, in ea quae
obscura sunt aperienda, and discutienda pergendum est, ut ad obscuriores
locutiones illustrandas de manifestationibus sumantur exempla, and quaedam
certarum sententiarum testimonia, dubitationem de incertis auferant.] You see
here that the Scripture, as sufficient to faith and manners, to be read by all
that fear God, and can read; and the harder places to be expounded by the
plainer, was the ancient Rule of faith and Religion: And this is the Religion
of Protestants.

Aug. lib. 3. c. 6. contra lit. Petiliani, page 127. [ Proinde, sive de Christo
sive de ejus Ecclesia, sive de quacunque alia re quae pertinet ad fidem
vitamque nostram, non dicam Nos, nequaquam comparandi ^i qui dixit [Licet si
nos] sed omnino quod secutus adjecit, si Angelus de coelo vobis annunciaverit
praeterquam quod in Scripturis and Evangelicis accepistis, Anathema sit.] I
must needs English this short passage, to the utter confusion of Popery. [And
therefore whether it be of Christ, or whether it be of the Church, or whether
it be of any other matter that pertains to our Faith or Life, I will not say
[ if we] as being not worthy to be compared with him that said [ Though we] but
(I will say) plainly what he added following: [If an Angel from heaven shall
declare to you any thing besides that which you have received in the Legal and
Evangelicall Scriptures, let him be Anathema, or accursed.] Was not the Church
then purely Protestant in their Religion?

The Minor needs no proof but our own Profession. My profession is the best
evidence of my own Religion to another: And I profess this to be my Religion;
which is contained in the holy Scripture, as the Test, or Law, or Rule. And let
no man contradict me, that knows not my Religion better then I do: The
Articles of the Church of England profess this also to be the Religion of the
Composers. And the Protestants commonly uno ore do profess it. It is the great
difference between us and the Papists. The whole Universal Law of God that we
know of, and own, is contained in Nature and Scripture conjunct. But the
Papists take somewhat else to be another part. We allow Bylaws about mutable
undetermined things (as aforesaid) to Governors: But we know no Universal Law
of faith and holiness, but Nature and Scripture: This is our Religion: And this
Religion contained in Nature and Scriptures has been still received.

Obj. We confess Scripture is sufficient to them that have no further light:
All that is necessary to the salvation of all, is in that perspicuously, as
Costerus, Bellarmine, and others say: but more is necessary to salvation to
some.

Ans. 1. Then at least it contains all the Essentialls of Christianity, which
suffices to our present end. 2. And what makes more Necessary to me, or
others here in England, if it be not necessary to all? Is it because that more
is Revealed to us? But how and by whom; and with what Evidence? We are willing
to see it, and can see no such thing: But if this be it, (if I may speak so
plainly without offense) it seems it concerns us to keep out Friars and
Jesuits from the Land, as much (if we knew how) as to keep out the Devil. For
they tell us, 1. That we must believe the Popes Sovereignty, against the
Tradition and judgment of most of the Catholic Church. 2. And we must believe
our selves to be void of Charity (because no Papists) contrary to our internal
sense and knowledge. 3. And we must believe that bread is not bread, and wine
is not wine, contrary to the common senses of all sound men: and if we will not
thus renounce the Churches Vote, Tradition, our Certain knowledge, Reason, and
all our Senses, we must be damned: where as before this doctrine was brought
us, we might have been saved, as having in the Scriptures all things necessary
to the salvation of all.

But the Papists must needs have us show them where our Church was, and name
the persons. Answ. 1. It were not the Catholic Church, if it were confined to
any place that is but a part of the Christian territories. 2. Nor were it the
Catholic Church if we could name half or a considerable part of the members:
As Augustine often tells the Donatists, it is the Church which begun at Jerusalem,
and thence is spread throughout the world. Part of it may be in one Nation one
year, which may forfeit and lose it before the next. God has not tied it to
any place. 3. To tell you where the Catholic Church has been in every age,
and who were the Members or the Leaders, requires much knowledge in History
and Cosmography, which God has not made necessary to salvation. 4. There are
no known Histories that deliver us the Catalogues of the Christians in every
age of the world. Had any been so foolish as to write them, they would have
been too chargeable to keep, and too long to read: yea were it but of the
Pastors. 5. God has nowhere commanded the Church to keep such Catalogues or
Histories, nor promised when they are written, that Papists shall not purposely
corrupt and destroy them, not Turks (as at Buda) take the Christian Libraries,
and burn them. 6. Papists cannot prove the successive extent and habitations of
the Catholic Church any more then we; and we can do it as well as they: for we
have the same means. If they can tell us where it has been in every age, they
need not ask us: If they cannot, they have as much need to learn as we, and
much more. They think it not necessary to their Laity, to the proving of their
faith, to be able to prove the habitations or names of the Members of the
Catholic Church in all ages: and why is it more necessary to us then them? 7.
But yet, to men acquainted with history, what can be more easy, then to tell
you where great multitudes of Christians in all ages have inhabited, and where
many parts of the Church have been, though no man can give you a Catalogue of
the Church, any more then of the world?

Would you know then where our Church, that is, the Catholic Church has been,
in all ages? why it has been in Asia, Africa and Europe. Is that too general?
It has been in Syria, in Mesopotamia, Parthia, Media, Armenia, India, Persia,
in Egypt, Habassia, Georgia, Cilicia, Circassia, Mengrelia, Natolia, Isauria,
Thrace, and more other Countries, then I have any need to name to you, (to say
nothing of Europe, and Britain by name, as a thing most known). But no man
well in his wits will deny a succession of the Christian Church which I have
defined, from the first plantation of it until now. If Christianity had ever
ceased in the world, how came it to be new planted, and revived?

That this before described is the only Catholic Church that has been owned
by the ancient Doctors, appears by their constant witnesses. To cite a few,
and yet enough.

August. in Psalm. 21. Vbicunque timetur Deus and laudatur, ibi est Ecclesia.

Id. Epist. 50. In Sanctis Libris ubi manifestatur Dominus Christus, ibi and
ejus Ecclesia declaratur (and therefore there it must be sought) Isti autem
mirabili caecitate, cum ipsum Christum praeter Scripturas nesciant, ejus tamen*
Ecclesiam non divinarum authoritate cognoscunt, sed humanarum calumniarum
vanitate confingunt. Christ is to be known in the Scripture, and therefore so
is the Church.

Ibid. In causa Caeciliani -- se ab Ecclesia Catholica, hoc est, ab unitate
omnium gentium diviserunt. Its not the Catholic Church because Roman, but
because extended to all Nations. Sed tamen Ecclesiam, quae non litigiosis
opinionibus fingitur, sed Divinis attestationibus comprobatur, propter
quemlibet hominem relinquere non debemus.

Id. In Psalm. 56. Corpus ejus est Ecclesia: non autem ista aut illa, sed toto
Orb diffusa: Nec ea quae nunc est in hominibus qui praesentem vitam agunt, sed
ad eam pertinentibus, etiam his qui fuerunt ante nos, and his qui futuri sunt
post nos, usque in finem seculi. Tota enim Ecclesia constans ex omnibus
fidelibus, quia fideles omnes membra sunt Christi, habet illud Caput positum in
coelestibus quod gubernat corpus suum, etsi separatum est a visione, sed
annectitur charitate.]

Id. Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 56. Ecclesia tanquam habitatori domus sua, and
Deo templum suum, and conditori civitas sua: quae tota hic accipienda est, non
solum ex part quae peregrinatur in terris, a solis ortu usque ad occasum
laudans nomen domini.]

Id. contr. Petilian. cap. 2. Purposely opening the true nature of the
Catholic Church for the stating of the Case, says, [ Quaestio certe inter nos
versatur, ubi sit Ecclesia? utrum apud nos, an apud illos? Quae utique Vna est,
quam majores nostri Catholicam nominarunt, ut ex ipso nomine ostenderent, quia
per totum est. -- Haec autem Ecclesia Corpus Christi est: sicut Apostolus
dicit, [pro corpore ejus, quae est Ecclesia.] Vnde utique manifestum est, eum
qui non est in membris Christi, Christianam salutem habere non posse. Membra
vero Christi per unitatis charitatem sibi copulantur, and per eandem capiti suo
adhaerent quod est Christus Jesus. -- Quaestio est, ubi sit hoc corpus, i. e.
ubi sit Ecclesia? Quid ergo facturi sumus? in Verbis nostris eam quaesituri? an
in Verbis capitis sui? Domini nostri Jesus Christi? Puto quod in illius potius
verbis eam quaerere debemus, qui verit as est, and optime novit corpus suum --
After he calls the Church over and over, Vniversum Orbem Christianum -- cap. 3.
Quia nolo humanis documentis, sed divinis oraculis sanctam Ecclesiam
demonstrari. Si sanctae Scriptura in Africa sola, etc. -- Si autem Christi
Ecclesia Canonicarum Scripturarum Divinis and certissimis testimoniis in
omnibus gentibus designata est, quicquid attulerint (N. B.) and undicunque
recitaverint, qui dicunt, [Ecce hic Christus, ecce illic] audiamus potius, si
^ves ejus sumus, vocem pastoris nostri dicentis [Nolite credere.] -- Cap. 4.
Totus Christus Caput and Corpus est: Caput unigenitus Dei filius, and Corpus
ejus Ecclesia, sponsus and sponsa; duo in carne una: Quicunque de ipso capite
ab Scripturis sanctis dissentiunt, etiamsi in omnibus locis inveniantur in
quibus Ecclesia designata est, non sunt in Ecclesia: and ^ursus quicunque de
ipso capite Scripturis Sanctis consentiunt, and Vnitati Ecclesiae non
communicant, (or as after) ab ejus corpore quod est Ecclesia ita dissentiunt,
ut eorum communio non sit cum toto quacunque diffunditur, sed in aliqua part
separata inveniatur, manif stum est eos non esse in Catholica Ecclesia.] (A sad
conclusion to the Papists.)

It would be tedious to recite half that Austin there has to this purpose.
Through all his exquisite disputes with the Donatists, he still describes the
Church, 1. As being the Body of Christ, its Head. 2. As dispersed through the
world, and containing all the Members of Christ. 3. And that which begun at
Jerusalem. 4. And is to be known by the word of God: Never mentioning the
Headship of the Pope, nor the Mistris-ship of Rome: of which more anon.

So Optatus lib. 2. advers. Parmen. Vbi ergo erit propriet as Catholici
nominis, cum inde dicta sit Catholica, quod sit rationabilis and ubique
diffusa, etc.] And before ( p. 46.) Ergo Ecclesia una est, cujus sanctitas de
sacramentis colligitur; non de superbia personarum ponderatur: He glories
indeed in the chair of Peter, and the Roman Church and succession, as being on
the Catholics side; but never makes them an Essential part of the Catholic
Church, nor talks of a Unity caused by subjection to them, but Charity to all:
And therefore calls the Schismatics, lib. 3. p. 72. Charitatis desertores, not
subjectionis desertores: Adding, gaud^t totus Orbis de Vnitate Catholica; but
never de subjectione Romae. Yea he says more of the seven Asian Churches, lib.
2. p 50. Extra septem Ecclesias quicquid foris est, ^lienum est. Never more (i^
^o much) can be found to be said to Rome: and now Rome it self is extra septem
Ecclesias. So he supposes God praising the Catholic, p 77. lib. 4. Dissentio
and sehisma tibi displicuit; Concordasti cum fratre tuo, and cum una Ecclesia,
quae est in toto orb terrarum: Communicasti septem Ecclesiis and memoriis
Apostolorum: amplexus es unitatem. So lib. 6. p. 95. he thus describes the
Catholic Communion. [ An quia voluntatem and jussionem Dei secuti sumus amando
pacem, communicando toti orbi terrarum; societati Orientalibus, ubi secundum
hominem suum natus est Christus; ubi ejus sancta sunt in pressa vestigia; ubi
ambu^averunt adorandi pedes; ubi ab ipso factae sunt tot and tantae virtutes;
ubi eum sunt tot Apostoli comitati; ubi est septiformis Ecclesia; a qua vos
concisos esse, etc.]

Tertullian dealing with Heretics indeed, that denied the Fundamentals,
thought it but a tiresome way to dispute with them out of Scripture, who
wrested so many things in it to their destruction, but would have them
convinced by Prescription: because they lived near the Churches that were
planted by the Apostles, and near their days: And what does he? appeal to
Rome, as the Judge, or Church that the rest are subjected to? No: but 1. It is
the common Creed or Symbol of the Church, that he would have made use of in
stead of long disputes (and not any other doctrine.) 2. And it is all the
Churches planted by the Apostles, that he will have to be the first witnesses.
3. And the present Churches, the immediate witnesses that they received this
Creed (not any supernumeraries) from them, as the Apostles doctrine. So de
praescript. c. 13. he recites the Symbol it self, and so cap. 20. he
mentions the sending of the twelve to teach this faith, and plant Churches,
which he describes thus [ Statim igitur Apostoli -- primo per Iudaeam
contestata fide in Iesum Christum, and Ecclesiis institutis, dehinc in orbem
profecti, eandem doctrinam ejusdem fidei nationibus promulgaverunt, and proinde
Ecclesias apud unamquamque civitatem condiderunt, a quibus traducem fidei and
semina doctrinae caeterae exinde Ecclesiae mutuatae sunt, and quotidie
mutuantur ut Ecclesiae fiant. Ac per hoc and ipsea Apostolicae deputantur ut
soboles Apostolicarum Ecclesiarum. Omne genus ad Originem suam censeatur,
necesse est. Itaque tot ac tantae Ecclesiae una est illa ab Apostolis prima, ex
qua omnes. (Are not those too gross deceivers that would persuade us that he
here means the Church of Rome by the [ una illa], when he plainly speaks of
the Catholic Church of the Apostolic age from which all the rest did spring?
If of a particular Church, it must be that of Jerusalem. Did all the rest arise
from Rome? Can they say [ex hac omnes?] Sic omnes primae, and omnes
Apostolicae, dum unam omnes probant unitatem. Communicatio pacis, and
appellatio fraternitatis, and contesseratio hospitalitatis, quae jura non alia
ratio regit, quam ejusdem sacramenti una traditio.]

Note here 1. That no Original Church is mentioned but those of Iudaea, with
the rest of the Apostles planting. And 2. That the Churches planted by the
Apostles themselv^s, (without any mentioned difference of superiority) are that
one Church which all the rest must try their faith by, as the witnesses 3. That
they are equally made traduces fidei, and mother Churches to others propagated
by them. 4. That per hoc, by this propagation (without subjection to the Church
or Pope of Rome) all the rest are Apostolical. 5. And the sufficient proof to
any Church then that it was prima and Apostolica, was (not subjection to Rome
but) that nuam omnes probant unitatem. That is, of the Apostolic faith,
received from that one Apostolic Church. 6. Yea when he recites the external
Characters of the Church, it is not subjection to Rome, that is any one of
them, but, Communicatio pacis, appellatio fraternitatis, contesseratio
hospitalitatis.] 7. Yea utterly to exclude the Roman subjection, he adds [ quae
jura non alia ratio regit, quam ejusdem sacramenti una traditio.]

So he proceeds Si haec ita sunt, constat proinde omnem doctrinam, quae cum
illis Ecclesiis Apostolicis matricibus and originalibus fidei conspiret,
veritati deputandum id sine dubio tenentem, quod Ecclesiae ab Apostolis,
Apostoli a Christo, Christus a Deo suscepit; reliquam vero omnem doctrinam de
mendacio praejudicandam, quae sapiat contra veritatem Ecclesi^rum, and
Apostolorum, and Christi, and Dei. Superest ergo ut demonstremus, an haec
nostra doctrina (the Creed; not the Popes additions) cujus regulam supra
edidimus, de Apostolorum traditione censeatur, and ex hoc ipso, an caeterae
(that contradict the Creed) de mendacio veniant. Communicamus cum Ecclesiis
Apostolicis ( Rome is not made the standard) quod nulla doctrina diversa, hoc
est testimonium veritatis.

And cap. 28. he does not send us to the Roman Church as Head or Judge, but
calling the Holy Ghost only, Vicarius Christi, Christ's Vicar, makes it
incredible that he should so far neglect his office, as to let (not Rome, but)
all the Churches to lose the Apostles doctrine; proving the certain succession
of it, by the Unity, and not by Romes authority [ Ecquid verisimile est, ut tot
ac tantae in unam fidem irraverint? Nullus inter multo seventus est unus
exitus: Variasse debuerat error doctrinae Ecclesiarum. Caeterum quod apud
multos unum invenitur, non est erratum, sed traditum. Audeat ergo aliquis
dicere, illos errasse qui tradiderunt?

So c. 32. when he calls them to the Apostolical Church, it is no more to Rome,
then another. Aedant ergo origines Ecclesiarum suaerum -- ut primus ille
Episcopus aliquis ex Apostolis vel Apostolicis viris, qui tamen cum Apost lis
perseveraverint, habuerit auctorem, and antecessorem. Hoc enim modo Ecclesiae
Apostolicae census suos deferunt: sicut Smyrneorum Ecclesia habens Polycarpum
ab Iohanne Collocatum refert; sicut Romanorum Clementem a Petro ordinatum edit:
proinde utique and caeterae exhibent] Here you see he puts Smyrna before Rome,
and John before Peter, and refers them to Rome, but only as one of the Churches
planted by the Apostles; and this is but to know their doctrine, delivered in
that first age, which we appeal to.

And after he expressly says [ Ad hanc it aque formam, provocabantur ab illis
Ecclesiis, quae licet nullum ex Apostolis, vel Apost^licus auctorem suum
proferant, ut multo posteriores, quae denique quotidie institutum; tamen in
eadem fidem conspirantes, non minus Apostolicae deputantur pro consanguinitate
doctrinae:] The Apostles doctrine will prove an Apostolical Church, when ever
planted.

And c. 38. he draws them from disputing from the Scripture, because they owned
not the true Scripture, but corrupted it, and charged the Catholics with
corruption [ Sicut illis non potuit succedere corruptela doctrinae sine
corruptela instrumentorum ejus: Ita and nobis integritaes doctrina non
competisset, sine integritate eorum (not by real tradition alone) per quae
doctrina tractatur: Etenim quid contrarium nobis in nostris? quid de proprio
intulimus, ut aliquid contrarium ei and in Scripturis deprehensum, detractione
vel adjectione vel transumtatione remediaremus? Quod sumus, hoc sunt. Ab initio
suo ex illis sumus; antequam nihil aliter fuit, quam sumus.]

And cap. 36. He sends them by name to the particular Apostolical Churches, and
begins with Corinth; then to Philippi, Thessalonica, Ephesus, and then to Rome,
of whose Sovereignty he never speaks a syllable.

So more plainly l. 4. contr. Marcion. c. 5. because Marcion denied the true
Scriptures, he sends them to the Apostolic Churches for the true Scriptures,
first to the Corinthians, then to the Galatians, then to the Philippians,
Thessalonians, Ephesians, and last of all to Rome.

But it would be tedious to cite the rest of the Ancients, that commonly
describe the Church as we; and such as we all own as members of it.

Arg. 3. If the Roman Church (as Christian, though not as Papal) has been
visible ever since the days of the Apostles, then the Church of which the
Protestants are members, has been visible ever since the days of the
Apostles: But the Antecedent is their own; therefore they may not deny the
consequent.

The consequence also is past denial. 1. Because the Roman as Christian, is
part of the universal Christian Church. 2. Because they profess to believe the
same holy Scriptures and Creed as we do. So that though they add more, and so
make a new form to their Church, yet do they not deny our Church, which is the
Christian Church as such, nor our Test and Rule of faith, nor any Article that
we account Essential to our Religion. So that themselves are our sufficient
witnesses.

Well! but this will not satisfy the Papists, unless we show a succession of
our Church as Protestant.

1. This we need not, any more then a sound man lately cured of the Plague,
does need to prove, that he has ever been, not only sanus but sanatus, a cured
man (before he was sick.) How could there be a Church protesting against an
universal Vicar of Christ, before any claimed that Vicarship? 2. And when the
Vicarship was usurped, those millions, abroad, and even within the Roman
territories, that let the pretended Vicar talk, and followed their own
business, and never consented to his usurpation, were of the very same Religion
with those that openly protested against him: And so were those that never
heard of his usurpation.

Object. But at least, (say they) you must prove a Church that has been
without the universal Vicar negatively, though not against him positively.

Answ. 1. In all reason, he that affirms must prove: It is not incumbent on
us to prove the negative, that the Church had not such a Roman head; but they
must prove that it had.

Object. But they have possession, and therefore you that would dispossess
them, must disprove their title.

Ans. 1. This is nothing to most of the Catholic Church where they have no
possession: therefore with them they confess themselves obliged to the proof.
2. This is a mere fallacious diversion: for we are not now upon the question of
their Title, but the matter of fact and history: we make good the negative,
that they have no Title from the Laws of Christ himself: and so will not
dispossess them without disproving their pretended Title. But when the question
is de facto, whether they have ever had that possession from the Apostles
days, they that affirm must prove, when we have disabled their title from the
Law.

2. But what must we prove? that all the Church has been guiltless of the
Papal usurpation, or only some in every age? of all its no more necessary to
us, then to prove that there have been no Heresies since the Apostles. If a
piece of the Church may turn Heretics, or but Schismatics, as the Novatians,
and African Donatists, why may not another piece turn Papists?

3. What will you say to a man that knows not a Protestant, nor a Papist, or
believes only Christianity it self, and meddleth not with the Pope, any
further then to say, [I believe not in him, Jesus I know: and the Apostles, and
Scripture, and Christianity I know, but the Pope I know not:] and suppose he
never subscribed to the Augustane, English, or any such confession, but only to
the Scripture, and the Apostles, and Nicene, and other ancient Creeds; By what
show of Justice can you require this man to prove that there has been no Pope
in every age?

4. The foundation of all our controversy is doctrinal, whether the Papal
Sovereignty be Essential to the Church? or necessary to our membership? we deny
it; you affirm it. If it be not Essential, it is enough to us, to prove that
which is Essential, to have been successive: we be not bound in order to the
proof of our Church it self, to prove the succession of every thing that makes
but to its better being.

Yet professing, that we do it not as necessary to our main cause, we shall ex
abundanti prove the negative, that the Catholic Church has not always owned
the Papal Sovereignty, and so that there have been men that were not only
Christians, but as we, Christians without Popery, and against it: and so shall
both prove our Thesis, and overthrow theirs.

Arg. 4. If there have been since the days of Christ, a Christian Church that
was not subject to the Roman Pope, as the Vicar of Christ and universal Head
and Governor of the Church; then the Church of which the Protestants are
members, has been visible both in its being, and its freedom from Popery. But
the Antecedent is true: therefore so is the consequent.

I shall prove the Antecedent, and therein the visibility of our Church, and
the nonexistence in those times of the Papacy.

Arg. 1. My first Argument shall be from the general Council of Chalcedon.

If the privileges of the Roman Sea were given to it by the Bishops
consequently because of the Empire of that City, and therefore equal
privileges after given to Constantinople on the same account; then had not
Rome those privileges from the Apostles (and consequently the whole Catholic
Church was without them). But the Antecedent is affirmed by that fourth great
approved Council: In Act. 16. Bin. p. 134. [We everywhere following the
definitions of the holy Fathers, and the Canon, and the things that have been
now read, of the hundred and fifty Bishops most beloved to God, that were
congregate under the Emperor Theodosius the great of pious memory, in the
Royal City of Constantinople, new Rome, we also knowing them, have defined the
same things concerning the privileges of the same most holy Church of
Constantinople, new Rome: For to the seat of old Rome, because of the Empire of
that City, the Fathers consequently gave the privileges. And the hundred and
fifty Bishops, most beloved of God, being moved with the same intention, have
given equal privileges to the most holy seat of new Rome: reasonably judging,
that the City adorned with the Empire and Senate, shall enjoy equal privileges
with old Regal Rome.]

Here we have the Testimony of one of the greatest general Councils, of the
humane original of Romes privileges. Bellarmine has nothing to say, but that
they spoke falsely, and that this clause was not confirmed by the Pope (which
are fully answered by me elsewhere.) But this is nothing to our present
business: It is a matter of fact that I use their Testimony for. And if all the
Bishops in two of the most approved general Councils, (called the
Representative Catholic Church) were not competent witnesses in such a case,
to tell us what was done, and what was not done in those times, then we have
none. The Papists can pretend to no higher testimony on their part. The Church
it self therefore has here decided the controversy.

And yet note, that even these privileges of Rome were none of his pretended
universal Government.

Its in vain to talk of the Testimonies of particular Doctors, if the most
renowned general Councils cannot be believed. Yet I will add an Argument from
them as conjunct.

Arg. 2. Had the Roman universal Sovereignty, as essential to the Catholic
Church, been known in the days of Tertullian, Cyprian, Athanasius, Nazianzen,
Nyssen, Basil, Optatus, Augustine, and the other Doctors that confounded the
Heresies or Schisms of those times ( e. g. the Novatians, Donatists, Arrians,
etc.) the said Doctors would have plainly and frequently insisted on it for the
conviction of those Heretics and Schismatics: But this they do not: therefore
it was not known in those times.

The consequence of the Major is evident hence: The Doctors of the Church were
men at least of common wit and prudence in the matters which they did debate:
therefore they would have insisted on this argument, if then it had been known.
The reason of the consequence is, because it had been most obvious, easy, and
potent to dispatch their controversies. 1. When the Arrians and many other
Heretics denied Christ's eternal Godhead, had it not been the shortest
expeditious course, to have cited them to the bar of the Judge of
controversies, the infallible Sovereign Head of the Church; and convinced them
that they were to stand to his judgment? 2. Had not this Argument been at
hand, to have confounded all Heresies at once, [That which agrees not with the
Belief of the Roman Pope and Church is false: But such is your opinion:
therefore]

2. So for the Donatists; when they disputed for so many years against the
Catholics, which was the true Church, had it not been Augustins shortest,
surest way to have argued thus: That only is the true Church that is subject to
the Pope of Rome, and adhereth to him: But so do not you: therefore.]

Either the Arrians, Donatists and such others did believe the Papal
Sovereignty and Vicarship, or not: If they did, 1. How is it possible they
should actually reject both the Doctrine and Communion of the Pope and Roman
Church? 2. And why did not the Fathers rebuke them for sinning against
conscience, and their own profession herein?

But if they did not believe the Papal Sovereignty, then 2. How came it to pass
that the Fathers did labor no more to convince them of that (now supposed)
fundamental Error? when 1. It is supposed as heinous a sin as many of the
rest. 2. And was the maintainer of the rest. Had they but first demonstrated to
them, that the Pope was their Governor and Judge, and that his Headship being
essential to the Church, it must needs be of his faith, all Heresies might
have been confuted, the people satisfied, and the controversies dispatched in a
few words.

3. Either Arrians, Donatists, Novatians, and such like, were before their
defection acquainted with the Roman Sovereignty, or not. If they were not, then
it is a sign it was not commonly then received in the Church, and that there
were multitudes of Christians that were no Papists: If they were, then why did
not the Fathers, 1. Urge them with this as a granted truth, till they had
renounced it? 2. And then why did they not charge this defection from the Pope
upon them, among their heinous crimes? why did they not tell them, that they
were subjected to him as soon as they were made Christians; and therefore they
should not perfidiously revolt from him? How is it that we find not this point
disputed by them on both sides, yea and as copiously as the rest, when it would
have ended all?

And for the Minor, that the Fathers have not thus dealt with Heretics, the
whole Books of Tertullian, Nazianzen, Nyssen, Basil, Optatus, Hierom,
Augustine, and others are open certain witnesses. They use no such Argument,
but fill their Books with others; most imprudently and vainly, if they had
known of this, and had believed it. Otherwise the Papists would never have been
put to gather up a few impertinent scraps to make a show with.

We see by experience here among us, that this point is Voluminously debated;
and if we differ in other matters, the Papists call us to the Roman bar, and
bring in this as the principal difference. And why would it not have been so
then between the Fathers, and the Donatists, Arrians, and such like, if the
Fathers had believed this? Its clear hence that the Papal Vicarship was then
unknown to the Church of Christ.

Arg. 3. The Tradition witnessed by the greater part of the Universal Church
says, that the Papal Vicarship or Sovereignty is an innovation and usurpation,
and that the Catholic Church was many hundred years without it: Therefore
there was then no such Papal Church.

This is not a single testimony, nor of ten thousand, or ten millions, but of
the Major Vote of the whole Church; and in Councils the Major Vote stands for
the whole. If this witness therefore be refused, we cannot expect that the
words of a few Doctors should be credited; Nor may they expect that we credit
any witness of theirs, that is not more credible.

And that the Antecedent is true, is known to the world; as we know that the
Turks believe in Mahomet, by the common consent of history and travelers. Part
of the Churches anathematize the Romans, and part more modestly disown them,
and the generality that subject not themselves do profess that Popery is an
usurpation, and that in the ancient Church it was not so; and this they have by
Tradition from generation to generation. And if the Roman pretended Tradition
be with them of value, the Tradition of the far greater part of the Church is
with us to be of more. We must despair of satisfying them with witness, if most
of the Christian world be rejected, and the Tradition of the greatest part of
the Church be taken to be false in a matter of public notorious fact.

Arg. 4. Many Churches without the verge of the Roman Empire, never subjected
themselves to Rome, (and many not of many hundred years after Christ:)
therefore there were visible Christian Churches from the beginning, to this
day, that were not for the Roman Vicarship.

That abundance of Churches were planted by the Apostles, without the reach of
the Roman Empire, is plentifully testified by the ancients, and the Papists
commonly confess it. That these were under the Papal Government, all the
Papists in the world cannot prove. The contrary is confessed by them, and
proved by us. 1. They came not so much as to General Councils. 2. They had no
Bishops ordained by the Pope, or any empowered by him. 3. They never appealed to
him. 4. They never had any causes judged by him. 5. They performed no obedience
to him, nor lived under his Laws; nor scarce had any communion with him, more
then the common communion that is held in Charity, and common faith and
ordinances with all. Such were the Indians, the Persians, the further Armenia
and Parthia, the Habassines and many more. And of long time the English and the
Scots, that refused so much as to eat and drink in the same Inn with the Roman
Legates: much less would obey him, so much as in the change of Easter day; we
challenge them to show us any appearance of subjection to the Pope in the
generality of the Churches without the Empire.

But you say, that the Habassines were under the Patriarch of Alexandria, and
he under the Pope.

Ans. 1. If that were true, yet what is that to all the rest? 2. Give us your
proof that the Abassines were under the Patriarch of Alexandria, before that
Patriarch broke off his communion with Rome. The Canons of Pisanus, of
yesterdayes invention, we regard not: Surely the true Canons of Nice ( Can. 6.)
measure out no more to the Patriarch of Alexandria, but Egypt, Lybia, and
Pentapolis. There Is no mention of Ethiopia: And its not like that the greatest
part of his Province would have been left out. 3. If it had been so, yet we
utterly deny that ever the Pope had the Government of the Alexandrian
Patriarch: Only for a little while he had a precedence in honorary Title, and
in Councils; as the City of London is preferred before York, but does not
Govern it at all.

Here therefore (without the Roman Empire) you may see those Churches that have
successively been visible, and yet no Papists. This your Raynerius confesses
contr. Waldens. Catalog. in Bibliothec. Patr. Tom. 4. page 773. saying [
Armeniorum Ecclesiae, and Aethiopum, and Indorum, and caeterae qua^ Apostoli
converterunt, non subsunt Romanae Ecclesiae.] See Godignus de Rebus
Abassinorum, of their Antiquity.

Arg. 5. The Eastern Churches within the Empire were never subjects of the
Pope: therefore there have been and are Churches Visible, that neither were nor
are his subjects.

The Antecedent I have proved in my Key for Catholics, from the Council of
Carthage's Letters to Pope Coelestine, after their resistance of Zosimus; and
diverse testimonies from Basil and others. And they can give us themselves no
plausible appearance of a proof of that subjection which they assert: no more
then the younger Justices on the Bench are subject to the elder, or the Jury to
the foreman, or a Master of Arts in a College to a Bachelor in Divinity, or
then the Mayor of Bristoll is to the Mayor of York.

1. The Pope never chose the Patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch, etc. 2. It did
not belong to him to ordain them: nor did he authorize any other to do it, nor
did they receive or hold their power from him. 3. They receive no Laws of his
to Rule by. 4. They were not commanded or Judged by him. 5. The Patriarch of
Constantinople had equal Privileges with him. So that here is nothing like to
Sovereignty and subjection, nor any acknowledgement of an universal Vicar of
Christ. Communion indeed they held with Rome, as they did with one another,
till pride divided them; but Communion is one thing, and Subjection is another.
The Greek Church never gave them this.

Arg. 6. My next Argument to prove the Novelty of their Church as Papal, and
consequently that the Universal Church was void of Popery, and therefore of the
same Religion with Protestants, shall be from the testimony of their own most
magnified Bishops.

Gregory 1. Epist. Regist. l. 4. c. 80. speaking against the Patriarch of
Constantinople, for usurping the Title of Oecumenicall Patriarch, or Universal
Bishop, says ( fol. 181, 182. Edit. Paris. 1551.) [ Sicut enim veneranda
vestra sanctitas novit, mihi per sanctam Chalcedonensem Synodum Pontifici sedis
Apostolicae, cui Deo disponente deservio, hoc Vniversalitatis nomen oblatum
est: sed Nullus unquam decessorum meorum hoc tam prophano vocabulo uti
consensit. Quia viz, si Vnus Patriarcha Vniversalis dicitur, Patriarcharum
nomen Caeteris derogatur. Sed absit hoc, absit a Christiana mente, id sibi
velle quempiam arripere, unde fratrum suorum honorem imminuere ex
quantulacunque part videatur. Cum ergo nos hunc honorem nolumus oblatum
suscipere; pensate quam ign^miniosum sit hunc sibi quempiam violenter usurpare
voluisse Propterea sunctitas vestra in suis Epist^lis neminem Universalem
nominet, ne sibi debitum detrahat, cum alteri honorem offert indebitum.]

1. Here he affirms that the Title of Universal was never used by any of his
predecessors nor received. 2. That it is a profane Title. 3. That it is an
injury to other Patriarchs. 4. That its unbeseeming a Christian mind to assume
it. 5. That its undue. 6. He persuaded the Bishops of Alexandria and Antioch to
give it to no man whosoever.

Obj. But he says that the Council of Chalcedon offered it him. Ans. 1. If he
renounce it as undue and profane, and say that de facto none of his
predecessors took it, this is as much as we desire. 2. That at the Council of
Chalcedon, near 150. years before this, two Deacons (that they say have no
Votes) called Theodorus and Ischirion, did superscribe their Libels, to Leo
Universal Archbishop, I find; but no more: And this is it that Gregory here
brags of: And what is two Deacons to the Council?

Obj. But it is only the Name and not the Thing that he disclaims, and that is
in modesty. Ans. 1. How then could he censure the name as undue, injurious,
profane, and blasphemous, if he owned the Thing? seeing aptanda sunt verba
rebus: words are to be fitted to Things. 2. But I shall confute this fully from
his following words.

[ Ita ut Vniversa sibi tentet ascribere, and omnia quae soli uni capiti
cohaerent, videlicet Christo, per elationem pompatici sermonis, ejusdem Christi
sibi studeat membra subjugare.]

Here it is plain 1. That it is the Thing as well as the Name that Gregory
wrote against. 2. And that it is also a palpable fiction of the Papists (for
want of a better) that Gregory opposes only such an Universal Episcopacy as
takes away all Episcopacy from others. Ridiculous! They would make us believe,
that John of Constantinople would have had no Bishop in the world but himself;
and that the Council that gave him the Title, intended all to degrade
themselves; and that there were no Bishops under him ever after; when other
Councils confirmed his Title. On the contrary, you here see 1. That there is
but one Head, even Christ. 2. And that John's sin in arrogating the Title [
Vniversal] was, that he would subjugate, or subject all Christ's Members to
himself. And is not this now the very form of Popery, which Gregory makes so
great a sin? even to subject all Christ's Members to one, as an Universal
Patriarch or Bishop? Yea much higher Titles do they arrogate, even to be [the
Vicar of Christ, and God, and in stead of Christ and God; and to be the
Vice-Christ.]

He proceeds [ Nec mirum quod ille tentator, qui initium omnis peccati scit
esse superbiam, etc.] Making the Devil the author of this Title.

He adds a weighty reason [ si enim hoc dici licenter permittitur, honor
Patriarcharum omnium negatur. Et cum fortasse is in errore periit qui
Vniversalis dicitur, nullus jam Episcopus remansisse in statu veritatis
invenitur] or as more plainly before c. 76. fol. 180. in the Epist. to the
Emperor Maurice [si igitur illud nomen in ea Ecclesia sibi quisquam arripuit,
quod apud bonorum omnium judicium fuit: Vniversa ergo Ecclesia, quod absit, a
statu suo corruit, quando is qui appellatur Vniversalis cadit] The reason is
plain, because the Head of every political society is essential to it: and
therefore if the Head of the Universal Church fall away to Heresy or
Infidelity, the Church falls: as Bellarmine knew when he told us, that if the
Pope should err in determining, the Church would be bound to take evil for
good, and vice for virtue.

He proceeds in the same Epist. ad Maur. Imperat. [ Sed absit a Cordibus
Christianorum nomen istud blasphemiae, etc.] [Far be this name of blasphemy
from the hearts of Christians, etc.]

And after again says [ Sed nullus eorum unquam. hoc singularitatis vocabulum
assumpsit, nec uti consensit] That none of the Roman Bishops did ever assume
this name of singularity, nor consent to use it.]

And therefore he concludes to the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch, c. 80.
[ Oportet ergo ut constanter ac sine praejudicio servetis sicut accepistis
Ecclesias, and nihil sibi in nobis haec tentatio diabolicae usurpationis
ascribat. State sorts, state securi; Scripta cum Vniversalis nominis
falsitate, nec dare unquam, nec recipere praesumatis] He charge them never to
give or take writing with the falsehood of this name [ Vniversal] as being from
the Devils tentation.

And in Ep. 38. c. 82. to John Constable. himself he calls it [ Nefandum elationis
vocabulum] and the cause [ Nefandum and prophanum tumorem] and after he calls
it [the usurping of a proud and foolish word.]

To all this Bellarmine miserably answers de Pontif. Romans l. 2. c. 31. that
the title [Universal] as it signifies a sole Bishop to whom all other are but
Vicars, is indeed profane, sacrilegious and Anrichristian, and is it that
Gregory speaks against, but not as it excludes not particular Bishops,] To
which I answer, 1. To be the Vicarius of a Superior, is not an exclusion. The
Pope says he is the Vicar of Christ the chief Pastor and Bishop of souls: and
all Pastors are to Preach the Word of reconciliation in his name and stead, 1
Cor. 5.19. and yet they are not thereby excluded from being Pastors. If to be
Christ's servants, may consist with Episcopacy; much more to be his Vicarii over
their particular flocks. Rather this is too high an honor for us to assume. I
do not think that all the Clergy under the Pope, do think themselves honored
so much as they should be if they were his Vicars. 2. Has not that man sold
his conscience to his cause, that will persuade the world that the Patriarch of
Constantinople was about to unbishop all the Bishops in the world except
himself? Let any man show us by tolerable proof, that John of Constant^nople
did claim any higher a power over all others, or would bring other Bishops by
his Universality to be lower, then the Pope of Rome does by his Universality,
and then I will confess that Papists only have eyes and reason, and all the
world besides are blind, and mad, or beasts. Their cause is at a fair pass,
when they must fly to such palpable falsehoods, as makes them the wonder of
their sober readers. 3. I proved before from the express words of Gregory, that
it is Superiority of Government, and making all other Bishops subject to him,
that he condemned in the Patriarch of Constantinople. And no doubt he made not
the least of his arrogance: Nor do I believe that it can be proved that John,
or the Council that gave him the Title, did ever intend so much as a Universal
Government, which the Pope now usurpeth; but only a Primacy before all, which
Popes were then striving for. For the Greeks to this day disclaim it, and they
never strove to exercise it.

I will give you more of Gregory's words to put the question past doubt, Cap.
82. Ep. 38. to John, says [ Humilitatem ergo frater charissime totis
vis^eribus dilige, per quam cunctorum fratrum concordia and sanctae Vniversalis
Ecclesiae unitas v^leat custodiri: Certe Paulus Apost^lus cum audiret quosdam
dicere, Ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego vero Cophae, hanc dilacerationem
corporis Dominici, per quam membra ejus aliis quodammodo se capitibus
sociabant, vehementissime perhorrescens exclamavit, dicens: Nunquid Paulus pro
vobis crucifixus est: aut in nomine Pauli baptizati estis? Sic ergo ille membra
Dominici corporis certis extra Christum quasi capitibus, and ipsis quidem
Apostolis subjici particulariter evitavit: Tu quid Christo Vniversalis scilicet
Ecclesiae capiti, in extremi judicii es dicturus examine, qui cuncta ejus
membra tibimet conaris Vniversalis appellatione supponere!]

Here you see 1. That the unity and concord of the Church is not maintained by
universal Headship, but by fraternal communion and humility. 2. That it wounded
Paul, and should do us, to see the Church make men as it were their heads,
though they were Apostles, and though Peter was one of them: and that extra
Christum, beside Christ, none, no not Peter should be as a Head to Christ's
members. 3. Much more abominable is it for any man to pretend to be the
universal Bishop or Head to all Christ's members: 4. That the sin of this
usurpation was against Christ the Churches Head, and that before him in
Judgment the usurper of universal Episcopacy will be confounded for this very
thing. 5. And that the crime of this title of universal Bishop was, that it
endeavored to put all Christ's members under him that used it (tibimet
supponere:) not to exclude all other Bishops, but to put under him all Christ's
members. These are the words of Gregory: and if men can make what their list of
words so full and plain, and often repeated in many Epistles, what hope have they
that their Judge of Controversies should do any more to end their Controversies
then Scripture has done, which they cannot understand without such an
unintelligible Judge?

He proceeds (ibid.) [ Quis ergo in hoc tam perverso vocabulo, nisi ille ad
imitandum proponitur, qui despectis Angelorum legionibus, secum socialiter
constitutis, ad culmen conatus est singularitatis erumpere, ut and nulli
subesse, and solus omnibus praeesse videretur.] He makes him the imitator of
the Devil, that aspiring above the rest of the Angels, fell by pride.

But Bellarmine has three Reasons to prove yet that Gregory after all this
meant not the universal Headship or Episcopacy indeed. 1. Because the holy
Council of Chalcedon offered it him. Ans. 1. A fair offer! because two or three
Deacons inscribed their Libels to him with the name of universal Archbishop:
And we must believe that the Council approved of this, though we cannot prove
it. Or if they called him the Head, as the City of London is the Head City in
England, and the Earl of Arundel the Head Earl, or the Lord Chancelour the
Head Judge, that yet have no Government of the rest, what advantage were this
to the Roman Vicarship? 2. If Gregory judge the name so blasphemous, when it
signifies an universal Governor of the Church, surely he believed that the
Council offered it not to him in that sense, but as he was the Episcopus primae
sedis. 3. But again, I say the matter of fact is it that I am enquiring of: And
I have the testimony of this Roman Bishop that none of his Predecessors would
receive that name.

2. But says Bellarmine, he says that the care of the whole Church was
committed to Peter, which is all one.] Ans. 1. But so it was committed also to
the rest of the Apostles: Paul had on him the care of all the Churches, that
claimed no Headship. 2. He expr^sly excludes Peter's Headship, both in the
words before recited, and after, saying [ Certe Petrus Apostolus primum membrum
(or rather as Dr. James Corrupt. of the Fathers Part. 2. p. 60 says he found
it in seven written Copies, [Apostolorum primus membrum] Sanctae and
Vniversalis Ecclesiae est: Paulus, Andreas, Johannes, quid ^liud quam
singularium sunt plebium capita? Et tamen sub uno capite omnes membra sunt
Ecclesiae] that is [ Peter the first of the Apostles, is a member of the holy
and universal Church: Paul, Andrew, John, what are they but the Heads of the
singular flocks of the people? And yet all are members of the Church under one
Head] (that is, Christ) so that Christ is the only Head: Peter is but a member,
as the other Apostles are; but not a Head.

3. But says Bellarmine, Gregory could not but know that the title of
Episcopus Vniversalis Ecclesiae, which is all one, had been often assumed by the
Popes.] Ans. 1. Whether was Bellarmine or Gregory the wiser man? at least the
fitter interpreter of those words: would Gregory have made them so blasphemous,
foolish, profane, and devilish, if he had thought them of the same importance
with those which his Predecessors used? Or was he so silly as not to know that
this might have been retorted on him? What a silly ^or, what a wicked
dissembling hypocrite, does Bellarmine feign Pope Gregory to have been? 2. But
verily did the Learned Jesuit believe himself that [ Vniversalis Episcopus
Ecclesiae] and Episcopus Ecclesiae Vniversalis] are of the same signification?
Every Bishop in the world, that adhered to the common Communion of Chr^^^ians
and was a Catholic, was wont to be called [a Bishop of the Catholic Church,]
and is indeed such; but he is not therefore [the universal Bishop of the
Church.]

But Bellarmine will not charge Gregory of such horrid dissimulation without
reason. His first reason is, [that Gregory did it for caution, to prevent
abuse.] Ans. What! charge it with blasphemy, profaneness, devilism, wronging all
the Church, and also to excommunicate men for it, and all this to prevent
abuse, when he held it lawful! Did hell ever hatch worse hypocrisy then this
that he fathers on his holiest Pope?

But 2. His other reason is worse then this; forsooth [because the question was
only whether John of Constantinople should have this title, and not whether the
Bishop of Rome should have it: and therefore Gregory simply and absolutely
pronounces the name sacrilegious and profane, that is, as given to John, (but
not to himself) yet he refused it himself, though due to him, that he might the
better repress the pride of the Bishop of Constantinople.] Ans. The sum is
then, that Gregory did merely lie and dissemble for his own end. He labors to
prove that blasphemous, sacrilegious, etc. which he desired; But we will not
judge so odiously of the Pope as Papists do. Does he charge the other
Patriarchs and Bishops to give it no man? does he blame them after in other
Epistles that gave him that Title? and does he profess that never any of his
Predecessors received it, and make so heinous a matter of it, and yet all this
while approve it as for himself? Who will believe a Saint to be so diabolical,
that calls it an imitation of the Devil? You see now what the Roman Cause is
come to, and whether their Church as Papal, that is, their Universal
Sovereignty, be not sprung up since Gregory's days.

Hear him a little further (ibid.) [Atque ut cuncta breviter cingalo locutionis
adstringam: sancti ante Legem, sancti sub Lege, sancti sub Gratia, omnes hi
perficientes Corpus Domini in membris sunt Ecclesiae constituti, and nemo se
unquam Vniversalem vocare voluit: Vestra autem sanctitas agnoscat quantum apud
se tumeat, quae illo nomine vocari appetit, quo vocari nullus praesumpsit, qui
veraciter sanctus fuit.] That is, [And to bind up all in the girdle of speech,
the Saints before the Law, the Saints under the Law, the Saints under Grace,
all these making up the Body of Christ, were placed among the Members of the
Church, yet never man would be called Universal. Let your Holiness therefore
consider how with your self you swell, that desire to be called by that name,
by which no man has presumed to be called that was truly Holy.]

Well! if this be not as p^^in as Protestants speak against Popery, I will
never hope to understand a Pope

I only add, that Gregory makes this usurpation of the name of an Universal
Bishop a forerunner of Antichrist: And that Pope Pelagius condemned it before
him; which Gratian puts into their Decrees, or Canon Law.

And that he took the Churches authority to be greater then his own, when he
tells John, [Sed quoad in mea correptione despicior, restat ut Ecclesiam debeam
adhibere.]

Lib. 7. Ep. 30. Dixi nec mihi vos, nec cuiquam alteri tale aliquid scribere
debere: and ecce in praefatione epistolae quam ad meipsum qui prohibui
direxistis, s^perbae appellationis verbum, Universalem me Papam dicentes,
imprimere curastis. Quod peto dulcissima sanctitas vestra, ultra non faciat:
quia vobis subtrahitur, quod alteri plusquam ratio exigit, praebetur.] See then
whether it be not judged by him undue to himself as well as to others.

And what the weight of the matter seemed to him, judge more by these words,
Ep. 83. l. 4. ad Arrian. In isto scelesto vocabulo consentire, nihil est aliud
quam fidem perdere.] [To consent in that wicked word, is nothing else but to
lose (or destroy) the faith.] That is, apostasy.

And l. 6. c. 194. Mauric. Aug. Ego fidenter dico, quia quisquis se universalem
sacerdotem vocat, vel vocare desiderat, in elatione sua Antichristum
praecurrit; quia superbiendo se caeteris praeponit, nec dispari superbia ad
errorem ducitur.]

Arg. 7. The Papists themselves confess, that multitudes of Christians, if not
most by far, have been the opposers of the Pope, or none of his subjects:
therefore by their Testimony there have been visible Churches of such.

Aeneas Sylvius, after Pope Pius 2. says, small regard was had to the Church
of Rome before the Council of Nice. Bellarmine says, This is partly true, by
reason of the persecution of those ages, and partly false. Ans. But, if true,
we prove the matter of fact, and leave Bellarmine better to prove his Reason.
If it be false, then their own Historians are not to be believed, though worthy
to be Popes. And then what historical testimony will they believe?

Voluminously do their Historians mention the Opposition of the Greeks on one
side, and of the Emperors and Kings, and Divines, that were under the Popes
Patriarchal power; as Mich. Goldastus in abundance of Treatises has manifested.

I gave before the testimony of Reynerius, that the Churches planted by the
Apostles, were not under the Pope.

I shall once more recite the words of Melch. Canus, Loc. Theol. lib. 6. cap.
7. fol. 201. [Not only the Greeks, but almost all (N. B.) the rest of the
Bishops of the whole world, have vehemently fought to destroy the Privilege of
the Church of Rome: and indeed they had on their side, both the Arms of
Emperors, and the greater Number of Churches; and yet they could never prevail
to abrogate the Power of the One Pope of Rome.] By the Papists confession then
most of the Churches, and almost all the Bishops of the whole world, and the
Emperors and their Armies, have vehemently fought to abrogate the Popes power,
and destroy the Privileges of Rome.

Reynerius his testimony concerning the Antiquity of the Waldenses, as from
Pope Sylvesters days, if not the Apostles, has been often cited: Had they been
but from Gregory's days, it had been enough, when we have his own Testimony,
that no Bishop of Rome would own (to that time) that wicked, profane,
sacrilegious, foolish, blasphemous, dividing name of Universal Patriarch or
Bishop, which who ever holds to, destroys the faith.

Arg. 8. The next Argument should have been from the Historical Testimony of
the Ancients, that the Papal Sovereignty was then no part of the Churches
faith, nor owned by them. But here to produce the Testimonies of all ages,
would be to write a Volume in Folio, on this one Argument alone: For how can
the History of all Ages be so particularly delivered out of such a Multitude of
Books, but in a multitude of words?

And it is done already so fully, that I provoke the Papists to answer the
Catalogues and historical Evidence given in, if they can. If you ask where, I
will now only tell you of, 1. Blondell against Perron d^ Primatu in Ecclesia
(in French) that shows you the torrent of Antiquity against the Papal
Sovereignty. 2. Molinaeus (in French) de Novitate Papismi against the same
Perron. 3. Bishop Usher, de statu and successione Ecclesiarum, and his Answer
to the ^esuites challenge. 4. Dr. Field of the Church, who lib. 5. answers
Bellarmines allegations from all sort of Antiquity, which are their strength. I
pass by many others, some of which I have named in the foresaid 3. Dispute of
the safe Religion: where also I have produced more of this evidence then they
can answer. At least much more then you have returned me in your last Paper for
the contrary, to which I desire your answer: For its in vain to write one thing
so often.

I shall only instance in the current Testimony of their own Historians, of the
Beginning of their Universal Headship. Says Regino Chron. l. 1. An. 808. p.
13. [ Bonifacius obtinuit apud Phocam Principem, ut seeds Romana Caput esset
omnium Ecclesiarum: quia Ecclesia Constantin^p^litana primum se omnium
Ecclesiarum scribebat.]

Hermannus Contractus, An. M. 4550. p. 122. [ Hoc tempore Phocas Romanam
Ecclesiam omnium Ecclesi^rum Caput esse constituit: Nam Constantinop. primam se
esse scripsit.]

So Marianus Scotus in Phoc. [ Bonifacius P. 67. impetravit a Phoca Caesare ut
seeds Apostolica Romana Caput esset Ecclesiae, quum antea Constantinopolis
Primam omnium se scriberet.] The same has Sigebertus Gemblac. An. 607. p. 526.
And so Compilat. Chron. and many more.

Beneventus de Rambaldis Lib. Augustali, says p. 8. in Phoca [Phocas occi^^r
Manritii -- qui Primus constituit, Quod Ecclesia esset Caput omnium
Ecclesiarum: Cum prius Constantin. supremum se nominaret.] Mark here the [
Primus Constituit.] So Beda, P. Diaconus, Anastasius, Pomponius Laetus, etc.

And of the Novelty of their worship, says Platina in Gregor. 1. [What should
I say more of this holy man! whose whole institution of the Church office,
specially the old one, was invented and approved by him? which Order I would we
did follow: then Learned men would not at this day abhor the reading of the
Office -- ] So that here is all invented new by Gregory (which was hardly
received in Spain) and yet that changed since.

Arg. 9. If the Generality of Christians in the first ages, and many (if not
most) in the later ages, have been free from the Essentials of the Papists
faith, ^hen their faith has had no successive Visible Church professing it in
all ages; but the Christians that are against it have been Visible: But the
Antecedent is true: as I prove in some instances.

1. It is an Article of their faith determined in a General Council at Laterane
and Florence, that the Pope is above a Council: But that this has not been
successively received, the Council of Basil and Constance witness, making it a
new Heresy.

2. It is an Article of their faith, that a General Council is above the Pope:
for it is so determined at Basil and Constance: But that this has had no
successive duration, the Council of Laterane and Florence witness.

3. It is an Article of their faith, that the Pope may depose Princes for
denying Transubstantiation and such like Heresies, and also such as will not
exterminate such Heretics from their dominions, and may give their dominions
to others, and discharge their Subjects from their oaths and fidelity: For it
is determined so in a Council at Laterane: But this has not been so from the
beginning: Not when the 13. Chapter to the Romans was written: Not till the
days of Constantine: Not till the days of Gregory that spoke in contrary
language to Princes: And Goldastus his three Volumes of Antiquities show you,
that there has been many Churches still against it.

4. It is an Article of their faith, that the Body and Blood, together with the
Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, is truly, really, and substantially
in the Eucharist, and that there is a Change made of the whole substance of
Bread into the body, and of the whole substance of Wine into the blood, which
they call Transubstantiation.] So the Council of Trent: But the Catholic
Church has been of a contrary judgment from age to age, as among many others,
Edm. Albertinus de Eucharist. has plainly evinced (though a quarreller has
denied it and little more): And its proved, in that successively they judged
sense (and Reason by it) a competent discerner of Bread and Wine.

5. It is now de fide that the true Sacrament is rightly taken under one kind
(without the cup) as the Councils of Constance and Trent show. But the
Catholic Church has practiced, and the Apostles and the Church taught
otherwise, as the Council of Constance, and their Writers ordinarily confess.

6. It is an Article of their faith (as appears in the Trent Oath) that we must
never take and interpret Scripture, but according to the unanimous consent of
the Fathers]: But the Catholic Church before these Fathers could not be of
that mind: and the Fathers themselves are of a contrary mind: and so are many
learned Papists.

7. It is an Article of their faith, that there is a Purgatory, and that the
souls there detained are helped by the suffrages of the faithful. But the
latter was strange to all the old Catholic Church (as Bishop Usher and others
have proved) and the very being of Purgatory, was but a new, doubtful,
indifferent opinion of some very few men, about Augustines time.

8. It is now an Article of their faith, that [the holy Catholic Church of
Rome is the mother and mistress of all Churches.] But I have showed here and
elsewhere, that the Catholic Church judged otherwise, and so does for the most
part to this day.

9. It is now an Article of their faith, that their Traditions are to be
received with equal pious affection and reverence as the holy Scripture. But
the Catholic Church did never so believe.

10. The Council of Basil made it de fide, that the Virgin Mary was conceived
without Original sin: But the Catholic Church never judged so.

11. Its determined by a Council now, that the people may not read the
Scripture in a known tongue without the Popes License: But the Catholic Church
never so thought, as I have proved, Disp. 3. of the safe Religion.

12. The Books of Maccabees and others are now taken into the Canon of faith,
which the Catholic Church received not as such: as Dr. Cousin, and Dr.
Reignolds have fully proved.

To this I might add the Novelty of their Worship and Discipline; but it would
be too tedious: and I have said enough of these in other writings. See Dr.
Challoner, page 88, 89.

In 16. points Dr. Challoner proves your Novelty from your Confessions. Indeed
his Book de Eccles. Cath. though small, is a full answer to your main Question.

Arg. 10. If Multitudes (yea the far greatest part) of Christians in all ages
have been ignorant of Popery, but not of Christianity; then has there been a
succession of Visible Professors of Christianity that were no Papists: but the
antecedent is true: therefore so is the consequent.

In this age it is an apparent thing, that the far greatest part are ignorant
of formal Popery. 1. They confess themselves that the common people, and most
of the nobility of Habassia, Armenia, Greece, Russia, and most other Eastern
Churches that are not Papists, are ignorant of the Controversy. 2. They use to
tell us here among Protestants, that there is not one of many that know what a
Papist is. 3. We know that of those that go under the name of Papists, there is
not one of a multitude knows. We hear it from the mouths of those we speak
with: I have not met with one of ten of the poorer sort of them, even here
among us, that knows what a Papist or Popery is; but they are taught to
follow their Priests, and to say that theirs is the true Church and old
Religion, and to use their Ceremonious worship, and to forbear coming to our
Churches, etc. and this is their Religion. And in Ireland they are yet far more
ignorant: And its well known to be so in other parts: Their Priests they know,
and the Pope they hear of, as some person of eminent Power in the Church: But
whether he be the Universal Vicar of Christ, and be over all others as well as
them and whether this be of Gods institution, or by the grant of Emperors or
Councils, etc. they know not. And no wonder, when the Papists think that the
Council of Chalcedon spoke falsely of the humane Original of the Primacy in the
Imperial territories: And when the Councils of Basil and Constance knew not
whether Pope or Council was the Head.

And that the people were as ignorant and much more in former ages, they
testify themselves: And before Gregory's days they must needs be ignorant of
that which was not then risen in the world.

Yea Dr. Field has largely proved, Append. lib. 3. that even the many
particular points in which the Papists now differ from us, were but the
opinions of a faction among them before Luther: and that the Western Church
before Luther was Protestant, even in those particular Controversies; though
this is a thing that we need not prove. And as Dr. Potter tells them, page 68.
[The Roman Doctors do not fully and absolutely agree in any one point among
themselves, but only in such points wherein they agree with us: In the other
disputed between us, they differ one from another as much almost as they differ
from us.] He appeals for this to Bellarmines Tomes. Though I cannot undertake
to make this good in every point, yet that proper Popery was held but by a
Faction in the Western Church, even at its height before Luther, is easily made
good.

He that reads but the Writers before Luther, and in History notes the
desires of Emperors, Kings, and Universities, and Bishops, for Reformation of
the things that we have reformed, may soon see this to be very true. It was
Avitas Leges and consuetudines Angliae (as Rog. Hoved^n and Matthew. Paris in H.
2. show) that the Pope here damned, and anathematized all that favored and
observed them (O tender Father, even to Kings! O enemy of Novelties!) The
German History collected by Reuberus, Pistorus, Freherus and Goldastus, shows
it as p^ain as day light, that a Papal Faction by fury and turbulency, kept
under the far greater part of the Church by force, that indeed dissented from
them, even from Hildebrands days till Luthers, or near. Says the Apologia
Henrici 4. Imperat. in M. Fr^heri Tom. 1. p. 178. [Behold Pope Hildebrands
Bishops, when doubtless they are murderers of Souls and bodies -- such as
deservedly are called the Synagogue of Satan -- yet they write, that on his and
on their side (or party) is the holy Mother Church: When the Catholic, that
is, the Universal Church, is not in the Schism of any side, (or parties) but in
the Universality of the faithful agreeing together by the spirit of Peace and
Charity.]

And p. 179. [See how this Minister of the Devil is beside himself, and would
draw us with him into the ditch of perdition? that writes that Gods holy
Priesthood is with only 13. or few more Bishops of Hildebrands: and that the
Priesthood of all the rest through the world are separated from the Church of
God: when certainly, not only the testimony of Gregory and Innocent, but the
judgment of all the holy Fathers agree with that of Cyprian -- that he is an
Alien, profane, an enemy; that he cannot have God for his Father, that holds
not the Unity of the Church: which he after describes to have one Priesthood.]
Et p. 181. [But some that go out from us say and write, that they defend the
party of their Gregory: not the Whole, which is Christ's, which is the Catholic
Church of Christ.] And p. 180. [But our Adversaries (that went from us, not we
from them) use thus to commend themselves -- We are the Catholics, we are in
the Unity of the Church.] So the Writer calls them Catholics, and us that hold
the faith of the holy Fathers, that consent with all good men, that love peace
and brotherhood, -- us he calls Schismatics and Heretics, and Excommunicate,
because we resist not the King -- ] And p. 181. [ Isidore says, Etym. l. 8.
The Church is called Catholic, because it is not as the conventicles of
Heretics, confined in certain countries, but diffused through the whole world:
therefore they have not the Catholic faith that are in a part, and not in the
Whole which Christ has redeemed, and must reign with Christ.] They that
confess in the Creed, that they believe the holy Catholic Church, and being
divided into parties hold not the Unity of the Church: which Unity, believers
being of one heart and one soul, properly belongs to the Catholic Church.] So
this Apol.

One Objection I must here remove, which is all and n^thing: viz. That the
Armenians, Greeks, Georgians, Abassines, and many others here named, differ
from Protestants in many points of faith; and therefore they cannot be of the
same Church.

Ans. 1. They differ in nothing Essential to our Church or Religion, nor near
the Essence. 2. Protestants differ in some lesser points, and yet you call them
all Protestants your selves. 3. I prove undeniably from your own pens, that men
differing in matters of faith, are all taken to be of your Church, and so of
one Church, (and therefore you contradict your selves in making all points of
faith to be Essentials of the Christian Religion or Church.)

1. The Council of Basil and Constance differed de fide with the Pop^ and the
Council of Laterane and Florence: They expressly affirm their doctrine to be de
fide, that the Council is above the Pope, and may depose him, etc. and the
contrary Heresy. And Pighius ( Hierarch. Eccles. lib. 6.) says, that these
Councils went [against the undoubted faith and judgment of the Orthodox Church
it self.]

2. Their Saint Tho. Aquinas, and most of their Doctors with him, differ from
the second Council of Nice, in holding the Cross and Image of Christ to be
worshipped with Latria, which that Council determined against.

See more Arguments in my Key for Cath. p. 127* 128. and after.

I will now add a Testimony sufficient to silence Papists in this point: and
that is, The Determination of the Theological faculty of Paris under their
great Seal, against one Johan. de Montesono ordinis Praedic. as you may find it
after the rest of the Errors rejected by that University, in the end of
Lombard, printed at Paris 1557. page 426. Their 3. Conclusion is, that [Saint
Thom. Aquin. doctrine is not so approved by the Church, as that we must believe
that it is in no part of it erroneous de fide (in matter of faith) or
heretical. They prove it, because it has many contradictions, even in matter
of faith; and therefore they ought not to believe it not heretical. Here fol.
426, 427. they give six examples of his contradictions: and therefore they
conclude, that though he were no Heretic (because not pertinacious) yet they
ought not to believe that his doctrine was in no part heretical, or erroneous
in the faith. They further argue thus [If we must believe his doctrine not
heretical, etc. this should be chiefly, because it is approved by the Church.
But there is some doctrine much more approved by the Church then the doctrine
of S. Tho. which yet is in some part of it heretical or erroneous in the
faith: therefore -- The Minor they prove by many examples. The first is of
Peter's doctrine, Gal. 2. (I own not this by citing it:) The second is of
Cyprian. The third of Hierom; and they add, that the same may be said of
Augustine, and many more approved Doctors. The fourth example is Lombard
himself, who they say has somewhat erroneous in the faith. The fifth is
Gratian, who had he pertinaciously adhered to his doctrine, they say, had been
a manifest Heretic: And (say they) some say the like of the Ordinary Glosses
of the Bible, which yet seem of greater authority then Aquinas. The sixth
example is of some not Canonized Saints, as Anselm. Cantuar. Hugo de Sancto
Victore, and others, as authentic as S. Thomas.] [And (say they) his
Canonization, hinders not, which some pretend as of great color -- To say
that S. Tho. in some part of his doctrine erred in faith, derogates not from
his Canonization, nor from the approbation of his Theological doctrine: even
as to say this of other Saints and chief Doctors derogateth not from their
Canonization or approbation. For as the Church by Canonizing one a Saint, does
not thereby approve all his Deeds, so in approving his doctrine, it does not
hereby approve all his sayings or writings, but only that which is not
retracted by himself, or corrected by another, or deservedly to be corrected as
contrary to truth.

And now when Fathers, even the chief, and your Saints and highest Doctors have
this Testimony from the famous University of Paris, to have somewhat heretical
or erroneous in the faith (and so who among you is free?) I leave it to modesty
to judge, whether the Greeks, Armenians, etc. and we, are not of one Faith,
Religion, and Catholic Church, for all our differences in some points! Have
you had all these Nations man by man before your bar, and convinced them of
pertinaciousness in heresy? If not, call them not Heretics till you are
willing to be called such your selves, and that by your selves.

And thus I have evinced, 1. That the Church of which the Protestants are
Members, has been Visible since the days of Christ on earth. 2. And ex
abundanti, that the Papal Church as Papal has not been visible, and that
Christian Churches without Papal Sovereignty have been Visible since Gregory's
days, and the whole Catholic Church was such before. And you see both in the
Essentialls, and in the freedom from the Romish Vice-Christ, where our Church
has been before Luther, even since Christ.

Sir, I have performed this task on this supposed condition, that you will now
do the like as to your own Church; and send me in solid Arguments your proof of
this Thesis.

[ The Church of which the Subjects of the Pope are Members, has been Visible
ever since the days of Christ on earth.]

Where note, that it is not the Visibility of your Church as Christian, United
in Christ the Head, that is in Question: We grant, as Christians, all of you
are of the true Christian Church that destroy not your Christianity: But it is
your new Church form, as Papal, that we question, and renounce. Protestants are
of no Church but the Christian united in Christ: The name Protestant signifies
not any essential of their Church, but their Rejection of your Church as
Headed by the Pope: You are therefore to prove that your Catholic Church as
Headed by the Pope has been visible in all ages.

And here I must in Justice expect, that you give us such a Definition as you
will stand to through the dispute, 1. Of [the Church] 2. Of [the Pope] and 3.
[Of the Subjects of the Pope] or [Papists.] The term [Roman Catholicks] would
but divert and elude: For it is not as [Romane] that we oppose you, that is, as
inhabitants of Rome, or as subject to him as a Bishop of Rome: Nor is it as
[Catholicks] that is, as of the Universal Christian Church: but as [Papists]
that is, [subjects of the Pope as universal Sovereign, or Bishop.] To dispute
of terms not agreed on, is lost labor: Define first, or you do nothing. I find
of your Writers, some by the [Church] mean [the Pope] as Gretser Defens. cap.
10. lib. 3. de Verbo Dei, page 1450, 1451. [By the Church (says he) we mean
the Pope of Rome] and [ per Ecclesiam Papam interpretantur: Non abnuo.] Some by
[the Church] mean [a Council] and what they mean by [a Council] I know not
well. And some mean [the Roman Clergy] i. e. of that Diocese: And some mean
[all the Clergy under the Pope:] And some mean [all the people that are his
subjects.] I have given you the Reason of my doubting of your meaning in these
terms, in a Book come out of the Press since your last to me, where I have
answered most of yours.

2. Let me desire of you such proofs as in your own judgment are cogent. I
suppose (as I have there told you, Key page 41. cap. 12.) that none of you will
take either Sense, Reason, Scripture, the Tradition or judgment of most of the
Church for a sufficient proof: but yet we will accept of them, when you argue
but ad hominem: for we renounce them not. I think what ever you say, that is
not the Determination of the Pope or a Council by him approved (which is all
one) you will give us leave to judge that you are uncertain your selves whether
you say true in it, if de fide. Says Skul. Revius Apol. pro Bell^rm. c. 6. p.
255. The Popes Power is as the hinge, the foundation, and (that I may
comprehend all in a word) the sum of the Christian faith.

Greg. Valent. Anal. fid. l. 8. c. 7. [The Authority that resideth in the Pope
alone, is called the Authority of the Church and Councils.

[ Bell^r. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 3. [It is apparent that the whole firmness
(or strength) of Councils is from the Pope; not partly of the Pope, and partly
of the Council.] Binnius Vol. 2. p. 515. says [Every Council has just so much
strength and authority, as the Apostolic seat bestows on it.] But I leave
you to give us your own judgment.

Your Testimonies from Fathers can seem of no great weight to us, while you so
slight them your selves as commonly you do: with what lies, or Errors, or other
incompetency, you charge Justin Mart. Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, Victorinus,
Cyprian, Eusebius, Epiphanius, Prudentius, Hierom, Lactantius, Augustine,
Procopius, Theodoret, Isidore, Euthymius, Sozomen, Oecumenius, Bernard, and all
the Fathers, see Dr. James Corrupt. of Fath. Part. 4. p. 2, 3. Tell us
therefore how far you credit them.

Sir if you refuse thus first to explain your terms, and then prove the
Visibility of your Church, as Papal, successively, as I have proved the
Visibility of the Church that I am of, I shall be forced to conclude, that you
love not the light, but at once give up your cause, and the reputation of your
impartial Love of truth.

Addenda Miscellanea.
Council. Ephesians. 1. in Epistola ad Nestor. Tom. 1 fol. 315. ed. Pet. Crab.
[Petrus and Johannes aequalis sunt ad alterutrum dignitatis.]

Comment. in epist Synodal. Basil. p. 31. and p. 40. Impress. Colon. 1613.
says that [The Provinces subject to the four great Patriarchs from the
beginning of the Christian Church, did know no other supreme but their own
Patriarcks -- And if the Pope be a Patriarck, it is by the Church; If he be
Head of all Churches, it is by the Church. And whereas we have said that it is
expressed in the Council of Nice, that many Princes were subjected to the
Church of Rome by Ecclesiastical custom, and no other right; the Synod should
do the greatest injury to the Bishop of Rome, if it should attribute those
things to him only from custom, which were his due by Divine Right.] This
Citation I take from Bishop Bromhall, having not seen the Book my self.

The Popish Bishop of Calced^n, Survey cap. 5. [To us it suffices that the
Bishop of Rome is Saint Peter's successor; and this all the Fathers testify,
and all the Catholic Church believes: but whether it be jure divino, or
humano, is no point of Faith.] An ingenuous Confession destroying Popery.

See Aubert Miraeus notitia Episcopat. where in the ancient Notit. and
Leunclavius record of Leo Philos. Impera. There are none of the Abassine, or
other extramperial Nations under the old Patriarcks. Cassander Epist. 37. D.
Ximenio ( operum p. 1132.) says of that learned pious Bishop of Valentia
Monlucius, (so highly commended by Thuanus and other learned men) that he said,
Si sibi permittatur in his tribus capitibus [viz. forma publicarum precum, de
ritibus Baptismi, de forma Eucharistiae, sive Missae) Christianam formam ad
normam priscae Ecclesiae Institutam legi, con^idere se quod ex quinquaginta
mill. quos habet in sua Dioecesi a praesenti disciplina Ecclesiae diversos,
quauraginta millia ad Ecclesiasticam uni^n^m sit reducturus] That is, If he had
but leave in these three heads (the form of public Prayers, of the rites of
Baptism, and the form of the Eucharist or the Mass) to follow the Christian
form Instituted according to the rule of the Ancient Church, he was confident
that of fifty thousand that he had in his Diocese that differed from the
present discipline of the Church, he should reduce forty thousand to
Ecclesiastical union.] By this testimony it is plain that the Church of Rome
has forsaken the ancient Discipline and Worship of the Church by Innovation;
and that the Protestants desire the restitution of it, and would be satisfied
therewith, but cannot obtain it at the Papists hands.

So Cass^nder himself, Epist. 42 p. 1138. [I would not despair of moderation,
if they that hold the Church possessions would remove some intolerable abuses,
and would restore at tolerable form of the Church, according to the prescript
of the Word of God, and of the ancient Church, especially that which flourished
for some ages after Constantine, when liberty was restored: which if they will
not do, and that betime, there is danger they may in many places be cast out of
their possessions.] Still you see Rome is the Innovator; and it is Restitution
of the ancient Church-form that would have quieted the Protestans, which could
never be obtained.

So again more plainly, Epist. 45. p. 1141.

Whether Heretics are in the Church.
When I came to London, I enquired after Mr. Johnson, to know whether I might
at all expect any Answer to the foregoing Papers, or not: And at last instead
of an Answer, I received only these ensuing lines.

Page 5. part 1. You say, I reply first, had not you despaired of making good
your cause, you should have gone by argumentation, till you had forced me to
contradict some common principle.

Now I have by Argumentation, forced you to this, if you will maintain what
after you seem to assert in diverse passages, (viz.) That Heretics are true
parts of Christ's Catholic Church; for thus you write p. 11. Some are called
Heretics for denying points essential to Christianity; those are no
Christians, and so not in the Church; but many also are called Heretics by
you, and by the Fathers for lesser Errors consistent with Christianity; And
these may be in the Church: And p. 12. you answer thus to your adversary:
Whereas you say it is against all antiquity and Christianity to admit condemned
Heretics into the Church; I reply first, I hate their condemnation, rather
then reverence it; where you saying nothing against their admittance into the
Church, seem to grant it.

I therefore humbly entreat you to declare your opinion more fully in this
question; Whether any professed Heretics, properly so called, are true parts
of the universal visible Church of Christ; so that they compose one universal
Church with the other visible parts of it.

Iunii 6to. William Johnson.


The Answer.
ANsw. My words are plain, and distinctly answer your question, so that I know
not what more is needful for the explication of my sense; Unless you would call
us back from the Thing to the mere Name, by your [properly so called,] you are
answered already. But I would speak as plainly as I can, and if it be possible
for me to be understood by you, I shall do my part.

1. It is supposed that you and I are not agreed What the Universal visible
Church it self is, while you take the Pope, or any mere humane Head to be an
essential part; which is an assertion that with much abhorrence I deny. You
think each member of that Church must necessarily ad esse, be a subject of the
Pope; and I think it enough that he be a subject of Christ; and to his orderly
and well-being, that he hold local Communion with the parts within the reach of
his capacity, and be subject to the Pastors that are set over him; maintaining
due association with and charity to the rest of the more distinct members, as
he is capable of communion with them at that distance. So that when I have
proved a person to be a member of the Catholic Church, it is not your
Catholic Church that I mean: No ^ound Christian is a member of yours; it is
Heretics (in the softer sense) that are its matter. Its necessary therefore
that we first agree of the Definition of the Catholic Church, before we
dispute who is in it.

2. Your word [Properly so called] is ambiguous; referring either to the
Etymology, or to some definition in an authentic Canon; or to custom and
common speech. Of the first, we have no reason now to enter controversy: For
the second, I know no such stablisht Definition that we are agreed on: For the
third, custom is so variable here, not agreeing with it self, that what is to
be denominated Proper or Improper from it, is not to be well conjectured.
However all this is but de nomine; and What is the proper, and What the
improper use of the word Heretic, is no Article of Faith, nor necessary for
our debate. Therefore again you must accept of my distinguishing, and give me
leave to fly confusion.

1. The word [Heretick] is either spoken of one that corrupts the Doctrine of
Faith (as such), or of one that upon some difference of Opinion, or some
personal quarrels, withdraws from the Communion of those particular Churches
that before he held communion with, and gathers a separated party: such are
most usually called Schismatics; but of o^d, the name [Hereticks] was often
applied unto such.

2. The word [Heretick] in the first sense, is either spoken of one that
(professing the rest) denies some one or more essential Articles of the Faith,
or parts of Christianity; or one that only denies not what is necessary to the
Being, but to the Integrality or sober and better-being of a Christian.

3. Heretics are either convict and condemned, or such as never were tried and
judged.

4. Heretics condemned, are either condemned by their proper Pastors, or by
others.

5. If by others, either by Usurpers, or by mere equal neighbor consociate
Pastors.

6. They are condemned either j^stly cl^ve non errante, or unjustly clave
errante.

7. They are either judged to be materially, as to the quality of their error,
Heretics; or also formally as obstinate, impenitent and habitually stated
Heretics.

Upon these necessary distinctions, I answer your Question in these
Propositions.

Prop. 1. As the word [Hereticks] signifies Schismatics as such, so Heretics
with drawing from some parts of the universal Church only, may yet be parts of
the who^e (even with those parts from which they separate). If they say [You
are no parts, and therefore we disown you, and will have no Communion with you]
this makes neither cease to be parts] and while both own the Head and the Body
as such, they have an union in tertio, and so a communion in the principal
respects, while they peevishly disclaim it in other respects. Besides that the
local or particular Communion, is it that is proper to members of a particular
Church, and therefore the renouncing it only separates him from that Church.
But it is the general Communion that belongs to us as members of the Church
Universal, which may be still continued. But should any renounce the Body of
Christ as such, and separate (not from this or that Church, but) from the
whole, or from the Church Universal as such, this man would be no member of the
Church.

Prop. 2. As the word [Heretick] is taken for one that denies any thing
essential to Christianity; so an Heretic, if latent, is out of the Church Deo
judice, as to the invisible part, or soul of the Church, (as Bellarmine calls
it) as a latent Infidel is; but he may be (if latent) in the outward communion,
or (as Bellarmine calls him) a dead member, that properly is none; as the straw
and chafe are in the cornfield.

Prop. 3. Such an Heretic convict and judged by the Pastors of that particular
Church, of which he is a subject-member, is accordingly to be avoided, and in
foro illius Ecclesiae, is so far cast out of that Church, as the sentence
imports.

Prop. 4. Such an Heretic, if he be a Pastor of one Church, and be convict and
condemned by the consociate coequal Pastors of the neighbor Churches, is
accordingly cast out from communion of all the Churches, of which they are
Pastors.

Prop. 5. So far as any Christians through the world have sufficient proof or
cognizance of the said conviction and condemnation, they are all bound
accordingly to esteem the condemned Heretic, and avoid him.

Prop 6. If [Heresie] be taken for the obstinate, impenitent resisting or
rejecting of any point of Faith (that is, of Divine Revelation) which is made
so plain to the person, that nothing but a wicked will could cause such
resistance or rejection, such persons being justly convicted and condemned as
aforesaid, are to be taken as persons condemned for obstinacy and impenitency
in any other sin; and are out of the Church, as far as a man condemned for
impenitency in drunkenness or fornication is.

Prop. 7. Heresy taken in this softer sense (for the denial of a truth of
Divine revelation, not essential to the Christian Religion, or necessary to the
Being of a Christian) excludes no man from the Church of it self, unless they
are legally convict of wicked Impenitency and obstinacy in defending it.

Prop. 8. A sentence passed in alieno foro, by an Usurper that has no true
Authority thereto, proves no man an Heretic.

Prop. 9. A sentence passed by an Authorized Pastor, (or by many) if it be
notoriously unjust, clave errante, proves no man an Heretic, or out of the
Universal Church.

Prop. 10. A sentence passed by one Church, or many consociate, binds none to
take the condemned person to be an Heretic, and out of the Universal Church,
but those that have sufficient notice of the Authority of the Judges, and
validity of the Evidence, or a ground of violent presumption (as its called)
that the sentence is just.

Prop. 11. He that is sentenced an Heretic or Impenitent by the Pastors of
some Churches, and acquit by the equally-authorized Pastors of other Churches,
is not eo nomine to be condemned or acquit by a third Church, but used as the
evidence requires.

Prop. 12. There is an actual excommunication pro medela and pro tempore, due
for an actual, willful defense of error, or for other willful sin; which
statedly puts not a man out of the Church; as there is an excommunication a
statu and Relatione, which is due for stated habitual or obstinate impenitency
in that or other great or known sin.

Having thus distinctly told you my judgment how far Heretics are, or are not
in or out of the universal Church, I add in order to the application: 1. That
this whole debate is nothing to the great difference between you and us, it
being not de fide in your own account, but a dogma theologicum, which you
differ about among your selves: Bellarmine tells you Alphonsus a Castro
maintains that Heretics are in the Church (de Eccles. l. 3. c. 4.) And he
himself says that haeretici pertinent ad Ecclesiam ut oves ad ovile unde
confugerunt, ibid. c. 4. so that they are oves still, and if it be but ovile
particulare (veluti Romanum) that they fly from, and not the Universal, that
proves them not out of the Universal Church. And Bellarmine says of the
Catechumen. and Excommunicatis, that they are de anima, et si non de corpore
Ecclesiae, ib. c. 2. and may be saved, cap. 6. And the anima Ecclesiae is not
incorporated in the world without: All that have that soul, are of that Church
which Christ (that animateth his members) is the head of. Which made Melchior
Canus ( fatente Bellarmino de Eccl. l. 3. c. 3.) confess the being of that
which indeed is the true Catholic Church, saying of the Unbaptized Believers,
that [ sunt de Ecclesia quae comprehendit omnes fideles ab Abel usque ad
consummationem mundi.]

2. Many Popes have been condemned for Heretics, even by General Councils, as
not only Henorius (by two or three) but Eugenius by the Council of Basil, when
yet he kept his place, and the rest come in as his successors. And your writers
frequently confess that a Pope may be an Heretic (as Pope Adrian himself
affirms.) Now if these are not of the Church, then they are not Heads of the
Church, and then being essential parts of your Church, it follows that your
Church is heretical and unchurched with them. But if these Popes may be in the
Church (and Heads of yours) while Heretics, then so may others.

3. Its commonly said by others (of yours) as well as Bellarmine, that the
Councils were misinformed about Honorius, (and the Popes that consented to
those Councils) and so that he was not a Heretic nor out of the Church: Also
that a Pope may err in matter of fact, and unjustly excommunicate. If so, a
Pope and Council may err about another, as well as about Honorius or other
Popes; and therefore their sentence be no proof that such are out of the
Church, no more then that he and Eugenius were out.

4. As the Pope and his Synods condemn the Greek, so the Greeks condemn and
excommunicate you; as formerly the Patriarch of Constantinople, and the Pope
have excommunicated each other. I am therefore no more bound to take them for
excommunicate persons, than you, they having as much authority over you as you
over them, and their witness being to us as credible as yours.

5. The Abassines, Armenians, Greeks, etc. are not proved to deny any essential
point of the Christian Religion, or which is necessary to the Being of a
Christian or Church.

6. Nor are they proved to be willful, obstinate and impenitent in defending
any errors, with a wicked mind; and so to be formally Heretics in your own
sense.

7. They are large Nations, and millions of souls, and their Pastors numerous,
so that its impossible they should be all legally by you convicted. They never
spoke for themselves, nor were witnesses heard against them. Noxa caput
sequitur. Guilt of Heresy is to be proved of each individual whom you condemn.
If a few Bishops were Heretics, or a Prince were such, that proves not that
the rest, and all the Pastors, or people, even to many mill^ons are such. Or if
half had been such in former ages, that proves not that half or any are such
now. Christ never appointed the excommunicating of millions for the sakes of a
few of their Rulers, nor of whole Nations unheard; but of single persons upon a
just and equal trial. If therefore your Pope, or any of his Councils, (which
you falsely call General) do excommunicate or condemn Habassia, Armenia,
Georgia, Syria, and other Na^ions as Heretics, it is so far from unchurching
them, or proving them such, as that it is one of the greatest sins that can be
committed by the sons of men, with inhumane injustice, cruelty, pride and
arrogance, presuming to pass a damning sentence on so many millions of souls,
whose faces you never saw, nor were ever called to a legal trial.

8. Your own writers ordinarily acquit the Greeks from Heresy; and those of
them that have traveled to other Countries, as Syria, etc. acquit most of
them, as I have proved in former writings out of their own words (not needful
therefore here to be recited, when you may see any writings.]

9. Your Pope (and Bishops) is none of their authorized Pastor, and therefore
has no power as such to judge them. And as neighbor Churches they have as
much to do to judge you as you to judge them. Therefore they are never the more
out of the Church for your judgment, any more than you for theirs.

10. There are as many and as great errors proved by them to be in your Church
as is by you to be in theirs: so that (in sum) your cause being much worse, and
your censure of them proving you guilty of such inhumane cruelty, injustice,
arrogance, usurpation, etc. by condemning them, you go much nearer to prove
your selves no Christians and no Church than them.

11. And yet I think the far greatest part of them (many thousands to one) are
not actually excommunicated or condemned by any pretended sentence of your own,
whatever your writers may say of them, and whatever one Council might say of
some few in some one age.

12. Lastly, It can be no matter of certainty to you your self, or any of you,
that these Nations or Churches are Heretics, both because it is a thing that
none of your approved Councils have determined of, as to any person now living,
nor to any considerable number comparatively, in other ages; and also because
you confess your Pope and Councils fallible in these cases, of fact and
personal application. You cannot therefore build upon such acknowledged
uncertainties.

BUt Sir, having thus answered your demand, I must ask you, what is all this to
the Answer of my last Papers, which I have now near a year expected from you? I
suspected some such ^ergiversation, when I took the boldness to urge you so
hard to the tasks that you were reasonably engaged to perform, viz. 1. To prove
by close Argumentation, the nullity of our Churches, as you begun in your first
Argument. 2. To answer my proofs of our successive visibility. 3. To prove your
own successive visibility in all ages since Christ, as I have proved ours. I do
therefore once more urge you speedily to do this, assuring you that else I must
take it for an open deserting of your Cause.

But yet I must add, that if you will please to dispute the main cause in
difference between us, upon equal terms; we have yet other Questions in which
we differ, that are lower then these, and nearer the foundation. Besides the
forementioned work therefore, I desire, that you will dispute the main Cause,
in two distinct disputations, in one of which be you the Opponent, and bring
your strongest Arguments against the Reformed Churches and Religion; and in the
other I will be Opponent and argue against Popery; in the beginning agreeing
upon the sense of those terms that we are like to have greatest use of through
our disputation. If you will but let us meet, and state our sense of such
terms, before I return into the Country, that we may the better manage it after
at a distance, it will be worth our labor: And for verbal dispute, I shall at
any fit time and place most cheerfully entertain it, if so many doubting
persons may be present, as that it may be worth our labor. In the mean time I
pray pardon it, if the roughness of any passages discover the frailty of

Your Servant, R. Baxter.
June 7. 1660.
Mr. Iohnsons EXPLICATION OF Some of the most used TERMS: WITH QUERIES
Thereupon: And his ANSWER: And my REPLY.

LONDON, Printed, 1660.

AFter the writing of the foregoing Paper, I again urged Mr. Johnson to the
speedy answering my Papers: Of which when he gave me no hope, I committed them
to the Press. But afterward, he seemed more inclinable both to that, and to a
Verbal conference: And in order to both, (if we had opportunity) I desired him
first that we might agree on the sense of those terms that are like to be most
used in the substance of our Controversy; promising him that I will give him
my sense of any term, when he shall desire it; and accordingly he explained his
sense of many of them as follows.

Queries of R. B. on these definitions, with Mr. Iohnsons Answer, and my Reply.
Mr. J. The Catholic Church of Christ. THE Catholic Church of Christ is all
those visible Assemblies, Congregations, or Communities of Christians, who live
in unity of true faith, and external communion one with another, and in
dependence of their lawful Pastors.


R. B. Of the Church. Qu. 1. Whether you exclude not all those converted among
Infidels, that never had external Communion with, nor were members of any
particular visible Church, of which you m^ke the Catholic to be constituted?


Mr. J. Answ. It is sufficient that such be subject to the supreme Pastor, and
in voto, quantum in se est, resolved to be of that particular Church actually,
which shall, or may be assigned for them by that Pastor, to be included in my
definition.


R. B. Reply. Q 1. Repl. ad 1m 1. You see then that your Definitions signify
nothing: no man can know your meaning by them. First you make the Catholic
Church to consist only of visible Assemblies: and after you allow such to be
members of the Church that are of no visible Assemblies 2. You now mention
subjection to the supreme Pastor as sufficient, which in your description or
definition you did not. 3. If to be only in voto resolved to be of a particular
Church will serve, then inexistence is not necessary. To be only in voto of the
Catholic Church, proves no man a member of the Catholic Church, but proves
the contrary, because it is Terminus diminuens. Seeing then by your own
confession, inexistence in a particular Church is not of necessity to
inexistence in the Catholic Church; why do you not only mention it in your
definition, but confine the Church to such? will you say you meant in voto? who
then can understand you, when you say they must be of visible Assemblies, and
mean, they need not be of any, but only to wish, desire or purpose it? 4. But
yet you say nothing to my case in its latitude. Many a one may be converted to
Christ by a solitary Preacher, or by two or three, that never tell him that
there is any supreme Pastor in the world: How then can he be subject to that
supposed Pastor, that never heard of him? The English and Dutch convert many
Indians to the faith of Christ, that never hear of a supreme Pastor. 5. If it
be necessary that a particular Church must be assigned for such members by the
supreme Pastor, then they are yet little the better that never have any such
assignation from him (as few have*)


R. B. Qu. 2. What is that faith in unity whereof all members of the Catholic
Church do live? is it the belief of all that God has revealed to be believed;
or of part? and what part?


Mr. J. Answ. Of all; either explicitly, or implicitly.


R. B. Reply. Reply, Ad 2m. Your second answer further proves that your
definitions signify just nothing. They must live in unity of the faith: that
is, either with faith or without it: with a belief of what Go^ has revealed to
be believed, or without it. For to believe any point implicitly, in your
ordinary sense, is not to believe it, but only to believe one of the Premises,
whence the conclusion must be inferred. But why do you not tell me what you
mean by [ an Implicit faith]? Faith is called Implicit in several senses. 1.
When several truths are actually understood and believed in confuso, or in
gross, in some one proposition which contains the substance of them all; but
not with accurate distinct conceptions, nor such as are ripe for any fit
expression: This indistinct, immature, imperfect kind of apprehension may be
called Implicit; and the distinct and more digested conceptions Explicit. 2.
When a general proposition is believed as the matter of our faith, but the
particulars are not understood or not believed: As to believe that omne animal
vivit, not knowing whether you are Animal or Cadaver. Or to believe that [all
that is in the Scripture is the Word of God and true,] but not to know [what is
in the Scripture]. 3. When it is only the formal object of faith that is
believed, without understanding the material object.

The first sort of these, I confess, is Actual Belief, though indistinct: But I
suppose you mean not this. 1. Because it is not the ordinary sense of your
party. 2. Because else you damn either all the world, or most of your own
professed-party at least as no members of the Church: for few or none have an
Actual understanding and belief of all that ever God revealed to them; because
all men (or most at least) have been sinfully negligent in searching after, and
receiving truth; and so are sinfully ignorant: No man knows all that God has
revealed, or that he ought to know. 3. Because by this rule it is impossible
for you or any man to know who is indeed a member of your Church; for you
cannot know men's confused knowledge, or know that it extends to all revealed:
For if you speak of all revealed in general, or in Scripture, you still damn
all, (or most in your own sense) for none, as I said, understand it all to a
word: But if you speak of all which that particular man has had sufficient
means to know, it is then impossible for you to make a judgment of any man's
faith by this: For you can never discern all the means (internal or external)
that ever he had; much less can you discern whether his faith be commensurate
to the truth so far revealed. So that by this course you make your Church
invisible. I pray tell me how you can avoid it?

2. The second sort of Implicit Belief, is no Belief of the particulars at
all. An Animal may live, and yet it follows not that you are alive or an
animal. If this were your meaning, then either you mean [that it is enough if
all be believed Implicitly besides that general proposition]; or you mean that
some must be believed explicitly (that is actually) and some Implicitly, (that
is, not at all). If the former be your sense, then Infidels or Heathens may be
of your Church. For a man may believe in general that [the Bible is the Word of
God and true] and yet not know a word that's in it; and so not know that Christ
is the Messiah, or that ever there was such a person. But if somewhat must be
explicitly (that is, Actually) believed, the Question that you should have
answered was, [What is it?] For till that be known, no man can know a Member of
your Church by your description.

3. If you take [ Implicite] in the third sense, then Implicit faith is either
Divine or Humane. Divine, when the Divine Veracity is the formal Object.
Humane, when man's Veracity is the formal Object. Which may be Conjunct where
the Testimonies are so conjunct, as that we are sure it is God that speaks by
man; who is therefore credible because God infallibly guides or inspireth him:
This is at once to believe a Humane and Divine Veracity. If any of this be your
meaning, the last questions remain still to be resolved by you. A man may
believe that [ God is true,] and that [his Prophets or inspired messengers are
true] and yet not understand a word of the message: so that still if this will
serve, a man may be of your Church that knows not that ever there was such a
person as Jesus Christ, or that ever he died for our sins, or rose again, or
that we shall rise. And are Infidels of your Church while you are arguing us
out? But if there be some truths besides the Veracity of God (and his
Messengers) that must be believed, you must show what it is, or your
Church Members cannot be known. Tell me therefore without tergiversation, [what
are the revealed truths that must actually be believed] or [what is the faith
materially, in unity whereof all members of the Catholic Church do live?] I
pray fly not, but plainly tell me.

And if again you fly to uncertain points, because of the diversity of means of
information, and say, [It must be so much to every man as he had means to know]
I again answer you. 1. If a man had no means to know that there is a Christ, it
seems then he is one of your Church. 2. You still damn all your own, there
being not a man that knows all that he had means to know, because all have
culpably neglected means. And so you have no Church. 3. Still you make your
Church invisible (if you had any:) For no man can tell, as I said, who knows
in full proportion to his helps and means. Do you not see now whither your
Implicit faith has brought you?


R. B. Qu. 3. Is it any lawful Pastors, or All, that must necessarily be
depended on by every member? and who are these Pastors?


Mr. J. Answ. Of all, respectively to each subject; that is, that the authority
of none of them, mediate or immediate, be rejected or contemned by him, that is
a true member of the Church.


R. B. Reply. Ad Qu. 3. R. Reply 1. Here still you tell me that your
descriptions signified nothing. You told me that the members must [live in
dependence on their lawful Pastors.] And now you tell me that [their authority
must not be rejected or contemned.] And indeed, is dependence and non-rejection
all one? The millions of heathens that never heard of the Pope or any of your
Pastors reject them not, nor contemn them: Are they therefore fit matter for
your Church? 2. If you say, that you mean it of such only as have a sufficient
Revelation of the Authority of these Pastors, I further reply. 1. It seems then
it is not only the Pope, but every Priest respectively that is an essential
member of your Church; or to whom each member must be subject necessarily ad
esse. If so, then every man that by falling out or prejudice, does culpably
reject the authority of any one Pastor or Priest among a swarm, is damned, or
none of the Church, though he believe in the Pope and in twenty thousand
Priests besides.

2. And then have we not cause to pray God to bless us from the company of your
Priests? or at least, that we may not have too many, when among a multitude we
may be in danger of rejecting some one, and then we are cast out of the Church!
What if a Gentleman should find some such as Watson or Montaltus describe in
bed with his wife; or a Prince find a Garnet, a Campion, or a Parsons in a
Treason, and by such a temptation should be so weak, as to contemn, or reject
the authority of that single Priest, while he honors all the rest: Is it
certain, that such a man is none of the Catholic Church for that? How hard is
it in France and Italy then to be a Catholic, where Priests are so numerous,
that its ten to one, but among the crowd the authority of some one may be
rejected!

3. But is it all the Priests that we never knew, or knew not to be Priests,
that we must depend on, or is it only those whose authority is manifested to us
by sufficient evidence? Doubtless you will confine our dependence to these only
(or else no man could be a Christian:) And if so, you know we are never the
nearer a resolution for your answer, till you yet tell us how we must know our
Pastors to have authority indeed. What if they show me the Bishops orders, and
I know that many have had forged Orders? am I bound to believe in his
authority? what if I be utterly ignorant whether he that ordained him, were
himself ordained? or had intentionem ordinandi? how shall I then be sure of his
authority that is ordained? And how can the people be acquainted with the
passages in Election and Ordination that are necessary to the knowledge of
their authority? especially of the Popes and prelates. And what if you tell me
your own opinion, of the sufficient means by which I must be convinced of the
Popes and Priests authority? how shall I know that you are not deceived; and
that these are the sufficient means indeed, unless a General Council have
defined them to be sufficient? And if they have, if it were not as an Article
of faith, you will say I am not bound of necessity to believe their definition.
And what if I have sufficient means to know the authority of a thousand
Priests, but am culpably ignorant of it in some few through my neglect? Does it
follow that therefore I am out of the Church? Is my obedience to each Priest as
necessary, as my belief of every Article of my faith? If so, I know not whether
your multiplying Articles, or multiplying Priests, does fill hell faster, if
men must be judged by your laws. But it is our Allegiance to our Sovereign,
that is the character of a Subject in the Commonwealth, and not our
Allegiance, or duty to every inferior Magistrate: the rejection of one of them
may stand with subjection, though not with innocence: It is not treason to
reject a Constable: why then should more be necessary to our Churchmembership
and salvation?

But still you make your Church invisible: For as no man can know that lives
in the remote parts of the world, whether your Popes themselves are truly
Popes, as being duly qualified and elected, nor which is the true Pope, when
you have often had more then one at once; so you can never know concerning your
members, whether their dependence on their Pastors be extensively proportionate
to the means that discovered their authority? and whether their disobedience
unchurch them or no? I earnestly crave your answer to the thirty uncertainties,
which I have mentioned in my Safe Religion, p. 93, to 104. And tell us how all
our Pastors may be known. And whether every particular sin unchurch men? and
if not, why the contempt or rejection of a drunken Priest does it, while all
the rest are (perhaps too much) honored?


R. B. Quest. 4. Why exclude you the chief Pastors, that depend on none?


Mr. J. Answ. I exclude them not, but include them* as those of whom all the
rest depend; as St. Hierom does in his definition, Ecclesia est plebs Episcopo
unita.

Repl. ad Resp. ad Quest. 4. How unconstant are you among your selves in the
use of terms? How frequent is it with you to appropriate the name of [the
Church] to the Clergy? But remember hereafter, when you tell us of the
Determinations, and Traditions of the Church, that it is the people that you
mean, and not only the Pastors in Council; much less the Pope alone.


Mr. J. Heresy. Is an intellectual obstinate opposition against divine
authority revealing, when it is sufficiently propounded.


R. B. Of Heresy. Is the opposition and obstinacy that makes Heresy, in the
Intellect or will?


Mr. J. In the will, by an imperate Act, restraining the understanding to that
error.


R. B. Reply. Of Heresy. Qu. 1. Reply 1. Still your descriptions signify just
nothing. You describe Heresy to be An Intellectual obstinate Opposition; and
yet say that this is in the will. And yet again you contradict your self by
saying that it is an Imperate act. No Imperate act is in the will, though it be
from the will. It is voluntary, but not in voluntate. An Imperant act may be in
the will, but not Imperate. All Imperate acts are in (or immediately by the
commanded faculties.) The Intelligere, which is the Imperate act, is in the
Intellect: though the Velle intelligere, which is an Elicite act, be in the
will. 2. From hence its plain that you cannot prove me or any man to be an
Heretic that is unfeignedly willing to know the truth, and is not obstinately
willful in opposing it: which are things that you cannot ordinarily discern and
prove by others, that are ready to be sworn that they would fain know the truth.


R. B. Qu. 2. Must it needs be against the Formal object of Faith? is he no
Heretic, that denies the matter revealed, without opposing obstinately the
Authority revealing?


Mr. J. Answ. Yes. Nor is he a Formal, but only a Material Heretic, who
opposes a revealed Truth, which is not sufficiently propounded to him to be a
Divine revelation.


R. B. Reply. Qu. 2. Reply 2. Every man that believes that there is a God
indeed, believes that he is true: For if he be not True, he is not God. If
therefore no man be Formally an Heretic, that does not obstinately oppose the
Veracity of God, which is the formal object, then as there are I hope but few
Heretics in the world, so those few cannot by ordinary means be known to you:
unless they will say that they take God to be a liar, so that you make none
Heretics indeed but Atheists.

What if a man deny that there is a Christ, a Heaven, a Hell, or a
Resurrection? and also deny the Revelation it self, by which he should discern
these truths? and yet deny not the Veracity of God, (no nor of the Church?) is
this no Heretic? I would your party that have murdered so many thousands as
Heretics, had so judged: (if a falsehood may be wished, as a thing permitted,
to have prevented such a mischief.) It is not Gods Veracity that is commonly
denied by Heretics, but the thing revealed, and the Revelation of that thing:
And your Turnebul against Baronius has told you, that the Revelation is no
part of the Formal object of faith, but as it were the Copula, or a condition
sine qua non. If he that obstinately refuses to believe that the Godhead of
Christ, or the Holy Ghost is any where by God revealed, and so denies it, be
no Heretic, unless he also obstinately deny or resist the Veracity of God;
then there are few that you can prove Heretics. (For forma dat nomen; and he
that is not a Heretic Formally, but materially only, is no Heretic at all.)

Lastly, many a truth is sinfully neglected by the members of the Church; that
have a proposal sufficient, and yet not effectual through their own fault: and
yet they are no Heretics. Millions in your Church are ignorant of truths
sufficiently proposed, and therefore their ignorance is their sin: but it
follows not that it is their Heresy. But if it be, then Heretics constitute
your Church; and then your Church is a thing unknown; because the Heretics
cannot be known, the sufficiency of each man's revelation being much unknown to
others.


R. B. Qu. 3. What mean you by a sufficient proposal?


Mr. J. Answ. I mean such a proposal as is sufficient in humanis, to oblige one
to take notice, that a King, or chief Magistrate, have enacted such, or such
Laws, etc. that is, a public Testimony, that such things are revealed by the
infallible authority of those who are the highest Tribunal of Gods Church; or
by notorius and universal Tradition.


R. B. Reply. Qu. 3. Reply (...) there lies not so much at the stake as a man's
salvation: and man is not so able as God to make a truly sufficient revelation
of his will to all: and therefore the proportion holds not. 2. But if it did,
either you think the sufficiency varieth according to the variety of
advantages, opportunities, and capacities of the persons, or else that it
consists only in the act of common publication, and so is the same to all the
subjects. If the first be your sense (as I suppose it is,) then still you are
uncertain who are Heretics, as being uncertain of men's various capacities, and
so of the sufficiency in question. Unless you will conclude (with me) that thus
you make all Heretics, as aforesaid; because all men living are culpably
ignorant of some truths, which they had a revelation of that was thus far
sufficient. If the second be your sense, then the same unhappy consequence will
follow (that all are Heretics;) and moreover, that some of obscure education
are unavoidably Heretics, because they had no opportunity to know those
things, which as to the Majority, are of public testimony or universal
Tradition. Is not the Bible, a public Testimony and record, and being
universally received, is an universal Tradition? And yet abundance of truths in
the holy Bible are unknown, (and therefore not actually believed) by millions
that are in your Church, and are not taken by your selves for Heretics. Your
befriending ignorance would else make very many Heretics.


Mr. J. Pope. By Pope, I mean St. Peter, or any of his lawful Successors in the Sea of Rome, having authority by the Institution of Christ, to govern all
particular Christian Churches, next under Christ.


R. B. Of the Pope. Qu. 1. I am never the nearer knowing the Pope by this, till
I know, how Peter's Successors may be known to me. What personal qualification
is necessary ad esse?


Mr. J. Answ. Such as is necessary ad esse for other Bishops; which I suppose
you know.


R. B. Reply. Of the Pope. Qu. 1. Reply. If so, then all those were no Popes
that were Heretics, or denied essential points of faith (as Johan. 23.) and so
were no Christians; and all those that wanted the necessary abilities to the
essentials of their work. And so your Church has often been headless, and your
succession interrupted, Councils having censured many Popes to be thus
unqualified: And the dispositio materiae being of it self necessary to the
reception of the form, it must needs follow, that such were no Popes, even
before the Councils charged them with incapacity or Heresy: because they had
it, before they were accused of it. And Simony then made many incapable.


R. B. Qu. 2. When and how must the institution of Christ be found?


Mr. J. Answ. In the revealed Word of God, written or unwritten.


R. B. Reply. Qu. 2. Reply 1. You never gave the world assurance, how they may
truly know the measure of your unwritten Word, nor where to find it, so as to
know what it is. 2. Till you prove Christ's Institution (which you have never
done,) you free us from believing in the Pope.


R. B. Qu. 3. Will any ones election prove one to be Pope? or who must elect
him ad esse?


Mr. J. Answ. Such as by approved custom, are esteemed, by those to whom it
belongs, fit for that charge; and with whose election the Church is satisfied.


R. B. Reply. Qu. 3. Reply. Here you are fain to hide your self instead of
answering; and show indeed that a Pope (that's made an essential part of the
Church; subjection to whom is made of necessity to salvation) is indeed but a
mere name, or a thing unknown; and so can be certainly believed or acknowledged
by none. For either Election of him (by some body) is necessary, or not. If
not, then you or another man unchosen may be Pope, for ought I know, or any man
else. If yea; then it is either any bodies Election of him that will serve
turn, or not. If it will, then you may be Pope, if your Scholars choose you,
and then you have had three true Popes at once; for so many were Elected. But
if it will not, then it must be known who has the Power of Election, before it
can be known who is indeed the Pope: But you are forced here by your answer to
intimate to us, that the Power of Election cannot be known: and therefore the
Pope cannot be known. For, 1. Here are no determinate Electors mentioned; and
therefore it seems none known to you: And no wonder: for if you confine it to
the people, or to the Cardinals, or to the Emperors, or to Councils, you cut
off all your Popes that were chosen by the other ways. 2. Nor do you determine
of any particular discernable note, by which the Electors, and power of
election may be known to the Church: But all these patches make up your
description. 1. It must be those that are esteemed fit for the charge. 2. And
that by those to whom it belongs. 3. And that by custom. 4. And that approved.
5. And the Church must be satisfied with the election. O miserable body then
that has been so often headless, as Rome has been! 1. Will esteeming them fit,
serve turn though they be unfit? then it is not the fitness that is necessary,
but the estimation, (true or false.) 2. But why did you not tell us to whom it
is that it belongs to esteem the Choosers fit? Here you were at a straight. But
is not this to say nothing while you pretend to speak? and to hide what you
pretend to open? 3. And who knows what custom, and of what continuance you
mean? Primitive custom went one way; and afterward custom went another way; and
later custom has varied from both; and has the power of Election changed so
often? 4. And who is it that must approve this custom? and what approbation must
there be? All these are mere hiding, and not resolving of the doubt, and tell
us that a Pope is a thing invisible or unknown. 5. And your last assures us,
that your succession was interrupted through many usurpations, yea indeed that
you never had a Pope. For the Church was unsatisfied with the election of
abundance of your Popes, when Whores, and Simony, and Murder, and power set
them up: And most of the Church through the world is unsatisfied with them
still to this day. And you have no way to know whether the greater part of the
Church is satisfied or not; for non-resistance is no sign of satisfaction,
where men have not opportunity or power to resist. And when one part of Europe
was for one Pope, and another for another through so many Schisms, who knows
which had the approbation of that which may be called the Church?


R. B. Qu. 4. Is Consecration necessary? and by whom ad esse?


Mr. J. Answ. It is not absolutely necessary ad esse.


R. B. Reply. Qu. 4. Reply. If consecration be not necessary to the Papacy,
then it is not necessary that this or that man consecrate him more then
another. And then it is not necessary to a Bishop. And then the want of it
makes no interruption in succession, in any Church, any more then in yours.


R. B. Qu. 5. What (...), or proof is necessary to your Subjects?


Mr. J. Answ. So much as is necessary to oblige them, to accept of other
Elected Princes to be their Sovereigns.


R. B. Reply. Qu. 5. Reply. When you have answered to the forementioned thirty
doubts, we shall know what that general signifies.


Mr. J. Bishops. I mean by Bishop, such a Christian Pastor as has power, and
jurisdiction, to govern the inferior Pastors, Clergy, and people within his
Diocese, and to confer holy orders to such as are subject to him.


R. B. Of Bishops. Qu. 1. Do you mean, that he must have this jure divino, or
humano? and if jure divino, whether mediately or immediately?


Mr. J. Answ. The definition abstracts from particulars, and subsists without
determining that question.


R. B. Reply. Of Bishops. Qu. 1. Repl. 1. You before seem to yield that the
Papacy is but jure humano; (and therefore sure of no necessity to salvation:)
For if man can change the power of election, and the foundation be humane, its
like the relation is but humane. And therefore if Bishops must be jure divino,
they are more excellent and necessary then the Pope. 2. How gross a subterfuge
is this? either the Bishop in question is a divine creature or a humane: If a
divine; as you may manifest it, or express it at least, so you ought; it being
no indifferent thing to turn a divine office and Church into an humane: If he
be not Divine, he is not of necessity to a divine Church, nor to salvation. And
yet thus your R. Smith Bishop of Calcedon (ubi supra) confesses it to be no
point of your faith, that the Pope is St. Peter's successor jure divino. And if
you leave it indifferent to be believed, or not, that both your Pope and
Bishops are jure divino, you confess you are but a humane policy or society,
and therefore that no man need to fear the loss of his salvation by renouncing
you.


R. B. Qu. 2. How shall we know who has this power? what Election, or
Consecration is necessary thereto? If I know not, who has it, I am never the
better.


Mr. J. Answ. As you know, who has Temporal Power, by an universal, or most
common consent of the people: The Election is different according to different
times, places, and other circumstances. Episcopal Consecration is not
absolutely necessary.


R. B. Reply. Qu. 2. Repl. 1. How now! Are all the mysteries of your succession
and mission resolved into Popular Consent? Is no one way of Election necessary?
Do you leave that to be varied as a thing indifferent? And is Episcopal
Consecration also unnecessary? I pray you here again remember then, that none
of our Churches are disabled from the plea of a continued succession, for want
of Episcopal Consecration, or any way of Election* If our Pastors have had the
peoples consent, they have been true Pastors, according to this reckoning: And
if they have now their consent, they are true Pastors. But we have more.

2. By this rule we cannot know of one Bishop of an hundred whether he be a
Bishop or no; for we cannot know that he has the Common consent of the people:
yea we know that abundance of your Bishops have no such consent: yea we know
that your Pope has none of the Consent of most of the Christians in the world;
nor (for ought you or any man knows) of most in Europe. Its few of your own
party that know who is Pope, (much less are called to Consent,) till after he
is settled in possession.

3. According to this rule, your successions have been frequently interrupted,
when against the will of general Councils, and of the far greatest part of
Christians, your Popes have kept the seat by force.

4. In temporals your rule is not universally true. What if the people be
engaged to one Prince, and afterward break their vow, and consent to a Usurper?
Though in this ease a particular person may be obliged to submission and
obedience in judicial administrations; yet the usurper cannot thereby defend
his Right, and justify his possession, nor the people justify their adhesion
to him, while they lie under an obligation to disclaim him, because of their
preengagement to another. Though some part of the truth be found in your
assertion.


R. B. Qu. 3. Will any Diocese serve ad esse? what if it be but in particular
Assemblies?


Mr. J. Answ. It must be more then a Parish, or then one single Congregation,
which has not different inferior Pastors, and one, who is their superior.


R. B. Reply. Qu. 3. Repl. This is but your naked affirmation. I have proved
the contrary from Scriptures, Fathers, and Councils in my disputation of
Episcopacy, viz. that a Bishop may be (and of old ordinarily was) over the
Presbyters only of one Parish, or single Congregation, or a people no more
numerous then our Parishes. You must show us some Scripture, or general Council
for the contrary before we can be sure you here speak truth. Was Gregory
Thaumaturgus no Bishop, because when he came first to Neocaesarea, he had but
seventeen souls in his charge? The like I may say of many more.


Mr. J. Tradition. I understand by Tradition the visible delivery from hand to
hand in all ages, of the revealed Word of God, either written, or unwritten.


R. B. Of Tradition. Qu. 1. But all the doubt is, by whom this Tradition that is
valid, must be By your Pastors, or people, or both? By Pope, or Councils, or
Bishops disjunct? By the Major part of the Church, or Bishops (or Presbyters)
or the Minor? and by how many?


Mr. J. Answ. By such and so many proportionably* as suffice in a Kingdom to
certify the people, which are the Ancient universally received customs in that
Kingdom, which is to be morally considered.


R. B. Reply. Of Tradition. Qu. 1. Repl. I consent to this general. But then,
1. How certainly is Tradition against you, when most of the Christian world,
yea all except an interessed party, do deny your Sovereignty, and plead
Tradition against it? And how lame is your Tradition, when its carried on your
private affirmations, and is nothing but the unproved sayings of a Sect!


R. B. Qu. 2. What proof, or notice of it, must satisfy me in particular, that
it so past?


Mr. J. Answ. Such, as with proportion is a sufficient proof, or notice, of the
Laws and customs of temporal Kingdoms.


R. B. Reply. Qu. 2. Repl. But is it necessary for every Christian, to be able
to weigh the credit of contradicting parties, when one half of the world faith
one thing, and the other another thing? what opportunity have ordinary
Christians to compare them, and discern the moral advantages on each side? As
in the case of the Popes Sovereignty, when two or three parts of the Christian
world is against it, and the rest for it, can private Christians try which
party is the more credible? Or is it necessary to their salvation? If so, they
are cast upon unavoidable despair. If not, must they all take the words of
their present Teachers? Then most of the world must believe against you,
because most of the Teachers are against you: And then it seems men's faith is
resolved into the authority of the Parish Priest or their Confessors. The Laws
of a Kingdom may be easier known, then Christian doctrines can be known,
(especially such as are controverted among us) by mere unwritten Tradition.
Kingdoms are of narrower compass then the world: And, though the sense of Laws
is often in question, yet the being of them is seldom matter of controversy;
because men conversing constantly and familiarly with each other, may plainly
and fully reveal their minds; when God that condescendeth not to such a
familiarity, has delivered his mind by inspired persons long ago, with much
less sensible advantages, because it is a life of faith that he directs us to
live.


Mr. J. General Council. A general Council, I take to be, an assembly of
Bishops and other chief Prelates, called, convened, and confirmed, by those who
have sufficient Spiritual authority to call, convene, and confirm.


R. B. Of a General Council. Qu. 1. Who is it ( ad esse) that must call,
convene, confirm it? till I know that, I am never the nearer knowing, what a
Council is; and which is one indeed.


Mr. J. Answ. Definitions abstract from inferior subdivisions. For your
satisfaction I affirm, it belongs to the Bishop of Rome.


R. B. Reply. Qu. 1. Repl. 1. If it be necessary to the being or validity of a
Council that it be called or confirmed by the Pope, then your definition
signifies nothing, if you abstract from that which is so necessary an
ingredient, unless it were presupposed to be understood. 2. If it belong to the
Bishop of Rome to call a Council as necessary to its being, then the first
great General Council, and others following, were none; it being certain that
they were not called by him. And as certain that he has never proved any such
authority to call them, or confirm them.


R. B. Qu 2. Must it not represent all the Catholic Church? Does not your
Definition agree to a Provincial, or the smallest Council?


Mr. J. Answ. Yes, my Definition speaks specifically of Bishops and chief
Prelates, as contradistinct from inferior Pastors and Clergy, and thereby
comprises all the Individuums contained in the Species; and consequently makes
a distinction from National, or particular Councils, where some Bishops only
are convened, not all; that being only some part, and not the whole Species, or
specifical Notion applied to Bishops of every age. And yet I said not all
Bishops, but Bishops and chief Prelates; because though all are to be called,
yet it is not necessary that all should come. Whence appears what I am to
answer to the next two Questions.


R. B. Reply. Qu. 2. Repl. 1. Then you have had no General Councils; much less
can have any more: For you have none to represent the greatest part of the
Church, unless by a mock representation.

2. If all must be called, your Councils have not been General, that called not
a great part of the Church.

3. If most are necessarily detained (as by distance, the prohibition of
Princes, etc.) the call made it not their duty to be there, and so makes it not
a General Council; which is so called from the generality of the meeting and
representation, and not of the invitation: no more then a Call would make it a
true Council if none came.


R. B. Qu. 3. How many Bishops, and from what parts must ( ad esse) make such a
Council?


Mr. J. Answ. The number is morally to be considered, more or fewer according
to the difficulties of times, distances of place, and other circumstances; as
is also the parts, from whence they are to come.


R. B. Reply. Qu. 3. Repl. This is a put-off for want of an Answer. Is it a
Council if difficulties keep away all? If not, it can be no General Council,
when difficulties keep away the most. Much less when such a petty confederacy
as met at Trent, shall pretend to represent the Christian world. You thus leave
us uncertain when a Council is General, and when not. How can the people tell,
when you cannot tell your self, when the Bishops are so many as make a Council
General!


R. B. Qu. 4. May none but Bishops and chief Prelates be members, as you
intimate?


Mr. J. Answ. No others; unless such inferiors as are sent to supply the
places, and as Deputies of those Bishops or Prelates, are such members of the
Council, as have Decisive votes in framing Decrees and Definitions.


R. B. Reply. Qu. 4. Repl. This is but your private opinion. No Council has
defined it, unless they are contradictory. For I suppose you know that Basil
and many Councils before it had Presbyters in them.


Mr. J. Schism. I understand by Schism, a wilful separation, or division of
ones self from the whole visible Church of Christ.


R. B. Of Schism. Qu. 1. Is it no Schism to separate from a particular Church,
unless from the whole?


Mr. J. Answ. No; it is no Schism, as Schism is taken in the Holy Fathers, for
that great and capital crime, so severely censured by them; in which sense only
I take it here.


R. B. Reply. Of Schism. Qu. 1. Repl. Though I take Schism more
comprehensively, and I think, aptly my self, yet hence I observe your
justification of the Protestants from the charge of Schism; seeing they
separate not from the Catholic or whole Church: For they separate not from the
Armenian, Ethiopian, Greek, etc. nor from you as Christians, but as scandalous
offenders, whom we are commanded to avoid. We separate not from any, but as
they separate from Christ.


R. B. Qu. 2. Or is it no Schism, unless wilful?


Mr. J. Answ. No; it is not Schism, unless the separation be wilful on his
part who makes it.


R. B. Reply. Qu. 2. Repl. Again you further justify us from Schism. If it be
wilful, it must be against knowledge. But we are so far from separating
wilfully or knowingly from the whole Church, that we abhor the thought of such
a thing, as impious and damnable.


R. B. Qu. 3. Is it none, if you make a Division in the Church, and not from
the Church?


Mr. J. Answ. Not, as we here understand Schism, and as the Fathers treat it.
For the Church of Christ being perfectly one, cannot admit of any proper Schism
within it self: for that would divide it into two; which it cannot be.


R. B. Reply. Qu. 3. Repl. Though I am sure Paul calls it Schism, when men make
divisions in the Church, though not from it; not making it two Churches, but
dislocating some members, and abating charity, and causing contentions where
there should be peace; yet I accept your continued justification of us, who if
we should be tempted to be dividers in the Church, should yet hate to be
dividers from it; as believing that he that is separated from the whole body,
is also separated from the Head.


Mr. J. Sir,
The want of a Scribe has forced me to fail a little in point of time: but I
hope you will excuse him, who desires to serve you,

W. J.
June 22. 1660.




R. B. Sir,
Urgent unavoidable business constrained me to delay my return to your
solutions, or explications of your definitions, till this June 29. 1660.

When you desire me to answer any such Questions, or explain any doubtful
passages of mine, I shall willingly do it. In the mean time you may see, while
your terms are still unexplained, and your Explications or Definitions so
insignificant, how unfit we are to proceed any further in dispute, till we
better understand each other as to our terms and subject: which when you have
done your part to, I shall gladly, if God enable me, go on with you, till we
come (if it may be) to our desired issue. But still I crave your performance of
the double task you are engaged in.

Richard Baxter.





Appendix.
THe most that I here said against the successive Visibility of our Church, is
reduced by them to the point of Ordination. They say, We can have no Church
without Pastors: no Pastors without Ordination; and no Ordination but from the
Church of Rome: therefore when we broak off from the Church of Rome, we
interrupted our succession, which cannot be repaired but by a return to them.
This is the sum of most of their discourses, in what shape soever they appear.
To which I answer.

1. As [ a Church] is taken for a Community of Christians, which are really
members of the Church universal, so it may ad esse be without Pastors. But the
Catholic Church can never be without them: nor yet, any true Political,
organized, particular Church.

2. It is contrary to the Papists own opinion that Ordination of their
particular Pastors, is necessary to the being of a true particular Church.
Bellarmine grants ( Lib. 3. de Eccles. c. 10.) that it is indeed to us
uncertain that our Pastors have potestatem ordinis and jurisdictionis; and that
we have but a moral certainty that they are true Bishops: though we may know
that they hold Christ's place, and that we owe them obedience; and that to know
that they are Our Pastors, non requiritur nec fides, nec Character Ordinis, nec
legitima electio, sed solum ut habeantur pro talibus ab Ecclesia. [i. e. It is
not requisite, that they have faith, or the Character of Order, or lawful
election; but only that they be taken for such by the Church.] And if it be
enough that their Church repute their Pastors to be elected, ordained, and
believers, though they are not so indeed; then can no more be necessary to
ours. We repute ours as confidently to be lawfully elected and ordained as they
do theirs.

3. It is contrary to the Papists own opinion, that any Consecration (much less
Canonical) is necessary to the being of their Universal Head. I need not cite
their Authors for this; as long as you have 1. The History of their Practices:
And 2. The confession of this learned man that I dispute with, in the
explication of the term [ Pope] in these his last Papers. And that which is not
necessary to their Pope, cannot by them be made necessary to our Bishops.

4. Nothing in Church History more certain, then that the Church of Rome has
had no continued succession of a truly elected, or ordained Pope according to
their own Canons. 1. If Infidelity or Heresy judged by a Council (in the case
of Honorius, Ioh. 23. Eugenius, etc.) will not prove a nullity and intercision.
2. If Simony, Murder, Adultery, etc. will not prove it. 3. If about forty
years Schism at once will not prove it: none knowing who was the true Pope,
but by the prevalency of his secular power; and their writers confessing that
it is known to none but God. 4. If intrusion without any just election will not
prove it; Then there is no danger to those Churches that are liable to no such
accusations. But if any or all of these will prove it, the Roman intercision is
beyond dispute, as I shall further manifest on any just call, if it be denied.

5. The standing Law and Institution of Christ, is it that gives the Power (by
imposing the duty) of Ministration: and Ordination only determines of the
person that shall receive it (together with election,) and solemnizeth it by
Investiture: as Coronation to a King, that is a King before.

I have already proved that an uninterrupted succession of Regular Ordination
is no more necessary to the being of a Church, then uninterrupted succession of
Regular Coronation is to the being of a King or Kingdom: which I am ready to
make good.

6. This whole case of Ordination I have already spoken to (so carefully and
fully according to my measure) in my second Dispute of Church Government, that
I shall suppose that man has said nothing to me, requiring my reply, on this
point, that does not answer that. And to write the same thing here over again,
cannot fairly be expected.

7. Voetius de desperata causa Papatus, has copiously done the same against
Iansenius, which they should answer satisfactorily before they call for more.

8. The Nullity which they suppose to make the Intercision, is either the
Ordination we had from the Papist Bishops before our Reformation, or the
Ordination that we received since. If the former be a nullity, then all the
Papists Ordinations are null; and so they nullify their Church and Ministry.
That the latter is no nullity, we are ready to make good against any of them
all.

Object. But if you own your Ordination as from the Church of Rome, you own
their Church.

Answ. We consider them, 1. As Christian Pastors. 2. As Popish Pastors; As
Christian Pastors in the Catholic Church, their Ordination is no more a
nullity than their Baptizing, (which we count valid.) But as Popish, they have
no authority for either. Object. But they gave both Baptism and Ordination as
Papists, and it must be judged of by the intention of the giver, and receiver.
Answ. It is the Baptism and Ordination of Christ's Institution, as such, which
was pretended to be given and received: Could we prove that they Administered
any other or otherwise, they say they would disown it: As such therefore we
must take it, till we can prove that they destroy the very essence of it. If it
be given and taken secondarily as Popish the scab of their corruption polluteth
it, but not nullifieth it. So they profess themselves first Ministers of
Christ, and but subordinately (as they think) of the Pope: so much therefore as
belongs to them in their first and lawful relation may be valid; though so much
as respects their usurped relation be sinful. Had I been baptized or ordained
by one of their Priests, I would disown all the corruptions of them, but not
the baptism and ordination it self.

9. There is no necessity to the being or well-being of a particular Church,
that it has continued from the Apostles days, or that its particular Ministry
have had no intercision. If Germany were converted but lately to the Christian
Faith, it may be nevertheless a true part of the Catholic Church. If Jerusalem
had sometime a Church, and sometime none, it may have now a true Church
nevertheless.

10. If our Ordination had failed by an intercision, it might as well be
repaired from other Churches (that have had a continued succession) as from
Rome. And much better; because without participation of their peculiar
corruptions. Or if any Bishops that were of the Papal faction should repent of
their Popery, and not of their Ordination, they might Ordain us as Bishops,
and repair our breach. And indeed that was the way of our continued Ordination.
Many that repented that they were Popish Prelates, continued the office of
Christian Bishops, and by such our Ancestors were Ordained. As Christianity and
Episcopacy were before Popery, and so are they still separable from it, and may
continue when it is renounced. Besides what I have more fully said in the
foresaid dispute of Ordination, I see no need of adding any more, against this
Objection, about successive Ordination and Ministerial Power.

As to their other Objection (which they make such a stir with, and take no
notice of the Answer which we have so often given) viz. [ When every Sect
pretend that they have the true Church and Ministry, who shall judge?] I again
Answer, There is a Iudicium privatum, and publicum: A private judgment of
discerning belongs to every man: The public judgment is either Civil or
Ecclesiastical. The Civil judgment is [who shall be thus or thus esteemed of,
in order to Civil encouragement or discouragement] (as by corporal punishments,
or rewards:) This judgment belongs only to the Civil Magistrate. The
Ecclesiastical judgment, is in order to Ecclesiastical Communion or
Excommunication. And so it belongs to those with whom the person is in
Communion, in their several capacities. The members of a particular Church, are
to be judged Authoritatively by the Pastors of that Church, (and by the people,
by a Private judgment of Discerning.) Pastors should associate for Communion
of Churches: and so in order to that Communion of Association, it belongs to
the several Associations to judge of the Members of the Society: which yet is
not by a public Governing judgment: For in Councils or Associations, the
Major Vote are not properly the Governors of the lesser part: But those that
are out of capacity of Communion, have nothing to do to judge of the Aptitude
of Pastors or Churches in order to Communion or non-Communion. And for the
Pope, he has nothing to do with us at such a distance, whose persons and cases
are wholly unknown to him; he being neither our Governor nor our Associate.
But if we and our case were known to him, he may judge of us so far as we may
judge of him. And other judgment (what ever men may say to deceive) there is
none to decide our controversies, but the final judgment of the Universal
Judge, who is at the door.

A LETTER Written to Thomas Smith A Papist, Concerning the Church of Rome.

LONDON, Printed, 1660.

Reverend Sir,
THe noted sanctity, admirable integrity, and extraordinary charity so
eminently appearing in your pious actions, (and as I have some cause to think,
the indelible characters of your sacred function) has animated me to make
choice of your self rather then any of your coat to this present address:
hoping your candor and tenderness will bear with what may be (by others less
sensible of the value of immortal souls slighted) interpreted according to the
candid and true sense of your supplicant by you. It has pleased the great and
terrible Judge of heaven and earth to put me upon some thoughts more seriously
then ordinary of my eternal estate, and to be somewhat doubtful (in the midst
of external perturbations) of those internal grounds which I have formerly
relied upon; And truly Sir with all cordialness, my desire is clearly to know
the mind of my God, which were I truly satisfied in, I should soon wave all
other interests to entertain: and assuring my self according to what I have
seen and read, the Church of Rome, to which I have long cleaved and adhered, to
be the pillar and ground of truth, and that Catholic Church which the ancient
Creed testifies, we are to believe in: My desire is to be as soon satisfied as
may be of your thoughts, whether it ever were a true Church, which I suppose
you will not deny, when you consider the first verse of the Epistle to the
Romans; and if so, when it made its defection? The reason of my urging this is,
because I think all other questions to be but going about the bush, and the
true Church being proved, all arguments else easily are answered. I have heard
Protestants aver the ancient maxim, viz. Extra Ecclesiam non est salus.
Therefore I suppose it the only thing pertinent to my purpose, and necessary to
salvation to enquire after. My occasions will suddenly draw me from these
parts, unless I hear from you speedily: and doubt not Sir, but I am one who
freely will resign my self to hear truth impartially. Therefore I beseech you
to send something to me by way of satisfaction the next Saturday, after which
you shall be more particularly sensible who the person is that applies himself
to you, and in the interim subscribes himself, Sir,

A thirsty troubled soul, and yours to his power, Tho. Smith.
Feb. 11. 1656. Direct your Letter to me if you please to Mr. John Smiths house
next door to the sign of the Crown in the broad street, Worcester. Good Sir, be
private for the present; otherwise it may be prejudicial to some temporal
affairs agitating at this time.




Sir,
THat you can have such charitable thoughts of one that is not of the Roman
subjection, and of my function, being not received from the Pope, is so
extraordinary, yea and contrary to the judgment of your writers, that I must
needs entertain it with the more gratitude, and some admiration. And that you
are so impartially willing to entertain the truth, (as you profess) though it
be no more then the truth deserves of you, and your own welfare does require;
yet is the more aimiable in you, by how much the more rare in those of your
Profession, so far as my acquaintance can inform me: for most of them that I
have met with, understand not well their own Religion, nor think themselves
much concerned to understand it, but refer me to others for a Reason of their
hope. For my part, I do the more gladly entertain the occasion of this
intercourse with you (though unknown,) that I may learn what I know not, and
may be true to my own conscience in the use of all means that may conduce to my
better information. And therefore I shall plainly answer your Questions
according to the measure of my understanding; most solemnly professing to you,
that I will say nothing which comes not from my heart in plain simplicity, and
that I will with exceeding gladness and a thousand thanks come over to your
way, if I can find by any thing that you shall make known to me, that it is
the mind of God that I should so do. And therefore I am desirous, that if what
I write to you shall seem unsound, you would not only afford me your own advice
for the correction of it, but also the advice of the most learned of your mind,
to whom you shall your self think meet to communicate it. But on these
conditions. 1. That it be a person of a tender conscience, that dare speak
nothing but what he verily believes. 2. That he will argue closly, and not fly
abroad or dilate Rhetorically. And for any divulging of it to your danger or
hurt, you need not fear it: For these two grounds of my following answers; I
shall here promise, 1. That I am so far from persecuting bloody desires against
those of your way, that their own bloody principles and practices where they
have power (in Italy, Spain, etc.) has done much to confirm me, that the cause
is not of God that must be so upheld and carried on. 2. And I am so far from
cruel uncharitable censures of any that unfeignedly love the Lord Jesus and his
truth, that it is the greatest motive to me of all other to dislike your
Profession, because it is so notoriously against Christian charity, restraining
the Catholic Church to your selves, and outing and condemning the far greatest
part of Christians in the world, and that because they believe not in the Pope,
though they believe in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and all that the
Primitive Church believed. I am so Catholic, that (according to my present
judgment) I cannot be of your Church, because it is so little Catholic. I am
of the one universal Church, which contains all the true Christians in the
world: And you are of a Party which has separated it self from most of the
Christians in the world. I am of that one body that is centred in Christ the
Head; you are of a piece of this body, that has centred in a man, and often a
confessed heretical wicked man, whom you take while he lives to be the
infallible Judge and foundation of all your faith and hope; and when he is
dead, perhaps pronounce him to be in hell (as Bellarmine did Pope Sixtus, and
others commonly.) I know, as every Sect has a kind of unity among themselves,
however divided from all the rest of the Church, so also has yours: but
nothing will satisfy me but a Catholic Unity, Church and Faith. So much being
premised, I answer your Questions.

Quest. 1. Whether the Church of Rome was a true Church in the Apostles days?

Answ. The word [ Church] signifies more things then one. 1. Sometime it is
used to signify the whole mystical body of Christ, containing all and only
those that are justified, whom Bellarmine calls living members. And in this
sense the Church of Rome in the Apostles days was not the Church, but the
justified members were part of the Church. 2. Sometime it is used to signify
all that profess true Christianity in the world: And thus the Church of Rome
was not the Church, but part of it. 3. It is often used by your writers to
signify one Church, that by Prerogative is the Head or Mistress of all
Christians in the world, to which they must all be subject, and from which they
must receive their name, as the Kingdom of Mexico, of Tripolis, of Fez, etc.
are so called from the chief Cities of the same name, and from which they
receive their Faith and Laws, as the body has life and motion from the head or
heart. In this sense the Church of Rome was no Church in the Apostles days. 4.
Sometime it is used to signify one particular Church, associated for personal
Communion in Worship. And thus the Church of Rome was a true Church in the
Apostles days. 5. Sometime it is used to signify a Collection or Conjunction
of many particular Churches (though not all) under the Bishop of one Church, as
their Patriarch or Metropolitan. And thus the Church of Rome was no Church in
the Apostles days, but about two hundred years after Christ it was.

It is only the Church in the third of these senses, that is in controversy
between the Roman and Reformed Churches. Now to your next Question.

Quest. 2. When was it that the Church of Rome ceased to be a true Church?

Answ. In the first, second, and third senses it never ceased to be a true
Church: for it never was one. In the first and second sense it never was one
either in title or claim, (I hope.) In the third, it was never one in Title,
nor yet in claim for many hundred years after Christ: but now it is. Therefore
the Question between us should not be, when it ceased, but when it begun to be
such a Capital Ruling Church, Essential to the whole?

In the fifth sense it never ceased otherwise then as it is swallowed up in a
higher Title. It begun to be a Patriarchal Church, about two or three hundred
years after Christ: and it ceased to be merely Patriarchal when it arrogated
the Title of Universal or Mistress of all.

In the fourth sense, the Question is not so easy, and I shall thus answer it.
1. By speaking to the use of the Question. 2. By a direct answer to it.

1. It is of small concernment to my salvation or yours, to know whether the
Church of Rome be a true particular Church or not: no more then to know whether
the Church of Thessalonica, or Ephesus, or Antioch, be now a true Church. In
charity to them I am bound to regard it, as I am bound to regard the life of my
neighbor: But what does it concern my own life, to know whether the Mayor and
Aldermen of Worcester or Gloucester be dead or alive? So what does it concern my
Salvation to know whether the Church of Rome be now a true particular Church?
If I lived at the Antipodes or in Aethiopia, and had never heard that there is
such a place as Rome in the world (as many a thousand Christians doubtless
never heard of it) this would not hinder my salvation, as long as I believed in
the blessed Trinity, and were sanctified by the Spirit of Grace. So that, as I
am none of their Judge, so I know not that it much concerns me, to know
whether they be a true particular Church, save for charity or communion.

2. Yet I answer it more directly. 1. If they do not by their errors so far
overthrow the Christian faith which they profess, as that it cannot practically
be believed by them, then are they a true particular Church, or part of the
universal Church. 2. And I am apt to hope at least of most that they do not so
hold their errors, but that they retain with them so much of the essentials of
Religion as may denominate them a true professing Church. More plainly: Rome is
considered first as Christian, secondly as Papal: As Christian, it is a true
Church: As Papal, it is no true Church: For Popery is not the Church according
to Christ's Institution, but a dangerous corruption in the Church. As a Leprosy
is not the man, but the disease of the man. Yet he that is a Leper may be a
m^^. And he that is a Papist may be a Christian: But 1. Not as he is a Papist.
2. And he is but a leprous or diseased Christian.

So much to your Questions.

By this much you may see that it no way concerns me to prove when Rome
ceased to be a true Church. For if you mean such a Church as Corinth, Philippi,
Ephesus, etc. was, that is, but a part of the Catholic Church, so I stick not
much, saving in point of Charity, whether it be true or false. But if you mean
as your party does, a Mistress Church to Rule the whole, and denominate the
Catholic Church [Roman,] so I say, its Usurpation is not ceased (that is the
misery) and its just title never did begin: and its claim was not of many
hundred years after Christ: so that your Question requires no further Answer.

But what if you had put the Question, At what time it was that your Church
began to claim this universal Dominion? I should give you these two answers. 1.
When I understand that it is of any great moment to the decision of our
controversy, I shall tell you my opinion of the man that first laid the claim,
and the year when. 2. But it is sufficient for me to prove, that from the
beginning it was not so. Little did the Bishops of Rome before Constantines
days, dream of governing all the Christians in the world. But when the
Emperors became Christians, their great favor and large endowments of the
Church, and the greatness and advantage of the Imperial City did give
opportunity to the Bishop of Rome (as having both riches, and the Emperors and
Commanders ears) to do so many and great favors for most other Churches, in
preserving and vindicating them, that it was very easy for the Bishop hereby
to become the chief Patriarch (which he was more beholden to the Emperor for,
then to any Title that he had from Christ or Peter.) And then the quarrel with
John of Constantinople occasioned the thoughts of an universal Headship; which
Gregory did disclaim and abominate, but Boniface after him, by the grant of a
murdering traiterous Emperor, did obtain: But so as the Sea swelled before
into a preparatory magnitude.

And if we could not tell you the time within two hundred years and more, it
were no great matter, as long as we can prove that it was not so before. For
who knows not that even some Kings in Europe have come from being limited
Monarchs, to be absolute, and that by such degrees, that none can tell the
certain time. Nay I may give you a stranger instance. The Parliaments of
England have part in the legislative power: And yet I do not think that any
Lawyer in England is able to prove the just time, yea or the age, (or within
many ages) when they first obtained it: which yet in so narrow a spot of ground
may be easilier done, then the time of the Popes usurpation over all the world.
For it could not be all at once: for one Country yielded to his (late) claim in
one age, and another in another age, and many a bloody battle was fought before
he could bring the Germane Emperors and Christian Princes to submit to him
fully.

3. But let me tell you one thing more; Though as to an arrogant claim, the
Pope is Head and Governor of all the Catholic Church, and Rome their Mistress,
(as the Pope makes Patriarchs of Antioch, Alexandria, and Jerusalem, that
never come near the place or people,) yet as to any possession or
acknowledgement on the Churches part, he was never universal Head, nor Rome the
Mistress to this day. For the greater half of the Christians did never subject
themselves to him at all, nor come under his power. So that the Pope even now
in his greatest height, is only the head of the universal Church by his own
claim, and naming himself so, without any Title given by God, or acknowledged
by men, and without having ever been possessed of what he claims. The King of
France does scarce believe that the King of England was King of France, for all
that he put it into his title: nor do the Swedes take the Pole for their King,
because he so calls himself. I am sure if the Turkish Emperor call himself the
Emperor of the world, that does not prove that he is so. Rainerius the Popes
Inquisitor ( in catal. post. lib. cont. Waldens.) says plainly, That the
Churches that were planted by the Apostles themselves (such as the Abassines,
(...)) are not subject to the Pope. Once he (...) the Government of no Church
in the world, but Rome it self: After that he grew to have the government of
the Patriarchate of the West: since that he has got some more, and claimed
all; but never got near half the Churches into his hands to this day. Do I need
then to say any more to disprove his universal Headship, and that Rome is not
the Catholic Ruling Church?

But having gone thus far in opening my thoughts to you, I shall forbear the
adjoining the proof of my Assertions, till I hear again from you. If I
understand it, The Question between you and me to be debated, must be this, [
Whether the Roman Church was in the Apostles days, the Mistress or Ruling
Church, which all other Churches were bound to obey, and from it were to be
called the Roman Catholic Church?] This I deny: and you must maintain, or else
you must be no Papist. The motion that I make is, that by the next you will
send me your Arguments to prove it (for it belongs to you to prove it, if you
affirm it.) To which I will return you (if they change not my judgment) both
my Answers and my Arguments for the Negative. And if you do indeed make good
but this one Assertion, I do (...) promise you, that I will joyfully and
resolvedly turn Papist: and if you cannot make it good, I may expect that you
should no longer adhere to Rome as the Ruling or Catholic Church, and the
Pillar and Ground of Truth; though charity should allow it to be [ a Catholic
Church] that is a member of the Catholic Church, which is indeed the Pillar
and Ground of Truth, wherein Rome may have a part as it is part of the Church:
But I would it were not a most dangerously diseased part. I crave your reply
with what speed you can, and remain,

An unfeigned lover of Truth and the friends of Truth. Rich. Baxter.
Feb. 12. 1656/7.

The two following Letters, with the Narrative, are annexed only to show the
effect of the former.

Sir,
THough the business in agitation betwixt your self and me, be the one thing
necessary, and so to be preferred to all obligations, and businesses of what
concernment soever; yet a resolution formerly taken up, has diverted me
somewhat from the present earnest prosecution thereof as it deserves. Temporal
credit, though it should give way to things of eternal moment, yet it often
sways the minds even of good men to neglect very important opportunities; which
though I cannot excuse my self of, yet I desire it may be heartily interpreted,
and that this may be accepted as a pledge to an answer of what you have
inserted. And I desire your next may be directed to me to London, to one Mr. T.
S. who is a kinsman of mine, and no small admirer of your self. My thanks in
the interim I return for the pains you have taken, which I hope through the
mercy of God will not prove successeless for the future one way or other: the
truth is, I have not divulged my self, or intentions as yet to any of my own
way, which I know will be very troublesome; and I know I shall be beset with
enemies from the ignorant, that way affected, as I doubt not of help from the
learned. Yet as I told you in my former, without any carnal interest
respecting, or outward troubles regarding, or inbred enemies combating, I
resolve by the grace and assistance of God to be guided by truth impartially
where I shall find it lie clearest: and shall make it my work to implore the
throne of mercy, that my understanding may be so enlightened, as to discern
truth from heresy. I desire Sir, if it may be no prejudice to your more
earnest occasions, that I may have two or three lines from you by way of advice
to meet me at London at the place aforesaid, and assure your self, however God
shall direct the success, I shall rest, Sir,

A thirsty desirer of truth, and yours unfeignedly, Tho. Smith.
Feb. 16. 1656. If what you write to me be first sent to Mr. John Smiths of
Worcester as before, it will be safely sent to me. Good Sir, think not I slight
a business of so eternal consequence by my neglect for the present; for none
shall for the future be found more earnest to find out the mind of God, and he
assisting, I hope, as cheerfully to close therewith.




Sir,
THe speed of your former applications to me by way of answer, incites me to
the confirmation of those thoughts of your worth which were at my first
addresses to you harbored in my breast; but the substance of your discourse is
a stronger motive. Although peradventure it may seem somewhat wonderful, that I
should so soon be brought over to the serious apprehensions of the weight of
what you have written to me; yet when you consult the divine providence, and
the Almighty direction which prompted me to the choice of your self above
others, upon grounds not altogether insufficiently established, which will be
further made good when I shall have the happiness of a personal intercourse of
communion with you, it will be certainly concluded upon by your self and
whosoever it shall be communicated to, that the truth, which I have already
seriously pondered, was the full aim of my intentions: which truth I shall
impartially and joyfully entertain wheresoever I find it, without any thoughts
at all of temporal or external discouragements, of which I have already
contested with some, and expect (the Lord arm me against them) far greater. It
is no small thing that I shall be looked upon as an Apostate, and so worthy of
excommunication utterly; but I conclude according to St. Augustine (I guess)
that it is no shame to turn to the better, and withal I add (although I could
insert some small exceptions) I am to the main satisfied, but yet in some
doubtful suspense, wherein I expect full satisfaction by your book, which I
received intimation from you is in the Press, and quickly to be published. If I
might receive two or three lines from you in the interim, by way of
establishment, it would be very gratefully accepted, in relation to the
comfortable taking off those obstacles which I am certain to meet with in my
change of judgment. I am very sorry that a person whom I know to be so tender
of eternal souls in general, should be so continually taken off your important
business daily by particulars. But being likewise sensible that you value a
soul according to the worth of the same; I am encouraged to think, yea I verily
believe, these rude things proceeding from a soul that is to rise or fall
according to what is now determining between us, it will not be unacceptably
received from, Sir,

The admirer of your worth, Tho. Smith.
March 24. 1656/7.

A Narrative of the case of T. S. by his friend.
Reverend Sir,
Mr. Thomas Smith late of Martins Ludgate London was brought up in the
Protestant Religion, and for some years accounted an affectionate professor
thereof, by those who were acquainted with his diligence and pains in writing
out at large the notes he took of (Mr. Calamies and others) pious Sermons: but
afterward (not living up to the knowledge he had) he grew more remiss in his
practice, and in his company; and became a great affliction to his Father in
his lifetime by reason thereof, but a greater to his Mother after his Fathers
death: which I suppose Mr. Iacomb, Mr. Fauller and others of her acquaintance
cannot forget. But when she understood the company he most frequented were
Papists, who did at length take the boldness to resort to her house, she was
very much perplexed, fearing that they had prevailed with her son to turn
Papist, which she soon found, as she told me, to be so indeed. I was not
willing to believe her report, but desired to satisfy my self by discoursing
with himself, hoping that I should not have found his judgment determined that
way, as I did to my great trouble find it to be, especially in his
justification of the Jurisdiction and Authority of the Pope, and other tenets
of the Church of Rome. By this time he had wasted his Patrimony, and had run
himself into debt so far, that he durst not walk up and down the streets as he
had done: he went a Voyage to the Barbados, but returned thence in a worse
condition then he went, yet continued still in the opinion he had received,
notwithstanding the great offense and trouble it was to those from whom he
expected relief and maintenance, whose hearts and hands were in that particular
somewhat shut up against him, in so much that he was reduced to manifold
extremities here. Afterward, hopeless of any livelihood here, he went over to
Ireland where he had a kinsman; but meeting with disappointment there of what
he expected, he returned again into England, and steered his course to
Worcester, where he had another kinsman lived; during this Voyage I exchanged
several letters with him, being desirous to make him sensible of the hand of
God eminently out against him, hedging up his way with thorns everywhere, which
I desired might be in order to his return to God, looking upon his condition to
be manifestly desperate for ever, if he should refuse to return, and harden his
heart against him. At Worcester he fell sick, which through Gods blessing
brought him to a more serious consideration of his everlasting state which he
apprehended to approach near. And it wrought some kind of doubt in him,
touching the truth of some of the chief of those things which he had
entertained as true about the Church of Rome, as he informed me by his letter;
whereunto for his conviction and better satisfaction, I did advise him to apply
himself unto Mr. Baxter of Kederminster (who I told him I did believe was a
great lover of souls) which he by letter did as he told me, and that Mr. Baxter
did return him an answer thereunto in writing, with liberty to show it to any
the most learned of his way; which when he came to London he showed me,
acknowledging himself much convinced by it: and the more taken, for that so
large and full an answer with that liberty should be dispatched to him with so
much expedition, which as I remember he said he had the next day after he sent
his. Yet was he confident, as he said, that it would be answered, and as he
told me, he had left it with one that had undertaken it; He spoke of its being
shown to Ambassadors or an Ambassador, and that within fourteen days he should
have an answer to it; but enquiring after it, I could never see any answer, nor
could he notwithstanding all his solicitations and provocations used, prevail
to have an answer; which he seemed to be very much offended at; and at length,
as he told me, those with whom he had to do about it, were much offended with
him: in so much that he intimated himself to be apprehensive of danger from
some of them: yet he seemed resolved to adventure whatsoever might befall him
in that respect, rather then he would stifle those convictions, which by Mr.
Baxters letter had been begotten in him; This letter of Mr. Baxters, together
with [The Safe Religion] a Book which he did refer him to, either then or near
that time in the press, which he went for and had of the Stationer upon Mr.
Baxters account, (which I had almost forgot) gave him such resolution and
satisfaction, that he thereupon altered his judgment and practice, and waited
upon the Ordinances here in London in our Congregations for some time; I my
self having seen him at the morning exercise in London: what further effects it
wrought upon him I know not; for that he left the City and went over into
Flanders as his Mother has informed me, and is since dead:

Sir, Your affectionate friend to serve you, T. S.


For Mr. William Johnson.
Sir,
WHen I was invited to this Disputation with you, I entertained hopes, from
your professed desires of close argumentation, that we should speedily bring it
to such an issue, as might in some good measure answer our endeavors, in
taking off the covering that Sophistry and carnal interest had cast upon the
truth. When my necessary employments denied me the leisure of reading over your
second Papers for some weeks; and when the loss of my Reply by the Carrier, and
the difficulty of procuring another Copy, had caused a little longer delay; you
urged so hard for a Reply, as put me in some further hopes that you were
resolved to go through with it your self. But after near a twelve months
expectation of a Rejoinder, and of the Proof of your own succession from the
Apostles, being here at London, I desired you to resolve me, whether I might
expect any such Return and Performance from you, or not: And when you would not
promise it, I took up the thoughts of publishing what had past between us: But
upon further urging you, some months after, you renewed my hopes, which caused
me to make some stay of my publication, and to desire you to give me your sense
of the most used terms; (promising you that I shall do the like, when you
require it; which I am ready to perform.) But yet I hear nothing to this day of
your Answer to my Papers, or the Performance of what is incumbent on you for
the justification of your Church: And therefore having waited and importuned
you in vain so long, and finding by your last, that you cannot or will not so
explicate your terms, as to be understood (without which there is no
disputing;) and also perceiving, that my abode in London is like to be but
little longer; my discretion and the ends of my writing have commanded me, to
forbear no longer the publication of what has past between us: For, though the
work be not copious and elaborate, yet being on a subject, which your party do
so much insist upon, I am assured it may be of common use. And I know that the
publication is no breach of any promise on my part, nor do I perceive how it
can be any way injurious to you; and therefore I see nothing to prohibit it:
And I am not willing to be used as Mr. Gunning and Mr. Pierson were, by the
partial unhansome publication of another.

If yet I may prevail with you, to justify your cause, as you are engaged, I
must entreat you specially to try your strength for the proof of your own
succession: for we are most confident that its a notorious impossibility which
you undertake. Our Arguments against it are such as these.

1. That Church which since the time of Christ has received a new essential
part, has not its being successively from the Apostles. But such is the Church
of Rome: Ergo --

The Major is undeniable. The Minor is thus proved. A Vice-Christ, or
Vice-head, or Governor of the Universal Church is an essential part of the now
Church of Rome. But a Vice-Christ, or Vice-head, or Gove^^^^ of the Universal
Church, is new, or a ^ove^^, (or has not been from the time of Christ on
earth:) Ergo, the Church of Rome since the time of Christ, has received a new
essential part. The novelty I have here and elsewhere proved: And Blondel and
Molinaeus against Perron have done it more at large.

2. That Church which has had frequent and long interceisions in its head or
essential part, has not had a continued succession from the Apostles. But such
is the Church of Rome: Ergo --

The Minor is here proved: and some hints of it are in the Appendix.

3. That Church which has had many new essential Articles of Religion, has
not had a continued succession from the Apostles: (For if the essence be new,
the Church is new.) But such is the Church of Rome. Ergo --

First it is commonly maintained by you that all Articles are Essential or
Fundamental: and you deride the contrary doctrine from the Protestants.

Secondly, that you have had many new Articles of Religion (of faith and points
of worship) is proved by our writers, and your own confessions. See Molinaeus
de Novit. Papismi. Prove a succession of all that is de fide determined in your
Councils, or but of all in Pope Pius his Creed, and the Council of Trent alone;
or of all that with you is de fide of those two and thirty points which I have
named in my Key for Catholics, p. 143, 144, 145. Chap. 25. Detect. 16. and I
will yield you all the cause: or I will profess my belief of every one of those
points of which you prove such a succession, as held by the Catholic Church,
as you now hold them.

Read and answer my Detect. 21. Cap. 33. in my Key for Catholics.

And how far you own Innovations, see what I have proved, ibid. cap. 35. and 36.

But these arguings being works of supererogation, I shall trouble you here
with no more; but wait for such proof of all your essentials, as we give you of
all ours. In the mean time, I shall endeavor so to defend the Truth, as not to
lose or weaken Charity, but approve my self

An unfeigned lover of the Truth and you. Richard Baxter.
Sep. 1. 1660.

FINIS.

