A TREATISE OF Self-Denial.

By Richard Baxter, Pastor of the Church at Kederminster.

Phil. 2. 20, 21. I have no man like minded who will naturally care for your
estate.

For all seek their own; not the things which are Jesus Christ's.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevil Simmons at the Princes Arms in
Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1675.

A PREMONITION Concerning this Second Edition.
READER,
I Take the Love of God and Self-denial to be the sum of all saving Grace and
Religion; the first of the Positive part, and the second of the Oppositive or
Negative part: And I judge of the measure of my own and all other men's true
piety by these two. And it is the rarity of these two which assures me of the
rarity of sincere Godliness. O how much selfishness and how little Love of God,
are too often found among those contenders for, supposed, true Doctrine, true
Worship, true Discipline, and the true Church! who can say that their Zeal for
these things, does eat up themselves, their Charity, their Peaceableness, and
their Brethren! The same men that will not abate an opinion, a formality, a
singularity, for the Churches Peace and Concord, or for the interest of Love,
and the healing of our wounds, will as hardly abate a jot of their Wealth,
their worldly honor, their carnal interest, or selfish wills; which shows that
their zeal and seeming Orthodoxness and wisdom (as in them) is not from above
but from beneath, Jam. 3. 15, 16, 17.

O that men knew what hearts-ease self-denial brings, by mortifying all that
corrupts and troubles the souls of sinners! And if that part of Religion
which seems hardest and harshest be so sweet, what is our Love and Delight in
God, but the foretaste of Heaven it self?

But the soul is seldom fit to relish this Doctrine aright, till some special
providence or conviction have made all the world notoriously insufficient for
our relief. But he that in or after sharp affliction will still be selfish in a
predominant degree, is next to hopeless. I remember that one accounted of
eminent wisdom, a little before he forsook the Land of his Nativity, made this
the first word that ever he spoke to me, [ I thank you especially for your Book
of Self-denial:] And The la^e Lord Chief Justice Oliver St. John.
when we are going out of the world, we shall all be much fitter to relish and
understand the Doctrine of Selfdenial, than now we are.

But though undeniable reason thus presented, by the grace of God, do much cure
some particular souls, yet alas, the World, the most of the Church visible and
the Land is so far uncured, as that selfishness still triumphs over our
innocence, piety and peace, and seems to deride our hopes of remedy. Were
Profession as rare as true Self-denial, I should be of their mind who reduce
the Church into a much narrower room than either the Roman, the National, the
Presbyterian, or Independent. Alas, how few are those true Believers, whose
inordinate SELF-LOVE, SELF-CONCEITEDNESS, SELF-WILL, and SELF-SEEKING are truly
conquered by FAITH, and turned into the LOVE of GOD as GOD, and of the PUBLIC
GOOD, and of their NEIGHBOR, as themselves; and into a HUMBLED UNDERSTANDING
conscious of its Ignorance; and into a humbled submissive WILL, which is more
disposed to follow than to lead, and to obey than to be Imperious and domineer;
and into a LIFE entirely devoted to God and to the Common good?

But this complaint was made before: But what we most feel, we are most
inclined to ^r; and to press that on others, which we find most necessary to
our selves. And I must say, that of all the Books which I have written, I
peruse none so often for the use of my own soul in its daily work, as my Life
of Faith, and this of Selfdenial, and the last part of the Saints Rest.

One little thing I will here tell the Reader, that no Book of mine (except the
two first) had ever the word [Dedicatory] joined to the Epistle by my consent,
but I have very often prohibited it in vain; whether by the oblivion or
self-conceit of the Booksellers or the Printers I cannot tell. Not that I
condemn the word in others, but that my Epistles were still of so different an
importance, as did require a different Title.

R. B.

To the Honorable Colonel JAMES BERRY, etc.
SIR,
PRovidence having deprived me of the opportunity of nearer converse with you,
which heretofore I have enjoyed, yet leaving me the same affections, they work
toward you as they can; and have chosen here to speak to you in the hearing of
the world, that my words may remain to the ends intended, when a private Letter
may be burnt or cast aside. Flattery I am confident you expect not from me,
because you know me, and know me to be your friend. (And yet my late Monitor
has made many smile, by accusing me of that fawning crime.) I am told what it
is to bless my friend with a loud voice, Prove. 27. 14. I have learnt my self,
that [Open rebuke is better than secret love; and that faithful are the wounds
of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful] Prove. 27, 5, 6. And
therefore I shall do as I would be done by. Faithfulness and Usefulness shall
be the measure of my message to you. And they have commanded me to set before
you this lesson of Self-denial, and earnestly to entreat you, and again entreat
you, that you will faithfully Read, and Learn, and Practice it. Though I judged
you have learnt it long ago, I think it not needless to mind you of it again;
my soul being astonished to see the power of Selfishness in the world, even in
those that by Confessions and Prayers, and high Professions, have frequently
condemned it. Yet this is the Radical-mortal sin. Where this lives, all sins
virtually lives. Say that a man is Selfish, and (in that measure) you say all
that is naught of him as to his inclination. That Selfishness is the sum of
Vice, and the Capital enemy of God, of Commonwealths, of Order and Government,
of all Grace and Virtue, of every holy Ordinance and Duty, especially of Unity
and Brotherly Love, and of the welfare of our neighbors, and of our own
salvation, I have manifested to you in the following Discourse. But alas, what
need we words to manifest it, when the flames of discord and long-continued
divisions among Brethren do manifest it! When hatred, strife, variance,
emulation, backbiting, violence, rebellions, bloodshed, resisting and pulling
down of Governments, have so lamentably declared it! When such havoc is made
by it before our eyes, and the evil spirit goes on and prospers, and
desolation is zealously and studiously carried on, and the voice of Peacemakers
is despised or drowned in the confused noise! [Presumptuous are they,
self-willed, they have not been afraid to speak evil of dignities, 2 Pet. 2.
10.] To speak evil? was that the height of presumption and self-willedness
then? Alas, how much further has it proceeded now? even under the Cloak of
Liberty and Religion? How many Conquerours that have often triumphed over their
enemies, are conquered by themselves, and live in continual captivity, under
this homebred most imperious Tyrant?

Whence is it but for want of. self-denial, that there is such scrambling for
Rule and Greatness, for Riches and Honors among all? As if they thought it
more desirable to fall from an high place than a low! and at death to part with
Riches than with Poverty! and at Judgment to have much to answer for, than
little! and to go to Heaven as a Camel through a needles eye, than by the more
plain and easy way!

Whence is it but for want of self-denial, that men are so hardly convinced of
their sins, be they never so open, and odious, and scandalous, if they be but
such as will admit of an excuse before the world? Most sins that are confessed,
are such as seem not to be disgraceful, or such whose justification would
double the disgrace, or such as are confessed in pride, that the Confessor may
gain the reputation of humility.

Whence is it but for want of self-denial, that Christian Love is grown so
cold, while all profess it to be the badge of Christ's Disciples? And that so
many professors have so little Charity for any but those of their own opinions:
unless it be a slandering Charity, or a persecuting, or murdering Charity? That
all is commendable or excusable, that is done by men of their own conceits; and
all condemnable, or a diminutive good, that is found in those that differ from
them; especially if they dispute or write against them?

Whence is it but for want of self-denial, that men who know that whoredom, and
drunkenness, and theft are sins, can yet be ignorant (in the midst of light)
that discord and Church-divisions are sins? And that they hear him with
heart-rising, enmity, or suspicion, that does declaim against them? As if
Uniting were become the work of Satan, and Dividing were become the work of
Christ. I mean not Dividing from those without, but Dividing in his Church, and
among his Members; who are all baptized with one Spirit into one body, 1 Cor.
12. 13. even the Body of Christ, (not of the Pope) of which even Apostles are
but members (and therefore Peter was not the Head) 1 Cor. 12. 27, 28. which is
so tempered together by God, that there should be no schism in it, but that the
members should have the same care one of another, 1 Cor. 12. 24, 25. And that
for all the plain and terrible passages against Divisions, that are found in
the word of God, it seems to some a Venial sin, and to others a commendable
Virtue, if not a mark of Christian Piety. I may seem to speak incredible things
of the delusions of selfish Professors of Religion, if they were not attested
by the common and lamentable experience of the times.

And whence is it but for want of self-denial, that Peacemakers succeed no
better in their attempts? That while all men cry up Peace and Unity, most men
are destroying them, and few are furthering them, and fewer do it with zeal and
diligence; so few, that they are born down in the crowd, and speed no better
than Lot among the rabble of the Sodomites, that cried out against him [This
one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: Now will we deal
worse with thee than with them] Genesis 19. 9. How long have some been longing,
and praying, and moving, and laboring for Peace among the professed sons of
Piety and Peace, in England? and all (for ought I see) almost in vain: unless
to the condemnation of a selfish unpeaceable generation. (But yet let the sons
of Peace plead for it, as long as they have a tongue and breath to speak.)

Whence can it be but for want of self-denial, that Magistrates professing a
zeal for Holiness, regard no more the interest of Christ? but that the name
(and but the name) of liberty, (a liberty that has neither Moral good or evil
in it) is set in the balance against the things of everlasting consequence,
and thought sufficient to over-weigh them? And that the mere pretense of this
indifferent-carnal Liberty, is thought an argument of sufficient weight, for
the introduction of a wicked damning Liberty, even a Liberty to deceive and
destroy as many as they can, and to hinder those that endeavor men's salvation?
And what is the argument pleaded for all this? It Is partly a pretense of
tenderness and mercy: and partly because men cannot be made Religious by force.
And must such ignorant or juggling confusions serve turn, to cheat a Nation of
their Religion and Liberties, and many thousands of their salvation? As if all
the controversy were, whether we should force others to be of our Religion?
when it is only or principally, whether we may hinder them from robbing us of
our own? and from tempting unstable souls to sin and to damnation? and from
hindering the means of men's salvation? and from the open practice of Idolatry or
ungodliness? If we cannot force them to the Christian faith, cannot we hinder
them from drawing others from it? And are unmerciful to them, if we give them
leave to damn themselves (for that is the mercy that is pleaded for) and only
hinder them from damning others? Is it cruelty or persecution to hinder them
from ticing souls to Hell, as long as they may freely go thither themselves? I
should rather think, that if we did our best to save themselves, it were far
from crucity. For example, if Infidel, or Papists Books be prohibited, what
cruelty or persecution is this? If Quakers be hindered from railing at Gods
Ordinances in the open streets and Assemblies, what cruelty or persecution is
this? But some think it enough for this Toleration, that they think as
confidently they are in the right, as we do that they err! And so do Heathens,
Mahometans, and Infidels. And what! Shall every man have leave to do evil, that
can but be ignorant enough to think, (or say he thinks) that he does well? And
must Magistrates rule as men that are uncertain whether there be a Christ, or a
Church, or a Heaven, or Hell, because some are found in their Dominions so
foolish or impious as to be uncertain of it? In plain English, is it any
hinderance to men's salvation, and furtherance of their damnation, to be made
Infidels, Papists, and such as deny the Essentials of Christianity, or not? If
not; then away with Christianity and Reformation. Why do we pretend to it our
selves? But if it be; will merciful Rulers set up a trade for butchering of
souls? and allow men to set up a shop of poison for all to buy and take that
will? yea to proclaim this poison for souls, in streets and Church assemblies,
as if men's souls were no more worth than Rats or Mice, or hurtful vermin, or
it were some noble achievement to send as many as may be to the Devil. Judge
impartially, whether all this be not for want of self-denial? If selfish
interest led them not to this, and if they were more tender of the Interest of
Christ than of their own, and of men's souls than of their flesh, it would not
be thus. But the same argument that tempts the sensual to Hell, does tempt such
Magistrates to set up Liberty for drawing men to Hell. The wicked sell their
souls to spare their flesh, and let go Heaven to enjoy the Liberty of sinning;
and run into Hell to escape the trouble of an holy life: And such Magistrates
sell the peoples souls to spare the flesh of the deceivers; and in tenderness
and mercy to their bodies, they dare not restrain men from seeking their
damnation. Is faith and holiness propagated by persuasion, and not by force?
Surely then Infidelity, Popery and Ungodliness, are propagated by persuasion
too! Again I tell you, self-love does make such Rulers wiser than to grant
Commission or Liberty to all that will, to tice their soldiers to mutinies or
rebellion, their wives to Adultery, their children to prodigality, or their
servants to thievery: But the love of Christ and men's salvation is not so
strong as to satisfy them whether men should be hindered from raising mutinies
in his Church, and from destroying souls! Forsooth, they tell us that Christ is
sufficient to look to his own cause. Very true (and they shall one day know
it.) But must he not therefore teach or rule by men? Is not Adultery, Murder,
Theft, Rebellion, against the Cause of Christ, and his Laws, as well as Popery
and Infidelity? And must they therefore be let alone by man? Christ is
sufficient to Teach the world, as well as to Govern. But does it follow that
men must be no Teachers under him? Nothing but selfishness could cause this
blindness.

And because I know, that this stream proceeds from the Roman spring, and it is
their great design to persuade the world, that it belongs not to Magistrates to
meddle with Religion, but only to cherish them that the Pope approves of, and
to punish those whom the Pope condemns, and that Christ must Govern and judge
of matters of Religion himself, that is, by his pretended Roman Vicechrist, I
shall only now say this: that if Rome were acquainted with self-denial, and if
the selfish carnal interest of Riches and Rule and worldly greatness, had not
blinded them, they could never have believed themselves, that Christ did
appoint the Pope of Rome to be his Universal Vicar; and that Princes and
Magistrates in their own Dominions, have not more Power to judge who is to be
tolerated or punished by the sword, than the Pope of Rome: when no Priest or
Prelate upon earth (as such) has any thing to do with such a judgment, no not
in the places where they live. All that they have to do herein, is to judge who
is the Heretic or offender in order to his censure and excommunication: But
it is Magistrates only that must judge who is the Heretic or effendor in order
to corporal punishment or restraint. And this I undertake to make good against
all the Papists in the world: much more that the Roman Tyrant, has no such
Power at the Antipodes, and in all the Christian Nations on earth.

Remember in all this, that I speak not against a Toleration of Godly tolerable
men, Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, etc. that will walk in
Charity, Peace and Concord; we shall never be well till these are closed.

But do we not know that Papists have Italy and Spain and Germany and France at
hand to help them? And that if we grant them such a liberty as shall strengthen
them and make way for their power, we give away our own liberty, and are
preparing faggots for our martyrdom, and giving away the Gospel that by wonders
of mercy has been till now preserved, (and I hope shall be preserved in
despite of Rome and Hell.) Nor yet do I plead for any cruelty against a Papist,
but for a necessary Defense of the interest of Christ and the souls of men, and
the hopes of our posterity. True Humanity abhors cruelty.

Did Magistrates well know their dependence upon God, and that they are his
officers, and must make him their end, they would not take their flocks to be
their masters, though they may take them for their charge; nor would they set
up a carnal interest of the multitude, against the pleasing of God, and men's
salvation: nor would they think so highly of men's conceits and wills as to
judge it a matter of so much moment, to allow them in Religion to say or do
what they list. If allowing a man's self in the practice of Known sin, is
inconsistent with a state of grace, and a sign of a miserable slave of Satan: I
leave it to you to consider, what it will prove to allow others even Countries
and Nations in Known sin. And if Rulers know not that setting up an Universal
Vicechrist, and worshipping bread (though they think there is no bread) with
Divine worshp, and serving God in an unknown tongue, with other points of
Popery, are sin; and that opposing and reproaching the holy Scriptures,
Ordinances, and Ministry, are sin; woe to such Rulers, and woe to the Nations
that are Ruled by such. O what a blessing is a holy self-denying Magistracy to
a Nation! If one could have told you twenty years ago, that you and such as you
should be Rulers in this Land, how confidently would you have promised an
universal encouragement to godliness, and a vigorous promoting the cause of
Christ, and a zealous suppressing of all that is against it! Little would you
or I have thought that after Professors of godliness were in power, so many
years should have been spent in destroying Charity and Unity, and cherishing
almost all that will stand up for the Devil, and plead his cause against the
Doctrine and Discipline and Worship and Churches and Officers of Jesus Christ.
And that in their days it should have been put to the Question, whether the
Ministry it self should be taken down. And that men in power should write for
Liberty, for all that will call it self Religion, even Popery not excepted (nor
I think, Infidelity or Mahumetism it self) and that those that write so should
be men in Power? My heart would have risen against him as an odious
calumniator, that should have presumed to tell me, that such men as have
attempted this, would ever have come to such a pass: and I should have
encountered them with Hazaels question, Are they dogs, that they should do so
vile a thing? and exercise such cruelty on souls, and seek to bring back the
people of God to the Romish vomit, and set up the greatest tyranny on earth,
and all under pretense of a Religious Liberty?

But alas, it is not Magistrates only that are so wanting in self-denial.
Ministers also are guilty of this crime: Or else we should not have been so
forward to divisions, and so backward to the cure; nor would men of this
profession, for the interest of their opinions and parties, have cherished
dissension, and fled from concord, and have had a hand in the resisting and
pulling down Authority, and embroiling the Nations in wars and miseries. And
whence is it but for want of self-denial, (for our own faults must be
confessed) that the Ministers of Christ are so much silent in the midst of such
heinous miscarriages as the times abound with? I know we receive not our
Commission as Prophets did, by immediate extraordinary inspiration! But what of
that? The Priests that were called by an ordinary way, were bound to be plain
and faithful in their Office, as well as the Prophets: And so are we. How
plainly spoke the Prophets even to Kings? and how patiently did they bear
indignities and persecutions? But now we are grown carnally wise and cautelous;
(for holy wisdom and caution I allow) and if duty be like to cost us dear, we
can think that we are excused from it: If Great men would set up Popery in the
Land by a Toleration; alas, how many Ministers think they may be silent, for
fear lest the contrivers should call them seditious or turbulent or
disobedient, or should set men to rail at them and call them Liars and
Calumniators: or for fear lest they should be persecuted, and ^uined in their
estates or names! If they do but foresee, that men in power or honor in the
world, will charge them with Lies or unchristian dealing, for speaking the
words of Truth and Soberness, against the Introduction of Popery and impiety,
and that they shall be made as the scorn and offscouring of all the world, and
have all manner of evil saying falsely spoken of them, for the sake of Christ,
his Church and truth, they presently consult with flesh and blood, and think
themselves discharged of their duty: when God says, Ezekiel. 33. 6. etc. [If the
watchman see the sword come, and blow not the Trumpet, and the people be not
warned; if the sword come and take any person from among them, he is taken away
in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at the watchmans hand.] And were
we no watchmen, yet we have this command, Lev. 19. 17. [Thou shall not hate thy
brother in thy heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not
suffer sin upon him.] Yet now many Ministers will be cruelly silent, lest they
should be charged with malice and hating those whom they are commanded to
rebuke. The sword of violence I persuade them not to meddle with: but were it
not for want of self-denial, the sword of the spirit would be more faithfully
managed against the sins of the greatest enemies of Christ and of the Gospel,
than it is by most, though it should cost us more than scorns and slanders, and
though we know that bonds and afflictions did abide us.

And verily I cannot yet understand, that the contempt and scorn of the
Ministry in England, is fed by any thing so much as selfishness. Could we be
for all men's Opinions and Carnal interests, (O what experience have I had of
this!) all men, for ought I see, would be for us: Is it a crime to be a
Minister? Doubtless it is then a crime to be a Christian: And he that rails at
us as Ministers to day, it is like will rail at us as Christians to morrow. But
if such will vouchsafe to come to me, before they venture their souls, and
soberly debate the case, I undertake to prove the truth of Christianity. The
world may see in Clem. Writers exceptions against my Treatise of Infidelity,
what thin transparent Sophisms, and silly Cavils, they use against the
Christian cause. When they have well answered, not only that Treatise, but Du
See my Reasons of the Christ. ^ ^^g. since written.
Plessis, Grotius, Vives, Ficinus Micraelius, and the ancient apologies of the
Christian writers of the Church, let them boast then that they have confuted
Christianity. The Devil has told me long ago in his secret temptations, as
much against the Christian Faith, as ever I yet read in any of our Apostates:
But God has told me of much more that is for it, and enabled me to see the
folly of their Reasonings, that think the mysteries of the Gospel to be
foolishness.

But if it be not as Ministers and Christi^n^ that we are hated; what is it
then? If because we are ingnorant, insufficient, negligent or scandalous, why
do they not by a legal trial cast us out, and put those in our places I may
with Tertullian call all our enemies to search their Court Records, and ^ce how
many of us have been cast out or silenced for any immorality, but for obeying
Conscience against the interest or wills of some who think that Conscience
should give place to their Commands. Read the two or three last Chapters in Dr.
Holden's Anal^fidei.
that are more able, diligent and godly, when we have provoked them to it, and
begged it of them so often as we have done? If it be because we are not Papists,
it is because we cannot renounce all our senses, our Reason, the Scripture, the
Unity, Judgment and Tradidion of the far greatest part of the Universal Church?
If I have not already proved that Poperty fights against all these, and am
not able to make it good against any Jesuit on earth, let them go on to number
me with Heretics, and let them use me as they do such when I am in their
power. If we are hated because we are not of the Opinions of those that hate
us, it seems those Opinions are enemies to Charity; and then we have little
reason to embrace them. And if this be it, we are under an unavoidable
necessity of being hated: For among such diversity of Opinions, it is
impossible for us to comply with all, if we durst be false to the known truth,
and durst become the servants of men, and make every self-conceited Brother the
Master of our Faith. If we are so reviled, because me are against an Universal
Liberty of speaking or writing against the truths and ways of Christ, and of
laboring in Satan's harvest, to the dividing of the Churches and the damnation
of souls, it is then in the up-shot, because we are of any Religion, and are
not despisers of the Gospel, and of the Church, and of men's salvation, and
because we believe in Jesus Christ. I have lately found by their exclamations,
and common defamations, and threatenings, and by the Volumes of reproaches that
come forth against me, and by the swarms of lies that have been sent forth
against me through the Land, that even the present Contrivers of Englands
Misery ( Liberty, I would say) and of Toleration for Popery, and more, are
themselves unable to bear contradiction from one such an inconsiderable person
as my self; and they have got it into the mouths of soldiers, that my writings
are the cause of wars, and that till I give over writing, they shall not give
over fighting (though I do all that Read Mr. Stubbs and Mr. Rogers books
against me, and the soldiers openly th^^ calumai^^ed me and th^e in e^ my
death, as the said Authors ^e^red them to call me to a tr^al, even for speaking
and writing against their casting dow the Government of the Land, and ^^ing
(...) themselves, and a^^^pting at once to Vo e out all the ^ar^^h (...)
I am able to do for Peace.) And if this be so, what a case would they bring
the Nation into, by giving far greater Liberty to all, than ever I made use of!
Unless they still except a Liberty of contradicting themselves, they must look
for other kind of usage, when Libertinism is set up. Yea if they will seek the
ruin of the Church and Cause of Christ, they must look that we should take
Liberty to contradict them, and to speak for Christ and the souls of men, till
they have deprived us of tongues, or pens, or lives; And they must expect that
we obey God rather than men, and that, as Paul did Peter, Gal. 2. 11. we
withstand them to the face; and that Satan shall not be unresisted, because he
is transformed into an Angel of Light; nor his Ministers be unresisted, because
they are transformed into the Ministers of Righteousness; nor the false
Apostles and deceitful workers, because they are transformed into the Apostles
of Christ] 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. Nor must they think to do so horrid a thing,
as to weave their Libertinism, and Toleration of Popery into a new Fundamental
Constitution of the Commonwealth, which Parliaments must have no power to
alter, and that the I know that it hardne^h thousands in impenitency, to say
that Others have done worse; and Is the matter mended with you? And will it
also e^se men in he^l to think that some others suffer more?
ages to come shall curse us for our silence, and say that Ministers, and other
Christians were all so basely selfish, as for fear of reproaches or sufferings,
to say nothing, but cowardly to betray the Gospel, and their Country. If the
rattling of the hail of persecution on the tiles, even on this flesh, which is
but the tabernacle of our souls be a terrible thing; how much more terrible is
the indignation of the Lord, and the threats of him that is a consuming fire!
If you can venture your life against an enemy in the field, we are bastards and
not Christians if we cannot venture ours, and give them up to persecuting rage,
as long as we know that we have a Master that will save us harmless, and that
the God whom we serve is able to deliver us, and that he has charged us not to
fear them that kill the body, and after that can do no more, etc. and that he
has told us that we are blessed when men revile us and persecute us, and say
all manner of evil against us falsely for his sake; bidding us, Rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is our reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the
Prophets that were before us, Mat. 5. 10, 11, 12. and when we are told that he
that will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life, for
the sake of Christ, shall find it, Mat. 16. 25. and when we know that we own a
cause that shall prevail at last, and resist them whose end shall be according
to their works, 2 Cor. 11. 15.

And what though this be unknown to the opposers? That will not warrant us to
betray a cause that we know to be of God; nor will the ignorance of others
excuse us, for neglecting known truth and duty. If the souls of private persons
be worth all the study and labor of our lives, and we must deal faithfully
with them, whatever it shall cost us: surely the safety of a Nation, and the
hopes of our posterity, and the public interest of Christ, is worthy to be
spoken for with much more zeal, and we may suffer more joyfully, for
contradicting a public destroyer of the Church, than for telling a poor
drunkard or whoremonger of his sin and misery.

Hither to I have permitted my pen to express my sense of the common want of
self-denial in the Land: Now give me leave, as your most affectionate faithful
friend, to turn my style a little to your self, and earnestly to entreat of you
these following particulars.

I. In general, that as long as you live you will watch against this common
deadly sin of Selfishness, and study continually the duty of Self-denial. We
shall be empty of Christ, till we are Nothing in our selves. Blessed are the
poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Self is the strongest and
most dangerous enemy that ever you fought against. It is a whole Army united;
and the more dangerous because so near. Many that have fought as valiantly and
successfully against other enemies as you, have at last been conquered and
undone by Self. And conquer it you cannot without a conflict: And the conflict
must endure as long as you live: And combating is not pleasing to the enemy:
And therefore as long as self is the enemy* and self-pleasing so natural to
corrupted man, (that should be wholly addicted to please the Lord)* Self-denial
will prove a difficult task: And if somewhat in the advice that would engage
you deeper in the conflict, should seem bitter, or ungrateful, I should not
wonder. And let me freely tell you, that your prosperity and advancement will
make the work so exceeding difficult, that since you have been a Major General,
and a Lord, and now a Counselor of State, you have stood in a more slippery
perilous place, and have need of much more grace and vigilance, than when you
were but Baxter's Friend. Great places and employments have great temptations,
and are great avocations of the mind from God. And no error scarcely can be
small, that is committed in public great Affairs; which the honor of God, and
the temporal and spiritual welfare of so many, do, in somesort, depend upon.
These times have told us to our grief, what Victory and Prosperity can do, to
strengthen the selfish principle in men: They have swallowed Camels since they
were lifted up, that would have strained at Gnats in a lower state. The
Ministry, and Ordinances, and Holy Communion that once were sweet to them, are
grown into contempt. Centaury and Wormwood are excellent helps to procure an
appetite, and strengthen the stomach; but marrow and sweetness breed a
loathing. The Vertiginous disease is not so strong with them that are on the
ground, as with them that stand on the top of a steeple. I had rather twenty
times look up at them that are so exalted, than stand with them, and have the
terror of looking down. Had not professors been intoxicated by prosperity, they
had not believed and lived so giddily. I have often seen men's reason marred
with a cup or two too much, but seldom by too little. And too many I have
known, that have wounded conscience and sold their souls for the love of
Prosperity and Wealth; but none that ever did it for Poverty. For a rich man to
be saved is impossible to man, though all things are possible with God, Matthew.
19. 26. Luke 18. 27. For my own part, I bless God that has kept me from
greatness in the world, and I take it as the principal act of Friendship that
ever you did for me, that you provoked me to this sweet, though
flesh-displeasing life, of the Ministry, in which I have chosen to abide. I had
rather lie in health on the hardest bed, than be sick upon the softest. And I
see that a fether-bed makes not a sick man well. The sleep of the laboring
man is sweet: The plow-mans brown bread and cheese, is more savoury to him, and
breeds fewer sicknesses, than the fullness and variety of the rich. This
Country Diet does not cherish Voluptuousness, Arrogance, Vainglory,
Earthlymindedness, Uncharitableness, and other selfish diseases, so much as
worldly greatness does.

Experience tells us that most men are best in a low estate: insomuch that a
bad man in sickness will speak better, and seem more penitent and mortified,
than many better men in health. It Is a wonderful hard thing to live like a
Christian in a full prosperity; and to be above this world, and have lively
apprehensions of the invisible things, and live a heavenly conversation, in
Health and Wealth, when our flesh has so much provision at hand, to
accommodate and please it. Prosperity does powerfully corrupt the mind: It
breeds many dangerous errors, and vices; and it makes useless that knowledge
which men have: so that though such men can speak the same words as another,
about the matters of the life to come, it is but dreamingly, and without life.
Their Knowledge has but little power on their hearts and lives. The world is
so Great with them, which is as nothing, that God and everlasting life are as
nothing to them which are All. They are so full of the creature that they have
no room for Christ: and so busy about Earth, that they have but little time
for Heaven: and taste so much sweetness in their present pomp, that they cannot
relish the true and durable delights. They know their Morals, as they know some
Astronomical, or Geometrical verities, by an opinion or uneffectual Knowledge:
so that indeed they Know not what they Know, Pausanias in his prosperity
desiring to hear some secrets of Philosophy, had no more from Simonides but,
Remember that thou art a man: He contemned this at the present, as a ridiculous
Memento of that which no man could forget: But when he was reduced to an
extremity, he then remembered the Philosophers Lesson, and perceived there was
more in it than he understood when he contemned it.

How little is there in a prosperous state, that should seem desirable in a
wise man's eyes? why is it that great Travelers and Statesmen, and all that
have most tried the world, desire to withdraw from it toward the evening of
their Age, and to retire themselves into a private life, that they may there
look toward eternal things, and cry out of the Vanity and Vexation which they
have here found? Must we not conceive them wiser after much experience* than
before? and therefore wiser in their recess, than in their aspirings? and
therefore that it is folly to be ambitious, and wisdom to contemn the world? why
else do dying men most contemn it? Dear friend, you will think of these things
more understandingly and more feelingly one of these days, when you come to
die, than you can do now. I would not for all the world have been without the
advantages of looking death so often in the face, as I have done since you
first knew me. If I have been but a while without this sight, and have but
conceited that yet I have many years to live, alas, how it has enervated my
Knowledge and my Meditations! So that twenty times thinking the same holy
thoughts, will not do so much as once will do, when I seem to be nearer my
everlasting state.

And what does worldly greatness add to your real worth in the eyes of God or
of wise men? Magistracy as a thing Divine I honor: But James has taught me,
not to be partial to the rich as rich, and call up the man with the Gold Ring
and gay attire, and say to the poor, Sit there at my footstool. As to be proud
of fine clothes is a childish or womanish piece of folly, below a man: so to be
proud of Victories, and Dignities and wealth, and worldly honors, is the
vanity of an Infidel or Atheist, and below a Christian that has the hopes of
heaven. If a man be holy, he is above his worldly greatness, and bears it as
his burden, and fears it as his snare. And if he be Carnal, he is the faster
in his misery; and golden fetters are stronger than any others. A pebble-stone
on the top of Atlas is but a pebble: and a Pearl is a Pearl in the bottom of
the Sea. A nettle on the top of a mountain is but a nettle: and a Cedar in the
lowest valley is a Cedar. If God dwell with the contrite, and have respect to
him that is poor and humble, and trembles at his word, it seems they are most
to be respected, and are the most honorable, if God can put more honor upon
us by his approbation than man. God will not ask us, where we have grown (in
order to our Justification) but what fruit we have born? nor whether we were
Rich or poor? but whether we were Holy or unholy? nor what was our station? but
How we behaved our selves in it?

Prosperity usually breeds a tenderness and sickly frame of soul, so that we
can scarce look out of door, but our affections take cold; and can scarce feed
on the most wholesome food, but we receive it with some loathing, or turn it to
the matter of some disease. But to worldly vanities, it br^^ds a Canine
appetite: so that ambitious wretches are like Dogs, that greedily swallow the
morsel that you cast them, and presently gape for more. But wholesome poverty
hardens us against such tenderness and infirmities, and breeds not such
diseases in the soul. [A poor man's rod when thou do ride, is both a weapon
and a guide] says our serious Poet. I sleep most sweetly when I have traveled
in the cold; frost and snow are friends to the seed, though they are enemies to
the flower. Adversity indeed is contrary to Glory, but it befriendeth Grace.
Plutarch tells us, that when Caesar past by a smoaky nasty Village, at the foot
of the Alps, some of his Commanders merrily asked him, [Whether there was such
a stir for Commands and Dignities and Honors among those Cottages, as there
was at Rome?] The answer's easy. Do you think that an Antony, a Mark, a
Hierom, or such other of the ancient retired Christians, were not wiser and
happier men, than a Nero or a Caligula, yea or a Julius, or Augustus Caesar? Is
it a desirable thing to be a Lord or Ruler, before we turn to common earth? and
as Marius that was one day made Emperor, and reigned the next, and was slain
by a Soldier the next; so to be worshipped to day, and laid in the dust, if
not in Hell* to morrow? It was the saying of the Emperor Severus, Omnia sui,
sed nihil expedit; And of King David, I have seen an end of all perfection. O
value these things but as they deserve! Speak impartially; Are not those that
are striving to get up the Ladder, foolish and ridiculous, when those that are
at the top, have attained but danger, trouble and envy; and those that fall
down are accounted miserable? -- Sed nulla aconita bibuntur
Fictilibus --
Juven.

There are more draughts of poison given in Golden than in earthen Vessels,
says the Poet. The Scythian therefore was no fool, that when the Emperor
Mich. Paleologus sent him precious Ornaments and Jewels, asked, What they were
good for? Whether they would preserve him from calamity, sickness or death? and
sent themhome, when he heard they were of no more use. You desire not the
biggest shoes, or clothes, but the meetest; So do by your Dignity and Estate:
A^ you must ask but your Daily bread, so must you desire no more: Neither
Poverty, nor Riches, but convenient food: yet so as to learn to abound and to
want, and in every state to be content: bearing Riches and Dignity if cast upon
you, without seeking; but not desiring or gaping after them, nor glorying in
them: Undergoing them as a burden with patience and self-denial, and carefully
using all for God; but neither desiring nor using them for Carnal self. [They
that will be rich (or great) fall into temptation and a snare, and into many
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition: for
the love of money is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after, they
have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows] 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.

Remember where you begun, and where you must end. Naked you came into the
world, and naked you must return to dust. You brought ^^ Riches bither, and
none shall you take hence, unless you learn the blessed art of making friends
of the unrighteous Mammon, and laying up a good foundation against the time to
come, and laying up a treasure in Heaven, by the right improvement of your
present mercies. Though our life be nor circular, but progressive, the end as
to our naturals, is liker to the beginning than to the middle. If we die not
children, yet liker to Children than we live. It Is sad that the height and
perfection of our Age should be the height of our folly: And that childhood and
retired Age should be least entangled with these vanities. And it is a
lamentable stupidity that allows self so confidently to play its game, so
near eternity; where one would think the noise of damned souls, and the
triumphant joys of blessed Saints, that past to rest by the way of
self-denial, should mar the sport, and turn their pride into shame and
trembling; and the great things of mortality that are even at hand, should
drown the noise of pomp and pleasure, and make the Greatness of this world
appear an inconsiderable thing. The Lord grant that you be no less humble, and
heavenly, and true to Christ, and above this world, than when you and I had our
first familiar converse, (and sure by this time you should be much better.)
It Is said of Agathocles King of Sicilie, that having been a Potters Son, he
would always have together* Earthen and Golden Vessels at his Table, to
remember him of his Original. You tread on earth* and bear about you such
evidences of your f^^^ty* as serve to tell you, whence your (...) and whither
it is going, and how it should be used now: Remember also your spiritual new
birth, by what seed you were begotten, and by what milk you were nourished, and
see that you degenerate not, and do nothing unworthy that noble birth, and the
heavenly nature then received.

II. And remember that self-denial is never right, unless it be caused by the
love of God; and as you deny your self, so you entirely and unreservedly devote
your self to him. To this end I crave your observation of these few
unquestionable precepts.

1. Take heed of Unbelief, and dread all temptations tending to it, and live by
that faith which makes absent things to be to you as present, and things
unseen as if they were seen. When Heaven once loses its interest in the soul,
the world may play Rex and delude and destroy us at its pleasure.

2. Take heed of all intrusions of selfishness: Especially overvalue not your
own understanding in the things of God. Draw not a great picture of a little
man. Be not easily drawn to contemn the judgments of those that have searched
the holy Scriptures with equal diligence and humility, and with much more
advantages of retirdeness, and time, and helps than you.

3. Take heed of engaging your hand, or tongue, or secret thoughts, against the
faithful Ministers of Christ: But further the work of Christ in their hands
with all your power. I am no Prophet, but yet presume to say, that if the
reproaches of a faithful Ministry in England be purged away without some
dreadful judgment of God on the Apostate reproachers, or else a desertion of
the Nation, by a removing of our glory, I shall wonder at the patience and
forbearance of the Lord. It Is a dreadful observation, to see so much of the
spirit of Malignity possessing those that once said, they fought against
Malignants. And that the Ministers and servants of the Lord, are railed at by
many of them, as formerly they were by the worst of those that their hands
destroyed: And with this dreadful aggravation, that then it was but some that
were reviled, and now with many it is all: then it was under the name of
Puritans and Roundheads, and now it is openly as Ministers under the name of
Priests, and Blackcoats, and Presbyters, and Pulpeteers. What have these souls
done, that they are so far forsaken by the Lord! The judge of all the world is
at the door, that will plead his servants cause in righteousness. It is hard
kicking against the pricks. He that despises, despises not men, but God.
Persecution under pretense of Liberty, is heightened with hypocrisy, and is
one of the greatest sins in the world. But men are not caught in Spiders webs,
though flies are: our Lord will make us a way to escape. Persecution never
conquered Christ, And because he lives, we shall live also. Here is the faith
and patience of the Saints.

I know that malice wants not words to cloak their iniquity, He that has will
and power to do hurt, has so much wit as to pretend some reason for it: Though
I think that malice did never walk more nakedly, since the Primitive
persecutions, than it does in England at this day. Their principles and
profound contrivances they can hide; but their Malignity goes stark naked, and
is almost grown past shame. They talk against Mercenary Ministers as if they
had never read 1 Cor. 9. Mal. 3. and such other Scriptures: The Quuakers and
other Self-esteemers are reverthemore reconciled to us now we have been eleven
years turned out of all.
Or, as if they envyed food and raiment to them that watch and labor for their
souls, to whom they are commanded to give double honor, 1 Timothy 5. 17. when
they envy not Provender to their Horses, nor Fodder to their laboring Ox, nor
the crumbs to their very Dogs. But the matter is, that their wit is too scant
and narrow for their malice; and therefore the Popish and Malignant enemies
have no fairer pretense to cast out the Ministry, than by this engaging the
Covetousness of the ignorant and ungodly sort against them. They talk of our
want of a just call: But what is it in point of Calling that is wanting?
Abilities say some; Succession say others; Miracles say others; and indeed it is
what the Interest of selfish men does dictate to the accusers. O that they
would tell us what is the due Call; and where is the Ministry on Earth that
has it, if we have not? If they would have all laid by that work not Miracles,
we may see what they would have done to the Church. If we are not what they
would have us be, and do not what they would have us do, why do they not come
in charity and meekness, and show us the course that we should take? If we are
fools or besides our selves, it is for them. The God whom we serve, that will
shortly judge us, is our witness, that we have chosen the Calling that we are
in, for their salvation, and for his glory; and that we labor in it in season
and out of season toplease Christ, and to profit them, rather than to please or
accommodate our flesh. You brought me into the Ministry: I am confident you
know to what ends, and with what intentions I desired it: I was then very
ignorant, young and raw: Though my weakness be yet such as I must lament, I
must say, to the praise of the great Shepherd of the slock, that he has since
then afforded me precious opportunities, much assistance, and as much
encouragement as to any man that I know alive. You know my Education and
initial weakness was such as forbids me to glory in the flesh: But I will
not rob God of his Glory, to avoid the appearance of ostentation, lest I be
proud of seeming not to be proud. I doubt not but many thousand souls will
thank you, when they have here read that you were the man that led me into the
Ministry. And shall I entertain a suspicion, that you will ever hearken to
those men, that would rob you of the reward of many such works, and engage you
against the King of Saints? Is it gain, or ease, or worldly advantages that
continues me in this work? Let me speak as a fool, seeing it is for the Lord
in imitation of Paul that was no fool. Was I not capable of Secular and
Military advancement as well as others that are grown great? Did I ever
solicit you so much as for my Arrears (which is many hundred pounds?) You
could scarce do the thing that would gratify my flesh more, than to silence
and depose me from the Ministry. Might I consult with the flesh, I should be
more against my own employment than many of my enemies are. Did I but turn
Physician, I ^^uld get more worldly wealth: And my Patients would not be so
froward, and quarrelsome, and unthankful, as most Ministers find their carnal
Auditors to be. When men come to me for Physic for their Bodies, how
submissive are they? and how do they entreat? and what thanks after will they
return? But when we would help their souls, what cavils, and quarrels, and
unthankful obstinacy do we meet with? We must be much beholden to them to
accept our help, and all will not serve surn. My Patients that have bodily
Diseases will pay me, if I would take it: But if by giving them twice as much
as I receive, I could satisfy and further the cure of diseased souls, how
joyful should I be? And must we deny our selves and all things in the world,
for our peoples sakes, and after all be reproached as if we were a mercenary
generation, and sought our selves! O how will God confound this ingratitude,
when he comes to judge!

Something they might say, if the Ministers of England had the provision of the
French and other Popish Clergy. (I will not presume to compare now our Calling,
fidelity and maintenance, with Magistrates, Judges and men of other
professions.) Should I suppose the Magistracy epitomized in you, and the
Ministry in me, I should give you an undue advantage: For I suppose there are
far more Ministers better than me, than there are Magistrates better than you.
And yet I think you would not judge of me, as the Ministers are judged of. As
there are no such Commissioners for ejection of scandalous insufficient
negligent Magistrates, as are for the ejection of such Ministers, so if there
were, I should not doubt, but you would quickly see which part were liable to
more exceptions. But when I took on the faithful Ministers round about me, (how
many of them could I name!) with whom my conscience tells me I am not worthy to
be compared in Holiness, I am then amazed at the ingratitude of the Apostates
of this age. How constantly and zealously do they preach in public, at home
and abroad, some of them many times a week? How diligently do they instruct the
ignorant in private, from house to house? How unblameably, and meekly, and
self-denyingly do they behave themselves? And are men that once made profession
of Religion, become the enemies of such a Ministry? [O my soul, come not thou
into their secret; unto their Assembly mine honor be not thou united] Genesis 49.
6. I had rather be in the case of Turks, yea of Canibals, than of those men.

I know that many think our very ignorant Dividers to have more illumination,
and that the Pastors of the flocks are carnal ignorant men: (As the blind man
that rusht against another, and asked him, whether he were blind, that could
not go out of his way.) But I have long tried the spirits; and I have found
that these Cameleons have nothing within but lungs: and that straw and little
sticks may make the quickest and the lightest blaze, but will not make a
durable fire, as the bigger fuel does. A Bittern has a loud ^^ voice than a
Swan or Eagle. And in some one thing a bungler may excel a better workman.
And what if one Minister excel in one gift, and another in another, and few in
all? Is not this like the Primitive administration? You be not angry with your
Apple Tree that it bears not Plumbs, nor with your Pear Tree that it bears not
Figs?

But I have been too tedious. I beseech you interpret not any of these words as
intended for accusation or unjust suspicion of your self: God forbid you should
ever fall from that integrity, that I am persuaded you once had. But my eye is
on the Times with grief, and on my Ancient, Dearest Friend with Love. And in an
age of Iniquity and Temptation, my conscience and the world shall never say,
that I was unfaithful to my friend, and forbore to tell him of the common
dangers.

Dear Friend, take heed of a glittering flattering world. Remember that
greatness makes few bad men good, and few good men better. As Seneca says, The
Carkase is as truly dead that is embalmed, as that which is dragged to the
grave with hooks. [And this I say, the time is short: It remains that they
that weep be as if they wept not, and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced
not, and they that buy as though they possessed not, and they that use this
world as they that use it not, for the fashion of this world passes away.] 1
Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31. And when the soul of the worldly fool is required of him,
then whose shall all their Dignities, and Honors, and Riches be? In the mean
time God judges not by outward appearance, as man judges, nor honors any
for being honored of men. Solus honor merito qui datur, ille datur.


These Truths (well known to you) I thought meet here to set before your eyes,
not knowing whether I shall any more converse with you in the flesh; and also
to desire you seriously to read over these popular Sermons (persuaded to the
Press by the importunity of some faithful Brethren, that love a mean Discourse
on so necessary a subject:) Watch and pray, that you enter not into temptation.
I rest,

Your Friend, Richard Baxter.
Sept 12. 1659.
THE PRFFACE.
Readers,
I Here present to your serious consideration, a Subject of such Necessity and
Consequence, that the Peace and safety of Churches, Nations, Families and souls
do lie upon it. The Eternal God was the Beginning and the End, the Interest,
the attractive, the confidence, the desire, the delight, the All of man in his
upright uncorrupted State. Though the Creator planted in man's Nature the
principle of Natural Self-love, as the spring of his endeavors for
Self-preservation, and a notable part of the engine by which he governs the
world, yet were the parts subservient to the Whole, and the whole to God: And
Self-love did subserve the Love of the Universe, and of God: and man desired
his own Preservation, for these higher Ends. When sia stepped in, it broke this
order: and taking advantage from the natural innocent principle of Self-love,
it turned man from the Love of God, and much abated his Love to his neighbor
and the public good, and turned him to Himself by an inordinate self-love,
which terminateth in himself, and principally in his Carnal-self, instead of
God and the Common good: so that Self is become All to Corrupted nature, as God
was All to Nature in its integrity. Selfishness is the souls Idolatry, and
Adultery: the sum of its Original and increased Pravity, the Beginning and End,
the life and strength of actual sin: even as the Love of God is the Rectitude
and Fidelity of the soul, and the sum of all our special Grace, and the Heart
of the new Creature, and the life and strength of actual holiness. Selfishness
in one word expresses all our Aversion Positively, as the want of the Love of
God expresses it Privatively; and all our sin is summarily in these two: Even
as all our Holiness is summarily in the Love of God and in self-denial. It is
the work of the Holy Ghost by sanctifying grace to bring off the soul again
from Self to God. Self-denial therefore is half the essence of Sanctification.
No man has any more Holiness, than he has Self-denial. And therefore the Law,
(which the Sanctifying Spirit writes on the heart) does set up God in the
first Table, and our neighbor in the second, against the usurpation and
encroachment of this Self. It says nothing of Love or Duty to our selves as
such expressly. In seeking the Honor and Pleasing of God, and the Good of our
neighbor, we shall most certainly find our own Felicity, which nature teaches
us to desire. So that all the Law is Fulfilled in Love, which includes
Self-denial, as Light includes the expulsion of darkness, o^ rather as Loyalty
includes a Cessation of Rebellion, and a rejection of the Leaders of it, and
as conjugal fidelity includes the rejection of Harlots. The very meaning of
the first Commandment is [ Thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
etc.] which is the sum of the first Table, and the Commandment that animateth
all the rest. The very meaning of the last Commandment is [ Thou shall Love thy
neighbor as thy self] which is the summary of the second Table, and in General
forbids all particular injuries to others, not enumerated in the foregoing
precepts, and secondarily animateth the four antecedent precepts. The fifth
Commandment looking to both Tables, and conjoyning them, commands us to
Honor our Superiors in Authority; both as they are the Officers of God, and
so paticipatively Divine, and as they are the Heads of humane Societies, and
our subjection necessary to Common good, so that self-denial is principally
required in the first Commandment, that is, The denying of self as opposite to
God, and his Interest. And self-denial is required in the Last Commandment;
that is, The denying of self, as it is an enemy to our neighbors Right and
welfare, and would draw from him unto our selves. Self-love and self-seeking as
opposite to our neighbors good, is the thing forbidden in that Commandment:
and Charity or Loving our neighbor as our selves, and desiring his Welfare as
our own, is the thing commanded. Self-denial is required in the fifth
Commandment in a double respect, according to the double respect of the
Commandment. 1. In respect to God, whose Governing Authority is exercised by
Governors, their Power being a beam of his Majesty, the fifth Commandment
requires us to deny our selves by due subjection, and by honoring our
Superiors; that is, to deny our own aspiring desires, and our refractory
minds, and disobedient self-willedness, and to take heed that we suffer not
within us, any proud or rebellious dispositions or thoughts, that would lift us
up above our Rulers, or exempt us from subjection to them. 2. In respect to
humane Societies, for whose Good Authority and Government is appointed, the
fifth Commandment obliges us to deny our Private interest, and in all
competitions to prefer the public good: and makes a promise of temporal peace
and welfare in a special manner to those that in obedience to this Law, do
prefer the Honor of Government, and the Public Peace and welfare, before
their Own. Thus Charity as opposed to selfishness, and including selfdenial, is
the very sum and fulfilling of the Law: And selfishness is the radical
comprehensive sin (containing uncharitableness) which breaks it all.

And as the Law, so also the Redeemer, in his Example and his Doctrine, does
teach us, and that more plainly and urgently, this lesson of self-denial. The
life of Christ is the pattern which the Church must labor to imitate: And Love
and self-denial were the summary of his life: Though yet he had no sinful self
to deny, but only natural self. He denied himself in avoiding sin; but we must
deny our selves in returning from it. He loved not his Life, in comparison of
his love to his Father, and to his Church. He appeared without desirable form
or comeliness: He was despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief: he bore our griefs, and carried our sorrows, and was
esteemed stricken, smitten of God and afflicted: he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our
peace was laid upon him: the Lord laid upon him the iniquity of us all. He was
oppressed and afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a Lamb
to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her sheerers is dumb, so he opened not
his mouth. He was taken from prison and from judgment -- he was cut off out of
the land of the living; for the transgression of his people was he stricken: --
It pleased the Lord to bruise him; he put him to grief*] Isa. 53. What was his
whole life, but the exercise of Love and self-denial? He denied himself in Love
to his Father, obeying him to the death, and pleasing him in all things. He
denied himself in Love to mankind, in bearing our transgressions, and redee^ing
us from the curse, by being made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. He made himself of
no reputation, and tock upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of men, and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross] Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. And
this he did to teach us by his example, to deny our selves, to [ be like
minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind, that nothing be
done through strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind that each esteem
others better than themselves; Looking not every man after his own matters, but
every man also after the things of others; and thus the same mind should be in
us that was in Christ Jesus] Phil. 2. 3, 4. 5. He denied himself also in
obedient submission to Governors. He was subject to Joseph and Mary, Luke 2.
51. He paid tribute to Caesar, and wrought a Miracle for money rather than it
should be unpaid, Matthew. 17. 24, 25, 26. He disowned a personal worldly
Kingdom, Joh. 18. 36. when the people would have made him a King, he avoided
it, Joh. 6. 15. as being not a Receiver, but a giver of Kingdoms: He would not
so much as once play the part of a Judge or divider of inheritances, teaching
men that they must be justly made such, before they do the work of Magistrates,
Luke 12. 14. And his Spirit in his Apostles teaches us the same Doctrine, Romans
13. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Ephesians. 6. 1, 5. And they seconded his example
by their own, that we might be followers of them as they were of Christ. What
else was the life of holy Paul and the rest of the Apostles, but a constant
exercise of Love and Self-denial? Laboring and traveling night and day,
enduring the basest usage from the world, and undergoing indignities and
manifold sufferings from unthankful men, that they might please the Lord and
edify and save the souls of men; and living in poverty that they might help
the world to the everlasting riches. In a word, as Love is the fulfilling of
the whole Law, as to the positive part, so is selfishness the evil that stands
in contrariety thereto, even self-conceitedness, self-willedness, selflove, and
self-seeking; and thus far self-denial is the sum of our obedience as to the
terminus a quo: and Christ has peremptorily determined in his Gospel, that If
any man will come after him, he must deny himself and take up his Cross and
follow him: and that whosoever will put in a reserve, but for the saving of his
Life, shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life for his sake shall find
it, Matthew. 16. 24, 25. And that he that does not follow him, bearing his Cross,
and that forsakes not all he has for him, cannot be his Disciple, Luke 14.
27, 33.

According to the nature of these holy rules and examples, is the nature of
theworkings of the Spirit of Christ upon the soul: He usually begins in
showing manhis sin and misery, his utter insufficiency to help himself, his
alienation from God, and enmity to him, his blindness and deadness, his
emptiness and nothingness, and then he brings him from himself to Christ, and
shows him his fullness and sufficiency, and by Christ he comes to the Father,
and God does receive his own again. It is one half of the work of
Sanctification, to cast ourSelves from our Understandings, our Wills, our
Affections, and our Conversations; to subdue self-conceitedness,
self-willedness, self-love and self-seeking: to mortify our carnal wisdom, and
our Pride, and our concupiscence, and our earthly members: And the other (and
chiefest part) consists in setting up God where self did rule: that his
Wisdom may be our Guide; his Will, our Law; his Goodness the chiefest object of
our Love, and his service the work and business of our lives. The Spirit does
convince us that we are not our Own, and have no power at all to dispose of our
selves or any thing we have, but under God, as he commands us: It convinces us
that God is our Owner and absolute Lord, and that as we are wholly his, so we
must be wholly devoted to him, and prefer his interest before our own, and have
no interest of our own, but what is his, as derived from him, and subservient
to him; Fear does begin this work of selfdenial; but it is Love that brings us
up to sincerity.

The first state of corrupted man, is a state of selfishness, and servitude to
his own Concupiscence; where pride and sensuality bear rule; and have no more
resistance, than now and then some frightening uneffectual check.

When God is calling men out of this corrupted selfish state, he usually (or
often at least) does cast them into a state of Fear; awakening them to see their
lost condition, and terrifying them by the Belief of his Threatenings, and the
sense of his indignation; and making use of their Self-love, to cause them to
fly from the wrath to come, and to cry out to the messengers of Christ, What
shall we do to be saved?

Some by these Fears are but troubled and restrained a little while, and
quickly overcoming them, settle again in their selfish sensual senseless state:
some have the beginnings of holy Love conjunct with Fear (of whom more anon.)
And some do from this principle of Self-love alone, betake themselves to a kind
of Religious course, and forsake the practice of those grosser sins that bred
their Fears, and fall upon the practice of Religious duties, and also with some
kind of faith do trust on the satisfaction and merits of Christ, that by this
means they may get some hopes that they shall escape the everlasting misery
which they fear. All this Religion, that is animated by Fear alone, without the
Love of God and Holiness, is but preparatory to a state of grace; and if men
rest here, it is but a state of Hypocrisy or self-deceiving religiousness: For
it is still the old Principle of selfishness that reigns. Till Love has
brought man up to God, he has no higher end than Himself.

The true mark by which these slavish professors and hypocrites may discern
themselves, is this: They do the Good which they would not do, and the evil
which they do not, they would do. They had rather live a sinful life, if they
durst; and they had rather be excused from Religious duties (except that little
outward part, which custom and their credit engage them to perform:) They are
but like the caged birds, that though they may sing in a Sunshine day, had
rather be at liberty in the wo^ds. They love not a life of perfect holiness,
though they are forced to submit to some kind o^ Religiousness, for fear of
being damned. If they had their freest choice, they had rather live in the Love
of the creature, than in the love of God; and in the pleasures of the fle^h,
than in the holy course that pleases God.

The third state, is the state of Love: and none but this is a state of true
Self-denial, and of Justification and Salvation. When we reach to this, we are
sincere: we have then the Spirit of Adoption, disposing us to go to God as to a
Father.

But this Love is not in the same degree in all the sanctified. Three degrees
of it we may distinctly observe. 1. Oft-times in the beginning of a true
Conversion, though the seed of Love is cast into the soul, and the Convert had
rather enjoy God, than the world, and had rather live in perfect holiness, than
in any sin, yet Fear is so active, that he scarce observes the workings of the
Love of God within him: He is so taken up with the sense of sin and misery,
that he has little sense of love to God, and perhaps may doubt whether he has
any or none.

2. When these Fears begin a little to abate, and the soul has attained
somewhat of the sense of Gods Love to it self, it Loves him more observably,
and has some leisure to think of the riches of his grace, and of his Infinite
excellencies, and attractive goodness, and not only to Love him because he
Loves us, and has been Merciful to us, but also because he is Goodness it
self, and we were made to Love him. But yet in this middle degree of Love, the
soul is much more frequently and sensibly exercised in minding it self than
God, and in studying its own preservation, than the honor an interest of the
Lord. In this state it is, that Christians are almost all upon the inquiry
after marks of Grace in themselves; and asking [ How shall I know that I have
this or that grace, and that I perform this or that duty in sincerity, and that
I am reconciled to God, and shall be saved?] Which are needful questions, but
should not be more insisted on, than questions about our duty and the Interest
of Christ. In this state, though a Christian has the Love of God yet having
much of his ancient Fears, and Self-love, and the Love of God being yet too
weak, he is much more in studying his Safety than his Duty; and asks oftener,
How may I be sure that I am a true believer? than, What is the duty of a true
believer? There is yet too much of Self in his Religion.

3. In the third degree of Love to God, the soul is ordinarily and observably
carried quite above it self to God; and minds more the Will and Interest of
God, than its own Consolation or Salvation: Not that we must at any time lay by
the care of our Salvation, as if it were a thing that did not belong to us, or
that we should separate the ordinate Love of our selves from the Love of God,
or set his Glory and our Salvation in an opposition: But the Love of God, in
this Degree, is sensibly predominant, and we refer even our own Salvation to
his Interest and Will: In this Degree, a Christian is grown more deeply
sensible; he is not his own, but his that made him and redeemed him; and that
his principal study must not be for himself, but for God; and that his own
interest is in it self an inconsiderable thing, in comparison of the interest
of the Lord, and that Rewarding us with Consolation is Gods part, and loving
and serving him is ours (assisted by his grace;) and that the diligent study
and practice of our duty, and the lively exercise of Love to God, is the surest
way to our Consolation.

In our first corrupt estate we are careless of our souls, and are taken up
with earthly cares. In our estate of Preparation we are careful for our souls,
but merely from the principle of Self-love. In our first Degree of the state of
saving grace we have the Love of God in us; but it is little observed, by reason
of the passionate fears and cares of our own salvation that most take us up. In
our second degree of holy Love, we look more sensibly after God for himself,
but so that we are yet most sensibly minding the Interest of our own souls, and
enquiring after assurance of salvation. In our third Degree of saving grace, we
still continue the care of our salvation and an ordinate self-love; but we are
sensible that the Happiness of Many, even of Church and Commonwealth, and the
Glory of God, and the accomplishment of his Will, is incomparably more
excellent and desirable than our own felicity: And therefore we set our selves
to please the Lord, and study what is acceptable to him, and how we may do him
all the service that possibly we can, being confident that he will look to our
felicity while we look to our duty; and that we cannot be miserable while we
are wholly his, and devoted to his service. We are now more in the exercise of
Grace, when before we were more in trying whether we have it: Before we were
wont to say, O that I were sure that I love God in sincerity! Now we are more
in these desires: O that I could know and love him more! and serve him better!
that I knew more of his holy will, and could more fully accomplish it! and O
that I were more serviceable to him! and O that I could see the full prosperity
of his Church, and the glory of his Kingdom! This high degree of the Love of
God, does cause us to take our selves as Nothing, and God as All; and as before
conversion we were careless of our souls, through ignorance, presumption or
security, and after conversion were careful of our souls, through the power of
convincing awakening grace; so now we have somewhat above our souls (much more
our bodies) to mind and care for: so that though still we must examine and
observe our selves, and that for our selves, yet more for God than for our
selves: When we are mindful of God, he will not be unmindful of us: When it is
our care to please him, the rest of our care we may cast on him, who has
promised to care for us. Even when we suffer according to his will, we may
commit the keeping of our souls to him in well doing as to a faithful Creator,
1 Pet. 4. 19, And it is not possible in this more excellent way (1 Cor. 12. 31)
to be guilty of a careless neglect of our salvation, or of the want of a
necessary Love to our selves; For the higher contains the lower, and
perfection contains those degrees that are found in the imperfect: This
neglect of our selves through the Love of God, is consequentially the most
provident securing of our selves: This carelessness is the wisest care: This
ignorance of good and evil for our selves, while we know the Lord, and know our
duty, is the wisest way to prevent the evil: To be something in our selves, is
to be Nothing: But if we be Nothing in our selves, and God be All to us, in him
we shall be something. Be not wanting to God, and I am sure you cannot be
wanting to your selves. He will Reward, if you will Obey.

I have showed you hitherto the Nature and Necessity of Self-denial: O that I
could next show you the Nations, the Churches, that are such indeed as I have
described! But when I look into the world, when I look into the Churches of all
sorts, and consider men of all degrees, my soul is even amazed and melted into
grief; to think how far the forwardest professors are swerved from their holy
Rule and pattern! O grievous case! how rare are self-denying men? Nothing in
the world does more assure me, that the number that shall be saved are very
few: When nothing is more evident in Scripture, than that none but the
self-denying shall be saved, and nothing more evident in the world, than that
self-denying men are very few. Would God but excuse men in this one point, and
take up with preaching and praying, and numbering our selves with the strictest
party, then I should hope that many comparatively would be saved. Would he give
men leave to seek themselves in a Religious way, and to be zealous only from a
selfish principle, and would he but abate men this self-denial and the
superlative Love of God, I should hope true godliness were not rare. But if
self-denial be the mark, the nature of a Saint, and this as effected by the
Love of God, then alas, how thin are they in the world! and how weak is grace
even in those few! It is the daily grief of my soul to observe, how the world
is captivated to it SELF; and what sway this odious sin does bear among the
forwardest professors of Religion; and how blind men are that will not see it;
and that it has so far prevailed that few men lament it, or strive against it,
or will bear the most suitable remedy. Alas, when we have prevailed with
careless souls, to mind their salvation, to read and pray, and hold communion
with the godly, and seem well qualified Christians, how few are brought to
self-denial! and how strong is Self still in those few? What a multitude that
seem of the highest form, in zeal, and opinions, and duties, delude themselves
with a selfish kind of Religiousness? And it grieveth my soul to think, how
little the most excellent means prevail, even with Professors themselves,
against this sin! What abundance of labor seems to be lost, that we bestow
against i? When I have preached over all these following Sermons against it,
(though grace has made them effectual with some, yet) selfishness still too
much bears sway in many that heard them. O what a rooted sin is this! How
powerful and obstinate! Men that seem diligently to hear, and like the Sermon,
and write it, and repeat it when they come home, and commend ^^, do yet
continue selfish. And they that walk evenly and charitably among us in all
appearance, as long as they are smoothly dealt with, when once they are but
touched, and crossed in their self-interest, do presently show, that there is that
within them which we or they before perceived not. It was (doubtless) from too
much experience of the selfishness even of Professors of Religion, and of the
successfulness of temptations in this kind, that Satan did tell God so boldly,
that Job would sin if he were but touched in his self-interest, Job 1. 9, 10,
11. and 2. 4, 5. [ Does Job (says he) fear God for nothing! have not thou made
an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he has on every
side? Thou have blessed the work of his hand, and his substance is increased in
the Land: But put forth thy hand now, and touch all that he has, and he will
curse thee to thy face.] As if he should have said, [Glory not of Job or any of
thy servants: It is not thee, but themselves that they seek: They serve thee
but for their own commodity: It is Self and not God that rules them, and that
they do all this for: Seem but to be their enemy, and touch their
self-interest, and cross them in their commodity, that they may serve thee for
nothing, and then see who will serve thee.] This was the boast of Satan against
the Saints of the most high, which hypocrites that encouraged him hereto would
have fulfilled; and which God does glory in confuting: and therefore he gives
the Devil leave to try Job in this point, and puts all that he had into his
power, ver. 12. And when Satan by this succeeded no^, he yet boasts that if
he might but touch him more nearly in his selfinterest, he doubted not to
prevail, c. 2. 4, 5. [ Skin for skin, yea all that a man has will he give for
his life: Put but forth thy hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he
will curse thee to thy face.] This confidence had Satan, even against such a
servant of the Lord, [ That there was none like him in the earth, a perfect and
upright man, that feared God and eschewed evil] c. 1. 8. And though the power
of grace in Job did shame the boasts of Satan, yet how frequently does he
prevail with men that seem Religious? How truly may he say of many among us [
Now they seem godly, but let the times turn, and godliness undo them in the
world, and then see whether they will be godly: Now they seem faithful to their
Pastors and Brethren; but give them a sufficient reward, and see whether they
will not play the Judas: Now they seem peaceable humble men: but touch them in
their self-interest, cross them in their commodity or reputation by an injury,
yea or by justice or necessary reproof; and then see what they will prove] O
that the Devil could not truly boast of thousands that by a few foul words, or
by crossing their self-willedness, he can make them speak evil of their
neighbors, and fill them with malice and bitterness against their truest
friends. Oh where are the men that maintain their Love, and Meekness, and
Concord any longer than they are pleased, and their wills and interests are
complied with, or not much contradicted?

Besides what I have more largely spoken of this master common sin, in the
following Discourse, take notice here of a few of the discoveries of it.

1. Observe but the striving that there is for Command and Dignity, and Riches,
and this even among Professors of Religion, and judge by this whether they are
self-denying men. Who is it for but themselves that men make such a stir, for
Offices and Honors, and places of Superiority? Surely if it were for the good
of others, they would not be so eager and so forward. We cannot perceive that
their Charity is so h^^, as to make them so Ambitious to be serviceable to
their Brethren. If that be it, let them keep their service till it be desired
or much needed, and not be so eager to do men good against their wills, and
without necessity. As Greg. Mag. says of the Ministry, [ Si non ad elationis
culpam, sed ad utilitatem adipsci desiderat, prius vires suas cum eo quidem
subiturus onere metiatur: ut and impar abstineat, and ad id cum metu cui se
sufficere existimat accedat.] Men use not to be ambitious of duty or trouble.
He that desires Government ultimately and principally for himself, desires
Tyranny, and not a lawful Government, whose ultimate end is the common good.
And will not the wrath of the King of Kings be kindled without so much ado, nor
hell be purchased at cheaper rates, than all the contrivance, cares and
hazards, that ambitious men do draw upon themselves? O ambitio, ( inquit
Bernardus) ambientium crux, quomodo omnes torques? Omnibus places, nil acrius
cruciat, nil molestius inquietat, nil tamen apud miseros mortales celebrius
negotiis ejus.] Wonderful! that such abundant warning tameth not these proud
aspiring minds! They set up or admired them but yesterday, whom they see taken
down and despised to day, and see their honor turned to scorn, and yet they
imitate their folly! They see the sordid relicts of the most renouned
Conquerours, and Princes levelled with the dirt; and yet they have not the wit
to take warning, and humble themselves that they may be exalted! They know how
death will shortly use them, and read of the terrors that pride and ambition
bring men to; but all this does not bring them to their wits. When Death it
self comes, then they are as sneaking shrinking worms as any: and the worm of
ambition that fed upon their hearts in their prosperity, does breed a gnawing
worm in their consciences, which will torment them everlastingly. But ( ut
Juvenal.)

-- Mors sola fatetur, Quantula sunt hominum corpuscula --

This Aerugo mentis, as Ambrose calls it, and regnandi dira cupido (ut Virg.)
does keep men from knowing what they know, and denies them the use of their
understandings. All former professions are forgotten; repentings are repented
of; the best parts are corrupted and sold to the Devil (as truly, as Witches
sell themselves, though not so grossly) and men are any thing that self would
have them be, where the humor of Ambition does prevail, and this secret poison
insinuates it self into the mind: This subtle malum (ut Bernard) secretum
virus, pestis occulta, doli artifex, matter hypocrisis, livoris parens, vitiorum
origo, tinea sanctitatis, ex^aecatrix cordium, ex remediis morbos creans, ex
medicina languorem generans.] The God of Vengeance that abhors the Proud,
and beholds them afar off, and that cast aspirers out of Paradise, will
shortly take these Gallants down, and lay them low enough, and make them wish
they had denied themselves.

2. Observe but men's desire of applause, and their great impatience of
dispraise, and judge by this of their self-denial. Who is it that is angry with
those that Praise them, yea though they exceed their bounds, and ascribe more
to them than is due? Says Seneca [ Si invenimus qui nos bonos viros dicat, qui
prudentes, qui sanctos, non sumus modica laudatione contenti; quicquid in nos
adulatio sine pudore congessit, tanquam debitum prehendimus: Optimos nos esse,
sapientissimosque affirmantibus assentimus, quum sciamus illos saepe multa
mentiri. Adeo quoque indulgemus nobis, ut laudari velimus in id, cui contraria
maxim facimus.] Even Proud men would be praised for Humility, and covetous men
for Liberality, and fools for Wisdom, and ignorant men for Learning, and
treacheros hypocrites for sincerity and plain honesty; and few of the best do
heartily distaste their own commendations, or refuse any thing that is offered
them, though beyond desert. But if they think they are lightly or hardly
thought of, or hear of any that speak against them, or dishonor them in the
eyes of men, you shall see how little they can deny themselves. O how the
hearts of many that seemed godly men, will swell against them that speak to
their disparagement? What uncharitable, unchristian deportment, will a little
injury produce? What bitter words! What estrangedness, and division, if not
plain hatred, and reviling, and revenge! Yea, it were well (in comparison) if a
due Reproof, from neighbors or from Ministers (that are bound to do it by the
Lord) would not draw forth this secret Venom, and show the world the scarcity
of self-denial. Let others speak never so well of God, and of all good men, and
be never so faithful or serviceable in the Church, yet if they do but speak ill
of them (though it is like deservedly and justly) these selfish men cannot abide
them. By this you may perceive what interest is strongest with them; were they
carried up from themselves by the Love of God, they would delight to hear the
Praise of God, and of their Brethren, and be afraid to hear their own; and say
from their hearts, Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name be glory,
Psalm. 115. 1. To praise another may be our gain (in the discharge of a duty,
and exercise of Love) but to be Praised our selves is usually our danger. Pride
needs no such fuel or bellows. Non laudato, sed laudant^bus prodest, says
Augustine. Esse humilem est nolle laudari in se: Qui in se laudari appetit,
superbus esse convincitur, inq. id. It is the expectation of these proud and
selfish men, that tempts men to the odious art of flattery, when they find it
is the way to please. And when one is flattering, and the other pleased with
it, what a foolish and sordid employment have they? [ Et Vani sunt qui
laudantur, and mendaces qui laudant:] says Austin. It is God to whom the
Praise is due, whom we know we cannot Praise too much, whose praises we should
love to speak and hear. [ In laud Dei est securitas laudis; ut laudator non
timet, ne de laudato erubescat] says Austin. We may boldly Praise him, of whom
we are sure we never need to be ashamed. It is God in his servants that we must
praise, and it is only his Interest in our own Praise that we must regard.

3. Observe but upon what account it is that most men's Affections are carried
to, or against their neighbors, and then judge by this of their self-denial.
Even men that would be accounted godly, do Love or hate men according as their
self-interest commands them, more than according to the Interest of Christ.
Let a man be never so eminent in holiness, and never so useful and serviceable
in the Church, and one that has proved faithful in the greatest trials, if he
do but oppose a selfish man, and be thought by him to be against him, he hates
him at the heart, or has as base contemptuous thoughts of him, as malice can
suggest. He can as easily nullify all his graces, and multiply his smallest
infirmities into a swarm of crimes, by a censorious mind and a slanderous
tongue, as if virtue and vice received their form and denominations from the
respect of men's minds and ways to him; and all men were so far good or evil,
as they please him, or displease him; and he expects that others should esteem
men such as he is pleased to describe or call them. Let all the Country be the
witnesses of a man's upright and holy life, yea let the multitude of the ungodly
themselves be convinced of it, so far as that their consciences are forced to
bear witness of him, as Herod did of John, Mark 6. 20. that he was a just man
and an holy; yet can the selfish hypocrite that is against him, blot out his
uprightness with a word, and make him to be Proud or False, or Covetous, or
what his malice please; yea make him an Hypocrite as he is indeed himself. No
man can be good in their eyes that is against them: or if he be acknowledged
honest in the main, it is mixed with exceptions and charges enough, to make him
seem vile while they confess him honest: and if they acknowledge him a man,
they will withal describe him to be so plaguey or leprous, that he shall be
thought not fit for humane converse. Such a man is an honest man, say they; but
he is a peevish, humorous, self-conceited fellow: And why so? Because he is
against some opinion or interest of theirs: He is proud, because he presumes
to dissent from them, or reprehend them: He raileth, every time he opens
their errors, or tells them of their mis-doings: He is a Liar, if he do but
contradict them, and discover their sins, though it be with words of truth and
soberness. In a word, no person, no speeches, or writings, no actions can be
just, that are against a selfish man. In differences at Law, his cause is good,
because it is his: and his adversaries is always bad, because it is against
him. In public differences the side that he is on (that is for him) is always
right, let it be never so wrong in the eyes of all impartial men: The cause is
good that he is for, (which is always that which seems for him) though it be
undoubted Treason and perfidious Rebellion, accompanied with perjury, murder,
and oppression: And the cause must be always bad that is against him; and they
are the Traitors, and Rebels, and Oppressors that resist him. His own murders
are honorable Victories, and other men's Victories are cruel and barbarous
murders. All is naught that is against themselves. They are Affected to men
according to their self-interest: they judge of them and their actions
according as they do Affect them: they speak of them and deal by them according
to this corrupted judgment.

But as for any that they imagine do Love and Honor them, they can Love them
and speak tenderly of them, be they what they will. A little grace or virtue in
them, seems much: And their parts seem excellent that indeed are mean: If
they drop into Perjury, Fornication, Treason, or such like scandalous sins,
they have always a mantle of Love to cover them: or if they blame them a
little, they are easily reconciled, and quickly receive them to their former
honor. If they have any thing like Grace, it is easily believed to be Grace
indeed, if they be but on their side: If they have nothing like Grace, they can
Love them for their good natures, but indeed it is for themselves.

When this self-love describes any person, when it writes Histories, or
Controversies about any cause or person that they are concerned in, how little
credit do they deserve! Whence is it else that we have such contrary
descriptions of Persons and Actions in the writings of the several Parties as
we find? How holy, and temperate, and exceedingly industrious a man was Calvin,
if the whole multitude of sober, godly men that knew him may be credited; or if
we may believe his most constant intimate acquaintance; or if we may judge by
his judicious, pious, numerous writings: And yet if the Papists may be believed
(contrary to the witness of a Popish City where he was bred) he was a
stigmatized Sodomite; he was a glutton (that eat but once a day, and that
sparingly;) he was an idle fleshly man (that preached usually every day, and
wrote so many excellent Volumes;) and he dyed blaspheming and calling on the
Devil (that is, in longing and praying for his remove to Christ, crying daily,
How long lord! how long!) and how comes all this inhumane forgery about? Why,
one lying Pelagian Apostate Bolsecke wrote it (whom Calvin had shamed for his
errors:) and a peevish Lutheran; Schlusselburgius has related part of it from
him; and this is sufficient warrant for the Papists, ordinarily to persuade
their followers it is true, and with seared Consciences to publish it in their
writings, though Massonius and some other of the soberer sort, among
themselves, do ^^ame them for the forgery. So do they by Luther, Beza, and many
more.

Among our selves here, how certainly and commonly is it known to all impartial
men acquainted with them, that the persons nicknamed Puritans in England have
been (for the most part) a people fearing God and studying an holy life, and of
an upright conversation, so that the impartial did bear them witness, that in
the scorners mouth, a Puritan was one that was Integervitae, scelerisque purus;
and this was the reason of their suffered-scorn; and that the name was the
Devils common engine in this Land, to shame people from reading and hearing
Sermons, and praying, and avoiding the common sins, and seriously seeking their
salvation: A Puritan was one that [ Believes (unfeignedly) that God is: and
that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him] Heb. 12. 6. that
strives to enter in at the strait gate, and lives as men that believe that
Heaven is worth their labor, and that Gods Kingdom and its Righteousness
should be first sought, Mat. 6. 33. And yet if Fitz Simon and other Jesuits,
and Bishop Bancroft, Dr. P. Heylin, Mr. Tho. Pierce, and other such among us
are to be believed, what an abominable odious sort of people are they (and
especially the Presbyterians, who are the greatest part of them) So common it
is for selfish me^, to make their gain sayers, as odious as they can devise,
that I con^e^s I wondered that I me with no more of this dealing my self, from
Papists, Anabaptists, or any that have turned their sti^e against me: And at
last Mr. Pierce has answered my expectation; and from my own confession, (not
knowing me himself) has drawn my picture, that I am Pro^^i, Lazy, False, an
Hypocrite, u^just, a Reader, etc. And from this Bolsecks credit, I make no
doubt but the Papists will think they may warrantably descr^b^ me, (if I be
thought worthy their re^embrance) in all following Age^; though now I have
nothing from them but good word^* But it is a small thing to be judged by man,
especially when our ^^u^^ enjoy the Lord.
what intolerable, hypocritical, bloody men? And what is the reason of these
accusations? Much is pretended; but the sum of all is, that they were in some
things against the Opinions or Interests of the persons that abuse them: the
Jesuits know that they were averse from their Doctrines and Practices. The rest
are angry because some of them would be excused from two or three Ceremonies,
and from Vowing Obedience to the Ceremonymakers. Yea many of their accusers
think themselves injured, if not oppressed and persecuted, as long as they are
withheld from silencing, ejecting or persecuting these, that would fain serve
God according to his Word, as the sufficient Rule, and have nothing imposed on
them in matter of worship, but Necessary things, according to the Apostles
decree, Acts 15. 28. By all this judge how rare self-denial is, when the
Interest of men's own Opinions, Persons or Parties, can cause such unchristian
dealing from self-esteeming-professors and Preachers of the Gospel. Selfishness
is the greatest Liar, and Slanderer, and the most malicious Calumniator in the
world.

4. Observe but how light most make of their own sins, and how easily they
aggravate the sins of others; and how light they make of the good that is in
others, in comparison of that which is in themselves, or those that are of
their side; and judge by this of their self-denial! Judah would have judged
Th^^ar hardly; but he was not so severe against himself David pronounces very
peremptorily the sentence (...) against the offender, till he heard from
N^than, Thou art the man. How hard is it to convince a selfish ^e of any sin
that will admit of an excuse or cloak? All the Town can see the Pride of some,
the covetousness of others, the unpeaceable unchristian behavior of others,
and yet themselves, that should most observe it, and best discern i^, perceive
it not, nor will by any means be brought to see it. No Minister can put them
down, when they are justifying themselves; nor make them humbly and heartily
confess that they have sinned. (But God will ere long convince them
irresistibly, and teach their tongues another kind of language.) Let the case
of another come before them, and how readily will they adjudge him to penitent
confession, reparation, restitution, and through-reformation! But the case is
altered, when it becomes their own. Such incompetent Judges are these selfish
hypocrites.

5. Observe but how casily men fall out with one another, and how hardly they
are reconciled, and how much ado any peacemaker shall have to end the
difference; and observe also whether all the quarrel be not about some selfish
interest: and judge by this of their selfdenial. When do they so fall out with
men, for wronging God, or the Gospel, or their own souls, as they do for
wronging them?

And if a Minister that can bear an injury against himself, do faithfully
rebuke them that deal injuriously against Christ, and against the Church, and
the souls of men, (especially if they be Great men in the world that are
reproved) it is strange to see how self makes them storm; though they have read
what a mark of Rebellion, and prognostic of misery it was, even in Kings, to
reject the reproofs of the Messengers of the Lord? much more to hate or
persecute the reprover.

6. Observe also how forward many are, unreasonably to exalt their own
understandings, above those that are far wiser than themselves: and judge by
this of their self-denial. Though their Brethren or Teachers, have studied, and
prayed, and sought after knowledge, ten times, or twenty times more than they,
and have as faithfully obeyed according to their knowledge, and indeed be
incomparably beyond them in understanding: yet how commonly shall you meet with
unstudied, unexperienced Novices (notably described, 1 Timothy 3. 6. and 6. 4.) of
undigested notions, and green, and raw apprehensions, that are so puffed up, with
a little smattering seeming knowledge, that they despise both Ministers and
people, that be not of their mind, and vilify them as a sort of ignorant
deluded men. And do they indeed excel us in knowledge as much as they pretend?
O that they did that so we might see the Church furnished with wiser better
Teachers, and might our selves have the privilege of being their hearers, and
of being better instructed by them! But how evident is it to all that have
eyes, that it is in Pride, and not in Knowledge that they excel; and that all
this comes from the Dominion of Self? and that they speak evil of the things
they know not, Jude 10.

7. Observe also how far men are carried by the fond over-valuing of their own
opinions against all Reason, and former promises, and against all bonds to God
and man; and then judge of their self-denial. If once they feel a new
apprehension, it tickleth them with delight, as being an elevation of their
understandings above other men's; and as Parents are fond of their children,
because they are their own, so are the Proud through the corruption of their
minds as fond of an Opinion which they can call their Own, if there be any
thing of singularity in it to make them seem persons of more than ordinary
understanding. And when they are once possessed of it, how partially do they
indulge it? How light do they make of the strongest arguments that are brought
against it? How contemptuously do they think and speak of the persons, the
judgments, the writings, the reasonings of any that are against them? Nay
usually they will not be persuaded so much as once to read the writings that
contradict them. Or if they do, it is with so much prejudice and partiality,
that they have in their minds confuted them, before they read or understand
them, and instead of considering the weight of arguments, and comparing
faithfully cause with cause, they only study what to say against their
adversary (for so they account those that would cross or confute their
opinions.)

Nay observe but what a change a new opinion makes upon them in reference to
their former friends. How strange do they look at them that cannot follow them
in their fancies? Though before they were their bosom friends, yet without any
change in themselves, they have lost their interest in these changelings: And
though before they honored and praised them, yet all is changed when they
themselves are changed; and their friends must seem to have lost their wits or
honesty (or never to have had any) as soon as themselves have lost their
humility and charity. How much am I able to say of this, from sad experience of
the change of many of my ancient friends? Some of them are changed to a
reproaching of the Scripture, Church, and Ministry, and Ordinances, and to a
denying of the Christian Faith; and these I have lost (for they have lost
themselves:) And indeed these have constrained me to withdraw from them my
ancient Love of complacency, though I have a Love of compassion to them still.
Others are secretly ensnared by the Papists: and these I have lost, (though
they seem to bear me some respect.) Others are changed to opinions which they
think meet to Hide: and these look strange at me; especially since I wrote
against these Hiders. Others are changed in the point of Baptism: and these are
greatly offended with me, for dissenting and giving the Reasons of my dissent:
and what uncharitable dealings some of them have been guilty of, I shall not
now express. Some of them have They waylaid the Messengers that I sent Letters
by to friends, took them from the ^ by force, and se^^ them to (...) to the
Council of State to the trouble of those I wrote to, though nothing was found
but ^^no^ency: And this was by my old (...), who differed from ^^^ in nothing
but ^^tant (...) Changes of our Government; and yet (...).
turned to one opinion, and some to another, and almost all that make these
turns have left their Charity behind them: Some of them take up new Causes in
the Commonwealth: and these are as angry with me as the rest, because I cannot
follow them in their Changes! How many ways has a man to lose a selfish
friend! I was once beloved by all these men: and now I am either hated, or
looked at as a stranger (at least:) when I am where I was when I had their Love.

If I know my heart, I speak not this in any great sense of the loss of my own
interest, but in the sense of the lamentable Power and Prevalency of Self-love,
and Self-conceitedness in the world. And while I am bitterly censured by almost
every party, how easily could I recover my interest and reputation with any one
of them, if I could but be of their mind and side? How wise and how honest a
man could I be with the Anabaptists, if I would but be Rebaptized, and turn to
them? And how much should I be valued by the Papists, if I would turn to them?
The like I may say of all the other forenamed parties: For every one of them
have by word or writing signified so much to me. Even the Grotian Prelatists
would wipe their mouths, and speak me fairer, if I could turn to them: Mr.
Pierce himself, that has exceeded all men (in his late Book abounding with
visible fal^hoods and unchristian abuse of the servants of the Lord, whom he
calls Puritans) yet tells me, page 212. [ We contend for your fellowship,
and daily pray for your coming in; if you, by name, should have occasion to
pass this way, and present your self with other guests, at the holy Supper of
our Lord, no man on earth should be more welcome: but if you and your partners
will continue your several separations, and shut your selves out from our
Communion, as it were judging your selves unworthy of the Kingdom of God, and
excommunicating your selves, etc. -- ] See here the power of Selfishness! A man
that is painted out as Lazy, a Reader, a Proud Hypocrite, and much more,
should be as welcome as any man on earth, if he will but have communion with
them in their way! how much more if he were but of their party? This would cure
Hypocrisy, Pride, and all these crimes. And till we can comply with them we [
Excommunicate our selves, and judge our selves unworthy of the Kingdom of God.]
He that thinks Bishops should not be, as now, Diocesan, and undertake many
hundred Parishes, and then feed and govern them by others; and he that submits
not to their mode, in a Surplice, or some form of Prayer, does therefore judge
himself [ unworthy of the Kingdom of God:] as if Gods Kingdom were confined to
them, and lay in meats and drinks, and not in Righteousness and Peace! And as
if we continued in an excommunication of our selves, because we are not of
their party: when yet we deny no Protestants to be our Brethren, nor refuse
local Communion with them, so they will grant it us on Scripture-terms: which
if they will not, we will yet hold communion with them in several
Congregations. But thus it appears how strong self-interest is in the world;
and how charitable men are to those of their own opinions or parties, and how
easily many do take liberty to speak their pleasure against any that are not of
their mind.

8. Observe also how forward men are to Teach, and how backward to be Learners,
and then judge of their Self-denial. Why are so many unwilling to enter by the
way of Ordination? but (too commonly) because they judge better of their Own
abilities than Ordainers do, and therefore suspect that they may be rejected by
the Ordainers, or disgraced at the least, while they think highly of
themselves. But if they were self-denying men, they would think the sober,
faithful Pastors, much fitter Judges of their abilities than themselves, and
would not run before they are sent. Many that reproach the Ministers as
deceivers, will needs be themselves the Teachers of the people: As if they
should say, (We silly ignorant souls) are wiser and fitter to be Teachers than
you: come down and let us take your places.] In conference you may observe that
most are forwarder to speak than to hear: which shows that they overvalue
their own understandings. And so much are Proud men delighted to be thought the
Oracles of the world, that if you will but seem to hearken to them, and learn
of them, and yield to their Opinions, you win their hearts, and shall be the
men that have their commendations. Insomuch that some late ambitious persons,
that have thought to rise by the art of dissimulation, have found that there is
no way for the deceiving of the people, and procuring the good will of most,
like this; even to seem to be of every man's opinion that they talk with, and to
make every Sect and Party believe that they are their friends, and of their
mind: Especially, if you will seem to be changed by their arguments, and give
them the glory of your convictions and illuminations, you will then be the
dearly beloved of their hearts. In all this you may see the rarity of
self-denial: Yea in the very work of God, too many of the most zealous godly
Ministers, that have been the instruments of converting many souls, are touched
a little with the temptation to this selfishness, looking too much to their own
part in the work.

9. Observe but how commonly with men called Christians, the interest of Christ
is trodden in the dirt, when it seems to cross any interest of their own. An
Argument drawn from the commands of God, or the necessity of the Church, or of
the souls of men, seems nothing to them, if their Honor, or Gain, or
Greatness, or safety, do stand up against it, and be inconsistent with its
conclusion. Hence it is that the souls of Hypocrites do cheat themselves by a
Carnal Religiousness, serving God only in subserviency to themselves. Hence it
is that Hypocrites do most show themselves in matters of self-interest: In the
cheap part of Religion, they seem to be as good as any: as zealous for their
party and opinions, (which they call the Truth) and as long and loud in prayer,
and for as strict a way of Discipline with others: But touch them in their
Estates or Names: Call them to costly works of Charity, or to let go their
right for peace, or public good, or to confess and lament any sin that they
commit, and you shall then see that they are but common men: and Self bears
rule instead of Christ. Hence also it is, that so many persons can bear with
themselves in any calling or trade of life that is but gainful, be it never so
unjust, and will not believe but it is lawful, because it is profitable; for
they suppose that gain is godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 5. Hence it is that so many
families will be so far Religious as will stand with their commodity; but no
further: Yea that so many Ministers have the wit to prove that most Duties are
to them no Duties, when they will cost them much labor or dishonor in the
world, or bring them under sufferings from men: And hence it is that so many
Carnal Politicians do in their Laws and Counsels always prefer the interest of
their bodies before Gods interest, and men's souls: Yea some are so far forsaken
by common reason, and void of the Love of God and his Church, as to maintain
that Magistrates in their Laws and Judgments must let matters of Religion
alone; as if that self, even carnal self were all their Interest, and all their
God: and as if they were of the Profane Opinion [ Every man for himself, and
God for us all] or as if they would look to their own cause, and bid God look
to his.

From the Power of this selfishness it is that so many Princes and States turn
persecutors, and stick not to silence, banish (and some of the bloodier sort,
to kill) the Ministers of Christ, when they do but think that they stand cross
to their carnal interests: And if you will plead the Interest of Christ and
souls against theirs, and tell them, that the banishment, imprisonment,
silencing or death of such or such a servant of the Lord, will be injurious to
many souls, and therefore if they were guilty of death in some cases, they
should reprieve them, as they do women with child, till Christ be formed in the
precious souls that they travail in birth with (so their Lives be not more
hurtful by any contrary mischief, which death only can restrain, which is not
to be supposed of sober men) yet all this seems nothing to a selfish
Persecutor, that regards not Christ's interest in comparison of his own. Self is
the great Tyrant and Persecutor of the Church.

10. Observe also how few they be that satisfy their souls in Gods
Approbation, though they are mis-judged and vilified by the world: and how few
that rejoice at the prosperity of the Gospel, though themselves be in
Adversity: most men must needs have the Hypocrites reward, Matthew. 6. 2. even
some commendation from men: and too few are fully pleased with his eye that
sees in seret, and will reward them openly, Matthew. 6. 4, 6. And hence it is
that injurious censures and hard words do go so near them, and they make so
great a matter of them. Those times do seem best to selfish men, which are most
for them: If they prosper, and their party prosper, though most of the Church
should be a loser by it, they will think that it is a blessed time: But if the
Church prosper, and not they, but any suffering befall them, they take on as if
the Church did stand or fall with them. Self-interest is their measure, by
which they judge of times and things.

11. Observe also how eagerly men are set to have their Own wills take place in
public businesses, and to, have their own opinions to be the Rule for Church
and Commonwealth: and then judge by this of their selfdenial. Were not self
predominant, there would not be such striving who should Rule, and whose will
should be the Law: but men would think that others were as likely to Rule with
Prudence and Honesty as they. How eager is the Papist to have his way by an
Universal Monarch? How eager are others for one Ecclesiastical National Head?
How eager are the Popular party for their way? as if the welfare of all did lie
in their several modes of Government. And so confidently do the Libertines
speak for theirs, that they begin now to make motions that our Parliament Men
shall be hanged or beheaded as Traitors, if any should make a motion in (a
free) Parliament, against the General Liberty which they desire. Wonderful!
that men should ever grow to such an overweening of themselves, and
over-valuing their own understandings, as to obtrude so palpable and odious a
wickedness upon Parliaments so confidently, and to take them for Traitors, that
will not be Traitors or grossly disobedient against the Lord? Self-denial would
cure these peremptory demands, and teach men to be more suspicious of their own
understandings.

12. Lastly, Observe but how difficult a thing it is to keep Peace (as in
families and neighbourhoods) so in Churches and Commonwealths; and judge by
this of men's self-denial. Husbands and Wives, brothers and sisters, masters and
servants, live at variance, and all through the conflicts that arise between
their contrary self-interests. If a beast do but trespass on a neighbors
grounds; if they be but assessed for the State, or poor, above their
expectations; if in any way of trading their commodity be crossed; you shall
quickly see where self bears Rule. This makes it so difficult a work to keep
the Churches from Divisions. Few men are sensible of the Universal Interest,
because they are captivated to their own: And therefore it is that men fear not
to make parties and divisions in the Church: and will tear it in pieces to
satisfy their interest or selfish zeal: Hence it is that Parties are so much
multiplied, and keep up the buckler against others, because that selfishness
makes all Partial. Hence it is that people fall off from their Pastors, or else
fall out with them, when they are crossed in their opinions, reproved for their
sins, or called to consess or make restitution, and perhaps that they may
sacrilegiously desraud the Church of Tithes or other payments that are due.
Hence it is also that members so often fall out with one another, for foul words,
or differences of judgment, or some point or other of self-interest: Nay
sometimes about their very seats in the place of Worship; while every man is
for himself, the Ministers can hardly keep them in Charity and Peace.

And is any of this agreeable to our holy Rule and Pattern? No man can think so
that has read the Gospel, but he that is so blinded by selfishness as not to
understand what makes against it. And here, besides what is largelier spoken
after, let me tell of a few of the evils of this sin, and the contrary benefits
of selfdenial.

1. The Power of selfishness keeps men strangers to themselves: They know not
their Original nor Actual sins, with any kindly humbling knowledge. The very
nature of Original sin does consist in these two things: Privatively, in the
want of our Original Love, or Propensity to God as God: I mean, the Privation
of the Root, or Habit, or Inclination, to Love God for himself, as the
Beginning or End of us and all things, and the absolute Lord, and infinite,
simple, inestimable Good. And Positively, in the inordinate Propensity or
Inclination to our selves: as for our selves, and not as duly subordinate to
God: The soul having unfaithfully and rebelliously withdrawn it self from God,
in point of Love and subjection, it become its own Idol, and looks no higher
than it self, and Loves God and all things but for it self (and principally
for its carnal pleasure:) And the Propensity to this, with the Privation of the
souls Inclination to God, is Original sin; the Disposition suited to the actual
sin that caused it, which was a retiring from God to self. He that feels not
this evil in himself, has no true knowledge of Original sin. And it is the want
of the sense of this great evil, (and so the want of being acquainted with
their hearts) that causes so many to turn Pelagians, and to deny the being of
Orignal sin.

2. Both selfishness, and the want of a true discerning of it, does breed and
feed abundance of errors, and teach men to corrupt the whole body of Practical
Divinity, and to subvert many Articles of faith, which stand in their way. How
comes the world to be all in a flame about the Universal Reign of the Pope of
Rome, but from the dominion of selfishness? Whence is it that the Nations of
the earth have been so troubled for Patriarchs, Metropolitans, and Diocesans
that must do their work by others, and for many things that (at best) can
pretend to be but humane, indifferent, changeable forms, but from the
prevalency of Self? Whence is it that men's consciences have been ensnared, and
the Churches troubled, by so many Ceremonies of men's invention, and the Church
must rather lose her faithfullest Pastors, than they be permitted to worship
God as Peter and Paul did? Has not selfishness and Pride done this? It is self
that has taught some to plead too much for their own sufficiency, and to deny
the need of special Grace. And so far has it prevailed with some of late, as
to lead them Doctrinally to deny, that God is the Ultimate End of man, and to
be Loved for himself, and above our selves and all things; but only (they say)
he is our finis cujus vel rei to be loved amore concupiscentiae: In a word, it
is this woeful principle that has corrupted Doctrine, Discipline and Worship,
in so many of the Churches.

3. We shall never have Peace in Church or Commonwealth, while selfishness
bears sway. Every man's Interest will be preferred before the public Interest,
and rise against it as often (which will be often) as they seem inconsistent. This
is the Vice that informs Tyranny, whether it be Monarchy, Aristocracy, or
Democracy, when selfish interest is preferred before the Common Interest. This
makes our people think themselves too wise or too good to learn, or to be
guided by their Pastors, and every man (of this strain) seems wise enough to
lead off a party of the Church into a mutiny against the Pastors and the rest.
This makes the labors of Reconcilers unsuccessful, while selfishness engages
so many wits, and tongues, and pens and parties, against the most necessary
equal terms, and endeavors of such as would Reconcile, Were it not for these
selfish men, how soon would all our rents be healed? how soon would all our
wars be ended? and all our heart-burnings and malicious oppositions be turned
into charitable consultations for an holy peace? If once men were carried above
themselves, they would meet in God the Center of Unity.

4. It is for want of self denial that we undergo so many disappointments, and
suffer so much disquietment and vexation. Were our wills more entirely
subjected to the will of God, so that his will were preferred before our own,
we should Rest in his will, and have no contradictory desires to be
disappointed, and no m^t^er left for self-vexation. Had we no disease, we
should feel no pain: and it is our self-will rebelling against the will of God
that is our disease. Self-denial removes all the venom from our hearts:
Persecution, and poverty, and sickness may touch our fle^h, but the heart is
fortified so far as we have his Grace. O how happily does it quiet and calm the
mind, when things befall us that would even distract a selfish man! O happy
man, where God is All, and Self is Nothing! There Duty, and Love, and Joy are
all, and trouble and distress is nothing; These are not our matters now; Partly
because we are above them, and partly because they belong not to our care, but
to his Povidence. Let us do our Duty and adhere to him, and let him dispose of
us as he sees meet. Who would much fear a Tyrant or any other enemy, that saw
God and Glory, which faith can see? Did we see the glorious Throne of Christ,
we should be so far from trembling at the bar of Persecutors, that we should
scarce so much regard them as to answer them; the infinite Glory would so
potently divert our minds. As we scarce hearken to our childre^s impertinent
babblings, when we are taken up with great Affairs; so if a Tyrant talk to us
of ^^^^ging or imprisonment, we should scarce hearke^ to such trivial
impertinencies, were we so far above our selves, as Faith and Love should
advance the soul.

I have further showed you in the following Treatise, how self-denial disableth
all Temptations; how it conduces to all eminent works of Charity, but
especially to the secret works of the sincere: It is of absolute necessity to
salvation: It is thething that hypocrites are condemned for want of: It is the
wisdom of the soul, as being the only way to our own security: And it is the
holiness and justice of the soul (as it is conjunct with the Love of God) in
that it restores to God his own: The excellency of Grace is manifested in
selfdenial. To do or suffer such little things as self is not much against, is
nothing: But to be Nothing in our selves, and God to be our All, and to close
with our first and blessed End, this is the nature of Sanctification.

Alas, poor England, (and more than England, even all the Christian world) into
what confusion and misery has selfishness plunged thee! Into how many pieces
art thou broken, because that every hypocrite has a self to be his principle
and end, and forsakes the true Universal End! How vain are our words to Rulers,
to Soldiers, to Rich and Poor, while we call upon them to Deny themselves! And
must we lose our labor? and must the Nation lose its peace and hopes? Is there
no remedy, but selfishness must undo all? If so, be it known to you, the
principal loss shall be your own; and in seeking your safety, liberty, wealth
and glory, you shall lose them all, and fall into misery, slavery and disdain.
Deny your selves, or save your selves, if you can. God is not engaged to take
care of you, or preserve you, if you will be your own, and will be reserving or
saving your selves from him. And though you may seem to prosper in self-seeking
ways, they will end, yea shortly end, in your confusion. You have seen of late
years in this Land, the Glory of Self-seekers turned to shame. But it is greater
shame that is out of sight. The word and works of God have warned you. If yet
the Cause and Church of God shall be neglected, and your selves and your own
affairs preferred, and men that shall not be tolerated to abuse you, shall be
Tolerated to abuse the souls of men, and the Lord that made them; and if God
must be denied, because you will not deny your selves, you shall be denied by
Christ, in your great extremity, when the remembrance of these things shall be
your torment. Hearken and Amend; or prepare your answer: for behold the Judge
is at the door.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the Nature of selfishness, as opposite to God; invading his
prerogative in ten particulars, Page 1 CHAP. II. Reasons of the Necessity of
Self-denial, p. 26 CHAP. III. Use 1. A general complaint of the prevalency of
selfishness, p. 33 CHAP. IV. The prevalency of selfishness in all Relations, p.
40 CHAP. V. The power of selfishness upon men's opinions in Religion, p. 49.
CHAP. VI. Men's great aversness to costly or troublesome Duties, p. 52 CHAP. VII.
Men's tenderness of Self in cases of any suffering, p. 60 CHAP. VIII. The
partiality of men's Judgment in their Own cases, p. 62 CHAP. IX. The great
power and prevalency of self discovered, p. 70 CHAP. X. Consectaries: 1. This
evinceth the fall of man, and Original corruption. 2. It tells us what to
expect from men, and gives us the truest Prognostic of affairs, so far as the
will of man determines them. 3. It warranteth a moderate incredulity and
jealousy of man. 4. It calleth^us to be jealous of our* sel^es, p. 77 CHAP.
XI. Use 2. To try our self-denial, Whether it be sincere, p. 79 CHAP. XII.
Exercise Self-denial. Ten Cases in which Self must be denied, p. 83 CHAP. XIII.
1. Selfish Dispositions to be denied: And 1. Selflove, p. 88 CHAP. XIV. 2.
Self-conceitedness must be denied, p. 93 CHAP. XV. Self-will must be denied --
p. 108 CHAP. XVI. Selfish passions to be denied -- p. 119 CHAP. XVII.
Self-imaginations to be denied -- p. 123 CHAP. XVIII. Inordinate appetite to be
denied -- p. 125 CHAP. XIX. II. Self-interest to be denied: And I. Pleasure:
And 1. That of the Taste, p. 134 Lustful pleasures to be denied, p. 140 CHAP.
XX. 3. Wanton talk, Love-songs, etc. to he denied, 142 CHAP. XXI. 4. Idle and
worldly talk to be denied, p. 147 CAP. XXII. 5. False stories, Romances, and
other idle tempting books -- p. 157 CHAP. XXIII. 6. Vain sports and past-times
to be denied -- p. 159 CHAP. XXIV. 7. Vain and sinful company to be denied, p.
166 CHAP. XXV. 8. Pleasing accommodations, Houses, Gardens, Horses, etc. 168
CHAP. XXVI. 9. Self-denial in Apparel needful, p. 174 CHA. XXVII. 10.
Self-denial against Ease, and Idleness, and worldly peace, p. 182 CHAP. XXVIII.
11. Delight in worldly Prosperity to be denied, p. 191 CHAP. XXIX. 12. Children
and Relationshow to be denied -- p. 195 CHAP. XXX. 13. Revengeful passions to
be denied, p. 203 CHAP. XXXI. 14. Useless History and News to be denied, p. 205
CHAP. XXXII. 15. Unnecessary knowledge and delight therein, to be denied -- -
p. 208 CHAP. XXXIII. 16. Afactious desire of the success of our Own opinions,
and the thriving of our own parties, as such, to be denied -- p. 214 CHAP.
XXXIV. 17. Carnal Liberty to be denied. There is an Holy Liberty, which none
must deny: And a wicked Liberty which none must desire: And an indifferent
Liberty: How far this must be denied, p. 218 CHAP. XXXV. 18. Our Native
Country and Habitations to be d^nied, p. 227 CHAP. XXXVI. 19. Bodily Health
and Ease from pains, p. 229 CHAP. XXXVII. 20. Natural life to be denied, p. 237
CHAP. XXXVIII. Twenty Reasons to move us to deny our Lives, and yield to
violent or natural death with comfortable submission, when God requires it, p.
243 CHAP. XXXIX. An answer to such Doubts as are raised by the fears of death,
p. 273 CHAP. XL. Directions to procure a willingness to die, p. 276 CHAP. XLI.
Self-denial in Point of Honor and Pride. And 1. Of climbing into dignities or
high places, p. 285 CHAP. XLII. 2. The Love and commendations of others, to be
denied, p. 291 CHAP. XLIII. 3. The Reputation of Wealth to be denied -- p. 293
CHAP. XLIV. 4. Comeliness and Beauty to be denied, p. 294 CHAP. XLV. 5.
Strength and Valor to be denied -- p. 296 CHAP. XLVI. 6. Wisdom and Learning
to be denied -- p. 297 CHAP. XLVII. 7. Reputation of Spiritual Gifts and
Abilities to be denied -- p. 299 CHAP. XLVIII. 8. The reputation of being
Orthodox, how to be denied -- -- p. 306 CHAP. XLIX. 9. The Reputation of
Godliness and Honesty, how to be denied, p. 309 CHAP. L. 10. A Renowned
perpetuated Name to be denied -- p. 313 CHAP. LI. Q. 1. Whether self-denial
consist in renouncing propriety? p. 331 CHAP. LII. Q. 2. Whether it consist in
renouncing Marriage? p. 333 CHAP. LIII. Q. 3. Whether it lie in solitude and
renouncing secular affairs? p. 335 CHAP. LIVE. Q. 4. Or in renouncing public
Offices and Honors? p. 336 CHAP. LV. Q. 5. Or in denying our Relations? p. 338
CHAP. LVI. Q. 6. Whether self-denial require us to give more to Godly
Strangers, than to kindred that are ungodly -- p. 340 CHAP. LVII. Q. 7. How we
must Love our neighbors as our selves? p. 343 CHAP. LVIII. Q. 8. What penance
or self-revenge it requires? p. 344 CHAP. LIX. Q. 9. Must all Passion be
denied? p. 345 CHAP. LX. Q. 10. How far must we deny our Reason? p. 346 CHAP.
LXI. Q. 11. How far must we be content with Gods afflicting will? etc. p. 347
CHAP. LXII. Q. 12. May God be finally loved as our felicity and portion, for
our selves? p. 349 CHAP. LXIII. Motives to self-denial: 1. Selfishness is the
grand Idolatry, p. 353 CHAP. LXIV. 2. It Is the enemy of all Moral good, p. 356
CHAP. LXV. 3. It Is contrary to the state of holiness and happiness, p. 365
CHAP. LXVI. 4. Self-seeking is self-losing: Self-denial is our safety, p. 368
CHAP. LXVII. 5. It Is the powerful enemy of all Ordinances, p. 373 CHAP. LXVIII.
6. It Is the enemy of all Societies, and Relations, and common good, p. 380
CHAP. LXIX. 7. It Corrupts and debaseth all that it disposes of, p. 300
CHAP. LXX. 8. Deny Self, or you will deny Christ, p. 394 CHAP. LXXI. 9. The
selfish deal worse with God than with the Devil, p. 396 CHAP. LXXII. It Is the
heaviest plague to be left to our selves, p. 398 CHAP. LXXIII. Ten Directions
to get Self-denial, p. 400 The Conclusion. p. 411
LUKE 9. 23, 24. And he said to them all, If any man will come after me, let
him deny himself, and take up his Cross daily and follow me: For whosoever will
save his life shall lose it: but whosoever will lose his life for my sake, the
same shall save it.
CHAP. I. What Selfishness and Self-denial are; at the Root.
I HAVE already spoken of Conversion in the foregoing Discourse, both opening
to you the true nature of it, and the reasons of its necessity, and persuading
men thereunto. But lest so great a work should miscarry with any for want of a
more particular explication, I should next open the three great parts of the
work distinctly and in order: that is, 1. From what it is that we must Turn: 2.
To whom we must Turn: 3. And By whom we must Turn. For though I touched all
these in the foregoing Directions, and through the discourse; yet I am afraid
lest so brief a touch should be uneffectual.

The first of these I shall handle at this time from this Text, meddling with no
more but what is necessary to our present business.

You may easily perceive that the Doctrine which Christ here proclaims to all
that have thoughts of being his followers, is this, that [ All that will be
Christians, must Deny themselves, and take up their Cross, and follow Christ,
and not reserve so much as their very lives, but resolve to resign up all for
him.]

Self-denial is one part of true Conversion: For the opening of this I must
show you; 1. What is meant by Self; and 2. What by Denying this Self: and 3.
The Grounds and Reasons of the point: and 4. I shall briefly apply it.

I. Self, is sometime taken for the very person, consisting of soul and body
simply considered: and this is called Natural or Personal Self. 2. Self is
taken for this Person considered in its capacity of earthly comforts, and in
relation to the present blessings of this world that tend to the prosperity of
man as in the flesh: And this may be called Earthly Self (yet in an innocent
sense.) 3. Self is taken for the Person as corrupted by inordinate sinful
sensuality; which may be called Carnal Self. 4. Self may be taken for the
Person in his sanctified estate; which is Spiritual Self. 5. And Self may be
taken for the person in his Naturals and Spirituals Conjunct, as he is capable
of a Life of Everlasting Felicity; which is the Immortal Self.

II. By Denying Self, is meant disclaiming, renouncing, disowning, and
forsaking it. Self is here looked on partly as a party dis^unct from Christ, and
withdrawn from its due subordination to God, and partly as his Competitor and
opposite: and accordingly it is to be denied, partly by a neglect, and partly
by an opposition.

Before I come to tell you how far self must be denied, I must tell you wherein
the disease of selfishness does consist; and for brevity we shall dispatch them
both together.

And on the Negative, 1. To be a natural Individual person distinct from God
our Creator, is none of our disease, but the state which we were created in.
And therefore no man must under pretense of self-denial either destroy himself,
or yet with some Heretics aspire to be essentially and personally one with
God, so that their individual personality should be drowned in him as a drop is
in the Ocean.

2. The disease of selfishness lies not in having a Body that is capable of
^asting sweetness in the Creature, or in having the Objects of our sense in
which we be delighted, nor yet in all actual sweetness and delight in them; nor
in a simple love of life it self: For all these are the effects of the Creators
Will. And therefore this selfdenyal does not consist in a hatred or disregard
of our own lives; or in a destruction of our appetites or senses, or an
absolute refusal to please them in the use of the Creatures, which God has
given us.

3. Yea though our Natures are corrupted by sin, selfdenyal requires not that
we should kill our selves, and destroy our humane natures that we may thereby
destroy the sin. Self-murder is a most heinous sin, which God condemns.

4. Our spiritual self, or self as sanctified must not be so denied, as to deny
our selves to be what we are, or have what we have, or do what we do: we may
not deny Gods Graces; nor deny that they are in us as the subject, nor may we
restrain the holy desires which God exciteth in us; or deny to fulfill them, or
bring them toward fruition, when opportunity is offered us.

5. We may not deny to accept of any mercy which God shall offer us, though but
a common Creature: nor to use any talent for his service if he choose us for
his stewards; much less may we refuse any spiritual mercy, that may further our
Salvation: It is not the self-denial required by Christ, that we deny to be
Christians, or to be sanctified by the spirit, or to he delivered from our sins
and enemies; or that we deny to use the means and helps that are offered us, or
to accept of the privileges purchased by Christ: Much less to deny our
salvation it self, and to undo our own souls. In a word, it is not any thing
that is really and finally to our hurt or loss.

But (as to the Affirmative) I shall show you what the disease of selfishness
indeed is, and so what self-denial is. 1. When God had created man in his own
Image, he gave him a holy disposition of soul, which might incline him to his
Maker as his only Felicity and Ultimate End. He made him to be blessed in the
sight of his Glory, and in the everlasting Love of God, and delight in him, and
praises of him. This excellent employment and glory did God both fit him for,
and set before him.

But the first temptation did entice him to adhere to an inferior good, for
the pleasing of his flesh, and the advancement of him self to a carnal kind of
felicity in himself, that he might be as God in knowing good and evil. And thus
man was suddenly taken with the Creature as a means to the pleasing of his
carnal self, and so did depart from God his true felicity; and retired into
himself in his estimation, affection, and intention; and delivered up his
Reason in subjection to his sensuality, and made himself his Ultimate End.

With this sinful inclination are we all born into the world; so that every man
according to his corrupted nature does terminate all his desires in himself:
and what ever he may notionally be convinced of to the contrary, yet
practically he makes his earthly life and the advancement and pleasure which he
expects therein, to be his felicity and end.

Self-denial now is the cure of this: It carries a man from himself again, and
shows him that he was never made to be his own felicity or end; and that the
flesh was not made to be pleased before God; and that it is so poor, and low,
and short a felicity, as indeed is but a name and shadow of felicity, and when
it pretends to that, a mere deceit. It shows him how unreasonable, how
impious and unjust it is, that a Creature and such a Creature, should terminate
his desires and intentions in himself: And this is the principal part of
self-denial.

2. As God was man's ultimate End in his state of innocence, so accordingly man
was appointed to use all Creatures in order to God, for his Pleasure and Glory.
So that it was the work of man to do his Makers will, and he was to use nothing
but with this intention.

But when man was fallen from God to himself, he afterward used all things for
himself, even his carnal self; and all that he possessed was become the
provision and fuel of his lusts; and so the whole creation which he was capable
of using, was abused by him to this low and selfish end, as if all things had
been made but for his delight and will.

But when man is brought to Deny himself, he is brought to restore the
Creatures to their former use, and not to sacrifice them to his fleshly mind;
so that all that he has and uses in the world, is used to another end (so far
as he denies himself) than formerly it was; even for God and not himself.

3. In the state of Innocence, though man had naturally an aversness from death
and bodily pains, as being natural evils, and had a desire of the welfare even
of the flesh it self; yet as his body was subject to his soul, and his senses
to his Reason, so his bodily ease and welfare was to be esteemed and desired
and sought, but in a due subordination to his spiritual welfare, and especially
to his Makers Will. So that though he was to value his Life, yet he was much
more to value his everlasting life, and the pleasure and Glory of his Lord.

But now when man is fallen from God to Himself, his Life and earthly felicity is
the sweetest and the dearest thing to him that is. So that he prefers it
before the Pleasing of God and everlasting life: And therefore he seeks it
more, and holds it faster as long as he can, and parts with it more
unwillingly. As Innocent Nature had an appetite to the objects of sense; but
corrupted nature has an enraged, greedy, rebellious and inordinate appetite to
them: so Innocent nature had a love to this natural earthly life and the
comforts of it: but corrupted Nature has such an inordinate love to them, as
that all things else are made but subordinate to them, and swallowed up in this
gulf: even God himself is so far loved as he befriendeth these our carnal ends,
and furthereth our earthly prosperity and life.

But when men are brought to Deny themselves, they are in their measures
restored to their first esteem of Life and all the prosperity and earthly
comforts of life. Now they have learned so to love them as to love God better;
and so to value them as to prefer everlasting life before them; and so to hold
them and seek their preservation as to resign them to the will of God, and to
lay them down when we cannot hold them with his Love, and to choose death in
order to life everlasting, before that life which would deprive us of it. And
this is the principal instance of self-denial which Christ gives us here in
the Text, as it is recited by all the three Evangelists that recite these
words, [ He that saves his life shall lose it, etc. And what shall it profit a
man to win all the world and lose his soul?] By these instances it appears,
that by self-denial Christ does mean a setting so light by all the world, and
by our own lives, and consequently, our carnal Content in these, as to be
willing and Resolved to part with them all, rather than with him and
everlasting life: even as Abraham was bound to love his Son Isaac, but yet so
to prefer the Love and Will of God, as to be able to sacrifice his Son at Gods
Command.

And the Lord Jesus himself was the liveliest Pattern to us of his Self-denial
that ever the world saw: Indeed his whole life was a continued practice of it.
And it has often convinced me that it is a special part of our Sanctification,
when I have considered how abundantly the Lord has exercised himself in it for
our example. For as it is desperate to think with the Socinians that he did it
only for our Example; so it is also a desperate Error of others, to think that
it was only for satisfaction to God, and not at all for our Example. Many do
give up themselves to Flesh-pleasing, upon a misconceit that Christ did
therefore deny his flesh, to purchase them a liberty to please theirs. As in
his Fasting and Temptations, and his sufferings by the reproach and ingratitude
of men, and the outward Poverty and Meanness of his condition, the Lord was
pleased to deny himself; so especially in his last Passion and death. As I have
showed elsewhere, he loved his natural life and peace: and therefore in
manifestation of that, he prays, Father, if it be thy Will, let this Cup pass
from me: But yet when it came to the comparative practical Act, he proceeded to
choose his Fathers Will with death, rather than life without it, and therefore
says, [ Not my Will (that is, my simple love of life) but thy Will be done.]
In which very words he manifests another will of his own, besides that, which
he consents shall not be done, and shows that he preferred the pleasing of
his Father in the Redemption of the world, before his own life. And thus in
their measure he causes all his Members to do: so that life, and all the
comforts of life, are not so dear to them as the love of God and everlasting
life.

4. When God had created man, he was presently the Owner of him, and man
understood this that he was God's, and not his own. And he was not to claim a
Propriety in himself, nor to be affected to himself as his own, nor to live as
his own, but as His that made him.

But when he fell from God, he arrogated practically (though notionally he may
deny it) a propriety in himself, and uses himself accordingly.

And when Christ brings men to deny themselves, they cease to be their own in
their conceits any more; Then they resign themselves wholly to God as being
wholly his. They know they are his, both by the right of Creation and of
Redemption: And therefore are to be disposed of by him, and to glorify him in
body and spirit which are his, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. Romans 14. 9. To be thus
heartily devoted to God as his own, is the form of Sanctification; and to live
as God's own, is the truly Holy life.

5. As man in Innocence did know that he was not his own; so he knew that
nothing that he had was his own; but that he was the Steward of his Creator,
for whom he was to use them, and to whom he was accountable.

But when he was fallen from God to himself, though he had lost the Right of a
Servant, yet be graspeth at the Creature, as if he had the Right of a Lord: He
now takes his Goods, his Lands his Money to be his own: and therefore he thinks
he may use them for himself, and give God only some small Contribution, lest he
should disturb his Possession: he says as the impious ones, Psalm. 12. 4. [ Our
lips are our own; who is Lord over us?] Though all of them know speculatively
that all is Gods, yet practically they take it and use it as their own.

But when Grace teaches them to deny themselves, it strippeth them naked of
all that they seemed Proprietors of; and makes them confess that nothing is
their own, but all is Gods; and to God they do devote it, and use it for him,
and give him his own: which the first Christians signified by selling all, and
laying at the Apostles feet. And therefore he asks God what he shall do with
it, and how he shall use it; and if God take it from him, he can bless the name
of the Lord with Job, Job 1. 21. as knowing he takes but his own: and can say
with Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3. 18. He
knows that God may do with his own as he list. Mat. 20. 15. and that he can
have nothing but of his bounty; and therefore that it is his Mercy that leaves
him any thing; but it were no wrong to him if he took away all. And thus he
understands that he is but a Steward, and therefore must use all that he has
for him that he received it from. If he have Children, his desire is to know
which way they may be most serviceable to God: and to that he will devote them.
If he have Wealth, or Honor, and Power among men, his care is to know which
way he may employ them for his Masters use, and so he will employ them. If he
have Wit and Learning, his care is to serve God by it. If he have strength and
time, he is thinking which way to improve them for his Lord. And if vain
Companions, or the World, or fleshly Delights would draw him to lay them out
for them, he remembers that this were to waste his Masters stock upon his
enemies. So that though the sanctified man has all things, yet he knows that
he has nothing. All things are his as Gods Steward: but nothing is properly
and ultimately his own. All things are his for God; but nothing is his for his
Carnal-self, nor ultimately for his personal or natural self. Upon this ground
he gives the Devil, the World, and the Flesh a Denial, when they would have his
Time, his Tongue, his Wit, his Wealth, or any thing that he possesses: he
tells them [ They are none of mine, but God's: I received them, and I must be
accountable for them. I had them not from you, and therefore I may not use them
for you: I must give to God the things that are God's: that which is yours I
will readily yield you. Justice requires that every one have his own.] And
thus Selfdenyal does take off the sanctified from giving that which is God's
unto themselves.

Object. But do we not lawfully use his Mercies for our selves? Is not our
Meat, and Drink, and Clothes, and Houses, and Goods our own, and may we not use
them for our selves?

Answ. Improperly they are our own: so far our own, as that our Fellow Servants
may not take them from us without our Lords consent: as every servant may have
a peculiar stock entrusted in his hands, or may have his tools to do his work
with, which indeed are his Masters; but are his to use. But as to a strict
Propriety they are none of ours, but God is the only Proprietary of the world.

And for the use of them, it may be for our selves in subordination to God, but
never ultimately for our selves. We may not use one Creature, but ultimately
and principally for God. When we eat or drink, we must never make the pleasing
of our Appetite our end, but must do it to strengthen, and cheer, and fit our
selves for the service of God, and therefore we must first ask God, and not our
Appetite, what, and how much we must eat and drink: And we must no further
please our Appetite, than the pleasing of it does fit us for the service of
God. It is the express Command, 1 Cor. 10. 31 [ Whether ye eat or drink, or
what ever ye do, do all to the Glory of God.] You may not wear your Clothes
merely and ultimately for your bodies, but only to fit your bodies for Gods
service: and therefore you must advice with his Word, and with your end, what
you should put on. You may not provide a house to dwell in, nor Friends, nor
Riches, nor any thing else for the pleasing of your flesh, as your ultimate
end, but for the service of your Lord. For you must put on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans
13. 14.

6. As man had his Being and well-being from God, so is it God only that can
preserve and continue them. Innocent man understood this, and therefore lived
in a Dependence upon God; looking to his hand for the supply of his wants, and
casting all his care upon him, and trusting him wholly with himself, and all,
and not distracting his own mind with cares and distrustful fears, but quieted
and contented his mind in the Wisdom, Goodness, and All-sufficienly of God.

But when man was fallen to himself from God, he desired presently to have his
portion or stock in his own hands, and grew distrustful of God, and began to
look upon himself as his own preserver; (in a great measure) and therefore he
fell to carking and caring for himself, and to studious contrivances for his
own preservation and supplies. He searched every Creature for himself, and
labored to find in it some good for himself, as if the care of himself had
been wholly divolved on himself. I have been as much troubled to understand
that Text in Genesis 3. 22. as any one almost in the Bible, being somewhat
unsatisfied with some ordinary expositions; and yet it is too hard for me. But
this seems to me the most probable Interpretation; that in his estate of
innocence Adam was as a Child in his Fathers house, that was only to study to
please his Father, and to do the work that he commanded him, but not to take
any thought or care for himself: for while he was obedient, it was his Fathers
part to preserve him and provide for him, to keep off death and danger, and
supply all his wants. And therefore though man had the faculty or power of
knowing more perfect than we have now, yet he did not need to trouble himself
about these matters of Self, because they belonged to God: and consequently had
not the actual consideration of knowledge of them: for that would have been but
a vain and troublesome knowledge and consideration to him: For though the
knowledge of all things Necessary to be known, was part of his perfection, yet
the actual knowledge of many things unnecessary and vexatious or tempring, may
be part of a man's infelicity and misery. And so he that increases knowledge
increases sorrow, Eccl. 1. 18. As man that foreknoweth his own death, is
through the fear of it all his life time subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 15. and
the fear is more grievous than the death it self; when a beast that knows not
his death is freed from those fears. Indeed in our fallen estate there is some
use for more of this kind of knowledge than before; But in innocence man needed
only to know his maker, and his will and works, and the Creature as his
utensils, and the glass in which he was to be seen, and to fear with moderation
the death which he had threatened, merely as threatened by him. But by the
temptation of Satan, man grew desirous to be past a child, at his Fathers
finding, and under his care, and would take care and thought for himself and
know what was good or evil for himself as to the natural man: and so far turned
his eye to the Creature to study it for himself, when he should have studied
God in it: and to search after good and evil to himself in it, which he should
have searched after the attributes of God in it, and daily gazed with holy love
and admiration upon his blessed face that shined in this glass: and so he would
use the Creature directly for himself, which he should have used only for Gods
service. And thus I conceive man did indeed by his fall attain to much more
actual knowledge as to the number of objects than he had before: which
knowledge was indeed in it self considered Physically good, but not Good to him
as any part of his felicity, or his virtue, but rather by participation his sin
and misery, as being unsuitable to his condition. It was better with him when
he knew One God, and all things in God as they conduced to the Love and Service
of God, and were suitable to his state, than when he turned his mind from God,
and fell to study the Creature in it self, and for himself, as Good or Evil to
himself, and so lost himself and his understanding in a crowd of unnecessary
and misused objects: Like a foolish Patient that having a most judicious and
faithful Physician that will take care of his health, and provide him the best
and safest remedies, does grow to an eager desire to be acquainted himself with
the nature of each medicine and to be skilful in the cure of his own disease,
that he may trust his Physician no longer, but may be his own Physician: and
therefore hearkneth to a seducer that tells him [ The Physician does but keep
thee in ignorance, lest thou should be as wise as he, and able to cure or
preserve thy self, hearken to me, and I will teach thee to known all these
things thy self, and so thou may take care of thy self.] So man was seduced
by Satan to withdraw himself from the fatherly care of God, by a desire himself
to be wise for himself in the knowledge of all that in the Creature which might
be directly good or evil to himself, so taking on himself the work of God, and
casting off the work that God had set him, and withdrawing himself from his
necessary dependence on his Maker. And accordingly much of this selfishness
knowledge of the Creature he did attain: but with the woeful loss of the Divine
knowledge of the Creature, and of the filial soul-contenting knowledge of God:
yea and of himself, as in his due subordination to God. This seems the sense of
this text, and this is the case of fallen mankind.

Naturally now every man would fain have his safety and Comforts in his own
hand. He thinks them not so sure and well in the hand of God: O what would a
carnal man give that he had but his life and health in his own hand, and might
keep them as long as he saw good! When he is poor, he had rather it were in his
hand to supply his wants, than in Gods; for he thinks it would go better with
him. When he is sick, he had far rather it were in his own hand to cure him,
than in Gods, for then he should be sure of it. If he be in any strait, he
cannot be content with a bare promise for his deliverance; but unless he see
some probability in the means, and work, and unless he be acquainted with the
particular way by which he must be delivered he is not satisfied: for he cannot
trust God, so well as himself. Is not this the case of all you that are carnal?
Would you not think your case much safer and better if it were in your own
hands, than you do now it is in Gods! What would you not give, that you were
but as able to give ease, and heath and wealth, and honor, and life to your
selves, as God is! Hence it is that you so anxiously contrive for your selves,
and trouble your selves with needless cares; because you dare not trust God,
but think you are fallen to your own care and finding. You think your selves
quite undone when you have nothing left you but God and his Promise to trust
upon, and when you see nothing in your selves and the Creature to support you.
And thus are all men fallen from God to themselves.

But Sanctification teaches men that self-denial which according to its
measure, does heal them of this disease. Though some actual knowledge of good
and evil, and some care of our natural selves be now become a necessary duty,
as suited to our lapsed state, which yet had never been but through sin: Yet
that which is sinful, selfdenyal does destroy. It shows man that he is every
way insufficient for himself, and that he is not the fountain of his own
felicity: nor does it belong to him, but to God, to preserve him and secure his
welfare. He sees what a folly it is to depart from the tuition of his Heavenly
Father, and as the Prodigal Son to desire to have his portion in his own hands.
Experience tells him with smart and sorrow that he has not been so good a
preserver of himself, nor used himself so well as to desire to be in the same
hands any longer that have so abused him: Yea he knows that it was God that
indeed preserved him, while he was over Solicitous about it himself, and would
needs have the managing of his own affairs. He now believes that he can be no
where safe but in the hands of God, and no way sufficiently provided for but by
his wisdom, love and power: Nor dare he trust himself hereafter with himself or
any Creature! He finds that he has but turmoiled and distracted his mind by
undertaking the management of his own preservation: and that he has brought
himself into a wilderness, and lost himself and ravelled his own affairs: when
if he had committed himself to God, and been satisfied in his Wisdom, Love, and
Power, all had been kept safe and sound, and man had not been lost, nor his
estate thus shattered and overthrown. And therefore the returning self-denying
convert is brought to an utter distrust of himself, and resolved hereafter to
trust himself upon nothing below All Sufficiency and Infinite Love. He is so
offended with himself for his former self-destruction, and for undoing himself
so foolishly, that he calls himself to account and into judgment for it, and
condemns himself as a Traitor to God, and a Murderer of himself, and will no
more be in the hands of so treacherous a delinquent: But as the eyes of a
servant are on the hand of his Master, so are his eyes on God for all supplies.
And this is the part of the work of the spirit of Adoption, who teaches us to
cry Abba, Father* and as Children, not to be very careful for our selves, but
to run to our Father in all our wants, and tell him, what we stand in need of
and beg relief: and to be careful for nothing: but in every thing by prayer
with supplication and thanksgiving to make knownour requests to God, Phil. 4.
6. And this acquiescence of the soul in the love of God, is it that keeps our
hearts and minds in that Peace of God which passes understanding, verse. 7. so
that the more self-denial, the less is a man dependant on himself, or troubled
with the cares of his own preservation: and the more does he cast himself on
God, and is careful to please him that is his true Preserver, and then quietech
and rests his mind in his All Sufficiency and infinite wisdom and love; and
so is a mere dependant upon God.

7. Moreover; It is the Prerogative of God as absolute Owner of us, to be the
sole Disposer of man and of all the other Creatures: and to choose them their
condition, and give them their several Talents, and determine of the events of
all their affairs, as pleases himself; And innocent man was contented with
this order, and well pleased that God should be the absolute Disposer of him
and all.

But when man turned from God to self, he presently desired to be the Disposer
of himself; and not of himself only, but of all the Creatures within his reach.
How fain would selfish corrupted man be the chooser of his own condition? His
will is against the will of God, and he usually disliketh Gods disposal. If he
had the matter in his own hands, almost nothing should be as it is; but so
cross would they be to God that all thing would be turned upside down: If it
were at their will, there is scarce a poor man but would be Rich: and scarce a
Rich man but would be richer: The Servant would be master: The Tenant would be
a Landlord: The Husbandman and Tradesman would be a Gentleman: the Labourer
would live an easier life: His house should be better: his clothing should be
better; his fare should be better: his Provision should be greater, his credit
or honor with men should be more; the Gentleman would be a Knight, and the
Knight a Lord, and the Lord would be a King, and the King would be more
Absolute and have a larger Dominion: Nay every man would be a King, and learn
the doctrine of the Jews, and many of this age among us, to expect that the
world should be ruled by them; and they should reign as Lords and Princes in
the earth. If it were with selfish men as they would have it, there is scarce a
man that would be what he is, nor dwell where he does, nor live at the rates
that now he lives at. The weak would be always strong; and the sick would be
well and always well; and the old would be young again; and never taste the
infirmities of age; and if they might live as long as they would, I think
there is few of the unsanctified that would ever die, nor look after Heaven as
long as they could live on earth. O what a brave life should I have, thinks the
selfish unsanctified wretch, if I were but wholly at my own Disposal, and might
be what I would be, and have what I would have! What would men give for such a
life as this? Had they but their own wills, they would think themselves the
happiest men on earth: that is, if they could be delivered from the will of
God, and be from under his disposal, and get the reins into their own hands!

Nay this is not all, but the selfish person would be the disposer of all the
world within his reach, as well as of himself. He would have Kingdoms at his
dispose, and all things carried according to his Will: He would have all his
neighbors have a dependence upon him; Very bountiful he would be, if he were
the Lord of all: For he would be the great Benefactor of the world, and have
all men beholden to him, and depend upon him. If he see things that little
concern him, he has a will of his own that would fain have the Disposal of
them. If he hear of the affairs of other Nations, some will he has of his own
which he would have fulfilled in them, at least so far as any of his own
interest may be involved in the business.

But when Sanctification has brought men to selfdenyal, then they discern and
lament this folly: They see what silly giddy worms they are to be Disposers of
themselves, or of the world: They see that they have neither wisdom, nor
goodness, nor power sufficient for so great a work. They then perceive that it
were better make an Idiot the Pilot of a Ship, or an Infant to be their
Physician when they are sick, or the Disposer of their estates, than to commit
themselves and the world to their dispose. They see how foolishly they have
endeavored or desired to rob God of his prerogative: And therefore they return
from themselves to him, and give up all by free consent to his sole Disposal,
that so he may do with his own as he list. He finds that he has work enough to
do of his own, and is become too unfit for that: and therefore he dare no more
undertake the work of God, for which he is infinitely unfit. He finds that the
more he has his own will, the worse it goes with him: and therefore he will
give up himself to God and stand to his will: If he feels that Providence does
cross his flesh, and that he has Poverty when the flesh would have riches, and
slame when that carnal self would have honor, and labor when the flesh would
have ease, and sickness when the flesh would have health, he would not for all
that have the work taken out of the hand of God, but truly says, Not my will
but thine be done: and believes that Gods disposal is the best; and that his
Father knows well enough what he does; And if it were put to his choice,
whether God or he should be the Disposer of his estate and honor and Life, he
had rather it were in Gods hands than his own: and would not undertake the
charge, if it were offered him. Alas, thinks he, I am almost below a man and am
I fit to make a God of? I come off so lamely in the duty of a Creature as
deserves damnation: and am I fit to arrogate the work of the Creator?

8. Moreover it is the high Prerogative of God to be the Sovereign Ruler of the
world; to make Laws for them, which must be obeyed; and to reward the obedient,
and punish the disobedient. God is King of all the earth; even King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords; and all shall obey him, or be judged by him for their
disobedience.

But sin turned man into a Rebel against Heaven, and a Traitor to his Maker: so
that now the selfish unsanctified man disliketh Gods Government, at least in
the particulars, and would Govern himself. The Law of God contained in his Word
and Works he murmurs at as too obscure, or too precise and strict for him. He
finds that it crosses his Carnal interest, and speaks not good of him but
evil, and therefore he is against it as supposing it to be against him and his
pleasure, profit, and honor in the world. If men had but the Government of
themselves, what a difference would there be between their way and Gods? If
corrupt unsanctified selfish man might make a Law for himself in stead of the
Word of God, what a Law would it be? and how much of the Law of God should be
repealed? If sinners might make a Scripture, you should find in it no such
passages as these, [ Except a man be Converted, or born again, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of heaven: without Holiness none shall see God.] If self might
make Laws, you should not read in them [ If ye live after the flesh ye shall
die; but if by the Spirit ye mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live*]
Nor should you there find, that the Gate is strait, and the way is narrow that
leads to life, and few there be that find it; or that the righteous are
scarcely saved] As all the Scripture is now for Holiness, and against
Profaneness, Ungodliness, and Sensuality; if self had the framing of it, it
should all be changed, and it should at least speak peace to fleshly-minded
men: All those true and dreadful passages that speak fire and brimstone against
the unsanctified, and threatened everlasting torments, should be razed out; and
you shall find no talk of damnation in the Scripture for such as they: no talk
of the worm that never dies, or the fire that is never quenched, or of [
Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity; I know you not] or that [ the way of
the ungodly shall perish] or that [ God does laugh at them, because he sees
that their day is coming] Abundance of the Bible would be wiped out, if Carnal
self had but the altering of it: Nay it would be quite made new, and made a
contrary thing: the Articles of our Creed would be changed: the Petitions of
our Rule for Prayer would be most altered: every one of the ten Commandments
would be altered, as I shall after show. Idolatry should be no sin, but the
principal Law; for self would be set up as the Idol of the world: will worship
would be no sin; men would he held guiltless that take the name of God in vain:
The Lords day should be a day of mirth and carnal pleasure: every Subject would
be the Sovereign; and every Inferior the Superior; Revenge would be made
lawful for themselves, though not for others: Fornication and Adultery would be
no mortal sin; Stealing would be made tolerable to themselves; it should be
lawful to them to do any wrong to the name and reputation of another: in a
word, every man would do what he list, and his will should be his Law, and
himself should be his own Judge; a gentle tender Judge no doubt. Thus would
self Rule.

But sanctification brings men to Deny this self; and to lay down the Arms of
Rebellion against God; and to see how unfit we are to Rule our selves; that we
are too foolish, and sinful, and partial to make Laws, and too partial also and
tender to execute them; and that as we were made to obey, so obey we must, and
come again into our ranks, and willingly subject our selves to the Sovereign of
the world. Self denial teaches a man to have his own Carnal wisdom and
reasonings that rise up against the Laws of God; and to Love them the worse
because they are thus his own; and to love the Laws of God the better, because
they are God's, and because they are against his Carnal self. The stamps of God
on them does make them current with him, when if they had but the private
stamps of self, he would disown them as counterfeit or treasonable. He has
indeed a flesh that is restrained by Gods Laws, and striveth against them; but
he thinks never the worse of the Law for that, but approves and likes it in
the inner man: and if he might have his choice, he would not blot out one
Commandment, nor one Direction, nor one Article of Faith, nor a tittle of the
Law, because that self is not the Chooser in him; but he has learned to submit
to the will and wisdom of the Lord.

And though he love himself, and have a nature that is unwilling of suffering,
and fears the displeasure of God, and the threatenings of his holy Law: yet
does he unfeignedly justify the Law, and acknowledge it to be holy, and just,
and good; and would not have the very threatenings of it to be repealed and
blotted out, if he had his choice: for he knows that the Determinations of God
are the best, and that none but he is fit to govern, and therefore he desires
that he himself may be taught better to obey, and not that he may rule; and
wishes that he were more conformed to the Law; and not that the Law were
conformed to him; and fain he would have his own will brought up to Gods, but
wishes not Gods will to be crookened and brought down to his. As far as men
have self-denial, this is so.

9. Moreover, as it is Gods Prerogative to be the Sovereign Ruler of our
selves, so also of all others as well as us. But when sin had set up self, man
would not only Rule himself, but would rule all others. An eager desire there
is in the unsanctified selfish heart, that he might be Ruler of Town and
Country, and all might be brought to do his will. And hence it is that there is
such resisting and grudging at good Governors, and that men are so ambitious
and fain would be highest, because they would have their own wills fulfilled by
all, and therefore would have power to force men to it: Hence it is that there
is such a stir in the world for Crowns and Kingdoms: and few men have ever been
heard of, that have refused a Scepter when it was offered them, yea or that
would not step out of their way for it, and wound their Consciences, and hazard
all their hopes of Heaven for it, if they found themselves in a likelihood of
obtaining it; because where self does reign at home, it would reign also over
all others. Nothing more pleases the Carnal mind, than to have his will, and
to have all men do what he would have them, and to see all at his beck, and
each man seeking to know his Pleasure, ready to receive his word for Law. This
is the reign of self.

But sanctification teaching men self-denial, does make them look fist at the
Doing of Gods will; and would have all the world obedient to that; and for
their own wills, they resign them absolutely to Gods, and would not have men
obey them but in a due subordination to the Lord. As they affect no Dominion or
Government but for God, so they desire not men to obey their wills any further
than it is necessary to the obedience of Gods will, to which they are
serviceable and conform. The self-denying sanctified man has as careful an eye
up and down the world for Gods interest, as the self-seeker has for his own:
And as eagerly does he long to hear of the setting up of the Name, and Kingdom,
and Will or Laws of God in the world, as the ambitious man longs for the
setting up of his own. And it as much rejoices the holy self-denying man to
hear that Gods Laws are set up and obeyed, and that the world does stoop to
Jesus Christ, as it would rejoice the Carnal selfish wretch to be the Lord and
Master of all himself, and his will become the Law of the world. An Holy
self-denying man would be far gladder to hear that Africa, America, and the
rest of the unbelieving part of the world were Converted to Christ by the power
of the Gospel, and that the Heathens were his inheritance, and the Kingdoms of
the world become the Kingdoms of Christ, than if he had Conquered all these
himself, and were become the King or Emperor of the world. For as self is the
chief interest of an unsanctified man; so Christ and the will of God is the
chief Interest of the sanctified: for the has destroyed the contradictory
Interest of self, and renounced it, and has taken God for his End, and Christ
for the Way, and consequently for his highest Interest: so that he has now no
business in the world but Gods business; he has no honor to regard but Gods
honor; he has none to exalt but the King of Kings; he knows no gain but the
pleasing of God; he knows no content or pleasure but Gods pleasure: for the
life that he now lives in the flesh, he lives by faith of the Son of God, that
has loved him and given himself for him; and thereby has drawn him out of
himself to the Fountain and End of Love; and so it is not he that lives, but
Christ lives in him, Gal. 2. 20.

10. Lastly, it is the high Prerogative of God, to have the honor and Power
and Glory ascribed to him, and be praised as the author of all Good to the
world: and his Glory he will not give to another: Man and all things are
Created, and preserved and ordered for his Glory: Nor shall man have any Glory
but in the Glorifying of his Lord: when we fell short of Glorifying the Lord,
we also fell short of the Glory which we expected by him.

But when sin turned man from God to himself, he became regardless of the
honor of God, and his mind was bent on his own Honor, so that he would have
every knee bow to himself, and every eye observe him, and every mind think
highly of him, and every tongue to praise and magnify him: It does him good at
the heart, to have virtue, and wisdom, and greatness ascribed to him, and an
excellency in all; and to have all the good that is done ascribed to him, and
to be taken to be as the Sun in the firmament that all must eye, and none can
live without, and to be esteemed the benefactor of all. When he hears that men
extol him and speak nothing of him but well, and great things; and when he sees
them all observe and reverence him, and take him as an Oracle for wisdom, or as
an Angel of God, O how this pleases his unsanctified selfish mind! Now he has
his End, even that which he would have; and verily says Christ, they have
their reward.

But when Sanctification has taught men to deny themselves, they see then that
they are vile and miserable sinners, and loath themselves for all their
abominations; and are base in their own eyes, and humble themselves before the
Lord, and abhor themselves in dust and ashes, and say, To us belongs shame
and confusion of face; Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name give
the glory, Psalm. 115. 1. Dan. 9. 7, 8. The holy self-denying soul desires no
glory and honor, but what may conduce to the glory and honor of his Lord: His
heart rises against base flattering worldlings, that would rob God and give
the honor to him: nor can they do him a greater displeasure than to ascribe
that to him belongs only to God, or to bring to him or any Creature, his
Makers due. If God be honored, he takes himself as honored, if he be never so
low: If God be dishonored, he is troubled, and his own honor will not make
him reparation. As he lives himself to the glory of God, and does all that he
does in the world to that end; so would he have others do so too: And if God be
most honored by his disgrace and shame, he can submit.

And thus I have showed you the true Nature both of selfishness and of
self-denial. But observe that I describe it as it is in it self: but yet there
is too much selfishness in the best, which may hinder the fullness of these
effects. But self-denial is predominant in all the sanctified, though it be not
perfect.

CHAP. II. Reasons of the Necessity of Self-denial to salvation.
III. ANd now you have seen the Description of self-denial, and I hope, if you
have studied it, you know what it is that is required; I shall next show you
some of the Reasons of its Necessity, and prove it to you beyond dispute that
it is no indifferent thing, nor the high attainment of some few of the Saints,
but a thing that all must have that will be saved, being of the very essence of
holiness it self; so that it is as possible to live without life; as to be Holy
without self-denial; and as possible to be saved whether God will or no, as to
be saved without self-denial in a predominant degree. And if any of you thing
strange that salvation should be laid on so high a duty, and that no man can be
a true Disciple that denies not himself, even to the forsaking of his Life,
and all, when God requires it, I shall show you that Reason that should easily
satisfy you.

Reas. 1. Till a man Deny himself, he denies God, and does not indeed believe
in him, and love him, and take him to be his God. And I hope you will grant
that no man can be saved that believes not in God, nor Loves him, nor takes
him for his God: He that will deny God and yet think to be saved, must think to
be saved in despite of God. The first Article of our faith, and of our
Baptismal Christian Covenant, is to Believe in God the Father, and take him for
our God, and give up our selves to be his people. But this no man can do
without self-denial. For by all that I have said in the description of it, you
may see that selfishness is most contrary to God, and would rob him of all his
high Prerogatives, and God should be no God, if the selfish sinner had his
will: and he does not heartily consent that he shall be God to him. I have
formerly told you, that self is the God of wicked men, or the worlds great
Idol: And that the inordinate Love of Pleasure, Profits and Honor, in Trinity,
is all but this self love in Unity; and that in the Malignant Trinity of Gods
enemies, the flesh is the first and foundation, the world the second, and the
Devil the third: Every man is an Idolater so far as he is selfish. God is not a
bare name: He that takes away his Essence or Attributes and Prerogatives, and
yet thinks he believes in him, because he leaves him his name and Titles,
does as bad as they that set up an Image, and worship that instead of God, or
that worship the Sun or Moon as Gods, because they somewhat represent his
Glory: for sure a bare Name has as little substance as an Image; much less can
you say it has more than the Sun. Now selfish ungodly men do all of them rob
God, and give his honor and prerogatives to themselves, and put him off with
empty Titles: They call him their God, but will not have him for their End,
their Portion and Felicity, nor give him the strongest Love of their hearts:
They will not take him as their Absolute Owner; and devote themselves and all
they have to him, and stand with a willing mind to his Dispose. They will not
take him for their Sovereign, and be Ruled by him, nor deny themselves for him,
nor seek his honor and interest above their own. They call him their Father,
but deny him his honor; and their Master, but give him not his fear, Mal. 1.
6. They depend not on his hand, and live not by his Law, and to his Glory; and
therefore they do not take him for their God. And can you expect that God
should save those that deny him and would dethrone him? that is, his very
enemies.

Reas. 2. Yea more than so; God will not save those that make themselves their
own Gods, when they have rejected him. But all these unsanctified selfish men,
do make themselves their own Gods: for in all the ten particulars before
mentioned, they take to themselves the Prerogatives of God. 1. They would be
their own End and loo^ further. 2. They use all Creatures but as means to (...)
End; yea God himself is esteemed but for themselves. 3. They Love their present
Life and Prosperity better than God. 4. They would be their own, and live as
their own, and not as those that are none of their own. 5. They would have the
Creatures to be their (...) them as their Own, and not as God's. ^. (...) ^^st
care for themselves, and shift for themselves ^t themselves wholly upon God. 7.
They would dispose of themselves and their own conditions, and of all things
else. 8. They would Rule themselves, and be from under the Laws and Government
of God. 9. They would be the Rulers of all others, and have all men do their
wills. 10. And they would be honored and admired by all, and have the praise
ascribed to them. And if all this be not to set up themselves as Gods or Idols
in the world, I know not what is. Certainly God is so far from having a thought
of saving such vile Idolaters (in this Condition) that they are the principal
objects of his high displeasure, and the fairest Marks for his Justice to shoot
at: and he is engaged to pull them down and tread them into hell: should God
stand by and see a company of rebellious sinners sit down in his Throne, or
usurp his Sovereignty and Divine Prerogatives, and let them alone, yea and
advance them to his Glory? No, he has resolved that he that humbles himself
shall be exalted, and he that exalted himself shall be brought low. And what
higher self-exaltation can there be, than to make ourselves as gods to our
selves? And therefore who should be brought lower than such?

Reas. 3. No man can be a Christian that takes not Christ for his Lord and
Savior; But no man without this self-denial can take Christ for his Lord and
Savior: and therefore no man without self-denial can be a Christian, and so be
saved. He that makes himself his End, cannot make Christ as Christ his way: for
Christ is the way to the Father, and not to Carnalself. Nay the business that
Christ came upon into the world, was to pull down and subdue this self.
Moreover whoever takes Christ for his Savior, must know from what it is that
he must save him; and that is principally from self: And no man can take Christ
for his Savior that renounceth not self-confidence, and is not willing to be
saved from the Idolatry of self-exaltation. No man can take Christ for his
Master or Teacher, that comes not into his school as a little child, renouncing
the guidance of Carnal-self, and sensible of his need of an heavenly Teacher.
No man can take Christ for his King and Lord, and give up himself to him as his
own and as his Subject, that has not learned to deny that self that claims
propriety and sovereignty in his stead. There is no Antichrist nor false Christ
that ever was in the world, that does more truly oppose Christ, and resist him
in all the parts of his office, than Carnal self. It is this that will not
stoop to his Righteousness, or to his Guidance, and to his teaching and holy
Government. Self is the false Christ or Savior of the world, as well as the
false God. And therefore there can be no salvation, where self is not denied
and taken down.

Reas. 4. He that believes not in the Holy Ghost, and takes him not for his
Sanctifier, cannot be a true Christian or be saved. But no man without this
self-denial believes in the Holy Ghost, and takes him for his Sanctifier: And
therefore without this Self-denial no man can be a true Christian or be saved.

The very nature of sanctification consists in the turning a man from himself
to God: in destroying selfishness, and devoting the soul to God by Christ. And
therefore it is past dispute, that none but the selfdenying are sanctified: and
therefore none b^ they do truly take the Holy Ghost for their Sanctifier, and
truly believe in him. So far as men are in Love with the disease, it is certain
they will not use the Physician.

Reas. 5. No man is a true Christian and in a state of salvation, that denies,
renounceth or rejects the word of God. But all men that have not self-denial
(that hear the word of God) do renounce, deny it or reject it: and therefore no
man without self-denial is a true Christian or can be saved. In the Scriptures
it is that we have eternal life: its they that must make us wise to salvation:
the man that will be blessed, must meditate in them day and night, Psalm. 1. 3.
And it is not the hearers but the Doers of them that are blessed. But nothing
is more clear, than that the voice of Scripture calls aloud on all men to
deny themselves; and that the scope of it is to cry down self, and set up God
in Jesus Christ. It is the very drift and meaning of it from end to end to take
down self, and abase men in their own eyes, and bring them home to God from
whom they are revolted.

Reas. 6. No man can be a Christian or be saved without saving Grace. But no
man without self-denial has saving Grace. For it is the nature of every Grace
to carry man from himself to God by Christ. It is the work of godly sorrow to
humble proud man, and break the heart of carnal self. It is the work of faith,
for a self-denying soul to pass out for hope and life to Christ. It is the work
of Love to carry us quite above our selves to that infinite goodness which we
love: it is the nature of holy fear to confess our guilt and insufficiency, and
to suspect our selves, and dread the fruit of our own ways. Confidence does
bottom us upon God, and Hope it self does imply a Despairing in our selves.
Thankfulness does pay the homage to him that has saved us from our selves. And
every grace has self-denial as half its very life or soul. And therefore it is
certain that no man has any more grace than he has self-denial.

Reas. 7. They that reject the Ministry and the fruit of all the Ordinances of
God, are not true Christians, nor cannot be saved: But so do all among us that
have not selfdenyal. For the use of the Ministry is to call home sinners from
themselves to God. The use of every Ordinance of God, is to get or keep down
carnal self and exalt the Lord. Confession is nothing but self-abasing: and he
must confess, that will have the faithful and just God to forgive him: for he
that covers his sin shall not prosper, 1 John 1. 9. Prove. 28. 13. Prayer is a
confession of our own emptiness, insufficiency and unworthiness, and a flying
from our selves for help unto another. In Baptism we come as condemned
prisoners for a pardon, as it were with ropes about our necks, and strip our
selves of the rags of our filthiness, that by the blood of the lamb we may be
washed from our blood, and our sins may be buried as in the depth of the Sea.
In the Lords Supper we renew the same Covenant, and receive the same renewed
pardon; and still fly from our selves to Christ for life; and renounce our
carnal selves by solemn Covenant, as a people coming home to God. So that never
was any Ordinance of God, effectual and saving on the soul of any, further than
it brought them to self-denial, or preserved, exercised or manifested it.

Reas. 8. He that can do no work sincerely, nor go one step in the way of life,
is no true Christian nor in a state life. But this is the case of all that have
not self-denial. For self is their Principle, Rule and End: and he that has
either a false Principle, Rule or End, cannot be sincere in any of the means;
much less when he is out in all of these. A selfish man is seeking himself in
his very Religion; and is serving himself when he seems to be serving God.
And indeed he does not any service sincerely unto God, because he makes not God
his End; And therefore cannot be accepted.

Reas. 9. No man is a true Christian or can be saved, that sticks in the depth
of his natural misery, in his lapsed state: But so do all men that have not
self-denial: for it is self that they are fallen to, and must be saved from.

Reas. 10. No man can be a true Christian and be saved, that is not a member of
the Holy Catholic Church and the Communion of Saints. But so is none but the
self-denying; for every true member of the Church has a public spirit,
preferring the Churches interest to his own, and suffering with fellow members
in their suffering, and having a care of one another, 1 Cor. 12. But the
self-seeking unsanctified person is a stranger to this disposition.

Reas. 11. He that is led by the greatest enemy of God and his own soul, is not
a true Christian, nor in a state of life. But so is every man that has not
learned to deny himself. For self is the greatest enemy of God and us. Escape
but your own hands and you are out of danger. All the Devils in Hell cannot
destroy you, if you would not be your own destroyers.

Reas. 12. Lastly, It is a plain contradiction to be saved without self-denial.
For as its self that we must be saved from both as our End and Means and
greatest enemy: so to stick in self is still to be lost and miserable, and
therefore not to be saved. So that the case is as plain as a case can be, that
no man can be a true Christian or Disciple of Christ without self-denial; and
consequently none without it can be saved. I have been the briefer upon the
Arguments, because the matter of some of them may come to be fullier opened
anon in the Application.

CHAP. III. Use. 1. A general complaint of the Prevalency of Selfishness.
Use. 1. AND now we have seen from the words of Christ the absolute Necessity
of selfdenyal, and that there is no true Christianity nor salvation without it;
let us next take a view of our selves, and of the world, and Judge of our
condition by this certain Rule.

Look well into your selves, and into the world, and tell me whether you find
not cause to lament, 1. That true Christianity is so rare a thing, even among
the professors of Christianity, seeing self-denial is so rare. 2. That Grace is
so weak and small in the most of the regnerate, seeing self-denial is so little
and imperfect.

O if the name of Christians would prove us Christians, and the magnificent
Titles we give to Christ would prove that we are his true Disciples; if
reading, and hearing, and outward duties, and a cheap Religiousness would serve
turn, we have then great store of Christians among us: If Christ would have
left out but this one point of self-denial from his Laws and conditions of
salvation, what abundance of Disciples would he have had in the world? and how
many millions might have come to Heaven, that now must be shut out? It is this
point that hinders all sorts of Heathens and Infidels from being Christians.
The Jews will believe in no Christ but one that will restore their Temple and
outward glory, and make them great and Rulers of the world: and therefore they
will not be the servants of that Christ that calls them to the contempt of
all these things, and of life it self for the hopes of an invisible Kingdom.
The Mahometans had rather believe in Mahomet that gives them leave to please
their lust, than in Christ that calls them to mortification and self-denial,
and tells them of nothing but suffering and patience, duty and diligence, till
they come into another world: The Idolatrous Heathens abhor Christianity when
they hear how much they must do and suffer, and all for a reward in the life to
come. Its an informing instance that Pet. Maffaeus gives us in his Indian
History of the first King of Congo that was baptized: He quickly received the
Articles of faith, and the form of Worship, and the outside and cheaper part of
Religion; and so did many of his Nobles and followers: But when he was called
to confession, and understood that he must leave his gluttony, and drunkenness,
and whoredom, and oppression, and inordinate pleasures, he would be a Christian
no more; his Nobles persuading him, that the forsaking of all this mirth, and
pleasure, and delights of the flesh, and taking up so strict a life, was too
dear a price to pay for the hopes of a life to come, and it was better keep the
pleasure they had, and put another life to the venture: And thus Christianity
had been quickly banished that Kingdom again, if it had not taken deeper
rooting in his Son and Heir Alphonsus, and made him venture his Crown and Life
for the sake of Christ. And thus is it at the heart with the most, even of
Baptized persons, and those that take themselves to be Christians: Because it
is the Religion of the Country, and they are taught that there is no salvation
without it, they will be Baptized, and be called Christians, and say their
Prayers, and come to Church, and say they believe in God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, and they will go as far with you in Religion as they can without
denying themselves: but for the rest, which is the life and truth of
Christianity, they will not understand it, or believe that it is of such
necessity: God forbid say they, that none should be Christians and saved but
those that thus deny themselves, and take up their cross and forsake all they
have, and accept not Life it self from Christ: They say they believe in Christ,
and yet they say, God forbid his word should be true; or God forbid we should
believe Christ that has spoken this in the Gospel! See what kind of Christians
multitudes are! Every man and woman on earth, that take themselves for true
Christians, and yet do not deny themselves, even life and all for the sake of
Christ and the hope of everlasting glory, are mere self-deceivers, and no true
Christians at all. He that will save his life, says Christ, shall lose it;
that is, He that in his coming to Christ, and Covenanting with him, will put in
an exception for the saving of his Life, and will forsake all for Christ if he
be put to it, except Life it self, this man is no true Disciple of Christ, and
shall be so far from saving his life, that he shall lose both Heaven, and Life,
and all: and the Justice of God shall take from him that Life which he durst
not resign to the will of mercy; and he shall lose that for nothing which he
would not lose for Christ and Heaven. It is impossible for that man to be
Christ's Disciple, that loves his life better than Christ and the hopes of Life
everlasting, Mat. 10. 37, 38. Luke 14. 25, 26, 33. Some Self-denial there may
be in the unsanctified: Many of them would leave a little pleasure or profit
rather than be damned; and many had rather suffer a little than venture upon
eternal sufferings. But I beseech you remember that this is the lowest degree
of Self-denial that is saving, to set more by Christ and the hopes of glory
than by all this world and life it self; and to be habitually resolved to
forsake life and all, rather than to forsake him. No less than this is proper
self-denial, or will prove you Christians, and in a state of life. This was the
trial that Christ put one to, that had thought to have been his Disciple, Luke
18. 21. [ Yet lackest thou one thing: sell all that thou have and distribute to
the poor, and thou shall have treasure in Heaven, and come and follow me] Not
that every man must actually sell all, but every man must set more by Heaven
than all, and therefore part with all when Christ would have him; and he that
is not thus resolved, let him go never so far in all other things, does yet
lack one thing, and such a one thing as he shall never be saved without. For
the meaning of the text is, that Christ would try by this command, whether he
set more by any thing than him, and whether he set more by Heaven or Earth; and
so would have us all to judge of our selves by the same evidence within, though
he put not all on the same way of discovering it. Many a man can deny self the
superfluities of pleasure, and as this rich man did, can avoid enormous crimes,
and say of whoredom, and theft, and drunkenness, and oppression, and gross
deceit, All these have I avoided from my youth. Education may moderate some
selfish desires, and natural temper may further that moderation: and custom and
good company and holy precepts may yet do more: and wit may teach men to do or
suffer somewhat rather than to run on the wrath of God: and therefore many
thousands may deny self the pleasure of some inordinate lust, or of some
recreation, or excess in meat or drink, and yet be far from denying life and
all, and so from the true self-denial of a Christian: Nay a man may deny self
for self in many particulars, and so may please self more than he denies it.
Many a civil ingenuous Gentleman and other persons will forbear the disgraceful
sins of Drunkenness, filthy speaking, Whoredom, Incivility, notorious
Profaneness, even because they are disgraceful, and therefore are against the
Interest of self; so much as self can possibly spare, a carnal heart may be
brought to part with. But still self is alive and predominant within them,
still it is the Ruling end and Principle. But to go out of self to God, and
resign up our selves to him, and possess no interest but him and in him, and to
have nothing that we esteem or love, or care for, in comparison of him, knowing
that for him we were made, redeemed, preserved and sanctified, and therefore
desiring to be wholly and only his, and to have no credit, no goods, no life,
no self, but what is his, for his service, at his will and at his Disposal and
Government and provision; this is the true self-denial, which the spirit of God
works in a prevailing though not a perfect measure, in every gracious
believing soul.

But alas Sirs, how strange is this in the world, and how weak and low in the
souls where it is found! And what matter of Lamentation would a survey of the
world, or of our selves present us with! Is not SELF the great Idol which the
whole world of unsanctified men does worship? Who is it that rules the
children of disobedience, but carnal self? For what is all the stir and
stirrings, the tumults and contentions of the world but for self? This rules
Kingdoms, and this is it that raises wars, and what is it except the works of
Holiness but self is the author of? Look unto the Thrones and Kingdoms of the
earth, and conjecture how many self has advanced and placed there; and how fe^
have stayed till God enthroned them and gave them the Crown and Scepter with
his approbation. Among all the Nobles and great ones of the earth, that abound
in riches, how few are there that were not set a work by self and ruled by it,
in the getting or keeping or using their riches, dignities and honors? Look on
the great Revenews of the Nation, and of the world, and consider whether God or
self, have the more of it. One man has many thousands a year, and another has
many hundreds, and how much of this is devoted to God, and how much to carnal
self? And the poor that have but little, would think us injurious to them if we
should call to them for any thing for God, who have not enough for themselves;
when indeed God must have all, and self must have nothing, but what it has by
way of return from God again, and that for God, and not for self but as
subservient unto him. Alas, of many hundred thousand pounds a year, which the
inhabitants of a Country possess among them, how little has God that should
have all, and how much has self that should have nothing? O dreadful reckoning
when these Accounts must be all cast up! Judge by the use of all whether self
have not yet Dominion of all? If men throw out to God his tenth, which is none
of their own; or if they cast him now and then some inconsiderable alms, when
in his member he is fain to beg for it first, they think they have done fair,
though self devour all the rest. Is it more think you for God or self that our
Courts of Law are filled with so many Suits, and Lawyers have so much
employment? Is it more think you for God or self that Merchants compass Sea and
Land for commodity? Who is it that the Soldier fights for? is it for God or
self? Who is it that the Tradesman deals for, that the Plowman labors for,
that the Traveller goes for? is it more for God or self? Who is it that the
most of men's thoughts are spent for, and the most of their words are spoken
for, and the most of their rents and wealth laid out for, and the most of their
precious time employed for? is it for God or self? Consider of it whether it be
not self that finally and morally rules the world. What else do most live for
or look after? And is not the common Piety, Religion and Charity of the world,
a mere sending God some scraps of the leavings of carnal self; If the flesh be
full, or have enough; then God shall have the cru^^ that fall from its Table,
or at most so much as it card, ^are: but till the flesh have done and be
satisfied, G^^ G^^st stay even for these scarps and crumbs! and if the^ but say,
[ I want it my self, or have use for it my self] they think it a sufficient
answer to all demands. One may see by the irregularity of the motions of the
world, the confusions, and crossings, and mutabilities, and contradictions, the
doing and undoing again, the differences and fierce contendings, that it is not
God but self that is the End and Principle of the motions. Nay most men are so
dead to God, and alive only to themselves, that they know not what we mean when
we tell them, and plainly tell them, what it is to live to God, and what it is
to serve him in all their affairs; and to eat, and drink, and do all things for
his glory; but they ask in their hearts as Pharaoh, [Who is the Lord, that I
should serve him?] And when they read these passages about self-denial, and
about referring all to God, they will not understand them: for they are
unacquainted with God, and know no other God indeed but self, though in name
they do.

Nay it were well if self were kept out of the Church, and out of the Ministers
of the Gospel, that must teach the world to deny themselves; that it did not
with too many choose their habitations, and give them their call, and limit
them in their labors, and direct them in the manner and measure; It were well
if some Ministers did not study for self, and preach and dispute for self, and
live for self; when they materially preach against self, and teach men
self-denial. And then for our People, alas, it rules their families, it
manageth their business, it drives on their trades; it comes to Church with
them, and fights within them against the word, and perverteth their judgment,
and will let them relish nothing, and receive nothing but what is consistent
with selfish, interest: in a word, it makes men ungodly, it keeps them ungodly,
and it is their very ungodliness it self. O, we it not for carnal self, how
easily might we deal with^^ ^^rts of sinners? but this is it that overcomes us.

CHAP. IV. The Prevalency of Selfishness in all Relations.
BEside all the generals already mentioned, it will not be amiss to give you
some particular Instances of the power of selfishness, and the rareness of
self-denial in the world, that you may see what cause of lamentation is before
us.

1. How ready and speedy, how effectual and diligent, how constant and
unwearied are they in the service of self? and how slow and backward, how
remiss and negligent, how unconstant and tired are they in the works that are
merely for God, and their salvation? Do I need to prove it to you? You may as
well call for proof whether there are men in the world? I were best for
instance begin next home. Many Ministers think it a drudgery and a toil that
God requires at their hands to confer with every family in their Parishes, and
instruct them privately in the matters of salvation. But see what self can do:
If the same men have but their tithe to gather, they will not think it a
needless thing, to go or send to every family, and speak with them all about
their own business. At least if it were any considerable sum, they would not
lose it for want of speaking for.

Our neighbors do many of them think it much that we should call them to be
personally Instructed or Catechized, and they will not come at us; but say,
[What needs all this ado? have we not teaching enough at Church? Its Children
that must be Catechized, and we are past Children.] You see how little interest
God and their Ministers and their own salvation has in them: But will you see
what carnal self can do more? Had I but money enough, I would undertake to make
them come to me, and follow me as a horse will follow his provender! Had I but
ten pound a piece to give them, yea or but ten shillings, I do not think I
should have any refuse to come and fetch it, unless it were those that now are
the forwardest in seeking relief for the wants of their souls. Had I but the
estates or lives of all these men in my power, how easily would they be ruled
and how diligently and submissively would they attend, that now for God and
their everlasting life, disdain to come and seek instructions. And yet these
men would scarce believe you, if you should tell them that self and the world
is made their God, and that God himself is denied and rejected by them.

Moreover, a long time I have been persuading all the families in the Town and
Parish, to read the Scripture, and daily call upon God together: I have proved
it their duty from Scripture, and this does not prevail. But see what flesh and
self can do? If these men were but sure of ten or twenty shillings a time, for
every Morning and Evening that they pray together, I warrant you, what ever the
heart did, the lips should be taught to do their part. O how busy would all
the Town and Parish be to learn to pray, that now look not after it? I do not
believe that there is ever a house among them all that would not very shortly
set up prayer, if they were but paid for it after these rates? Judge now
whether God or self bear sway among these men, and whether soul or body be more
regarded.

Moreover, we have too many drunkards in the Town, that no means that we can
use will restrain and keep sober. They love the drink, and they cannot forbear;
and tell them of Gods word, that does threaten them with damnation, and they
will for all that be drunk the next day. But if one of these wretches might
have but ten pound a week on condition he would forbear, I do not think for all
this but he could forbear: Or if he were sure that for every cup of drink, he
should drink after it a cup of piss or gall, I warrant you he would soon begin
to abate.

We have abundance of ignorant sensual men that for love of sin refuse
Church Government, and will not come under it. But if the Magistrate would but
make a Law, that all men shall he members of a particular Church and submit to
discipline, or forfeit but twenty shillings a month, how few refusers should we
have in all the Town or Country?

We have many that seldom come to hear in the public Assemblies; but let the
Parliament make a Law that they shall pay for their resusal, and how readily
will it bring the most of them? (unless they have hopes that the Law will not
be executed) And judge now whether self or God have greater Interests in these
men's hearts.

I see but one piece of self-denial among this sort of people in this Town, and
that this: Though the officers are to give the money to the poor which they
have from swearers, drunkards, unlicensed and abusive Alesellers, prophaners of
the Lords day, etc. yet that sort of the poor themselves do hate those officers
that are zealous in their duties. This is strange, that the love of money does
not change them. But whether it be that they can deny their flesh for the
Devil, though not for God; and in enmity to godliness, though not to further
it; or whether it be that the officers do use to give their money to an honester
sort of poor, and these have none of it, I cannot well tell.

And having given so many sad instances of the power of self and scarcity of
self-denial in others, I hope the Magistrates will not take it ill if we help
them to discern this enemy in themselves, nor be offended that they come last,
unless it were in a more honorable cause. I hear the best and wisest men that
I can meet with, complain that in most places, Alehouses flourish under the
Magistrates Noses; and that whoredom, swearing, profaning the Lords days,
shall seldom be punished, but when they are very much urged to it, nor then
neither if it will but displease a neighbor, or friend, especially if it be a
worshipful swearer or drunkard that is to be punished. We see in most places
that its more than the Justice can do to put down one Alehouse of many that
they consess should be suppressed; and I doubt but few can keep them from
increasing: Men say that there is so much ado before they can have Justice from
many of them, and those that seek it are counted but for busy troublesome
fellows, that many are ready to let all alone: And whence is all this, that men
in Power can do so little against those that have no Power to resist them? Why
Alas the cause is plain: Self is against it: They have none but God and
Ministers, and a few precise fellows to persuade them to it: and they have no
greater motives, than what is fetched from Heaven and Hell to move them to it:
and these are but small matters with them (I speak of the unsanctified) It must
be one that has greater interest in them than God that must persuade them to
it: It must be more powerful matters than the promises of Heaven and the
Threatenings of damnation that must prevail with such moderate Gentlemen as
these. And who is it that can do this that God and their salvation may not do?
Why even self, carnal self* If you know but how to engage their own
self-interest in the business, I warrant you it will go better on. Let but
every informer be well p^^d for his pains, and every Justice have a h^^dr^d
pound from the Exch^quer for every due exec^^ion of such laws, and how roundly
would the work go on? Then they would not say [ We cannot do it, or We are not
bound to look after them.] Do you think I wrong them or speak without proof? I
will leave it to your judgment when I have given you but these few instances.
Let but the Plague break out in the Town, and infect but a quarter as many
houses as here are infectious Alehouses that harbor tiplers and drunkards, and
see whether the Magistrates of this or any Town will not a little better bestir
themselves, and send to search after infected places, and nail up their doors,
and write on them [ Lord have mercy on us] that all may take warning and keep
away: They will not here be offended with Informers, nor say, [ Am I bound to
look after them?] And why are they not as zealous against sin as against the
plague? Great reason! Self is for sin; and God only is against it: but self is
against the Plague, because it is concerned in it: sin does but hurt the soul,
and bring men to Helfire* but the plague destroys their body; and this is the
greater matter with them, because they have flesh and sense to judge of it; but
they have not faith to believe the other.

Again, let but one house in the Town be on fire, and all are up to quench it,
and the Bell is rung, and the Magistrate does not think that he wants a Call
himself to look after it. And when the fire of Hell is kindling in an
Alehouse, that is nothing, but must be let alone: there is no such zeal, nor no
such haste. And why so? Why one they see in good sadness, and perceive that it
is fire indeed: but the other they believe in jest, as if it would prove but a
painted fire.

Again, let but an ungodly fellow slander the Magistrate, or call him all to
naught, especially if he give him but two or three boxes on the ear, and see
whether he will let that man alone. But let the same man abuse the name of God,
and break his Laws, and with too many he may be let alone, unless they be urged
to do Justice. And how comes this difference? Why self is touched in one, and it
is but God ( But God! O Atheists!) that is touched in the other. Self can do
more with them than God can do (Remember still when I say that self can do more
with them than God, that I speak not of what God could do by his Omnipotency if
he would; but of the final Causality, or the small interest that God has in
their hearts by holy Faith and Love.)

Again, let but a servant rob the Magistrate, and carry his money and goods to
an Ale-seller to reset; and try whether he will look after him and the
Ale-seller. And why not as soon and as zealously when Ale-sellers reset men's
sons and servants, and drown men's understandings and turn them into beasts?
Why? because in one it is but God and men's souls that are concerned: (a matter
of nothing) but in the other it is self, (a greater matter with them.)

Shall I give you but one instance more, that the Ale-sellers themselves will
take my part in, so far as to bear me witness that its true! Here are Farmers
of the Excise that have power to know what Alehouses are in the Town, and
their gain lies on it: and there shall scarce a man in Town or Country sell
Ale so secretly but they will know it; nor sell a Barrel but what they are
acquainted with. They do not say, [ I am not bound to go search after them:]
nor that they be not able to discover them and to bring them to pay Excise. But
the Justices (too commonly) can overlook abundance that the Excise-men can
find; and they cannot make one of twenty pay, when the other can; And what is the
matter? Why one works for self and money, and the other works but for God and
his own and other men's salvation (a small matter!) See then beyond denial what
self and money can do with such men, when God and men's salvation can do next to
nothing.

But I must desire you not to mistake me, and think I speak this of any honest
godly Magistrate, and abuse the good by joining them with the bad! No: far be
it from me to be so injurious. For its evident that they can be no good men,
nor have any true Love of God in their souls, that are such in a predominant
sense as I have here described. It is not in my thoughts to lay this blame on
any honest Godly Magistrate: for none but the ungodly would do as I have
mentioned, and prefer themselves before the Lord, and the bodies of men before
the souls.

And, alas, if the Sovereign Powers of the Nations of the world were not too
sick of the same disease, gain would not be accounted Godliness, but Godliness
the greatest gain: and carnal Policy would not go for Piety, but true Piety
would go for the surest Policy: It would not be so common in most Nations to
have the Truth and Cause of Christ disowned, and his servants persecuted, and
their lives and blood to be made a sacrifice to carnal Self and worldly
Interests. Nor would the breaches of the Churches be so long unhealed, and grow
wider and wider, and few much regard them, but all have their own work to do
which must be looked after. Yea and the Cause of Christ and the Gospel must be
trod down if it stand in the way of their own: And the Churches must be set on
fire by their wars and contentions for their selfish Interests. And if Self
were not too strong among us, we should not have had such connivence at
doctrinal and practical abominations, nor so much delay or neglect of healing
the discomposed Churches, and uniting the divided Christians, or attempting it
more effectually than we have done. But because I desire to speak to none but
those that are within my hearing, I will return home to our selves.

The holy ordering and instructing of families, and suppressing sin in Children
and servants, is one of the most effectual works, for the building up of the
Church, and the glory and stability of the Commonwealth. O if Parents and
Masters would but sanctify their houses to the Lord, and teach their families
the will and fear of God, and do their best (by punishment, when instruction
will not serve) to hinder sin, how fast would Reformation then go on? And what
hinders? why carnal Self: If it were but for wordly commodities they would do
more: Would you have me prove it? Let experience speak. Let a servant or child
go prayerless to their work, and few regard it: but they will not go without
meat, or drink, or clothes. The Master will suffer them to neglect Gods
service; but if they neglect his own, and should do him no more or better
service than they do to God, they should soon hear of it, and be turned out of
door: and they were no servants for him. They will teach their children to do
their own work, or set them Apprentices to learn it; but the work of God and
their salvation, they shall for them have little teaching in, how plainly
soever God has commanded it them, Deuteronomy. 11. 18, 19. and 6. 6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 6.
4.

Let a servant or child reproach his Master or Parent, or call them all to
naught, and they think not fit to put up that (nor indeed is it) but let them
swear by the name of God or break his Laws, and they can patiently bear with
it, and a cold rebuke like Eli's will serve turn. They can get them into field
or shop to work together, but they cannot get them before and after to prayer
together. And why is all this? Why one is for Self, and the other is for God:
One is for the body, and the other is for the soul. So that you see what Self
can do, and how commonly it is the master of Families, Towns and Countries,
because it is the master in men's souls.

God must be loved above all, and our neighbor as our selves: But if God were
allowed but so much love as a very neighbor should have, it would not be all
so ill with the selfish world as now it is. But because I have been so long on
this first discovery of the power of Self, and the scarcity of Self-denial, I
will be shorter in the rest that follow.

CHAP. V. The power of Selfishness upon men's opinions in Religion.
2. ANother instance Discovering the Reign of selfishness in the world, is, The
great Power that it has to form men's Opinions and Conceptions in Religion.
Though the understanding naturally be inclined to Truth, yet a selfish by as
upon the soul, especially on the will, does commonly delude it, and make the
vilest error seem to be Truth to it, and the most useful Truth to seem an
error. The Will has much command over the Understanding: and when selfishness
is become the very habit, the byas, the nature of the will, you may easily
conjecture how it will pervert the understanding. But what need we more than
experience to satisfy us. Do you not see that where self is but deeply
engaged, the judgment is bribed or overmastered, and carried from the Truth?
So that as the eye that looks through a colored glass, does see all things as
if they were of the same color as the glass: So the understanding that is
mastered by a selfish inclination, thinks every thing is truth that savoureth
his self-interest. And here I shall offer you some more particular instances.

1, We all see that almost all the world is of that Religion or Opinion which
has the countenance of the Government that they live under, and the persons
that have greatest power on their reputation; or at least which is consistent
with their safety, if not rising and prosperity in the world. The Turks are
commonly Mahometans: the subjects of Rome, and Spain, and Austria, etc. are
generally Papists: those in Denmark, Sweden, Saxony, etc. are generally
Lutherans: those of Scotland, England, Helvetia, etc. are commonly Calvinists
(as they are called.) I know the power of education is great, and hearing
evidence only on one side, may byas a well* meaning man: But Papists and
Protestants (as to the learned part) have the Books of the contrary-minded at
hand: And therefore that Opinions should run in a stream, and whole Countries
almost be of a party, must needs be much from the power of selfishness, because
they are swayed by them that have the power of their reputation, and estates
and liberties in the world.

2. Moreover, when a man is by custom grown selfconceited, or by the power of
Pride is wise in his own eyes, how hard a matter do we find it to convince such
men by the clearest evidence! They will not see, when they can hardly wink so
close as to keep out the light. It is their opinion, and therefore shall be so:
and they will hold it because it is their own.

3. Especially if it be an Opinion of a man's own invention, which is doubly his
own, both as he is the contriver and possessor, how close will he stick to it,
too commonly beyond the evidence of truth, because that self has so gre^^^n
interest in it?

4. Yea, if a man be but deeply engaged for it, either by laborious Disputes,
or confident owning it, or any way, so as that his credit lies on it, how
tenacious will he be of it, because of the powerful interest of Self?

5. And if it be but an Opinion that seems to befriend any former Opinion that
we have much engaged for, how much does selfishness usually appear in our
inordinate propensity to it?

6. Also if we live in days of persecution, how easily do we receive those
Opinions that would keep us from prison and fire? Or if any suffering lie upon
it, we commonly take that side to be right, that is safest to the flesh,
(except when self would be advanced by the occasion of sufferings) And in
prosperity, if there be any controversy arise, which our gain is concerned in,
how easily believe we the thriving opinion? If any Oath, Engagement, or Duty be
imposed on us by those that have Power to do us harm, the generality are for
it, be it what it will. In all these cases it is commonly Carnal Self that is
the Judge.

And how far Self commands in such cases, you may see by these discoveries
following.

1. In studying the case, men's thoughts run almost all one way. They study what
to say for their own opinions, and how to answer all that is against them: but
they study but very little what may be sa^d on the other side. They sit at
their studies with a biased will, inclining or commanding their understanding
what to do, even to prove that to be true, which they would have ^o be true,
whether it be so or not.

2. And hence it is that the weakest Arguments on their own side do seem
sufficient, if not invincible; and they stand wondering at the blindness of all
those men that cannot see the force of them: But no Arguments seem to have any
weight, that are brought against them. And all this is from the power of self.

3. Yea, sometimes when they are silenced and know not what to say for their
opinions, nor how to answer the Arguments for the contrary, yet they can say,
We are of this mind, and we will be of this mind. And why, but because it is
espoused to them and their own?

4. And hence it is, that if a man be but an admirer of us, or of our own
opinion in other things, we are readier to receive an opinion from him than
from another.

5. And hence it is that Disputations do so s^ldome change men's minds, because
they take it to be a dishonor to be changed by another (unless it be a person
of great renown;) we envy to an Opposite the glory of altering our
understandings: But if we may have the doing of it our selves by the power of
our own understandings and studies, we will sometimes yield to change our
minds. He is a stranger to the ungodly world that sees not how much
self-interest does, to master their understandings, and turn their hearts from
the holy doctrine of Christ, and how much it does to make them like or dislike
their teachers, or any point or practice in Religion. And he is a stranger even
among Divines themselves, that sees not the sway that self does bear in their
judgments, and disputes, and course of life, and the choice of their party or
society to which they join themselves.

CHAP. VI. Men's great aversness to costly or troublesome duties.
3. ANother discovering instance of the rarity of self-denial is this, The
great aversness of men to any costly, or troublesome, or self-denying duty, how
necessary soever, how plainly soever revealed in the Scripture, and how
generally soever acknowledged by the Church: As if self had a Negative voice in
the making of Laws for the Government of the world, and none must be binding
without its consent. I shall come down to some more particular instances.

1. The great duty of charitable relieving our brethren in necessity to the
utmost of our power, is commonly made almost nothing of in the world. And men
cheat their souls by thinking they are passed from death to life, because they
love the brethren with such a cold and barren love as will neither lay down
estate for them, nor venture life for them, but think they are sure Christians,
because they can say as the believers that James mentions, [ Depart in peace:
be you warmed and filled, but give them not that which is necessary thereto]
James 2. 16. Though it be told them plainly by Christ himself that it is not a
fruitless uneffectual love, but that which causes them to feed and cloth and
visit the Saints, that must stand them instead at judgment, Matthew. 25. and the
Apostle asks them, How the love of God can dwell in that man that sees his
brother have need, and shuts up the bowels of his compassion from him, 1
John 3. 17. Yet do men think that by dropping now and then a penny, they have
discharged all this great duty. And when they see many ways by which they
might promote the Gospel, and help the Church, and serve God with their
estates, yet self will not let them see the meaning of the plainest Scriptures
that do require it.

2. When men should practice the great duty of forgiving injuries, trespasses
and debts, and of loving our enemies, and blessing them that curse us, and
praying for them that hate and persecute us, how stubbornly does selfishness
resist these duties. What abundance of words may you use in vain, with most men
to persuade them to any of this work? No: they must have their right; and that
which is their own, though it be to the undoing of their brother. Passion and
revenge even boil within them, and the thoughts of an injury stick in their
minds; and if they do take on them dissemblingly to forgive it, yet they cannot
forget it, nor heartily love a brother that displeases them, much less an
enemy: And all this is from the dominion of self, and shows that it prevails
above God in the soul, and therefore shows a graceless heart.

3. When the Ministers of the Gospel themselves should be painful in their
great and necessary work, and should watch over all the flock, Acts 20. 28.
warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that they may present
every man perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1. 28. condescending to men of the
lowest sort, and teaching them in season, and out of season, what reasonings
and shifts will self bring in to resist so great and excellent a duty, and
prove it no duty, and that God will give them leave to spare their pains; and
all because of the Powerful interest of self?

4. And let the same Ministers have a disordered flock, that has scandalous
members, especially if they be great ones, or many, and how rarely will they do
their duty to them, in plain reproof, and in case of impenitency and
continuance in sin, by Public Admonition and Rejection? what shiftings and
cavillings will they find against this displeasing work of Discipline? even
when they will reproach a man themselves whose Opinion is against Discipline,
and when they have preached and written and disputed so much for it: and almost
all parties are agreed of the necessity of it in the substance; yet when it
comes to practice, it cannot be done without procuring men's hatred and
opposition; and laying us open to much incommodity; and therefore self does
persuade us to forbear; and whether God or self have the more servants even yet
in a reformed Ministry, I leave you to judge as your observation of the
congregations through the Land shall direct you. But were it not for self I
should undertake to do more for discipline and personal Instruction with most
Ministers, by one Argument, than I have done by a volume, and you might see an
unanimous concurrence in the work, and consequently a great alteration in the
Churches.

5. And whence is it but from selfishness that plain and close Application in
our Sermons is taken to be an injury to those that think themselves concerned
in it? If a Minister will speak alike to all, and take heed of meddling with
their sores, they will patiently hear him: but if he make them know that he
means them in particular, and deal closely with them about their miserable
state or against any special disgraceful sin, they fall a railing at him, and
reproaching him behind his back, and perhaps they will say, They Will hear him no
more. O says the selfish ungodly wretch, [ I know he meant me to day: had he
no body but me to speak against?] As if a sick man should be angry with the
Physician, for giving directions and medicines to him in particular, and say, [
Had he no body to give Physic to but me? Were there not sick men enough in the
Town besides me?] When Christ told the Despisers of the Gospel of the certain
and dreadful destruction that was near them, Mat. 21. 41, 44, 45. its said that
[ When the chief Priests and Pharisees had heard his Parables, they perceived
that he spoke of them! (A heinous business) and therefore they sought to lay
hands on him, but that they durst not do it for fear of the multitude.]

6. Nay, let a Minister preach but any such doctrine as seems consequentially
to be against Self, and to conclude hardly of them, and they are ready to say
as Ahab of Micaiah [ I hate him: for he prophesies not good of me, but evil,]
1 Kings 22. 8. Let us but tell them how few will be saved; what holiness and
striving and diligence is necessary, though we have the express word of God for
it, Heb. 12. 14. Mat. 7. 13, 14. Luke 13. 24. 2 Pet. 1. 10. yet because they
think that it makes against their carnal peace, they cannot abide it: Plain
truth is unwelcome to them, because it is rough, and grates upon the quick, and
tells them of that which is troublesome to know: Though they must know their
sin and danger and misery, or else they can never escape it; yet they had rather
venture on Hell, than hear the danger. And as a sortish Patient, they love that
Physician better that will tell them there is no danger, and let them dye, than
he that will tell them, [ your discase is dangerous; you must bleed or vomit,
or purge, or you will dye] O what a wrong they take it to be told thus? If a
Minister tell one of them that has the death marks of ungodliness in the face
of his Conversation [ Neighbor, I must deal plainly with you: your state is
sad: you are unsanctified and unjustified, and in the slavery of the Devil, and
will be lost for ever, if you dye before you are converted and made a new
creature; and therefore turn presently as you love your soul,] its ten to one
but he should have a reproachful answer instead of thanks and obedience. And
all this shows that self bears the rule. I will give one instance from the
Gospel, that will tell you plainly the power of self. In Luke 4. 20. etc. you
read of an excellent Sermon preached by Jesus Christ himself, so that all did
wonder at his gracious words: yet few were converted by it, but they fell on
cavilling against him because of his supposed Parentage and Breeding: Whereupon
Christ tells them that Elias and Elisha though most excellent Prophets, were
sent but for the sake of a few, and therefore it was no wonder if of all that
multitude it was but a few that should be converted and saved by him. This very
doctrine so netled these wretches, that the Text says, ver. 28, 29. that [ all
they in the Synagogue when they heard these things were filled with wrath, and
rose up and thrust him out of the City and led him to the brow of the hill
whereon their City was built that they might cast him down headlong.] See what
entertainment such doctrine had even from Christ himself! As if they should
have said, what! are we all unconverted and ungodly, shall none be saved but a
few such as you! Self was not able to bear this doctrine, they would have had
his life for it.

7. Again, let but a Minister or private Christian, deal closely with ungodly
men or Hypocrites about their particular sins, by private reproof, and see
whether Self be not Lord and King in them. O how scurvily they will look at
you? and their hearts do presently rise against you with displeasure, and they
meet you with distaste and passion, and plead for their sins, or at least
excuse or extenuate them; or bethink themselves what they may hit you in the
teeth with of your own: Or if malice it self can fasten nothing on you, they
let fly at professors, or those that they think are of your mind and way: in a
word, they show you that they take it not well that you meddle with them, and
let not their sin alone, and look to your selves, for all that God has
expressly commanded us, Lev. 19. 17. [ Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy
heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon
him.] And Heb. 3. 13. [ Exhort one another daily while it is called to day,
lest any be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin] So Mat. 18. 15, 16. Try but
plain dealing with your neighbors one twelve month with as much prudence and
love and lenity as will stand with faithfulness; and when you have done I dare
leave it to your selves to judge, whether God or self have the more servants in
the world, and whether self-denial and Sanctification be not very rare.

8. Yet further, you see it is the duty of Christians to admonish and
faithfully reprove one another: but because most men take it ill, and plain
dealing will displease and lose a friend, how few even of professors will be
brought to perform it? yea, of those that expect a Minister should reject the
offender, when it cannot be done till after admonition and impenitency
thereupon. No, this is a troublesome duty, and self will not give them leave to
do it.

9. Moreover: You know that Church Government and Discipline is an undoubted
Ordinance of Christ which the Church has owned in every age: (though in the
execution some have been negligent, and some injurious:) and that open
scandalous sins must have open confession and repentance, that the ill effects
may be hindered or healed, and the Church see that the person is capable of
their communion, and that the absolution may be open and well grounded. And yet
let any man (except the truly penitent and godly) be called after a scandal to
such a necessary confession, and how hardly are they brought to it? What
cavilling shall you have against the duty? They will not believe that it is
their duty; not they! And why so? is it because it is not plainly required by
God? No, but because it tends (they think,) to their disgrace; and self is
against it: and when you have showed them such reasons for it that they cannot
answer; yet, the sum is, they will not believe it; or if they believe it, they
will not do it. What! will they make themselves the laughing stock, and talk of
the Country? No they will never do it; and it is an injury, they think, for
God or man to put them upon it. God commands: and self forbids: God bids them,
yield, lest they perish in impenitency: self bids them, not to yield, lest they
shame themselves before men: God persuades, and self disswadeth? and which is
it that most commonly prevails (Though to avoid the shame of excommunication,
self also will some time make them yield) Did but the Magistrate by a penalty
of ten or twenty pound upon refusers persuade them to this, not one of a
hundred would then refuse: but when God urges them with the threatening of
Hell, the wages of impenitency, they make little or nothing of it: as if they
could escape it by not believing it, or some way or other could deal well
enough with him: Judge by the performance of this one duty, Whether God or Self
have more Disciples.

10. Lastly, let me instance in one duty more; Suppose a deceitful Tradesman,
or oppressing Landlord, or any one that gets unlawfully from another, is told
from the word of God, that it is his duty to make Restitution, either to the
person, or to his posterity, (or to God by the poor, if neither can be done;)
and to give back all that ever he thus unjustly came by, though he have been
possessed of it (without disgrace) never so long: See what entertainment this
doctrine will have with the most. Self will not lose the prey that it has got
hold off, till death shall wring it out of its jaws, and Hell make them wish
they had never meddled with it, or else had penitently and voluntarily restored
it. O what abundance of objections has self against it! and no answer will
satisfy from God or man. Of a thousand unjust getters, how many do restore,
and say as Zachaeus, Luke 19. 8. [ Behold Lord, the half of my goods, I give to
the poor, and if I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I
restore him four fold.

Nay, let us instance in a duty of lesser self-denial, than this of
Restitution. If two do but fall out, and one give railing words to the other;
or if one slander his neighbor and do him wrong; though it be undoubtedly the
will of Christ that he penitently ask him forgiveness that he has wronged,
Luke 17. 34. yet proud-hearted selfish men will refuse it? What! will they
stoop to such a fellow, and ask him forgiveness (specially if it be their
inferior?) No, they scorn it: never talk to them of it more: they will never do
it: And why so? would not God have them do it? Has not he said, He that
humbles himself shall be exalted? Yea, but what tell you them what God says,
and what Scripture says, as long as self, and flesh, and pride are against it.
Judge now by these ten duties that I have named, whether God or self be King
with most.

CHAP. VII. Men's exceeding tenderness of Self in case of any suffering.
4. ANother Discovering instance of the Dominion of self, and the scarcity of
self-denial is, The exceeding tenderness of our selves in any case of
suffering, and the great matter that we make of it, and our displeasure against
all that are the causes of it, be it never so just. I shall here also give you
some more particular instances.

1. When did you ever see an offender (at least very few) that Justified the
Judge, and heartily confesses that his punishment is due (unless some few at
the Gallows, when the sight of death takes down their pride?) But at most every
one that suffers for his fault does repine at it, and at them that caused it,
and think they have wrong, or are hardly dealt with. If all the Swearers,
Cursers, Prophaners of the Lords day, Drunkards, or Ale-sellers that reset
them, or are otherwise guilty, were accused by their Neighbors, and punished
by the Magistrate but according to the Law, how many of all these is there that
would not be displeased with the accusers, and with the Magistrate, and think
himself wronged, and bear them a grudge in his mind that did it? And why so? Is
it not just and according to the Laws of God and man? Must we make a stir in
choosing Parliament Men? and must they sit there month after month, and use
their utmost skill and diligence to make such Laws as are necessary for the
common good? and when all is done, must not these Laws be executed? why then it
were better spare the Parliament Men the labor of sitting about them, and our
selves the trouble of choosing us Parliament Men, than do all this for nothing.
What is every Ale-seller, or Drunkard, or Swearer, or Profane person, wiser
than all the Parliament and the Prince? or are they all better, and juster, and
honester than they? No; but its self that stands up against all. Its in vain to
tell them of Kings, or Parliaments, or Laws, or common good, as long as you go
about to cross the flesh, and trouble them in their private interest; set but
self against all, and all goes down before it as nothing. There Is scarce a
Thief or Murderer that is hanged, but thinks he has hard measure; because it is
against himself.

2. Nay, it is not only penalties, but words that men are very sensible of, if
they be but against themselves. An angry or disgraceful speech, or any contempt
or disrespect, does seem a great matter against them; and they have
aggravations enough to lay upon it. So tender are they of themselves, that you
may see how little they deny themselves.

3. Yea, Gods own Corrections do seem so heavy to them, that they murmur and
are impatient under them. A little loss or cross to self does lie as a mountain
on them. Poverty, or sickness, or disgrace, or troubles, do make them complain,
as if they were almost quite undone: and all this shows how little they have
learned to deny themselves.

CHAP. VIII.. The partiality of men's practical judgment in their own Case.
5. ANother Discovering instance of the Dominion of self, is, The strange
Partiality of men's practical Judgments when the Cause is their own; and the
equity of their judgments when the Case is another man's.

For* particular instances of this, you may take up those that were mentioned
before. I Will give you but a few.

1. Take but a dull and backward Minister, (for I know you will expect I begin
next home) and he that is most averse to particular Instruction, and
Discipline, and Self-denying duties, will be content that another man should
perform them, and will commend and extol him for a worthy man: except he
perceive that another diligence disgraceth his selfishness and negligence, and
then indeed he may possibly repine at it.

2. A man that will not come near us to be instructed or Catechized, will yet
let his children or servants come. Why what is the matter? does he more regard
their salvation than his own? or has he not a soul to save or lose as well as
they? and has he not need of teaching? Yes: but they are not himself: If they
learn a Catechism, it is no trouble to him: If their ignorance be opened, he
takes it to be less dishonor to him than if he show his own. He can yield to
their submission without self-denial, but not to his Own.

3. Take a common glutton or drunkard, that cannot forbear, but must needs have
that which the flesh desires, and they can be content that another man be
temperate and sober: and if a neighbor should have the Cup before him, as they
have, or a provocation to their appetite, they could be content that they let
it alone; yea, they can tell them that it is the best way, and give them good
counsel; and yet when the case is their own, it is otherwise. I have known
drunkards that would persuade their children to take heed of it, and swearers
that would whip their children for swearing, and persons that would not read or
pray, that would be content to have their children do it. And why is all this?
why that which goes by their own throats, must cost them self-denial in the
displeasing of their greedy appetites; but that which goes by the throat of
another does cost them nothing: self is not so much against their childrens
abstinence and reformation as their own.

4. The same Magistrate that will not trouble himself and displease his
neighbors, by suppressing Alehouses, and punishing vice, will perhaps be
content if it were done by another; so that self might have none of the trouble
and ill will.

5. Some men that will not instruct their families, nor pray with them morning
and night, will confess it is well done of others that do it. Yea, some that
will not be persuaded to an holy heavenly life, will confess it is the best and
wi^est course, and approve of it in others, and wish they might but dye in such
men's case: And yet they will not themselves be brought to practice it. They
will commend Peter, and Paul, and the Fathers, and the Martyrs for a holy life,
and as I said, keep holy-da^es for them, and yet they will not be persuaded to
imitate them. And why so? why it costs them nothing to commend Holiness in
others: but to practice it themselves, must cost them self-denial.

6. If another man be so ingenuous as to forsake an old self-espoused opinion,
which their reputation seems to lie upon, and this upon their arguing, or in
conformity to their minds, they will commend his great self-denial and
sincerity: But yet they will not do so themselves, where the case is perhaps
more clear and necessary.

7. Take a man that is never so worldly and unmerciful, that gives not to the
poor any considerable part of his estate, nor does nothing worth the mentioning
for the Church, and yet this man will consent that another shall be as
bountiful and charitable as he will: when you can hardly scrue a groat out of
his purse, he will be content if another will give an hundred. And he will
commend the liberal, and speak well of them, when he will not imitate them. And
why is this? why it costeth him nothing for another to be liberal; and
therefore he can advise it, or consent to it without self-denial: but self is
against it when he should do it himself.

8. Take the most selfish unsanctified man, that cannot love an enemy, nor
forgive a debt, or a wrong, and he will yet commend it in another, and advise
them to it, and speak well of those that will do so by him: And why is this?
why it costeth him nothing to have another man love an enemy, or forgive a debt
or wrong; but he cannot himself do it without self-denial.

9. Those men that love not to be touched themselves by the Ministers
application, can yet endure well enough that others be dealt as sharply with as
may be; And they are glad to hear any sharply reproved whose sins they do
dislike. The Covetous man loves to hear us reprove the drunkard, and the
drunkard is content to have the Covetous reprehended: Erroneous professors,
dividers and hypocrites do hate the Minister that reprehendeth their own sin,
and can scarce endure to hear him, but say, he is bitter, or a presecutor, or
raileth at the godly (alas that wickedness should have so impudent a plea!) But
they can freely give us leave to deal as plainly as we will with the openly
profane: scarce any sect can endure you to speak against their own mistakes:
but you may speak as freely against the contrary minded as you please. How
easily can Papists endure one to speak against Protestants? or Anabaptists
endure one to speak against Infant Baptism? And the openly profane can well
enough endure to have Sects, and Schismatics, and Heretics reproved: And why
is all this, but from the Dominion of self, and the scarcity of self-denial in
the world? To have another rebuked, touches not Self, and therefore may be
born.

The poor man loves to hear us preach against the Vices of the rich, and to
reprehend the luxury of Gentlemen, and the cruelty of oppressors: The subject
too often loves to hear the Rulers faults laid open: The Countryman loves to
hear the Courtiers, the Ministers, but specially the Lawyers faults laid open:
Here you may speak freely: but Self must be let alone, upon pain of their
displeasure, and many a reproach.

10. So also in case of personal close reproof: those that cannot endure it
themselves, do think it the duty of others to endure it, and expect that others
should submit to them; and if any will say, [Neighbour, I thank you for your
plain and friendly dealing, and having so much compassion on my soul, as to
help to save me from my sins: I confess I am a vile unworthy sinner; but by the
grace of God I will do so no more: or if I be any more overtaken, I pray you
tell me of it, and let me not alone in it.] I say if another should answer them
thus and thank them for their reproof, they would think the better of him, and
take it well. But yet they will not do so themselves: for it costeth Self
nothing to have another submit and humble himself.

So those that are most backward to the admonishing of others, lest they lose
their love, can like to have a a Minister or another do it: For that does not
put them to deny themselves.

12. Nay take a scandalous professor, that is drawn to public Confession as a
Bear to the Stake, and if it were another man's case, he would think it but
reasonable and meet, and would persuade him to it. If another had committed the
same sin against God as he has done, or had slandered, or wronged him, and
would freely, without urging, confess in the Congregation with tears in his
eyes, that he has sinfully provoked God, and offended the Church, and wronged
his Brother, and laid a stumbling block in the way of the ungodly, and the
weak, and dishonored his holy profession, and is never able to make
satisfaction for such heinous sins, and is unworthy any more to be a member of
the Church, and to have any communion with Christ or them; and should earnestly
entreat them to pardon him, and pray for him, and retain him in their
Communion, and entreat God to pardon him; Would not the stander by think this
were well done, and a better way to his recovery than to refuse it? And all is,
because that self is not touched in another man's case; unless he apprehend it
like to become his own; and then he may be against it, and scorn at this, as
too precise a Course.

13. Take also the extortioner, or any man that has defrauded or injured
another; and that will not be persuaded to make Restitution of all that he has
got amiss: and let this man hear of the case of Zacheus, and he will say, It
was well done: Or let another case be propounded to him, and he can tell them
that [ Restitution is the safest way: whatever it cost you, its fit that every
man should have his own.] Self will give him free leave to consent to another
man's Restititution; but not to his own.

14. Moreover; Suppose that persecution were afoot, and a man must either
knowingly sin against God, or lose his Estate, and part with all that he has
in the world, and burn at a Stake for the cause of Christ: The selfish
unsanctified person will not be persuaded that this is his duty, or at least,
he will not be persuaded to submit to it: He cannot suffer, nor burn: He will
trust God with his soul, rather than men with his body; (as such speak that
despise God, and reject him, and prefer the world before him, and call this
trusting him.) But if this were another man's case, they could tell him that its
better displease men than God, and that its better venture a short life, than
an endless life; and that it is little profit to win all the world, and lose
his own soul; and that it is the wisest way to make sure work for eternity, and
not to venture on endless misery: And they could consent that another should
rather suffer than sin* Why else do they commend the Martyrs for it? And what
is the reason of this strange partiality? Why Self is the great Ruler, and God
has but the name. Self is partial in their own cause, but not in another man's:
and therefore they can consent to his suffering without selfdenial: And hence
comes the difference.

15. Moreover, when Offenders murmur at their punishment, ask but the standers
by, and they are of another mind. When the Ale-seller thinks he is wronged if
he be put down: ask but the poor women whose Husbands use to be drunk there,
and whose children, lack meat, and drink, and clothes, because the Alehouse
devours that which should buy them, and they will be quite of another judgment,
and think you love not God nor the Country, if you will not suppress them.

16. Also when you hear men extenuating their sin, and excusing it; put but the
case as another man's, and let them not understand that it is their own, and you
shall hear another judgment. So Nathan came about David, and put but a far
lower case as another about the robbing a poor man of his only Sheep, and he
could presently say and swear, [ As the Lord lives, the man that has done
this thing shall surely die, because he had no pity:] and his anger was greatly
kindled against the man, 2 Samuel 12. 5, 6. But why was he not as angry with
himself for a greater sin? O self had got the better in that grievous fall,
till grace broke his heart by true repentance. So when Judah heard of Thamars
fornication, he commands [ Bring her out that she may be burnt,] Genesis 38. 24.
But when he understood that it was by himself, the case was altered.

17. Let a man that his provoked by injuries and ill words, have as bad by
himself done or spoken against another, and he can make but a small matter of
them, or think they should be easily put up or pardoned: when yet the same
words spoken against him, do seem intolerable.

18. Let a man speak with others in poverty, sickness, or any affliction, and
what good counsel can he give him to submit to God, and take all patiently! But
let the suffering be his own, and he cannot take the counsel that he gives.

19. Nay more; men are not only partial for themselves, but for any that are
near themselves, or that self is related to. Let another man's Son or Servant do
evil, and you can be content that he be rebuked or corrected: But if it be a
Son, or Kinsman, or Servant of your Own, the case is altered; its then a wrong
to punish, him, because of his relation to you. Let a Stranger do amiss, and
you can give way to Justice: But if the Drunkard, or Ale-seller, or Swearer be
your friend, then he must be born with and forgiven, and the justice must be
entreated for him.

Let a scandalous, or insufficient Minister, or Schoolmaster be offered to any
place: If he be a Stranger, you can be content that he be rejected: but if he
be a Kinsman, or Child, or Friend of yours, what an alteration does this make
in the case! then he must be born with, or tried, and you hope he will mend,
and his faults are made the least of, and his virtues more than indeed they are.

Nay any man that does but love your selves and honor you, and think highly of
you, shall have a favourabler construction for all his words, and actions, and
intentions, than one that you imagine is against you or has low thoughts of
you, or is against your interest, or your opinion.

Sirs, I have run into abundance of instances, but not a quarter so many as
might be given; and all is to meet with the turnings and windings of this
Serpent self; and to let you see (if light it self can make you see, against
the blinding power of self) how rare self-denial is in the the world, and what
a large Dominion self obtains.

I would here have added some more Discoveries, as 6. From the excessive care,
and cost, and labor that almost all the world is at for self? and the little
they are at for God, or the good of others, 7. The large proportion that is
expended on self, in comparison of God and others. 8. The Zeal of men to
vindicate self, but the little Zeal for God or others. 9. The rigorous Laws
that are made in the cause of self: (Thieves and Traitors must die): and the
remissness of Lawgivers in the cause of God: Blasphemy, Malignity, and Impiety
is not so roughly handled. 10. The firmness of men to carnal self, and their
great mutability and unfaithfulness to God. But I had rather omit somewhat,
than to be too tedious, and therefore I go no further in these Discoveries,
save only to add a few of those Aggravations that show you the extent of selfs
Dominion, as you have seen the sad discoveries of the reality of it.

CHAP. IX. The great Power and prevalency of selfishness discovered.
ANd that you may see what cause we have for our Lamentation: Consider the
greatness of selfish Tyranny in these Particulars.

1. Consider what a Power it is that self bears down in the world: The
Commands of the God of heaven are overcome by it. The promises of eternal life,
are trod under foot by it. The threatenings of endless torments are nothing to
it. It casts by Heaven: it ventures upon Hell: It tramples upon the precious
blood of Christ: It will not hear the voice of wisdom it self: Nor the voice of
goodness and mercy it self: It refuses him that speaks from heaven: Love it
self is not lovely where self is Judge: It quenches all the motions of the
Spirit: it despises Ministers: It turns mercies into wantonness and sin:
Like Sampson, it breaks all bonds that are laid on it: and till it be weakened
it self, there is no holding, no ruling, no saving the soul, that's ruled by it.

2. Consider also the exceeding Number of its Subjects: Truly if there were no
other proof, that the sanctified and the saved are very few, this one is so
full and sad a proof, that it tempts me sometime to think them much fewer
than willingly I would do. Alas, how few self-denying persons do you meet with
in the world; yea in the Church! yea among the stricter Professors! Look over
all the world, and see how few you can find at work for any one but for carnal
self? If you observe the Courts, and see whose work is done most there; and
look into the Armies of the world, and see who it is that rules there: if you
look upon the affairs of Nations, and the wars of Princes, and their
confederacies, and see who it is that rules in all; how little will you see
(save here and there) but carnal self? It is self that makes the cause and
manageth it: It is self that makes Wars and Peace. Come down into our Courts
of Justice, and whose voice is loudest at the bar, but selfs? and who is it
commonly else that brings in the Verdict? at least who is it else that made and
follows on the quarrel? How many causes has self at an Assize, for one that
God has? Come lower into the Country and who is it that plows and sows; who is
it that keeeps House or Shop but self? I mean what else but carnal self is the
Principle? what else but carnal self is the End? what else but the will of self
is the Rule? and what else but selfish commodity, or pleasure, or honor are
the matter, or some provision that is made for these; and consequently what
else but self-respect is the form? For the End informs the means as means;
and therefore all that is done for self is self-service and self-seeking. In a
word, as God is all in all to the sanctified, so self is as all in all to the
ungodly. And alas how great a number are all these!

3. Consider that it is a sin that is nearer us objectively than any other sin;
And the nearer the more dangerous. Alas that a man should turn his own
substance into poison and feed upon it to his own destruction! If you have
drunk poison, you may cast it up again, or nature may do much to work it out:
but if your own blood, and humors, and spirits be turned into venom, that
should nourish and preserve your life, what then shall expel this venom, and
deliver you?

4. Moreover it is the most obstinate disease in the world. No duty harder
(except the Love of God) than self-denial. O how many wounds will self carry
away and yet keep life, and heal them all. How commonly do we convince some
carnal Gentlemen, that One thing is needful, and that its a better part than
Earth, and honor, and sensuality that must be chosen, or else they are undone;
and that the more they have, the more they must forsake, and the more
self-denial is required to their salvation; (and that all their lands, and
wealth, and honors, and all their wit, and parts, and interest must be at the
service of their Maker and Redeemer; and that when they have all in the world
that they can get, that all must become Nothing, and God must become all; their
treasure must become the dross and dung, and Christ must become their treasure,
or they are lost? I say, how often do we convince men of all estates of these
important evident truths? And yet this self is still alive, and keeps the
garrison of the heart; and all that we can have from most of them, is, as the
rich man, Luke 18. 23, 24. to be very sorrowful that they cannot have heaven at
easier rates, and that Christ will not be a servant unto Self, or they cannot
have two Masters! They go away sorrowful (but away they go) because they are
rich; which makes Christ say upon this observation, How hardly shall they that
have riches enter into the Kingdom of God? But when the Disciples were troubled
at his observation, he lets them know that it is Self and not Riches that is
indeed the deadly enemy. It is the selfish that trust in Riches, and love and
use them for themselves, and deny not themselves, and devote not all to God,
that will be kept out of Heaven by them; Or in Christ's own words, Luke 12. It
is [ he that lays up treasure for Himself, and is not rich toward God.]
Conquer self and Conquer all.

5. Moreover self is the most constant malady; the sin that does most
constantly attend us. Many actual sins may be laid by, and we may for the time
be free from them. But selfishness is at the heart, and lives with us
continually; It parts not from us sleeping or waking: It goes to the worship
of God with us: it will not stay behind in the holiest ordinance: It will not
forbear intermixing it self in the purest duties; but will defile them all. So
that above all sins in the world, its this that must have the strictest,
constantest watch, or else we shall never have any peace for it.

6. Yea this self does lamentably survive even in the sanctified soul, among
the special graces of the Spirit, and lamentably distempereth the hearts and
lives of too many of the godly themselves. Not that any godly man is selfish in
a predominant sense; or that self is higher or more powerful in his heart than
God: for that is a contradiction: such a man cannot be a godly man (without
Conversion:) But yet the very remnants of conquered Self, what a smoke do they
make in our Assemblies, and what noisome scent in the lives of many godly men?
what a stir have we sometimes with those that we hope are godly, before we can
get them to an impartial judgment; to lament their own fowl words, or other
miscarriages, and to humble themselves, or freely to forgive another that has
wronged them! especially to confess disgraceful sins in any self-denying
manner? How close stick they to their own conceits? how lamentably do they
improve them, to the contempt of Ministers, and trouble and division of the
Church? How wise are they in their own eyes, and how hardly yield they to any
advice that crosses Self? How hardly are they brought to any dear and costly
duty? How much do they indulge their appetites and passions? and how cheap a
Religion do many think to come to heaven with? we can scarce please some of
them, they are so selfish: either because we cross them in their opinions, or
in their ways; or because we allow them not so much special countenance and
respect as self would have: or deny them somewhat which self desires. If they
have any use for us, if we leave not more public or greater work which god
has set us on, and allow them not that part in our time or labors, or other
helps, which God and Conscience will not allow them, they are offended and take
it ill, that self is not preferred before God and the public service. Their
selves are so dear to themselves, that they think we should neglect all to
serve them.

Let the most useful Minister live in a place that has the plague, or other
contagious mortal sickness; and most that are visited, will take it ill if the
Minister come not to them, though they know that his life is hazarded by it,
and that his loss to the whole Church is more to be regarded than the content
or benefit of particular persons; and it is not the pleasing of them, nor their
benefit by him then, that will countervail the Churches loss of him. What is
this but too much preferring self (I hope not habitually, but) in that act,
before the Church and honor of God?

Let a Minister or any other man resolve to bestow all that God has given him
for his service, on the poor, or pious uses: Perhaps he shall displease as many
as he pleases, because he has not enough for all: and if he give to nineteen,
the twentieth will say [He past by me; and I am never the better.] And thus
this insatiable, unreasonable self will hardly be pleased; And among the godly
how much does it prevail! O how many Ministers in England can tell by sad
experience, how much of self surviveth in Professors! so much that we can
hardly rule them or keep them from breaking all to pieces, and every man
running away of his own. The ruin of England's expected Reformation; the fall
of our hope* in too great a measure, the multiplying of sects: the swarms of
errors: the rage against the faithfullest Ministers: the neglect of Discipline,
and obstinate refusal of penitent confessions, and humbling, self-denying
duties: the backwardness to learn: the forwardness to be teachers; the high
esteem of weak parts, and weaker grace: the commonness of backbiting,
censuring, and slandering, especially those that are not of their fond
opinions: the rising designs of many* the tenderness of their reputations: the
contendings for pre-eminence, all these, with many others, do too loudly tell
the world how much of self, and how little self-denial is in many that seem
godly.

7. But yet this is not the highest discovery of the power of Carnal self.
Though its sad to think that it should be so potent in any that have grace: yet
its sadder to think, that it has too much Power in the wisest and most learned
Magistrates and Ministers, that should be the greatest enemies of it in the
rest. A Magistrate, as a Magistrate is for the common good. Political societies
consisting of Sovereign and Subject, are therefore called Commonwealths, from
the final Cause, which is the common good, or weal of all: so that it is
essential to a Magistrate to be for the common good. And yet self creeps in,
and makes such work with many of them, that its hard to judge whether it have
left them the essence of the Magistracy, and whether they should be called
Magistrates or no.

But yet its sadder, that the Learned, Godly Preachers of self-denial should
have so little of it, as too many have. Alas, that Ministers do not remember
how ill Christ took the first contendings among his Disciples, who should be
the greatest; that they do not imprint upon their minds the image of Christ's
setting a child before them, and after girding himself, and washing their feet.
I think those men that make a Sacrament of this, do err much less than those
that forget it. And I suspect that our contrariety to this example, will tempt
some ere long into this contrary extreme, and it may be set up as a Sacrament
indeed. O woeful case! to be daily lamented by all the compassionate members of
the Church: that the Learned, Zealous Pastors of it, are the leaders,
fomenters, and continuers of her divisions: and when they have opportunity to
seek for healing, they want a will; and so much of self surviveth in them, that
though God call to them for Peace and Unity, and the bleeding Church is begging
it of them on her knees; yet self has such power over them, that God is not
heard, and the Church cannot be regarded; but Peace, and Piety, and all must be
sacrificed to the will and Interest of self: As if they were the Priests of
self, and the honor of God, and Peace of the Church were the daily sacrifice
which they have to offer! Not a motion can be made for Reformation or Unity,
but some selfish Ministers rise up to strangle it, under pretense of mending
the terms. Not a consultation can be held, but self creeps in, yea openly
appears, and ravels the work, and will needs be the doer of all that's done, or
nothing must go on that's done against it.

O Blessed Nation, if self-denial were more eminent and predominant therein! O
precious Ministry, and Great, and Honorable, if we truly sought our honor in
the habit of children, and by being the servants of all! O happy Churches,
abounding in Holiness and Peace, if once the Pastors and People were better
skilled in the practice of self-denial! I must confess, to the praise of Gods
grace, many such Ministers and people I have had the happiness to converse
with! and how sweet the fruit has been both to them and me, both they and I
are ready to confess. But one self-seeking, unmortified Minister, is enough to
disturb a whole society, and break the good endeavors of many: And alas how
many such are abroad, that talk of almost nothing but their opinions, or
parties, or carnal interests; and are not in the harvest as Reapers to gather,
but as wild beasts that are broken in to make spoil, or Sampsons Foxes to set
all on fire; running up and down from Country to Country with firebrarnds at
their tails, and stings in their mouths, which they call by the reverend name
of Zeal.

But you may think I have been long in discoveries, aggravations, and
complaints; and therefore I will go no further in that sort of work, but only
to adjoyn these three or four practical consectaries following.

CHAP. X. Some weighty Consectaries.
Consect. 1. SO common and Potent is selfishness in the world, that its enough
to convince a rational Considerate man, of the truth of the doctrine of the
fall of man, and of Original corruption, against all the objections that all
the Socinians or Pelagians in the world do make against it. He that thinks that
God made man in this distempered, distracted state that selfishness does hold
the world in, has unreasonable thoughts of the workmanship of God. He that
sees even children before they can speak or go so selfish as they are, and all
mankind without exception to be naturally as so many Idol gods in the world,
and can believe that this is the Image of God, in which they were created, does
make the Image of Satan to be the Image of God: No wiser, no better is the
Doctrine that denies Original sin, when self has such a tyrannical, universal
reign in all the world.

Consect. 2. So deep rooted, and powerful, and universal is this abominable
vice, that it must teach us what to expect in all places we live in, and may
help us to make the truest Prognostics, or probablest conjectures of any
mutations where the will of man is like to be the determiner. Know once but
where self-interest lies, and you may know what almost all men will endeavor,
and might write a probable Prognostication of the changes that are like to be
in States, and Kingdoms, and anywhere in the world, were it not for the
interposition of two greater Powers that have got the victory of self, and that
is Grace, and Divine-over-ruling Providence. I say were it not that these step
in, and cross self, and hinder its designs, you might foresee in self-interest
the changes that are made in humane affairs.

Consect. 3 And so Potent and common is the Dominion of self that it may
warrant an honest, moderate incredulity and jealousy of almost all men, in
cases where the interest of self is much concerned. Let him be never so
ingenuous, let his parts and profession be never so promising, let his former
engagements to you be never so great,, let him be your own Brother; yet be not
too confident of him, if his carnal self be concerned or engaged against you.
For you shall see by experience, as long as you live, that self will still bear
Dominion in the most.

Consect. 4. Above all, every wise and godly man should herein maintain the
greatest Jealousy of his own heart: Keep the heart above all keepings; and
keep out self above all sins whatever: Take heed of selfishness, as ever you
would be Christians, and live as Christians, and have the Peace of Christians.
And to that end be always suspicious of every cause, opinion, controversy, or
practice, where self is much concerned. The very names of SELF and OWN should
sound in a watchful Christians ears as very terrible, wakening words, that are
next to the names of Sin and Satan; and at least carry in them much cause of
suspicion.

And this has led me up to the next Use of the Point.

CHAP. XI. Use 2. To try our self-denial: the sincerity of the least degree.
Use 2. Of Exhortation.
BEloved hearers, I have now before me as great a sin and danger to deter you
from (even selfishness and its effects) and as great a Duty to offer to your
entertainment (even self-denial) as any (save one) that I am acquainnted with
in the world. The raising up the soul to God is indeed the greatest work: But
the mortifying of the flesh, and the Denying of self, is surely the next to it,
being a real part of the change. You hear Ministers tell you of the odiousness,
and danger, and sad effects of sin: but of all the sins that ever you heard of,
there is scarce any more odious and dangerous than this, and yet I doubt there
are many that never were much troubled at it, nor sensible of its malignity. My
principal request therefore to you is, that as ever you would prove Christians
indeed, and be saved from sin and damnation that follows it; take heed of this
deadly sin of selfishness, and be sure you be possessed with true self-denial:
and if you have it, see that you use and live upon it.

And for your help herein, I shall 1. Tell you how your self-denial must be
tried; and 2. How it must be exercised; and 3. I shall give you some further
Reasons to persuade you to it; and 4. Some Directions for the procuring and
strengthening it.

1. The trial of your self-denial may be performed by the help of the Signs
that have been given you before. In the ten particulars mentioned in the
beginning, you may see what is selfishness, and what is self-denial. But for
your further satisfaction, I shall only tell you in a few words, how the least
measure of true self-denial may be known. And, in one word, that is thus:
Wherever the Interest of Carnal self is stronger and more predominant
habitually than the Interest of God, of Christ, of everlasting life, there is
no true self-denial or saving grace: But where Gods Interest is the strongest,
there self-denial is sincere. If you further ask me, How this may be known?
Briefly thus.

1. What is it that you Live for? what is that Good which your mind is
principally set to obtain? and what is that End which you principally design
and endeavor to obtain, and which you set your heart on, and lay out your
hopes upon? Is it the Pleasing and glorifying of God, and the everlasting
fruition of him? Or is it the Pleasing of your fleshly mind in the fruition of
any inferior thing? Know this, and you may know whether Self or God have the
greatest interest in you. For that is your God, which you Love most, and Please
best, and would do most for.

2. Which d^ you set most by? the means of your Salvation, and of the Glory of
God; or the Means of providing for Self and Flesh? Do you set more by Christ
and Holiness, which are the way to God? or by Riches, Honor, and Pleasures,
which gratify the flesh? Know this, and you may know whether you have true
Self-denial?

3. If you are truly self-denying, you are ordinarily Ruled by God, and his
word and spirit, and not by Carnal Self. Which is the Rule and Master of your
lives? whose Word and Will is it ordinarily that prevails? When God draws, and
self draws, which do you follow in the tenor of your life? Know this, and you
may know whether you have true Self-denial.

4. If you have true Self-denial, the drift of your lives is carried on in a
successful opposition to carnal Self, so that you not only refuse to be ruled
by it, and love it as your God, but you fight against it, and tread it down as
your enemy: So that you go armed against Self in the course of your lives, and
are striving against Self in every duty; and as others think, it then goes best
with them, when Self is highest, and pleased best; so you will know that it
then goes best with you, when Self is lowest, and most effectually subdued.

5. If you have true Self-denial, there is nothing in this world so dear to
you, but on deliberation you would leave it for God. He that has any thing
which he loves so well that he cannot spare it for God, is a selfish and
unsanctified wretch. And therefore God has still put men to it, in the trial
of their sincerity, to part with that which was dearest to the flesh. Abraham
must be tried by parting with his only Son. And Christ makes it his standing
rule, [ He that forsakes not all that he has, cannot be my Disciple] Luke 14.
33. Yet it is true that flesh and blood may make much resistance in a gracious
heart; and many a striving thought there may be, before with Abraham we can
part with a Son, or before we can part with wealth or life: But yet on
deliberation self-denial will prevail, and there is nothing so dear to a
gracious soul, which he cannot spare at the will of God, and the hope of
everlasting life. If with Peter we should flinch in a temptation, we should
return with Peter in weeping bitterly, and give Christ those lives that in a
temptation we denied him. For Habitually God is dearest to the soul.

6. In a word, true self-denial is procured by the Knowledge and Love of God,
advancing him in the soul to the debasing of self. The illuminated soul is so
much taken with the Glory and Goodness of the Lord, that it carries him out of
himself to God, and as it were estrangeth him from himself, that he may have
communion with God; and this makes him vile in his own eyes, and abhor himself
in dust and ashes; He is lost in himself; and seeking God, he finds himself
again in God. It is not a Stoical Resolution, but the Love of God and the Hopes
of Glory that make him throw away the world, and look contemptuously on all
below, so far as they are mere provision for the flesh.

Search now, and try your hearts by these evidences, whether you are possessed
of this necessary grace of selfdenial. O make not light of the matter Sirs, and
presume not of it, till you find good grounds. For I must tell you that self is
the most treacherous enemy, and the most insinuating deceiver in the world. It
will be within you when you are not aware of it, and will conquer you when you
perceive not your selves much troubled with it, and of all other vices is both
the hardest to find out, and the hardest to cast out; the hardest to discover,
and the hardest to cure. Be sure therefore in the first place that you have
self-denial: and then be sure that you use it and live in the practice of it.
And for this I must give you more particular advice.

CHAP. XII. In what respect self must be denied.
II. AND here I beseech you take heed of Self in all these following respects.
1. You must Deny Self as it is Opposite to God, and a Competitor with him, and
the Idol of the soul and of the world; and this is in all the ten respects
which I mentioned in the beginning, and therefore shall not now rehearse. And
this is the principal part of self-denial.

2. Self must be denied as it is but conceived as separated from God; and would
be an End in a divided sense from God. For our selves and all things else are
created contingent, dependent beings, and must not be once thought of as if we
were either our own beginning, or end, or in any capacity, but subservient unto
God. Self becomes a Satan, when it would cast off its due subordination to God,
and would be any other than the workmanship of God, depending on him, and ruled
by him, and living to him, loving him, desiring him, and seeking after him, and
either mourning when we miss him, or rejoicing when we find Communion with him.

3. Self must be denied as it stands up against the Truth of the Gospel, and
blindly and proudly quarrelleth with that word which faith relyeth upon for
Justification and salvation. Carnal self is both the most incompetent Judge of
the word of God, and of spiritual affairs, and also the most forward, and
arrogant, and audacious, for all it is so incompetent. And this is the damnable
fountain of unbelief. That self is an incompetent Judge of the word and ways
of God, is evident: for 1. It is a natural enemy to them, and an enemy is no
competent Judge, Romans 8. 7. [ Because the Carnal mind is enmity against God:
for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.] Deny therefore
this enemy the power of judging the word of God. Ill Will never says well.
Enmity is credulous of all evil, and overlooks the good, and is accompanied
with false surmises, and wresteth every word, and suspecteth or makes an evil
sense where there was none: there is not a worse expositor in the world. And
therefore no wonder if such a nature of enmity can find matter of quarrel with
the very Scripture it self, and with an holy life, yea with God himself; for it
is him especially that the enmity is against.

2. Moreover self is a party, and therefore an incompetent judge. It is self
that the Scripture principally speaks against: All over the Gospel there are
the words of disgrace, and the arrows of death directed against the very heart
of Carnal self. God there proclaims and manageth an open war against it. And
shall a party be the judge? shall the traitorous delinquent be the judge? A
child will hardly speak well of the rod, whatever he do by the Corrector: but
it is not to be expected that a thief should love the halter or the gallows.
Gods word is the weapon that self must be slain by; and therefore self is an
incompetent judge of it.

3. Moreover self is quite blind in the matters of God: the natural man
discerns them not, nor can do, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor.
2. 14. And the ignorant and blind are incompetent judges.

4. And the selfish man is no good student in the Laws of God; even when he
reads the letter, he does not mind or savor the spirit of them. Romans 8. 5. [
For they that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh: but they
that are after the spirit, the things of the spirit.] A fair world it would be,
if every Colliar should judge the Privy Council and the Judges of the Land! or
if every thief should sit upon his accuser and his Judge, and every traitor
should judge the Prince. And a thousand-fold more insufficient is self to judge
the Word of God.

And yet as insufficient as it is, it is exceeding arrogant, and steps up into
the judgment seat, at every Chapter that is read or heard: and if this blind
and malicious Judge be unsatisfied, forsooth the Scripture must be dark or
contradictory, or what he pleases. This horrible presumptuous arrogance of self
is it that has opened so many mouths against the blessed Doctrine of
Salvation, and made so many wretched Apostates in the world, and cast so many
others into doubtings of that word by which at last they must be judged, and
which should have been the ground of their faith and hope.

4. Moreover, self must be denied as it stands up against the Lord Jesus
Christ. When Christ is presented in his wonderful Condescension, in his
Incarnation, and mean despised life, and in his ignominious death, Proud self
is offended at so low a Savior, and disdaineth that Humiliation which his own
necessities did require, and despises Christ because he became despised and a
man of sorrows in our stead. When he is propounded as the remedy of a miserable
soul, and as our only Life, and Righteousness, and Hope, Self does seduce the
soul to undervalue him: It will not easily be convinced of so much misery as to
need such a remedy: it is too well to value such a Physician: it is too
righteous to value the righteousness of a Mediator. It has too much Life and
Hope at home, in its own supposed innocence or sufficiency, to set much by the
Hopes that Christ has purchased, and to Live in him.

O down with self that Christ may be Christ to you. How shall he come in, while
Self is the Porter that keeps the door? How shall he pardon you, when Self will
not suffer you to feel the want and worth of pardon? How shall he bind up your
hearts, when Self will not suffer them to be broken? How shall he cloth you
with his righteousness, while self keeps on your own defiled rotten rags? Down
therefore with self, that Christ may be exalted. Away with your own conceited
righteousness, that he may be your righteousness; down with your Selfish
foolish wisdom, that the supposed foolishness of God may be your wisdom. Level
this mountain, which Satan has built up in enmity against the holy mountain of
the Lord.

5. Moreover, Self must be denied as it is the great resister of the Holy
Ghost. The sanctifying spirit has no greater enemy, at least, except the Devil
himself. One half of the work of sanctification, is to destroy this Carnal
self. And therefore no wonder if hence it find the chief resistance. Not an
holy motion can be made to the soul but self is against it. No work has the
spirit to do upon us, but self is ready to gainsay it, and contradict it, and
work against it: when ever therefore this mortal Principle is contending
against the spirit of God, dishonouring holiness, dissuading you from duty,
persuading you to sin, down with it and deny it, as you would be true to the
spirit and your selves.

6. Moreover, self must be denied as it traitorously complyeth with the enemies
of Christ and your own salvation: when it takes part with Satan, and pleads for
sin, and says as wicked men say, and enters a conspiracy with all that would
undo you, and all this under pretense of your own good. When ever it speaks for
sin, you may be sure it speaks against God and you, and therefore it is reason
you should deny it. Self also must be denied when it rises up against the
supposed tediousness or difficulty of duty: when it grudgeth at an holy life,
and says, [What a stir is here? what a weary life is this? what do I get by
serving God?] Now self is playing the traitor against God and you; and
therefore deny it.

7. Moreover, when self does rise up against sufferings, and make you believe
that they are intolerable; and that it is unreasonable for a man to forsake all
that he has for fear of a sinful word or deed, when we sin every day, when we
have done our best; it is time now to stop the mouth of self; for it plays the
Devils game against God and you, and would persuade you to prefer a short,
uncertain, miserable life, before eternal life, and to give up your self to
wilful sin, because God bears with the sins of men's infirmity. It Is reason
that you should deny so unreasonable an enemy to God and you.

8. Moreover, self must be denied when it stands up against the Ordinances of
God. When it pleads against the arguments of the word, and finds fault with
the Law that it should obey, and quarrelleth with prayer and all holy duties,
and would make all instituted means uneffectual for your saving good; it is time
now that you deny it.

9. When self does rise up against the Officers of Christ, and would make you
believe your teachers fools, and you are wise; that they are beside the truth,
and you are in the right; or that they speak against you out of malice or
singularity, or some such distemper, and so would deprive you of the saving
benefit of their Doctrine and Office, it is time now to deny self, if you know
but what belongs to your peace. And though I grant that you must not follow a
Teacher into a certain sin and error; yet when it is not God but self that
rises up against your Teachers, and possesses you with a spirit of
bitterness, disobedience, contradiction and malignity, this self must be denied.

10. Lastly, as self is against the good of our neighbor or humane Societies,
it must be denied. For we must love our Neighbor as our selves: that is, both
self and neighbor must be loved in a due subordination to God, as means to his
Glory, and in this notion of a means, the Love should be equal; though there is
also a Natural Love in order to self-preservation put into us by the Creator,
which our Love to every Neighbor is not to equal in degree; yet our love to
Societies should exceed it; and our Love to a Neighbor should come so near it,
that we should diligere proximum proxima delictione, love him as a second self,
and so study his welfare, as to promote it to our power, and not to covet or
draw from him for our selves, nor do him any wrong. This is the sense of the
tenth Commandment, and sum of the second Table.

CHAP. XIII. 1. Selfish Dispositions must be denied, and 1. Selflove.
HAving seen in what respects and upon what accounts it is that self must be
denied; I am next to tell you the particulars of that selfish interest that
must be denied, and the parts that are contained in this needful work.

And here you must remember what saving faith is, that seeing how self opposes
it, you may know wherein it must be denied.

Saving faith is such a Belief in Christ for Reconciliation with God, and the
everlasting fruition of him in Glory, as makes us for sake all the things of
this world, and give up our selves to the conduct of the word and spirit, for
the obtaining of it.

When a man can strip himself of all the pleasures and profits, and honors of
this world, first in his estimation, and love, and resolution, and then in the
actual forsaking of them at the Call of God, because of the firm belief and
hope that he has of the fruition of God in Glory, as purchased and promised by
Jesus Christ; this is a Christian, a Disciple of Christ, a true believer; and
none but this. And (as I have told you) as God in Unity, and Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost in Trinity, is the Object of our saving faith; so Carnal Self in
unity, and Pleasure, Profits, and Honors in trinity must be renounced and
denied by all true Christians; as being that which we turn from, when we turn
to God. So that in brief to deny your selves, does generally consist in denying
all your own Dispositions and Interests whatsoever as they are against God the
Father, Son, or Spirit, or stand not in a due subserviency to him: And this
Interest which you must deny, consists in your Pleasures, Profits, and
Honor: Of these therefore I shall speak distinctly, though but briefly.

I. You must begin at the denial and mortification of your Corrupt and selfish
Disposition, or else you can never well deny your selfish interest. It is not
enough to keep under this selfishness by denying it somewhat that it would
have: but the selfish Inclination or Nature it self must be so far mortified
and destroyed, that it shall not reign as formerly it did. For this which we
call selfishness is not your very Persons, nor any spiritual or right natural
desire of your owngood: But it is the inordinate adhering of the soul to your
selves, by departing from God to whom you should adhere: and so a carrying over
Gods interest and honor to your selves. Holiness is an Inclination and
Dedication to God: by which two we are said to be separated to him. And
wickedness is an Inclination, and Addictedness, or Devotedness to our selves
above God, or as separated from God: And this Inclination, Disposition, or
Separation of man to Himself instead of God, is it that I call self or
selfishness; and this self must it self be first destroyed, as to the
predominant degree.

And therefore let us First observe wherein this selfish Disposition does
consist, which must be destroyed; and then Secondly, wherein the selfish
Interest does consist that must be denied.

And first the selfish Disposition consists in these several parts that
follow.

1. The principal part of it consists in an inordinate Self-love: This is a
corruption so deep in the heart of man, that it may be called his very Natural
Inclination, which therefore lies at the bottom, below all his Actual sins
whatsoever; and must be changed into a New Nature which principally consists in
the Love of God. This is Original sin it self, even in the heart of it. This
speaks what man by Nature is: even an inordinate self-lover; And as he is, so
he will act. In this all other vice in the world is virtually contained: even
as all grace is in the Love of God: which made the Schoolmen say, that Love is
the Form of all Grace: not as they are this or that Grace in particular; not of
Faith as Faith, nor of Hope as Hope; but of Faith, Hope, etc. as vital or
gracious acts: because the respect to the End is essential to the means as a
means: and therefore the respect to God as the End, is Essential to Faith,
Hope, etc. as a means to him: and therefore that Grace (of Love) which is
terminated on the End, must have an essential participation, concurrence, or
influence on those that are directly terminated on the Way or Means; and must
convey somewhat of its very essence to them; and so far as they partake of that
essence of Love, so far are they indeed those special Graces which carry the
soul to God its End: And in this sense we may allow the distinction between
Fides, Spes, etc. formata charitate (which is true Christian Faith and Hope,)
and Fides, Spes etc. informis, which is but an opinion and dream. And so it is
in the body of sin: When self-love does reign, it is the Heart of wickedness:
And though every sin has its own specific nature; yet all are virtually in
self-love, and are so far mortal, or prove men graceless, as they are informed
by the essential Communication of self-love: For self being the End, informs
all the means as they respect it. I say the more to you of this, because indeed
it is a weighty truth, for the right understanding of the true nature of Grace
and sin; and I doubt many are in the dark for want of understanding and
considering it. A man that fears and Loves God, and an unsanctified man may
be both overtaken with the same sin; perhaps a gross one, as Noah's, and David's,
and Peter's was: and yet this may be a mortal sin in the ungodly; I mean such as
proves him in a state of death, and yet not so in the gracious person. The
wicked will deride this in their ignorance, as if we made God partial; but it is
no such matter: The Papists cannot endure it, but suppose Peter, David, and
Noah, were quite without the Love of God, and so were again unsanctified men:
but this is their error. It was not from the Power of reigning self-love, and
the Habitual absence of the Love of God, that these men (or any Saints) did
sin: but from a particular act of mortified self-love by a surprise upon the
neglect of the actual exercise of the Love of God. But all the sins of
unsanctified men, or at least their common sins, are from the Habitual reign of
self-love, and the Habitual absence of the Love of God: And therefore the sins
of the Saints are, as the Schoolmen speak of the graces of the ungodly,
unformed: they be not Mortal sins in the sense aforesaid, because they be not
naturalized, informed, animated, by the malignity and venom of the Mortal End
and Principle, which is Habitual reigning self-love: But those of the wicked
are sins informed by this inordinate selflove as an habitual reigning sin; and
therefore being animated by its malignity are mortal: Yet say not that this
makes God partial, and not to hate the same sin in one as he does in another.
For two things must be taken in: 1. Where the heart is sanctified, such sins
are strangers: perhaps one Godly man of ten or twenty may be guilty of one of
them, as Noah was of drunkenness once in all his life (since his conversion:)
For it will not stand with grace to live in them. For such as a man's Love, and
Inclination, and nature is, such will be the drift of his Life. And would not
you have God make a difference between those that sin once, and those that live
in it? 2. Besides, will not any honest man make a great difference of the same
acts according as they come from different hearts? you will not take a
passionate word from a Father, Husband, or Wife, so ill as the same word from a
malicious enemy. If an unthrifty Son should spend you twenty shillings
wastfully, you will not prosecute him as you would do a thief or an enemy that
takes it from you violently. Wilful murder and casual manslaughter, have not
the same punishment by the Law of the Land. If you will make such a difference
your selves, of the same words or deeds as they come from different meanings
and affections, quarrel not with God for doing that which you confess is just
and necessary to be done.

1. The Faculty where this Disposition is principally seated, is the Will:
which in man is the Heart of Morality, whether Good or Evil. And the Principal
Act is, an Inordinate Adhesion of man to himself, and Complacency in himself:
And this is the inordinate self-love that must be first mortified.

2. The next faculty that self has corrupted, is the Understanding; and here
we first meet with the sin of self-esteem, which is the second part of
selfishness to be mortified. It is not more natural for man to be sinful, vile,
and miserable, than to think himself virtuous, worthy and honorable. All men
naturally overvalue themselves, and would have all others also overvalue
them. This is the sin of Pride. But of this I must speak by it self.

CHAP. XIV. Self-conceitedness must be denied.
3. THe next part of selfishness to be mortified, is in the same faculty, and
it is called self-conceitedness. And it consists of two parts: the first is a
Disposition to selfish opinions or conceits that are properly our own: and the
second is, to think better of those conceits than they do deserve.

Naturally men are prone to spin themselves a web of opinions out of their own
brain, and to have a Religion that may be called their own: And it is their Own
in two respects: 1. Because it is of their own devising, and not of Gods
revealing or appointing: 2. Because it suiteth with their own carnal ends and
interests. Men are far readier to make themselves a faith, than to receive that
which God has formed to their hands. And they are far readier to receive a
Doctrine that tends to their carnal commodity, or honor, or delights, than one
that tends to self-denial, and to abase themselves, and exalt the Lord. 2. And
when they have hatched or received such opinions which are peculiarly their
Own, they are apt to like them the better, because they are their own, and to
value them because of the Interest of self. O Sirs, that you did but know the
commonness and danger of self-conceitedness in the world! Even with many that
seem humble, and verily think that it is the spirit of God that bears the
greatest sway in their understandings, yet self does there erect its throne. O
how secretly and subtly will self insinuate, and make you believe that it is a
pure self-denying light which guides you, andt hat what you hold is merely by
the cogent evidence of truth, or the illumination of the Spirit, when it is but
a Viper that self has hatched and doateth on, because it is her own. Because
the Papists have gone too far in teaching men to depend on the Church and on
their Teachers, therefore self-conceitedness takes advantage of their error, to
draw men into the contrary extreme, and make every Infant-Christian to think
himself wiser than his most experienced Brethren and Teachers; and every raw
unstudied Christian to think himself wiser than those that have been searching
into the word of truth by study and prayer almost all their days: and therefore
to cry down that learning, wisdom and study, which they are unacquainted with;
that seeing they have it not themselves, they may at least be thought as wise
men without it, as those that have it, and so may provide for the reputation
and interest of self: O what sad work has this great sin of self-conceitedness
made in the world! In too many places men make it their Religion to strive who
shall be greatest for wisdom and abilities in the eyes of men: and it is the
very work of their Prayers, and conference, and teaching, to exercise
self-conceitedness, and to make it appear that they are some body in knowledge:
Hence is it that they are so apt to fall upon novelties which either few receive,
or none before themselves devised, that being singular, self may be the more
observed, and they may have something which may be called their Own: Hence also
it is that they are so little suspicious of their own opinions, never bending
their studies impartially to try whether they are of God or not, but rather to
maintain them, and to find out all that can be said for them, and against the
contrary minded: Hence is it that men have such light and contemptuous thoughts
of the judgment of those that excel them in knowledge, and that the voice of
Corah, and those other Conspirators, Numb. 16. 3. is grown so common in the
mouths of ignorant proud professors, [ Ye take too much upon you (say they to
their Guides and Teachers) seeing all the Congregation are holy, every one of
them, and the Lord is among them: wherefore then lift ye up your selves above
the Congregation of the Lord?] It is the Holiness of the Congregation, and all
its members, and the presence of God himself among them, that is pleaded
against the Superiority of Moses and Aaron, as if with so Holy a people, that
had God himself to be their Teacher and Guide, there were no need of men to be
lift up above the Congregation of the Lord. But it was self that was intended,
what ever was pretended. From this self-conceitedness also it is that the
weightiest common truths that self has no special interest in, are so little
valued and relished, and insisted on; and that a less and more uncertain point
which self has espoused, shall be more relished, insisted on, and contended
for: Hence also is most of the common confidence of men in their own Opinions;
that when the point is doubtful, if not certainly false, in the eyes of wiser
men than themselves, yet the fool rages and is confident, Prove. 14. 16. He can
carry on a conceit of his Own with as brazen a face, and proud contempt of
other men's arguments, as if he were maintaining that the Sun is light, and
other men pleaded to prove it dark: when, alas, it is self-interest that is the
life, the strength, the goodness of the cause. Hence also it is that men are so
quarrelsom with the words and ways of others, that they can scarce hear or read
a word, but these pugnacious animals are ready to draw upon it, as if they had
caught an advantage for the honoring of their valor, and were loath to lose
such a prize and opportunity for a victory and triumph: Hence it is that
hi^^ing at the sayings and doings of others, is the first, and most common, and
most sensible part of their Commentaries. And that they can make heresies and
monsters not only of tolerable errors, but of truths themselves, if they have
but the inexpiable guilt of crossing the wisdom of these self-conceited men.
Hence it is that opinions of their own are more industriously cultivated and
studiously cherished, by a double if not a tenfold proportion of Zeal and
diligence, than common truths that all the godly in the world have as much
interest in as they, though the common truths be incomparably the greater. And
hence it is that men are so tenacious of that which is their Own, when they
easilier let go that which is Gods; and must have all come to them, and every
man deny his own judgment, except themselves; and that it must be the glory of
others to yield to them, and their glory to yield to none, but to have all men
come over and submit to them. All these are the fruits and discoveries of self
as it reigns in men's understandings, who possibly may think that it is Christ
and the Spirit that is there exalted.

Yet mistake me not: I do not say or think that a man should forsake a certain
truth for fear of being accounted self-conceited, nor that he must presently
captivate his own understanding to a learneder man, or the stronger, or more
numerous side, for fear of being self-conceited. Much less must I deny that
grace of God that has made me savingly wise by his illumination, that was
formerly foolish, disobedient, and deceived in the days of my ignorance. The
world must give us leave to triumph over our own former folly with Paul, Tit.
3. 3, 4, 5. and say with the same Paul, that we were no better than mad when we
were enemies to the Gospel, Act. 26. 11. and with the man in Joh. 9. 25. [ One
thing I know, that whereas I was blind, now I see.] It Is no self-conceitedness
for a man that is brought from the blind distracted state of sin, into the
light of the sanctified, to know that he is wiser than he was before; and that
he was formerly besides himself, but now is come to his understanding again.
Nor is it any self-conceitedness for the meanest Christian to know that a
wicked man is more foolish than he; or for a Minister or any man that God has
caused to excel in knowledge, to hold fast the truth he knows, and to see and
modestly oppose the errors of another, and to know that in that he is wiser
than they. God does not require that we shall turn to every man's opinion, and
reel up and down from sect to sect, and be of the opinion of every party that
we come among, and all for fear of thinking our selves wiser than they. David
knew he had more Understanding than his Teachers: Psalm. 119. 98, 99. and true
believers fear not to say* We know that we are of God, and the whole world
lies in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. and 3. 19. and 2. 3. And Paul would not
forbear the reproving of Peter, for fear of being thought to be self-conceited,
Gal. 2. some men are so desperately self-conceited that they take every man to
be self-conceited that is not of their conceits.

But when self is men's instructor, and chooses their Text, and furnishes them
with matter, and nothing is savoury but what is either suited to the common
interest of self, or which it has not a special interest in; when men are
absolutely wise in their own eyes, and comparatively wiser than those that know
much more than they; when self-interest serves instead of evidence to the
receiving, retaining, or contending for a point; when men think they know that
which indeed they do not know; and observe the little which they do know, more
than an hundred fold more that they are ignorant of; doubtless here is
self-conceitedness with a witness; and they that will not see it in a lower
degree, methinks should see it in such a case as this. He that will not believe
that a man is drunk when he reels and stammereth, may know it when he lies
spewing in the streets.

Well Sirs, I beseech you see that self in the understanding be mortified and
pulled down. It Is the throne of God, the Lanthorn of holy truth, the temple of
the Spirit; and shall self Rule there? The understanding is it that guides the
soul and all the actions of your lives: and if self rule there, what a Ruler
will you have? and what a case will heart and life be in? If your eye be dark,
your Light be dark, how great will be your darkness: and if it be selfish, it
is certainly so far dark. O believe the Holy Ghost, Prove. 26. 12. [ See thou
a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool than of him.] For a
mere fool that is ignorant only for want of teaching, has no such prejudice
against the truth, as the selfconceited have: Nor is it so hard to make him
know that he is ignorant: nor yet to make him willing to Learn: He that knows
himself to be blind, is willing to be led. Moreover the self-conceited have
much to unlearn, before they can be fit to receive the truth in a saving manner.
O how many thousands are undone by self-conceitedness! It is this that keeps
out Knowledge, and every Grace, and consequently all true peace and comfort;
and this it is that defends and cherishes all sin. Let us show men the
plainest word of God for duty and against sin, and show them the clearest
reasons, and yet self-conceitedness bolts the door against all: Yea so
wonderfully does this sin prevail, that the ignorant silly people that know
almost nothing, are as proudly self-conceited as if they were the wisest men:
They that will not learn, and cannot give an account of their knowledge, in the
very Catechism or Principles of Christian Religion, nor cannot pray, nor scarce
speak a word of sense about the matters of Salvation, but excuse themselves
that they are no Scholars, yet these very people will proudly resist their
Teachers, though they were the wisest and learned men in the Land: Let us
but cross their conceits of Doctrine or Practice in Religion; about their own
title to Church Priviledges, or fitness for them, and they are confident and
furious against their Ministers, as if we were as ignorant as they, and they
were the wisest men in the world: so that pride and self-conceitedness makes
people mad, or deal like mad men. We cannot humble men for sin, nor reclaim
them from it, till they know the sin, and the danger of it: and
selfconceitedness will not let them know it, no nor let them come to us to be
taught: but they are wise enough already: and if we tell them of the sin and
danger, they are wiser than to believe the Word of God or us! They will tell us
to our faces, they will never believe such and such things, which we show them
in the Scripture. O the precious light that shines round about you all, and
would make you wise, if self-conceitedness did not keep it out by making you
seem wise already. 1 Cor. 3. 18. These men that thus deceive themselves, by
seeming wise to themselves, must become fools in their own eyes, if ever they
will be truly wise; and confess themselves, as Paul himself did, that they were
foolish and deceived, when they served their lusts and pleasures, Tit. 3. 3.
This Pride and Self-conceitedness is like the barm in the drink, that seems to
fill up the vessel, but indeed works it all over: This is the Knowledge that
puffs up, 1 Cor. 13. like the pot that by boiling seems to be filled, that
was half empty before; but it is empty in the bottom, and presently boils over,
and is emptier than before. So is it with the self-conceited, that have a
superficial knowledge, while they are empty at the bottom, and by the heat of
pride, that little they have boileth over to their loss. It is the humble that
God reveals his secrets to, and the hungry that he fills with good things,
and the full that he sends empty away. He will have no Disciples that come
not to his School as little Children, teachable and tractable, not thinking
themselves too old, or too wise, or too good to be taught. If you would see the
mysteries of the Gospel savingly, you must even creep to Christ on your knees,
and cry, Lord be merciful to me a sinner! He will not lift up your minds and
hearts to heaven, till you think your selves unworthy to lift up your very eyes
to heaven, because you have sinned against heaven. And if you were even lifted
to heaven, should you there but be lifted up with pride or self-conceitedness,
you should soon have a ^rick in the flesh, to let out that dangerous, venomous
wind that puffs you up.

And if you should have any Knowledge of the most precious truths, as long as
you are thus proud and self-conceited, it will not be savoury and effectual on
your hearts. Humility feeds, and Pride starveth every Grace. The Spirit of
God will not dwell with the proud: He will beat you out of your selves, unless
you drive him away from you. Some seeming raptures and comforts, the
self-conceited have; which are but the deluding flatteries of self, and the
encouragements that Satan gives to his servants: (For Satan will needs be a
comforter for a while, as the Holy Ghost is to the Saints: and his followers
also have their joys.) But it is the humble soul that has the solid comforts.
From the dust of Humiliation, we have the clearest sight of Glory, and
consequently, the sweetest tastes of it. As high as the rain comes from, it is
the lowest valleys that receive it most, and retain it. Faith it self will not
prosper in the proud and self-conceited: To such the Gospel will be
foolishness, or an offense. It is only the humble that savingly close with its
mysteries. Humility cherishes the fear of God, and makes us say, How shall we
do this evil? or neglect this duty? But Self-conceitedness and Pride is blind
and bold, and destroys in men's apprehensions, the difference between things
sacred and common, the holy and the unclean: It disposes them to such an
unreverent boldness with holy things, as usually ends in a profane contempt:
so that such can at last despise holy Ordinances which they should live upon.
Repentance and this Pride are deadly foes. To be Penitent and Proud, is to be
Hot and Cold, alive and dead. Though Christ love not to find you in the dust of
earthly-mindedness, yet he loves to find you in the dust of humility. The
Publican that hanged down the head, did ^it the way better to the sight of God,
than the self-conceited Pharisee. The most self-denying humiliation is the
nearest way to heaven, and the most self-exalting Pride is the surest and
nearest way to hell. I had rather sit with Mary washing and wiping the feet of
Christ, than ask as the Mother of James and John, to sit at Christ's right hand
and left hand in his Kingdom. Mary was in a manner thanked for the Love of her
humility: and they were in a manner denied the request that so little savoured
of self-denial. Our Lord does not use to thank people for their service, and
yet he did that which was next to it, to this humble, selfdenying, penitent
woman. He does not use to deny his own Disciples an heavenly request: and yet
he did that which was next to a denial, when self brought him the petition. He
that has taught us not to press to the highest room, lest with shame we hear,
[ Sit lower] does hereby tell us what we must expect from himself: And he that
has bid us sit down at the lower end, that we may hear [ Friend sit up higher]
does express his purpose for humble, self-denying souls. I had rather from the
dust hear his [ Come up higher] than from self-exaltation to hear [ Come down
lower.] O you that are proud, self-conceited wretches, did you but know what
good it does an humble soul, to feel Christ take him up from the dust, you
would soon fall down that you might taste their comforts in his lifting up. O
what a blessed feeling it is, to feel ones self in the arms of Christ! Our
common compassion that makes us run to take up one that falls before us, is a
spark of that compassion in Christ: who meddles with him that walks before us?
but a man that falls down in a swoon, we are all ready to lay hands on! O happy
fall, that makes us feel the arms of Christ! Though the fall into sin be never
the better, that occasioneth it, yet the fall into Humiliation is the better,
that prepares for it. He that in his agony had an Angel to minister to him,
will not leave the self-denying, humble soul, without his Angel, or some way of
relief that is suitable to the necessity. Christ himself will not communicate
himself to the proud and self-conceited. He is wisdom, but not to them that are
wise in their own eyes already. He is Righteousness, but not to them that
Justify themselves: He is Sanctification, but not to those that never found
their own uncleanness. He is Redemption, but to none but those that feel
themselves condemned. He has the white raiment, and the treasures of grace and
glory: but it is only those that penitently feel that they are poor and
miserable, and blind, and naked. Truly Sirs, though I have no mind to trouble
the well-grounded peace or comfort of any of your Souls, yet I would advise
you, if you have never so good thoughts of your selves, suspect lest it should
be the fruit of self-conceiteduess: And if you should have never so much peace
and joy, look well whether it come from God or self-conceit! And if it come not
in against self, it is ten to one but it comes from self. If your Peace and
Comfort be not won from Christ, in a way of self-denial, and as the spoils of
the flesh, you have it not in the ordinary way of God. Did you come to your Joy
and Peace by humility, and self-denial, and patience, and mortification, and by
becoming little Children, and the servants of all, and by learning of Christ to
be meek and lowly? If not, take heed lest you nourish a changeling, an Imp of
Hell, and a selfish brat, instead of the fruit of the Spirit; the peace and joy
of the Holy Ghost. If you feel no great matter at home to trouble you, you are
too Righteous to be Justified by Christ. If you groan not under your ignorance
and unbelief, you are too wise to be Christ's Disciples. If you mourn not under
the load and pain of sin, you are too well to be Christ's Patients. If you are
readier to justify and excuse your selves, than to condemn your selves, and
had rather hear your selves praised, than reproved, admonished, or instructed,
and like Diotrephes, love to have the pre-eminence, you are too high for Christ
to take any acquaintance with you; and too full of self to have any room for
his Love, and Spirit, and heavenly Consolations. He that gave us the Parable of
the importunate widow, Luke 18. 2, 3. would have us understand that bare
necessity is not enough to fit us for relief (for then the worst of men should
be the fittest:) but it must be Necessity so felt, as to humble us, and drive
us to importunity with God. The Prodigal was miserable when he was denied the
husks; but he never felt his Fathers embracements till he came to himself by
denying himself, and returning to his Father. And this the self-conceited will
not be persuaded to. The first that must touch Christ after his Resurrection,
is not a King, nor a Lord, no nor a man, but a woman that had been a sinner.
When she held him by the feet, Love did begin low in humility, but it tended
higher, and ended higher. Christ has told us that where much is forgiven there
will be much love. For there is most of the fruits of God's love, and least of
self, and most to abase self. It is not possible that love to Christ should
dwell or work in any but the humble, that feel at the heart that they are
unworthy of love, and worthy of everlasting wrath. The Proud and Self conceited
cannot love him; for they cannot be much taken with Christ's love to them,
except as the Pharisee in a way of self-flattery. But the poor soul that was
lost, will heartily love him that sought and found him; and he that was dead,
will love when he finds himself alive; and he that was condemned both by God
and conscience, will surely love the Lord that ransomed him! And it is the
apprehensions that men have of themselves that much causes all this
difference. The self-abhorring self-judgeing, self-denying sinner is melted
with the love of God in Christ, because it is to such a worthless, sinful
wretch. What Lord, says he, is the blood of Christ, the pardon of sin, the
spirit of grace, the privileges of a child, and everlasting glory for such an
unworthy wretch as I, that have so long offended thee, and so much neglected
thee and lived such a life as I have done, and am such an empty unprofitable
worm? [ O what a wonder of mercy is this!] But the full soul loathes the
honeycomb. The self-conceited unhumbled sinner looks as mindlesly at Christ,
as a healthful man at the Physician, or an innocent man at a pardon.

And that good that is in the Proud and Self-conceited does seldom do much good
to others, (much less to themselves.) As such do but serve themselves, so
ordinarily God does not bless their endeavors: but as they are perverted, they
are the likest to pervert others, and propagate their self-conceitedness: Two
words from an humble self-denying man, does oftentimes more good than a Sermon
from the self-conceited.

I admonish you therefore in the name of God, that you take heed of this part
of selfishness and mortify it. It will else keep out God, and almost all that
is good. If you are proud and self-conceited, you will hear a Minister rather
to cavil with him, than to be edified: and when any thing from God does cross
your foolish wisdom, you will but slight it, or make a jest at it: And if any
truth of God do strike at the heart of your selfish interest, you will but fret
at it, and secretly hate it, and perhaps, as the Devils open soldiers,
publicly reproach it; and as the Jews did against Stephen, Act. 7. even gnash
the teeth at the Preacher, or as they did by Paul, Act. 22. 22. [ They gave him
audience to that word (even that word that made against themselves) and then
lift up their voices, and said, Away with such a fellow from the earth; for it
is not fit that he should live] This entertainment we still meet with from our
hearers, when self has brought them the next step to hell.

O Sirs, suspect your own understandings: Think not of them beyond the
proportion of your seize: Nor beyond your experience, and the helps, and
time, and opportunities which you have had for knowledge, nor beyond the
measure of your diligence for the improving of these. For these are God's
ordinary way of giving in a ripeness in knowledge. Read and study, Heb. 5. 12,
14. 1 Timothy 3. 6. Set not up your own conceits too boldly against those of
longer standing and diligence in holy studies, much less against your Teachers,
and much less against a multitude of Ministers; and much less against all the
Church of God; and least of all against God himself, as speaking to you by the
holy Scriptures. O take warning by the swarms of heresies and scandals that
have been caused by self-conceitedness and pride.

Object. If you may think your self wiser than me and others without
self-conceitedness, why may not I think my self wiser than you and such others
without self-conceitedness? Answ. I may not do it in the cases
beforementioned. I may not think my self to be what I am not, nor exalt my
self above them that are wiser than I, nor against my Guides, or the Church of
God.

Object. But it is but your conceit that you are wise enough to be a Teacher,
or wiser than others, and why may not I as well conceit it?

Answ. No man on his own Conceits must become a Teacher; but the judicious of
that Calling must Call them, and judge of their abilities. And conceits are as
the ground of them is. The true understanding of the grace that we have
received is a duty, and fitteth us for thankfulness: but the false conceit that
we have what we have not, is a dangerous delusion [ For he that thinks he is
something when he is nothing, deceives himself, Gal. 6. 3.] What if a blind
man should argue as you do with one that sees, and say, [ You say that you see
so far off, and why may not I say so too?] would you not answer him [ I know
that which I say to be true, and so do not you] And what if he still go on and
say [ you think that I am blind, and I think that you are blind; and why may
not I be believed as well as you?] would this kind of talk prove the man to
have his eyesight? or should it make me question whe^^er I have mine? He that
sees knows that he sees, whoever question it: and if another make doubt of
it, let men that have eyes in their head be Judges, but not the blind. But I
confess, spiritual blindness has this disadvantage, that whereas I can easily
make any other blind man know that he is blind, and therefore be willing to be
led or helped: here the more blind men are, most commonly they are the more
confident that they see, and scornfully say, as the Pharisees to Christ, John
9. 40. [ Are we blind also?] For Pride will not let them know their ignorance.
The same light that cures ignorance, must reveal it. Especially when men are
born blind and never knew the saving illumination of the Saints, they will not
believe that there is any other light than they have seen. But I have been
somewhat long on this part; I pass now to the next.

CHAP. XV. Self-will be denied.
4. THe fourth part of selfishness to be mortified, is self-will. And this is
the fruit of selfconceit, and also a natural corruption of the soul; And a most
deep rooted obstinate vice it is. Every wicked man is a self-willed man,
against God, and all that speak for God. And till self be mortified in the
will, there is no saving grace in that will.

Quest. But what will is it that is to be called a self-will?

Answ. Not that which is from God and for God; but all the rest. 1. That will
that is not fetched from God, and moved by his will, as the lesser wheels in a
clock are moved by the first wheel and by the p^^^^, is no better than
self-will. A will that is not dependent on Gods will, is an Idol, usurping the
prerogative of God; for it is proper to him to be dependent upon none, and to
have a will that is not ruled by a Superior will. Little do the most know how
great a sin this is, to be self-willed. You have a will to something or other
continually; and it is your will that rules the rest of your faculties and
actions: but what is it that rules your will? whence do you fetch the rise and
reason of your desires? Is it from Gods will, or is it not? You pray to God [
Thy will be done] and do your own wills answer these prayers? or are they
hypocritical dissembling words? If indeed it be Gods will that you would have
fulfilled, then will the knowledge of that will of God determine your own
wills. As a servant depends on his Masters will, for all the work that he is
to do, and does not what he will himself, but what his Master will have him do;
and as a Scholar depends on his Masters will, and learneth only such books
and lessons as he sets him; so must we depend on the will of God; and know what
is his will, before we give way to any will of our own. The reason why you
choose any trade or calling or course of life, should be the will of God. If
you are in Poverty, and desire to be richer, and that to please your own wills,
and not that you think that it would be any more pleasing to God, this is
self-willedness. If you desire any change in your condition, if you undertake
any thing in the world, know why you do this: whether it be principally because
you think it is the will of God, or because it is your own will; I tell you
again, you should not have one wish or desire in your souls, till you can prove
or find that God would have it so: and if your own wills be made the absolve
rulers of your ways, you make Gods of your selves, and God will deal with you
accordingly.

2. Yea if you do think the will of God is according to your will, and you are
moved the more to it on that account, yet if your own wills do lead and make
the first choice, and Gods will be brought in but to follow and encourage
yours, this is still Self-willedness and Self-idolizing. This is the common
trick of the ungodly. They first give way to their own self-will, and then they
will go to Scripture for somewhat to bear them out; and will needs believe that
God's is agreeable to theirs, that so they may go on with peace of Conscience.
They go for counsel to God as Balaam did, not sincerely to know the will of God
with a resolution to obey it, but with a desire that God would conform his will
to theirs. I tell you if the matter be never so much commanded in the
Scriptures, and never so agreeable to the will of God, yet if you desire and do
it from your selves, and not for this reason, because it is the will of God,
and do not let Gods will lead your own, but let your own will lead, and Gods
will follow, this is no better than selfwilledness, were the matter never so
good in it self.

3. If the end that moves your will, be not the service and glory of God, but
only your own Interest, this is but self-will. God gives you leave to look to
your selves as his servants in a due subserviency to him: But if you will
principally look at your own interest, and make light of Gods, and fetch the
reason of your will and desires from your own ends and commodity, rather than
his Glory, this is an ungodly selfish-will. And yet alas, how many are there
that know not any better frame of will than this? If they were truly to give an
account of the principal reason and motive of every desire of their hearts, why
they would have this, or why they would do that, must they not confess it is
for themselves, because it serves their own ends or interests, and because it
pleases their own wills, and not because it furnishes them better to serve
and please the will of God. If you ask men in their buying, and selling, and
marrying, and trading, and dealing with men, why it is that they do this or
that; can they truly say, I do it because I think in this way I can do God the
best service, and the Church or Commonwealth most good; and this is my chief
reason? Alas, I fear they are too few that have any higher principal end and
motive than self. Self-will is the spring of their whole Conversations, that
sets them upon all they do. Nay doubtless, in the very duties of Religion, in
praying, hearing, reading and the like, they are but serving self, while they
take on them to serve God; and their holiest devotions is but such a serving of
God, as flatterers will serve their Prince or Landlord, merely that he may do
them a good turn, and may serve their Ends, and be serviceable to them; or else
as some Indians serve the Devil, for fear of him lest he should do them a
mischief. The will that is moved chiefly by self-interest, is a self-will.

4. And much more is it self-willedness, when men contradict the Will of God:
when Scripture says One thing, and they another: when they disrelish Gods
Laws, and dislike the work that he sets them on; when they have a Will to that
which God forbids, and would fain be doing with unlawful things; yea and it
does not satisfy their corrupt desires to see that the express will of God is
against them; this is self-will in a high degree.

5. So also when men's wills are to that which is against the honor and
interest of God; which would hinder this Gospel, and the saving men's souls, and
is displeasing to him, this is self-willedness in a high degree.

And thus you see what it is to be self-willed. And now do but consider whether
this part of self be commonly denied in the world. Among the millions of
desires that are in men's hearts, how few of them are kindled by the commands of
God, or moved by his Interest and Glory? How commonly are the word and ways of
God distastful to the world? How ill do men like the disposals of his
providence? And what a striving is there in their wills against him? And were
it not that God is above them and unconquerable, and they know that striving
will not help them, you should have most of the world in open war against the
God of Heaven: I speak no more than I am able to prove. The Dominion of self is
so great in the wills of all that are unsanctified, that their wills are
utterly against the Will of God; and it is merely, because there is no remedy,
that they submit to him so far as they do. Those very persons that think they
love and serve him as well as the precisest, would be in arms against him
before to morrow, and pull God out of Heaven if it were in their power: Or if
they had but as much hope to prevail against God, as they have against his
servants, what work would be in the world? I know these men will not believe
this by themselves: No, self is too strong in them to let them so far know
themselves; But the Case is plain. For as God himself tell us, that ever since
the fall an Enmity is put between Christ and this serpentine seed; so we see it
manifested by daily sad experience. How generally is the Will of God disliked
by the world? What has God spoke against in his Word but sin? and what else
has he commanded his Messengers to Cry out against? And yet what is there that
more pleases the minds of the most? And how stubbornly do they resist not only
God, but Magistrates and Ministers that would draw them from it? what is it
that God commends to the world so so much as an Holy and Heavenly life? And
what is the Heart of most men more against? and how much do they strive against
all our persuasions that would bring them to it? and how obstinately do they
resist us, if not deride and scorn that Holiness which the will of God has so
abundantly commended to them? His whole Word speaks for it: his Prophets,
Apostles, and all his servants are examples of it; his Son Jesus Christ in his
sacred person, and office, and holy life, has yet more notably commended it to
the world; and it was a principal part of his business in the flesh, to set men
a pattern of Holiness and Self-denial: And yet many scorn it, and hate it, and
most dislike it, and even fight against this holy Will of God, that is, against
God himself, if they had but any hope to get the le^ter* There is no doubt of
it, though ^h^y w^ll not know so much by themselves. Do y^u think it is for
nothing that God calls them his enemies, and resolves them the reward of
enemies, even because they would not have Christ to rule over them? Luke 19.
27. Doubtless God sentenceth no man u^justly: If he say they are such, and
condemn them as such it is certain that they are such. O but the infinite
dreadful God ^s ou^ of their reach; but they be not out of his reach. Their
malice cannot hurt him any more than it can stop the course of the Sun; but his
displeasure will quickly bring them down. In the mean time, these wretches
should consider what a God they have had to do with, that bears with their
malignity. The Sun or Moon forbear not to shine even on the dogs that bark at
them. Thy rebellious self has hitherto been maintained by the mercy of that
Will of God which thou have resisted. But this patience will not always last:
Take therefore this necessary advice in time. Down with thine own Idolatrous
self-will; Know not a will or desire in thy self, that is not moved by the will
of God, even by his word as thy ground, and his pleasure and honor as thy
chiefest end. Destroy that will that springs but from self, and is moved but by
the Interest of self. Slay it before the Lord as his enemy as Samuel did Agag.
Though an hypocritical Saul will spare this King of rebellion, designed to
destruction, yet so will not an obedient ^ervant of G^d. I will not bid thee
offer it in sacrifice to Gods Will: for it is too vile to be an acceptable
sacrifice: But utterly d^stroy it as the accursed thing. Know not hereafter
such a thing within thee as a will that is Originally or finally thine Own. If
the Word and the Glory of God be the movers of it, thou may call that Gods
Will, as well as thine own ^ It is thine subjectively, but it is Gods as the
principal Efficient and End. O that you did but know what your Own wills are,
and what they have done against you, and what they may yet do, if they be not
mortified! You would not then be so indulgent to them, and pamper and please
them, and be so desirous to have your own wills as you have been. To this end I
pray you consider but of these particulars following.

1. The will of man is the terrestial Throne of God. It is there that he must
reign. The will is to Rule all the inferior faculties; and God is to rule the
will. And shall self presume to dethrone the Lord, and sit down in his place?
He that rules the will rules the man. And shall self be thy Ruler? And will God
put up all this?

2. It is God only that has the Sovereign authority, and self has nonebut
under him. We are not our own; and therefore have nothing to do with our selves
but at the Will of God that is our Owner. Take heed therefore of this
Usurpation.

3. Thy own will is a corrupt and sinful will, and therefore unfit to be thy
governor: what will thou choose an unjust, a wicked and unmerciful governor,
that is inclined to do evil? Why such is thine own Will; But the Will of God is
perfectly good, that has not the least inclination to evil, nor possibility of
such a thing. Be ruled by it, and you are most certain to have the most just,
and holy, and faithful, and merciful ruler in the world. To prefer self-will
before the Will of God, is as the Jews, to prefer a murderer Barabbas, before
the Lord of life.

4. Moreover, Our own wills are guided by a dark understanding: and therefore
ready on every occasion to turn aside. Though the will commands, yet the
understanding guides it: And therefore as the dark understanding is commonly
at a loss, or quite mistaken* judging evil to be good, and good to be evil: so
the will must be an unhappy governor, that follows the direction of so
ignorant a Counselor: But if you will deny your Own wills, and be ruled by the
Will of God, you need not fear misleading, seeing his wisdom is infallible and
infinite. Choose not a blind guide then, when you may have the conduct of wisdom
it self; when God is content to be your Governor, prefer not such foolish
sinners as your selves before him.

5. Moreover, Your self-will has almost undone you already: It has been the
cause of all your sin and misery: Never any hurt befell you, or any man on
Earth, but from self-will. And yet will you follow it still, and take no
warning, as if it had not done enough against you? But on the contrary, you
were never hurt in all your lives by following the Will of God: unless it be
such a hurt as the searching or cleansing of a sore, without which it cannot be
healed; or such a hurt as the taking of Physic, without which you can have no
cure. Tell me if you can, when ever the Will of God did wrong you? when did you
speed the worse for the following of his counsel? Look back upon your lives,
and tell me whether all your smart and loss have come from your following Gods
Will, or your own; and which you think you have more cause to repent of.

6. There is none follows self-will to the end, but is everlastingly undone
by it: It leads directly to the displeasing of Gods Will, and so to Hell: But
on the contrary, there is none that sincerely and finally follow the Will of
God, that ever do miscarry: He is the safest Conductor: He never led a soul to
hell. All that follow him, live with him: For whither should he lead them but
to himself? And where God is, there is life and glory. To obey his Will, is to
pleas his Will: And to please him, is our very end. It can not go ill with them
that please the Lord and Judge of all the word, the dispenser of all Rewards
and Punishments.

7. Your own wills are so mutable as well as misguided, that they will bewilder
you and toss you up and down in perpetual disquietness; though I know you think
that is the only way to your content, and nothing will content you unless you
have your will. But you are lamentably deluded; your wills are like the will of
a man in a sever, that would fain have cold water, which pleases him in the
drinking, but afterward may be his death. You love that which hurts you; yea
that which is no bet^^r than poison to your Souls. You would soon undo your
selves, if you had your own wills. It is none of the least of Gods mercies to
you to cross your wills* and to deny you that which you have a mind to. You
will not let your Children eat or drink what they will, but what you will, that
know better what is good for them. A patient can deny his own will for his
health, and submit himself to the will of his Physician. And should not you
much more submit to God? yea you should desire him to deny your own wills, when
ever he sees them contrary to his Will, and to your own good: Had you but the
skill of judging aright of Gods dealings, I am persuaded that upon the review
of your lives, you would find, that God has showed you more mercy in the
crossing of your wills, then in accomplishing them. Be not therefore too eager
for the time to come, to have what you Love, till you are surer that you Love
nothing but that which is good for you, and which you should love. The present
contenting of diseased self-will, is but the breeding after-disquietness, But
in the Will of God you may have sull and durable content. For his Will is
always for good, and therefore has nothing that should cause your discontent.
His will is still the same and unchangeable; and therefore will ^ot disquiet
you by mutations. He knows the end at the beginning, and sets you upon nothing
but what he is sure will comfort you at the last. It belongs to his will and
not to yours to dispose of you and all your affairs. And therefore there is all
the reason in the world, that Gods Will should be set up, and in it you should
rest your selves content, and that self-will should be denied as the disturber
of your quietness.

8. Moreover, Self-will is Satan's will, and stirred up by him against the Lord.
How else do you think the Devil rules the children of disobedience, but by
self-conceit and self-will? If therefore you would deny the Devil, deny
self-will; for in being ruled by it, you are ruled by him; and in pleasing it,
you please him. God himself tells you this in plain expressions, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2,
3. They that walk in trespasses and sins, and so are dead in them, according to
the course of this world, and in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires
of the flesh and of the mind, these the Holy Ghost there tells you, do walk
according to the Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in
the children of disobedience.

9. It is the very perfection and felicity of man, to be conformed to the Will
of God, and to rest with full content therein; And it is the corruption and
misery of man, to have a selfish misguided Will of his own, and strive against
his Makers Will. And so far as you stick in your own wills, and are set upon
them, and must have them fulfilled, and cannot rest in the Will of God, so far
are you still unsanctified, and unsaved, and in the power of your great
disease. And so far as you are dead to self-will, and look up to the Will o God
both for direction and content, and will that which he wills, even because he
wills it, and would have you will it, and can rest your souls in this as full
satisfaction [It is my Fathers Will, and therefore best.] So far are you
sanctified and restored to God.

10. Lastly, let me tell you, that it is best for you to deny self-will in time,
and give your wills to the Will of God. For when you have done all that you
can, God will have his Will, and you shall not have your own will long. You may
strive against the Will of God, but you shall not frustrate it. You may break
his Laws, but shall not escape his judgments. You may rebel against his
commanding will, but you cannot resist his punishing will. When you have done
your worst, it is Gods will that must stand; and such a will as is little to the
pleasure of your wills. But Self-will is never of long continuance: its content
is short. Now you will have your will, let God say what he will to you: you
Love to please your appetite in meats and drinks; you love to be carnally
merry, and spend your time in vain sports and pleasure; you love to be
respected and humoured by all, and to be honored and counted some body in the
world; you love to be provided for, for the time to come, and to be wealthy
that you may take out of a full heap; or at least not want for the contentment
of your flesh: and therefore you must have your wills, and have that you love,
if you can tell how to get it: But how long will you have your wills? How long
will you have that you love, though God forbid it? When death comes, will you
have it then? when you lie in pain expecting every hour to appear in another
world, will you then have your wills? when you are in Hell, will you then have
your wills, or that you love? O Sirs, Self-will is short-lived, as to its
delights and pleasure: But the Will of God is everlasting. And therefore if you
take up with your own wills, how short will be your content! but if you look
for content in the Will of God, you will have everlasting content. Your own
wills may be crossed by every trifle; Any man that is greater than you can cross
them: yea those that are under you can cross them. The poorest beggar can rob
you, or scorn you, or raise a slander of you, or twenty ways can cross your
self-wills; A hundred accidents may cross them. Your very Beast can cross you;
and almost any thing in the world can cross you; much more can God at any time
cross you; and cross you certainly he will: so that in your own wills there is
no rest nor happiness. But if you could bring your wills to Gods, and take up
your full content in this [ It is the Will of God,] then what a constant,
invincible content might you have! Then all the world could not disturb you and
rob you of your content, because they cannot conquer the Will of God: Hiswill
shall be done; and so you should always have content.

CHAP. XVI. Selfish Passions to be denied.
5. ANother part of selfishness to be mortified and denied, is, selfish
Passions. The soul is furnished with Passions by God, partly for the exciting
of the will and other faculties, that they do not sluggishly neglect their
duties; and partly to help them in the execution when they are at work: So that
they are but the wheels or the sails of the reasonable soul, to speed our
motion for God and our Salvation, and not to be employed for carnal self. When
Passions and affections are sanctified and used for God, they are called such
and such particular Graces, and the fervor of them is an holy Zeal; But when
they are used for carnal self they are our vices; and the heat of them is but
fury, or carnal zeal, and the height of vice. But how rare is it to meet with
men that are meek and patient in their own cause, and passionate in a holy zeal
for God? I know many are passionate in disputes and other exercises about
Religion, and think that it is purely zeal for God, when self is at the bottom
of the business, and rules as well as kindles the fire, when they searce
discern it, and little know what spirit they are of: But pure zeal for God,
conjoined with self-denial, is exceeding rare. How few can say that their Love
to God, is greater and hotter than their Love to themselves? The Desires of men
are strong after those things that supply their own necessities, and please
their own corrupted wills: but how cold are they after the honor of God? How
averse are men from that which hurts the flesh! as to go into a Pesthouse,
or to take deadly poison, or to suffer any pain: but few are so averse to the
breaking of the Law of God. A hard word or a little injury done to themselves,
will put them into a passion, so that their anger is working out in reproach,
if not in more revenge: but God may be abused from day to day, and how
patiently can they bear it? There Is few carnal minds but can more patiently
hear a man swear, or curse, or scorn at Scripture and a holy life, than hear
him call them Rogue, or Knave, or Thief, or Liar, or any such disgraceful name.
It seems an intolerable dishonor with selfish persons that are advanced by
Pride to be great in their own eyes, for a man to give them the lie, or to
reproach their Parentage, or make them seem base: but they can hear twenty
oaths and reproaches of the truths or ways of God as quietly and patiently as
if there were no harm in them. Their own enemies, whom God commands them to
love, they hate at the heart: but the enemies of God and holiness, whom David
hated with a perfect hatred, Psalm. 139. 21, 22. do little or nothing at all
offend them. It is not thus with self-denying gracious souls. When David heard
Shimei curle him, he commanded his soldiers to let him alone, for God had
bidden him; that is, by that afflicting providence on David he had occasioned
it, and by the withdrawng of his restraint he had let out his malice, for a
trial to David. Thus David could endure a man to go along by him cursing him,
and reviling him as a Traitor, and a man of blood, and throwing stones at him;
and he rebuked Abishai that would have taken off his head, 2 Samuel 16. 7, 8, 9,
13. But when the same David speaks of the wicked, the froward, the slanderer,
the proud, the liar, and the deceitful, he resolves that he will not know
them, they shall not dwell in his house, nor tarry in his sight; he hates
them; they shall depart from him; he will cut them off, and early destroy him
from the Land, and from the city of the Lord, Psalm. 101. So was it with Moses:
when God was offended by the Idolatry of the Israelites, he was so zealous that
he threw down the Tables of Stone, in which God had written the Law, and broke
them: but when Miriam and Aaron spoke against himself, he let God alone* with
the cause, and only prayed for them; for says the Text, [ He was very meek
above all the men that were on the face of the earth.] Numb. 12. 3. Phinehas
his zeal for God did stay the plague, and was imputed to him for righteousness:
when the selfish zeal of Simeon and Levi was called but a cursed anger, and
brought a curse on them instead of a blessing from their dying Father, that
they should be divided in Jacob, and scattered in Israel; and left them the
name of Instruments of cruelty, Genesis 49. 5, 6, 7.

Take warning then from the word of God; and use your passions for God that
gave them you; but when it is merely the cause of self, be dead to passion as
if there were no such thing within you. If the wrong be done to you, think then
with your selves, [ alas, I am such a silly wretched worm that a wrong done to
me is a small matter, in comparison of the least that is done to God: it is not
great enough for indignation or passion:] Remember, that it is Gods work to
right your wrongs, and your work to lament and hinder the abuse of God. And
therefore if men curse you, or revile you, or slander you, if Gods interest in
your reputation command you to seek the clearing of it, then do it, but not for
your self, but for God: but otherwise, be as a dead man that has no eyes to
see an injury, nor no ears to hear it, nor no heart to feel it, nor no
understanding to perceive it, nor no hands to be revenged for it: This is to be
mortified, and dead to self. When Passion begins to stir within you, ask What Is
the matter? who is it for? and who is it that is wronged?] If it be God, ask
counsel of God, what he would have you to do, and let your passion be well
guided and bounded, and then it will be acceptable holy zeal: but if it be but
self that is wronged, remember that you are not your own; and therefore take no
thought of the business, but leave God to look to his own, and do with it as he
please: If you are his, your cause is his, and therefore let him look to it
that is concerned in it more than you; and that has said, [ Vengeance is mine,
and I will repay.]

CHAP. XVII. Self-imagination to be denied.
6. ANother part of self to be mortified and denied, is Self-imagination. It is
the selfishness of men's thoughts, that is the vanity of their thoughts; and
these are the imaginations that are only evil continnally. The thoughts should
be let out on God, and his service; so that our meditation of him should be
sweet, and we should delight in the Lord, Psalm. 104. 34. and in the multitude
of our thoughts withi nus, his comforts should delight our souls, Psalm. 94. 19.
His word should be our meditation all the day, Ps. 119. 97, 99. and in his Law
we should meditate day and night, Ps. 1. 2. God should be the Spring, the End,
the Sum of all our thoughts; If we find a thought in our minds, that savoureth
not of God, yea that is not sent by him, and doing his work, we must disown it,
apprehend it, and cast it out. But alas how contrary is the case with the most?
As self is advanced highest in their imagination, so does it there attract and
dispose of the thoughts. What are all the thoughts of unsanctified men employed
for, but for themselves and theirs? Their fantasies hunt about the world; but
it is their own game and pleasure that they range about. The thoughts of one man
run upon his covetousness, and another man's upon his filthy lusts, and another
man's on his sports and pleasures, and another upon his honor and reputation
with men! They feed the imaginations of their mind upon almost nothing but
selfish things! sometimes delighting themselves with the very thoughts of men's
esteem of them, or of their worldly plenty, or of their sinful lusts and
pleasures, and sometime troubling themselves with the thoughts of their wants,
or low condition, or crosses, or injuries from men: sometime contriving how
they may attain their desires; and carking and caring for accomplishing their
selfish ends: morning and evening, at home and abroad, as the thoughts of the
sanctified are on God, and heaven, and the way thereto: so the thoughts of the
unsanctified are all upon self, and the interest of self, and the means
thereto. O cleanse your minds Sirs, of this great self-pollution: Keep them
more clean and chaste to God. Deny self this room in your imaginations, and
waste not thoughts and precious time, on such unjust and unprofitable
employment. It is an impertinency, to be so much solicitous about the charge of
God, and to care so much when he has bid us, Be careful for nothing: It is a
debasing of our minds to feed them so long on so low an object, when they might
be taken up with God. Care not therefore what you shall eat or drink, or
wherewith you shall be clothed; for after all these things do the selfish
unsanctified Gentiles seek; and our Father knows that we have need of all
these things: but seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and
all these things shall be added to you, Man. 6. 31, 32, 33. Self does but rob
you of the fruit of your thoughts which you might reap by feeding them on God.

CHAP. XVIII. Inordinate Appetite to be denied.
7. THe last part of self to be denied is your inordinate Appetites, excited by
the senses, commonly called the sensitive Appetite. These are not to be
themselves destroyed; for the Appetite is natural and necessary to our welfare:
but the inordinate desire is to be denied, and the Appetite restrained, and no
further satisfied than is allowed by the word of God; and by this means the
inordinancy of it may come to be mortified. Though selfishness has defiled the
whole man, yet sensual pleasure is the chief part of its interest, and
therefore by the senses it commonly works, and these are the doors and windows
by which iniquity enters into the soul. And therefore a principal part of
self-denial consists in denying the sensitive Appetite.

Quest. But how far is this Appetite to be denied?

Answ. 1. When ever it craveth any thing that is forbidden: This is past doubt.
It must not be pleased to the disobeying of God. 2. When it ticeth us toward
that which is forbidden, and would be feeding on the baits and occasions of
sin; unlefs the thing desired be necessary, it is here to be denied. For sin
and Hell are dangers that no wise man will draw too near to. 3. When ever the
pleasing of the sense conduces not to Gods service, and does not fit or
furnish us for our duty, it is unlawful.

Quest. But may not the Creatures be received for Delight as well as for
Necessity?

Answ. It Is an ill expressed question: As if Delight it self were never
necessary. Necessity is either Absolute, as of those things without which we
cannot be saved; or it is only to our bettering and the greater securing of our
salvation: and so it is taken for that which is any way useful and profitable to
it; directly and indirectly. We may and must make use of the creatures, 1. Not
only for our own Necessity, but principally for the service and glory of God, 1
Cor. 10. 31. And 2. not only for our Absolute necessity, but also when they in
any measure further us in or to the service of God; so be it they be not on any
other account unlawful. 3. We may use the Creatures for delight, when that
Delight it self is a means to fit us for the work of God, and is sincerely
sought for that intent. But we may not use them for any other Delight, but that
which it self is necessary or useful to Gods service. Reasons are evident. 1.
Because we should else make that Delight our ultimate end, which is as bad as
brutish; for either it must be an End, or Means. If it be not used as a means
to God as our ultimate end, it must be our ultimate end it self, which is no
better than to take his place. 2. That action is idle, and consequently a
sinful misimploying of our faculties which does not conduce to the end that we
were made for, and live for. 3. It is a misimploying of Gods creatures, and a
sinful casting them away to use them for any end which is not it self a means
to the great end of our lives. All is lost that is no way useful to God and our
salvation. It is contrary to the end of their Creation and of ours. 4. It is a
sinful robbing God of the use of his talents, if we use them for any end that
is not subservient to himself as the chief end. For certainly he made all
things for himself, and that which is not employed for him, is taken from him
injuriously. All men must answer for the mercies which they have received;
whether they have so used them for God, as that they can give him his own with
the improvement.

5. The sensitive Appetite by reason of its inordinacy, is grown a Rebel
against God and Reason; and an enemy to him and to our selves. And no man
should unnecessarily please or feed so dangerous an enemy. Sin does most make
its entrance this way; and most men lie in sin before our eyes, by pleasing
their senses: And shall we run our selves on such a great and visible, danger,
against the warning of so many experiences? Yea we know that we have been often
this way overtaken our selves, and that abundance of sin has crept in at these
passages; and yet shall we plead for liberty to undo our selves? The godly are
so conscious of their weakness and proneness to sin, that they are jealous of
themselves; and therefore it beseems not such to do any thing needlessly that
may tempt them to it, and is so likely to prove a snare. If Paul must beat and
tame his body to bring it into subjection, lest when he had preached to others,
he should be cast away himself, (1 Cor. 9. 27.) much more have we need to be
watchful that are more weak. We are commanded expressly to make no provision for
the flesh, to satisfy the lusts (or desires) thereof, Romans 13. 14. And
therefore they that eat, or drink, or do any thing else for the mere
satisfaction of the desires of the flesh, and for its delight, do break this
express command of God. And how is it said, that they that are Christ's have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts or desires thereof, if they
may use the Creatures merely to delight and please the flesh? This is not
Crucifying its affections and desires, Gal. 5. 24.

Jobs Covenan` with the eyes that they gaze not on alluring objects, ( Job 31.
1.) was an act of self-denial that others need as well as Job. Such a Covenant
with our taste, and with our ears, and with every sense, that they move not but
by the consent of God and Reason, and let not in any sin into the soul, is a
most eminent part of this necessary duty. David's Adultery and Murder did first
make its entrance at the eye. Had Noah more jealously watched his Appetite, he
had not by Drunkenness been a warning to posterity. It was Achan's eyes that
betrayed his heart to the gold, and silver, and rich attire, though an accursed
thing, Josh. 7. 20, 21. What sin almost does not enter at some of these ports?

Be sure therefore that no sense be without its guard: Accustom your selves to
deny them, and the conquest will be easy. It is not to deny them any thing
that is useful to you for Gods service, and a true means to your holy Ends,
that I advise you to; but only that which would betray you by delighting in
them. It is not to destroy the body, but to tame it, keep it under, and bring
it into subjection: and this must be done. To move to this, consider yet
further these three or four things more distinctly.

1. It is for want of this part of self-denial that the world is so full of
scandals, and the Consciences of men so full of wounds, and Professors walk so
unevenly with God, and seem to be but as other men. Here one drops into
tippling, if not stark drunkenness; and there another into wantonness, if not
fornication: and many live in gluttony, and never see it nor repent of it; and
many are drowned in covetous desires and practices; and some give up themselves
to sensual pastimes; and all because they do not make this Covenant with their
senses, nor have everyet learned to deny themselves; but because it pleases
them, they think it is not displeasing to God; and that it is no sin, but a part
of their Christian liberty: yea many of them think that by this Doctrine of
self-denial, we would deny them the use of the mercies of God, and consequently
hinder them from thankfulness for them. And thus they make a Religion of
pleasing the flesh, which is the deadly enemy to God and Religion. They imagine
a Liberty purcased them to Please it, and fulfill its desires; and they measure
out mercies as they please it, and they would return God a fleshly thanks for
these mercies, and offer him a sacrifice as the Heathens did to Ceres and
Bacchus; when as the Gospel knows no mercy, but either eternal mercy, or that
which is a means to it: nor will it call that a mercy which has not a tendency
to God: nor did Christ purchase us an^ liberty, but what is from sin or
punishment, and is for his Service: He did not suffer in the flesh to procure
us liberty unprofitably to indulge and please the flesh, and to strengthen our
enemy, and by use to give it the mastery, when this mastery is the damnation of
most of the world. If Christians had learned more to deny their senses, they
would walk more blamelesly and inoffensively in the world: if they would keep
at a distance from the bait, and when they cannot do so, yet shut up these
doors, that it may be at a distance from their minds, how safely would they
walk that now are stumbling at every creature that is given for their relief!
The objects of sense are these lower things, so contrary to the objects of
faith, that the more we love the one of them, the less we shall regard the
other: and therefore these are always working against each other. And as the
objects of faith are then most sweet and powerful with us, when faith is set
most fully upon them; so the objects of sense are then most powerful to draw us
from God, when the doors of sense are set wide open, and the appetite let loose
upon them.

2. And you may further observe that almost all the grossest sins in the world,
do begin with some little liberty of the senses, which at first we take for a
lawful or indifferent thing. The filthiest whoredoms do usually begin in
lustful looks, and thoughts and speeches, and so proceed to lascivious
behavior, and so to filthiness it self. And the glutton and the drunkard are
first ensnared by the eye, and then by tasting, and so proceed by little and
little to excess: see therefore that you keep as far from the baits of
sensuality as you can: and lay a command upon your senses to forbear: if you
look upon it, you are next to touching it; and if you touch it, you are next to
tasting it, and if you taste it, you are like to let it down; and if you let it
down, you are like to venture again and let down more: and all must up again or
you are lost. And therefore keep out the first beginnings, and think with your
selves, If sin be the poison of my soul, the digesting of it will be my ruin:
and if I cannot digest it, why should I let it down? and if I may not let it
down, what reason have I to be tasting it? and if I should not taste it, why
should I touch it or be meddling with it? and if I may not meddle with it, why
should I look upon it or hearken to them that would entice me to it? so that
the Denying of your senses and your Appetite, is the sure and easy way to
prevent those dreadful gripes that else may follow.

3. Moreover, if you deny not your sensitive appetites, you will never be
acquainted with heavenly delights. The soul cannot move two contrary ways at
once, toward earth and toward heaven. When you gaze upon this world and feed
your appetites with fleshly delights, you have no heart nor mind to the
delights above. It is the soul that retires from creatures, and sensual
objects, that is free for God, and ready to entertain the motions of Grace. Not
that I would have you turn Hermits and Monks, and forsake the company of men
and all worldly business; No, it is an higher and nobler course that I propound
to you: even in the midst of the world to live as without the world, and as if
there were nothing before you for sensuality to seed upon: To live so fully to
God in the world, that you may see God in all the creatures, and converse with
him in those same objects, by which the sensual are turned from him: and to
live in the greatest fullness of all things, as if there were nothing but penury
to your flesh, and seeing God in all, and using all for God, and denying self,
where you have opportunity to please it; this is the most noble life on earth.
But if you find that you cannot attain to this, and that you cannot deny your
selves the delights of earth, unless you withdraw from the sight of the
objects; do so and spare not, so far as may consist with your serviceableness
to God and humane Society: But still you shall find that whether earthly
delights are present or absent, your minds must retire from that which does
allure and gratify the flesh, if ever you would enjoy Communion with God, and
taste of the delights of an heavenly conversation.

4. And by pleasing your senses, you will increase their vicious inordinate
desires. The more you gratify them, the more they will crave: you feed your
disease by yielding to such desires; but never think to quiet it by contenting
it. The more the flesh has, the more it would have. The only way to abate the
rage of sensual desires, is to deny them, and use them constantly to that
denial. The safest food and raiment is that which best strengthens and
furnishes us for Gods service, with the least content and pleasure to our
sensual appetites and desires. And the same I must say of house, and lands, and
labors, and friends, and all the Creatures; that is the best state of life in
which God is served and pleased best, with the least content and pleasure to
the flesh. Carnal delights and spiritual are so contrary; the one so drossie
and sordid, and the other so sublime and pure, that they will not well consist
together; but the delights of the flesh do corrupt or weaken the spiritual
delights.

5. Lastly Consider, what a base unmanly thing it is, for a man to be a slave
to his sensitive appetite. As truly as the horse was made to be ruled by the
rider, and all the bruits to be under man; so was the appetite and all the
senses made to be ruled by reason; and no sense should be pleased till Reason
do consent: a beast has no rule for his eating and drinking but his appetite;
and therefore man's reason is to moderate him: But a man has a better guide
than appetite or sense to follow: you should not eat a bit or drink a drop
merely because the appetite would have it, but Reason must be advised with, and
God must give advice to Reason. A Swine that will drink whey till he burst his
belly, is blameless, because he knew not the danger, and had not Reason to
restrain him: But a man that has Reason, and yet will eat, and drink, and
sleep, and use the Creatures merely to please the appetite of his flesh, is
utterly unexcusable: What must the light of Reason be put out, or put under the
cover of sensual concupiscence? must a nature that is kin to Angels, be
enslaved to that which is kin to beasts? Unworthy is he of the honor or glory
of a Saint, that casts away the honor of his manhood, and makes himself a
very beast. What else does that wretch, that when he sees a dish before him
that he loves, does never ask whether it be wholesome or unwholesom, bute eats
it as an Horse does his provender, merely because his appetite would have it:
Yea perhaps though he know, or be told that it is unwholesom, yet as long as it
pleases his taste, he cares not? And what else does that wretch, that when he
sees the cup, must needs be tasting: he loves it, and that is reason enough with
him. What a base unmanly thing is it, (much more unchristian) to be a Slave to
a fle^^ly appetite! Would one of these Gentlemen-gluttons, Drunkards, or
Whoremongers, or any of our voluptuous Epicures, that must needs have that they
love, be contented to become a servant to a Beast? would you take a Dog or a
Swine for your Master, and serve them, and obey them, and do what your brutish
Master would have you? why what is the matter that many of our worshipful and
honorable Beasts do not see that they do as bad? What is your own fleshly
sensual Appetite any better than that of a Beast? A Dog has as good a scent as
you; and a Swine has as good a taste or sight as you, and also as strong a
lust as you. What great difference is there betwixt the serving your own flesh
and another? your own brutish part, or any other brute that lives about you?
Wonderful! if the favor of God be nothing with you, and if damnation be
nothing with you, that yet you are insensible of your honor in the world, and
that you that cannot put up a disgraceful word or blow, can yet put up at your
own hands such a bestial indignity, as the subjecting of a Rational immortal
soul, to that brutish flesh, which was made to be its servant!

CHAP. XIX. Self-interest, And 1. Pleasure, And 1. Of the Taste to be denied.
2. I Have told you what the selfish Disposition is that must be mortified and
denied; and now I must tell you what is the selfish Interest that must be
denied: Having described self-denial from the Faculties, I must now describe it
by its Objects.

The selfish Interest consists in this Trinity of Objects, Pleasure, Profit,
and Honor, not spiritual, but carnal; not heavenly, but worldly Pleasure,
Profit, and Honor: sometime all these are comprehended in the word [ Pleasure]
alone; and then it is taken more comprehensively, and not only for sensual
Pleasure, called voluptuousness, as it is here in this distribution. And
sometime all is comprehended in the term [ world] and selfishness in the word [
flesh] the world being that harlot with which the flesh commits adultery. So 1 John 2. 15, 16. [ Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world. If
any man Love the world, the Love of the Father is not in him. For all that is
in the world, the Lust of the flesh, the Lust of the eyes, and the Pride of
Life, is not of the Father, but is of the world: and the world passes away,
and the Lust thereof: but he that does th will of God abides for ever.] To
these three heads therefore we shall reduce all that we have to say of this
matter.

I. The selfish, fleshy Pleasure that must be denied, consists in these
particulars following, which I shall but briefly touch, because they are so
many. 1. One Principal part of Sensuality or Self-interest, consists in meats
and drinks to please the Appetite. So far as these are taken to fit us for Gods
service, and used to his Glory, so far they are sanctified, as before was said:
but when they are merely to please the appetite, they are offered to an enemy,
and are the fuel of lust. Do you see any thing that your Appetite desires,
whether meats or drinks, whether for quality or quantity? Take it not, touch it
not, merely upon that account: but enquire whether it tend to the strengthening
and fitting your bodies or minds for the service of God: and if so, take it; if
not, let alone. If your appetite had rather have Wine than Beer, or strong Beer
than small, take it not merely upon that account: If your appetite would fain
have one cup more, when nature has as much as is profitable, deny that
appetite. If your appetite would fain be tasting of any thing that is not for
your health, deny that appetite. If it would fain have one bit more, when you
have as much before as is wholesome or useful to you, deny that appetite: Or
else you are guilty of flesh pleasing, and plain Gluttony.

Quest. But is it not lawful at a feast to taste of another dish, or eat
another bit, when I think that nature needs no more? what perplexities then
will you cast men into, to know just how many morsels they may eat?

Answ. It is gluttony and no beter to take the creatures of God in vain, and
sacrifice them to a devouring throat, which should be used only for his
service. That which is a man's ultimate end is his God. What would you have
plainer than express words of Scripture, that tell you that whether you eat or
drink it must be all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. and that the fleshly
do make their bellies their Gods? Phil. 3. 18. And therefore when you have
taken as much as suiteth with your end, the service and glory of God, you must
not take more for another end, the pleasing of your fleshly desires. But for
the scruples that you mention, about the just proportion, we need not be
disquieted with them: For God has given us sufficient means to direct us, to
know what is for our good, and what is superfluous; and it is our duty in an
even and constant way to use our Reason and keep as near the due proportion as
we can; and when we know that this is our desire and endeavor, it were a sin
against God to trouble our selves with continual or causless scruples or fears,
lest we do exceed or miss the rule. For what can we do more, than go according
to the best skill we have, and if for want of skill we should a little mistake,
it is pardoned with the rest of our daily infirmities; and to trouble and
distract our selves with causeless fears would more unfit us for Gods service,
than some degree of mistake in the proportion would do, and so would be as
great a sin as that which we feared. And therefore our way is quietly and
comfortably, without distracting fears or scruples, to do our best, and use our
prudence with self-denial, and remember that we have to do with a Father that
knows the flesh is weak when the spirit is willing. But yet wilfully to cast
away one cup or one morsel, on the pleasing of our appetites, when it no way
fits us for the service of God, and will do us no other good, this is not
self-denial but sensuality.

Quest. But nature knows best what is good for it self, and therefore that which
it desires is to be judged best: A Beast lives as healthfully as a man, that
obeys his appetite only. Is it not lawful to take either meat or drink on
this account, that the Appetite is pleased with it?

Answ. 1. Some Beasts would presently kill themselves in pleasing their
appetites, if man that is Rational did not rule; restrain and moderate them. A
Swine will burst himself with whey in half an hour. A Beast in new after-grass
will surfeit, if he be suffered. No Beast knows poison from food, but would
soon perish by it, in obeying his appetite. 2. And yet as a B^^st has no
Reason, so he is better provided to live without Reason, than man is. His
appetite is not so corrupted by sin as ours is! Original sin has depraved and
enraged our appetites. And if man had not more use for his reason than a Beast
even in ordering his natural actions, God would not have given him reason to
rule his appetite, and commanded him to use it herein. And who knows not that
if a man did follow his appetite alone as Beasts do, he were like to murder
himself the next day or week, or at least in a very little space? The appetite
would presently carry us to that for quality, or quantity, or both, that would
cast us into mortal diseases and soon make an end of us: And in those diseases,
the pleasing it usually would be certain death. And indeed this is a beastly
doctrine, that man that has reason to rule his sensual inclinations, should
lay it by and please his appetite without it like a brute! what more do all
Gluttons, Drunkards, and Whoremongers, but follow there fleshly desires? And if
the desires of the flesh might be followed, who would not be such as they, in
some measure? That which is no sin in a Beast, is a heinous sin in a man,
because man has reason to rule his appetite, and a Beast has none; and
therefore is not capable of sin. And for the body, it is certain that most of
the diseases in the world are bred and fed by the pleasing of the appetite; and
I think that there is few that are laid in their graves, but this was the cause
of it, though the ignorant know it not, and the sensual are loath to believe it.

And for the question, whether we may not take any meat or drink purposely to
please the appetite? I answer, yes, as a means to fit us for duty: but not as
your chief end. 1. Sometimes, especially in weak bodies, the very Pleasing of
the Appetite does recreate nature, and further strength. 2. And sometime the
appetite shows what sort of food nature will best close with and concoct, so
that as to the quality if Reason have nothing against it, it has something for
it; because it is a sign that it is like to be best digested, which is most
desired. And so if you thus far follow the appetite, as a sign directing your
reason what is best, and take nothing ultimately to please it, but by pleasing
it to preserve the health or vigor of your bodies for Gods service; thus you
may do and yet be self-denying: for this is not a sensual serving of your
flesh. But if you will 1. Take that which reason tells you is unhealthful in
quality; 2. Or that which reason tells you is either hurtful, or but needless
and unprofitable in the quantity. 3. Or have mastered your reason so far by
your appetite, that you will not believe that is hurtful or needless which you
love, but judge what is good for you, merely by your appetite as a beast. 4. Or
if you make the pleasing of your appetite your chief End, in any meat or drink
that you take; all this is bestiality, sensuality, carnality, gulosity, and
contrary to true moderation and self-denial.

Live therefore like men and not like beasts; like Christians, and not like
Atheists and Epicures: He has as base a god as most of the vilest heathen
Idolaters, that makes his belly his god. He that cannot deny himself a
delicious cup or morsel, would ill deny himself a Kingdom if it were made the
bait of sin. He that will not displease his appetite in so small a matter,
would leardly leave his estate, or liberty, or life, if he were put to it,
either to sin, or leave them. As he is a faithful servant to God indeed, that
will not displease him in the smallest matter; so he is most fully obedient to
the flesh, that cannot deny it the least thing that it desires. Though I know
that the smalness of the matter does often so relax the cautelousness even of
the godly, that they venture on a small thing who would not on a greater: yet
even with them it is some aggravation of the sin, that they cannot bear so
small a matter as the displeasing of their appetites in such a trifle: and that
they cannot deny themselves, where they may do it at so cheap a rate; and that
they have the hearts to displease God, and wrong their souls for a cup or a
morsel which their appetite has a mind to. He sets little by Heaven or the
favor of God, that will venture it for so small a thing. It has often times
abated my compassion to dying men, when I have known that their death was
caused by a wilful obeying their ppetite against the persuasion of their
Physician; and be the person never so dear to me, I feel that there is somewhat
in nature that inclines us to consent to the sufferings of the willful, or
abateth our pity of them in their misery. It was an aggravation of Adams sin
that a forbidden morsel could entice him to venture on the wrath of God, and
the ruin of himself and his posterity. And it will be a double aggravation of
your sin, if you will take the same course, and take no warning by him, or by
the sinning world, that has followed him to this day [when the woman saw that
the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eye, and a tree to
be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof and did eat] Genesis
26. Thus entered sin, and death by sin.

2. ANother part of self-interest to be denied is, the pleasing of lustful
venereous inclinations. Not only in avoiding the gross act of adultery and
fornication it self; but also in avoiding the pleasing of any of the senses by
lascivious actions that lead to this: especially some men that are naturally
prone to lust, have need to set a work both faith and reason, and sometime call
for help from others to quench these dangerous hellish flames; For it is a sin
that God has spoken terribly against, and that so often that intimates man's
proneness to it, and expresses Gods detestation of it. And seldom does Paul
rebuke it, but he reckons up the several kinds, that he may make it odious,
and no^e may escape. Gal. 5. 19. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which
are, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, etc. of the which I
tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such
things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. The sins which he would not have
the Ephesians name, are, [ fornication and all uncleanness, neither filthiness,
nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient: because no
whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an Idolater, has any
inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God] so Col. 3. 5, 6. [ Mortify
therefore your members which are upon earth; fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness which is Idolatry;
for which things sake the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience]
1 Cor. 6 9, 10. [ Be not deceived; neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, etc. shall
inherit the Kingdom of God] 1 Timothy 1. 10. The Law is made for whoremongers, for
them that defile themselves with mankind, etc.] Heb. 13. 4. Whoremongers and
adulterers God will judge] Read also 1 Cor. 5. 11. Matthew. 15. 19. Heb. 12. 16.
1 These. 4. 3. Romans 1. 28, 29, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 13, 18. and 10. 8. Jud. 7, 8.
These filthy dreamers defile the flesh, etc. 2 Pet. 2. 10, 14. [ But chiefly
them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness -- Having eyes full
of Adultery, and that cannot cease from sin.] Abhor therefore this filthy
damnable sin, which God abhors. And to that end please not the flesh by any
beginnings of it, or any thing that savoureth of it, or makes way to it.
Chambering and wantonness are mentioned by the Apostle among the fullfilling of
the fleshly lusts, Romans 13. 13, 14. the allurements of the lusts of the flesh
and wantonness was the course of the wretched Apostates, 2 Pet. 2. 18. 1 Pet.
4. 3. Ephesians. 4. 19. 2 Cor. 12. 21. Mar. 7. 22. And Christ himself has told you,
that [ he that looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery
already in his heart] Mat. 5. 28. Suffer not therefore your eye to entice your
hearts, by gazing on beauty or any alluring objects; touch them not, come not
near them without necessity. The fire of lust does need no blowing up: but in
some it needs all that ever they can do to quench it. Fly therefore from the
temptations and occasions if you would escape; cast not your selves upon
opportunities of sinning; Let temptations have as little advantage as you can.
A weak Christian may walk more evenly that flies from temptations, and keeps
at a distance from that which would ensnare him, than a strong Christian that
suffers the bait to be near him. David's woeful experience could tell you, what
it is to give way to a wandering lustful eye. When Joseph's resolution may tell
you what an advantage it is, to fly away and not to stand a parley with
temptations. As ever you would escape this sin, this horrible soul-destroying
sin, keep off from all opportunities of committing it, and live not with
temptations near you: especially take heed that you suffer not an unclean
spirit to possess your thoughts; but cast out the first impure cogitations with
abhorrency. O the daily filthiness that lodges in the thoughts and
imaginations of some men! They can scarce look on a woman of any comeliness,
but they have presently some filthy thought. If they attempted actual
uncleanness, a chaste person may easily reject them with detestation; but in
this secret way of heart-filthiness, they will commit fornication with whom
they please, and as many as they please, and as often as they please; but the
ruin and sin are only their own. As you love the favor of God, the credit of
the Gospel, and the peace and salvation of your own souls, deny your selves not
only the lusts of uncleanness, but of unchaste behavior, and wanton dalliance,
and the filthiness of your thoughts. For how unfit is that mind to converse
with God, and to be employed in holy ordinances, that comes but newly from
thinking of filthiness, and feeding on lust!

CHAP. XX. Wanton discourse, songs, to be denied.
3. ANother part of self-interest or sensuality to be denied, is, the use of
wanton filthy discourse, and of wanton books, and songs and ballads, commonly
called Love songs. As these are the fruits of vain minds that do invent them,
so do they breed and feed the like vanity in others. Indeed they are the Devils
Psalms and Liturgy, in which he is served with mirth and jollity, by persons of
corrupt and sensual minds. They that will not be at the pains to learn a
Catechism will learn a wanton song or ballad, which one would think should be
as hardly learned. When we desire them to learn any thing that is necessary to
their salvation, they tell us that they are no Scholars, and they have weak
memories, and they cannot learn. But they can learn an idle tale, or a filthy
song, though they are no Scholars, and though their memory be weak. Their weak
memories are strong enough to keep any thing that is naught; like a riddle that
will not hold the corn, but it will hold the straws and rubbish; or like a sive
that will not hold the milk, but it will hold the hairs and filth. And so much
greater is this sin than many others, because it is studied for, and labored
for, and therefore is committed purposely, resolvedly, and with delight, and
not as some other sins which men are tempted to by sudden passions or
surprisals! What abundance of children are set to School to the Devil, and must
bestow many days and hours in learning their lessons! and when they have
learned them, he must hear them say them over, usually more than once a day. As
they are at work in their shops or fields, they are at it, either by wanton
songs, or ribbald filthy talk: yea they be not ashamed to sing them as they go
about the streets: Mark this, you that are the servants of Christ! will you
evermore be ashamed of your Master or of his holy service! will you be ashamed
to confess him in the open streets, or to be heard at Prayer, or reading, or
singing the Praise of God in your houses; when the Devils servants are trained
up in their very childhood to sing his Psalms in the open streets, and
publicly to serve him without fear or shame! May not a man conjecture by their
Education, what trade they are intended for? They that serve an apprenticeship
to a trade, are sure intended to live upon it. One would think by the talk and
the songs of many of our children in the streets, that the parents had bound
them apprentices to a brothelhouse, and intended that their trade should be
fornication, whoredom, and all uncleanness! why else do they learn the art of
talking of it, but in order to the art of practicing it? Sure I am, they are
the apprentices of Satan: and a doleful case it is to think on; that as the
Turks do take the children of Christians, and breed them up to be their Army of
Janissaries, to fight against Christians as their stoutest Soldiers, when they
come to age; so the Devil and their own parents do take the children that in
baptism were dedicatedonce^o Christ, and listed under his command, and they
teach men to fight against Christ, by cursing, and railing, and swearing, and
mocking at Godliness, and by baudy songs and ribbaldry. Christ tells us that
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks; and therefore they cannot
in reason blame us, if we judge of their hearts by their tongues: for though
the tongue be too often better than the heart, it is seldom worse. And surely
if many of our wretched neighbors may be judged of by this rule of Christ, we
must needs conclude that they have lustful, filthy adulterous hearts? what else
can we think of them when their discourse and songs are filthy, but that their
hearts are filthy? Christ has warranted us to conclude, that rotten speeches
come from the abundance of a rotten heart. Young people, I beseech you regard
your credit, if you regard not your salvation. Will you openly proclaim in the
ears of the world that you are trained soldiers of the Devil, learning to be
whores and whoremongers, or that you have lust and whoredom in your hearts? Is
it your meaning to tell this to all the town? what does it in your mouths, if
it be not in your hearts? will you not judge by a man's language what Country
man he is? If he speak W^lch, you will think he is a Welsh man: If Irish, you will
think he is an Irish man; if English, you will conjecture he is an Englishman: And
if you speak the language of harlots and brothelhouses, what can we think but
that you are such your selves, or at least are learning to be such? For ^^ame
do not so disgrace your parents that breed you up, and the houses that you live
in; what may folks think and say, when they hear you talk filthily, and singing
filthy songs, will they not think that you have Adulterers or filthy persons to
your parents, that teach or suffer you to learn such things? and that they are
bringing you up for their own profession? will they not think that you live in
whorehouses, and not in Christian families? Do not for shame proclaim this
suspicion of your parents, or the families you dwell in, in the hearing of the
world, unless you think it an honor to be harlots. It would make the ears of a
modest person to glow on his head, to hear the ribbaldry that is ordinary in
some profane families; especially in many Inns and Alehouses, where the
quality of the company and the nature of the employment is such from whence no
better can be expected.

Let all that would be accounted Christians, deny and abhor this part of
sensuality in themselves and theirs. Again consider the command of God [ But
fornication, and all uncleanness, or Covetousness, let it not once be named
amongst you, as becomes Saints: neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor
jesting, which are not convenient; but rather giving of thanks: Ephesians. 5. 3, 4.
and 4. 29, 30. [ Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but
that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the
hearers; und grieve not the holy spirit of God.] Mark here, how such filthy
speech is called [ Corrupt] Communication, or rotten; like Carrion in a ditch,
which should cause all that pass by to stop their noses. And yet this is our
peoples sport: what say these wretches, may we not jest and be merry, when we
mean no harm, without all this ado? Have you no honester mirth than this? nor
no more cleanly jests than these? will you feed upon that which is Carrion or
corrupt, and make it your Junkets to delight your palate? will you make merry
with that which God condemns, and threatens to shut you out of his Kingdom
for, and makes the mark of the unsanctified, and charge you not once to name
it, that is not without distaste and rebuke? Have you nothing but filthiness,
and the service of the Devil, and the wrath of God to play with, and to make
merry with? Prove. 10. 23. [ It is a sport to a fool to do mischief] I may well
say of this, as Solomon of another sin, Prove. 26. 18, 19. [ As a madman that
casts firebrands, arrows and death, so is the man that deceives his
neighbor, and says, Am not I in sport?] It Is mad sporting with sin,
especially to choose it purposely for a recreation; and specially such an
odious sin as this that infecteth others, and banisheth all gracious edifying
conference, and increases the corruption of the mind, and prepares people to
actual whoredom, selfpollution, and abominable uncleanness: for thoughts and
words are but preparatives to deeds.

CHAP. XXI. Idle and worldly talk to be denied.
4. ANother part of sensuality to be denied, is, Idle and worldly talk, which
most men make their daily recreation. It is not to be made light of that Christ
himself has told you, that for every idle word men shall give account in the
day of Judgment, Matthew. 12. 36, 37. such an account as that they shall be
charged on you as sins; and if they be not repented of, and pardoned through
the blood of Christ, they will be your condemnation as well as greater sins. By
idle words is meant, not only all wicked, and all lying words, which are vain
in a high degree and worse; but also useless unprofitable speeches that tend
not to any good, and which you have no call to speak, Tit. 3. 9. And that which
the Apostle calls [ foolish talking] Ephesians. 5. 4. When that Christian wisdom is
left out that should guide and season our speech, and direct it to some good
end: especially when by vain jesting men will make fools of themselves to
please others: or when they lay by Christian gravity, and by jesting affect to
become ridiculous, Ephesians. 5. 4. much more when men jest with holy things, and
speak unreverently, contemptuously or scornfully of the matters of God, which
is impiety in an high degree: The same may be said of proud boasting words, and
of multitude of words, even when the matter is good, but the multitude of words
unseasonable and unprofitable; as also of rash unconsidered words, that tend to
stir up strife and passion: as also censuring, backbiting, reproach, flattery,
dissembling, and many the like: but the thing that I principally speak of now,
is the pleasing of a man's self by a course of idle unprofitable talk. And alas
how common is this sin! Not only the fooli^^ multitude are guilty of it, but
persons of judgment, and gravity, and reputation. How many may you come in
company with, before you shall have any edifying Communication, that tends to
minister grace to the hearers? vanity is become the common breath of the
greatest part. What the better can any man be for their discourse, unless by
taking warning by them, to avoid the vanity which we hear them guilty of? Even
ancient persons with whom the words of wisdom should be found, ( Job 12. 12.)
and who should be examples unto youth, are yet given up to idle talk; and an
old story is more savoury with them than heavenly discourse: even Parents and
Masters that should be examples to their families, will in their hearing
multiply idle words, as if they would teach them to be vain as they are; when
alas, the souls of those about them have need of other manner of discourse; and
it is another task that God has set them, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8. and 11. 18, 19.
Whence is it that Children learn a course of idle fooli^h talking, more than of
their own parents? For one word of God, and the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the
matters of salvation, that their families hear from most of them, they hear an
hundred, yea a thousand of the world and of unprofitable things. Had God but
the Tithe of their words, we should account them very pious. And they that
cannot spare him the tithe of their words, I doubt do not allow him the Tithe
of their affections, and would not allow him the tithe of their increase, if
they could tell how to keep it. Not but that with some persons, that are called
to much worldly business, more than ten parts of their daily speeches may
^^wfully be about the creatures* But then even those with godly men are
ultimately for God, and so are sanctified, and not unprofitable: and also they
are glad to redeem what time they can for speeches of an higher and more
excellent subject.

And the commonness of this sin of idle talk, yea with many that we hope are
godly, does make me think that it is thought to be a smaller matter than it is;
and I doubt this conceit is it that makes it to be so common. And therefore I
shall here give you some of the aggravations of this sin, that you may
hereafter judge of it as it is, and not be encouraged in it by false
apprehensions.

A custom of vain words, is a sign of a vain and empty mind: were the heart but
full of better things, the tongue would be employed in better speeches. Either
the head, or heart, or both is empty and vain, in that measure as the tongue is
vain, Eccles. 5. 3. [ A dream comes through the multitude of business, and a
fools voice is known by multitude of words] Eccles. 10. 12. [ The words of a
wise man's mouth are gracious; but the lips of a fool will swallow up himself]
Eccles. 10. 14. [ A fool is full of words] And therefore Solomon opposes the
tongue of the just and the heart of the wicked, Prove. 10. 20. [ The tongue of
the just is as choice silver: the heart of the wickd is little worth] See Pro.
17. 27, 28. Psalm. 37. 30, 31. [ The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, and
his tongue talks of judgement] and whence is this [ The Law of his God is in
his heart: none of his steps shall slide.] It is a sign that a man has little
feeling of the greatness of his own sin, of the greatness of Gods Love in
Christ, of the greatness of the joy that is set before him, of the greatness of
duty that lies on him, when he can spend so much of his time in talking of
mere vanity. You cannot get a dying man, or a man that is taken up with any
great important business, to jest and prate with you of idle matters. It Is only
alienated idle minds that can give way to a course of idle words: nay it is a
sign that Conscience is not so tender as it ought to be, when men can knowingly
go on in a course of sin: Does not Conscience ask you what you are doing, and
whether this discourse do tend to edification, and the cherishing of grace?
What Consciences have you that look no better after your tongues, but will let
them wander so long after vanity, before they call them to account? Do you
remember Gods presence, and withal his holiness and jealousy? Can you talk so
idly and God stand by, and hear every word, and put down all? How can you be so
contemptuously fearless of his presence?

2. The tongue of man is a noble member, called our glory, Psalm. 30. 12. and
57. 8. given us for the Praise of our great Creator, and for other high and
noble ends. And should it be abased and abused to idleness and vanity? You will
not take the clothes that adorn your bodies to cloth a Maukin, or sweep the
Oven, or wipe your dishes with: and why should you use your tongues to filth or
base unprofitable things, that are given you for the noblest uses in the world,
even the honor of God, the edifying of your brethren, the reproof of sin, and
your own salvation?

3. Consider, what abundance of great and needful employment you have for your
tongues, and then tell me, whether you should spare them to idleness and
vanity? O what work has that little member to perform! what matters have you
to mind and talk of? what transcendent subjects? what matter of highest
excellency, and greatest necessity? you have a life of sin to look back upon
and lament: you have many a sin to confess to others: you need much help
against temptations, and for the strengthening and exercise of your graces: what
need to make sure of your title to salvation? and to prepare for death, and to
get ready the graces that you must use in you last necessities? and yet have
you words to spare for vanity? What abundance of poor souls about you are
ignorant, hard-hearted, sensual, covetous, empty of grace, in a state of death,
and need all that ever you can do for their recovery, and all too little: and
yet can you find in your heart to talk with them of vain unprofitable things?
Alas Sirs, most of the persons about you are within a step of death, and going
to the bar of God, and want nothing but one stroke of death to make them past
help, and send them to damnation: And can you find in your hearts to talk idly
with such men? O cruel unmerciful people, that regard no more your neighbors
miseries! If you came to them at the point of death, or if their houses were on
fire, would you sit down and tell them an old tale, or talk of the weather, or
this trifle, or that? what an absurdity would this be, and insensibility of
your brethrens case? And will you do so in a case ten thousand fold greater?
Can you find in your heart to stand jesting and prating with a poor
unregenerate man that is within a step of Hell? Have you not more need to call
to him to look about him in time, and to remember eternity, and to turn and
live? If you see but the nakedness of the poor, or the sores of a Cripple, it
should move you to compassion: And will not men's ignorance and ungodliness move
you? Their miseries cry aloud to you for pity, though themselves are silent, [O
help to save us from sin and hell, as you have the hearts of men] and yet will
you stop your ears, and fall a prating and jesting with them? you rob them of
the means that God has commanded you to use for their recovery. God has
commanded, that [ the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom,
teaching and admonishing one another -- Col. 3. 16. yea that you daily exhort
one another while it is called to day, lest any be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 13.

Nay you have the great mysteries of the Gospel to discourse of with the Godly;
the glorious things of everlasting life to make mention of to one another, yea
you have the high praises of God to advance in the world, and all his blessed
attributes to magnify, and all his glorious works to praise, and all the
experiences of your own souls to lay open, and his many and great mercies
toward you to admire and thankfully contess. And yet have you leisure for idle
talk? For number of objects, you have God and all his works in heaven and earth
(that are revealed) to talk of; you have all his providence, all his
judgments* all his mercies, and all his word: And is not this field large
enough for your tongue to walk in, but you must seek out more work in vanity it
self? For Greatness, you have the greatest things in all the world to mind and
talk of: For necessity, you have the matters of your own and other men's
salvation to discourse of: For excellency, you have God and his Image, and
works, and ways, and heaven it self to talk of: For delightfulness, you have
the sweetest objects in the world, even goodness it self, salvation, and the
way to it, to be the matter of your discourse. And lest one thing should weary
you, you have a world of variety to employ your speeches on; even God, and all
his works, and word, and ways beforementioned. And is it not a shame to talk
of vanity, yea to go seek for recreation in vanity, while all these stand by,
and offer themselves to the subjects of your wise, and fruitful, and
delightfullest discourse: Consider whether this be wise or equal dealing.

4. Moreover a course of idle talk, is a thief that robs us of our precious
time. And he that knows what God is, or what duty is, or what his soul is, or
what everlasting joy or torment is, will know that time is a commodity of
greater worth than so contemptuously to be cast away for nothing. O remember
when thou art next in idle talk, Did God make thee for this? does he continue
thee among the living, and keep thee out of hell, and yet prolongeth thy days,
that thou should waste thy time in idleness and vanity? Have thou so many
sins to mortify, and so many other works to do, which heaven or hell lies on,
and so short and uncertain a time to do them in, and yet have thou leisure for
idle talk?

5. Moreover, this sin is so much the greater, because it is not a rare or
seldom sin, but frequently committed and continued in. It is not like the sin
of David or Noah, that though greater, yet was but once committed: But this is
made great by the number and continuance. How many thousand idle words have you
been guilty of in your time?

6. And it is a sin that tends to greater sins. For idle words are the
ordinary passage to backbiting, railing, lying, and contentious words, [Prov.
10. 19. In the multitude of words there wants not sin, but he that refraineth
his lips is wise] Thus a fools lips enter into contention, Prove. 18. 6. [ His
mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the snare of his soul] Eccles. 5. 7.
[ In the multitude of dreams, and many words, are diverse vanities: but fear
thou God] Eccles. 10. 12, 13. [ The Lips of a fool will swallow up himself; the
beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness, and the end of his talk is
madness] Idleness is the beginning, but worse than Ideness is the end.

7. It is a sin that habituateth the speaker and hearers both to vanity: use
makes us disposed to that which we use. It will grow strange to you to speak of
better things when you are used to vanity. And the use of hearing you, is an
exceeding wrong to the souls of the hearers. And a small matter confirms such
bad hearts as the most have, in the vanity that they are in. You cast water on
their graces and your own, if there were any. If any of them had better
thoughts, your idle talk does drown and divert them.

8. And it is a sin that hinders abundance of Edification that holy conference
might bring. It Is a precious thriving course for Christians to be communicating
experiences, and declaring the excellencies and loving kindness of God, and
exciting one another: and this you lay by and turn to vanity. Nay perhaps some
other that is in the company may be purposed to set upon such profitable
discourse, and your idle talk does hinder them, and suppress the exercise of
Gods graces for your good. At least there may be much precious matter in them,
that wants but vent, and if you would but begin, it may be poured forth as
precious ointment. Many wise and able men are too backward in beginning
edifying discourse, that yet are exceeding fruitful when you have once set them
a work. And idle talk is the hinderer of this.

9. And it is a very fruitless sin. You offend God for nothing. What get you by
an hours idle talk? or what have you to tempt you to it?

10. And it is a wilful sin, and usually accompanied with much Impenitency,
which makes it much the greater. Men use not to lament it, and call themselves
to account for it, and say, what have I done? but go on in it as if it were no
sin.

And now you see the greatness of the sin, I beseech you make more conscience
of it than you have done. And that you may avoid it, observe these brief
Directions.

Direct. 1. Labor for understanding in the matters of God: for that is it that
must furnish the tongue, and prevent vanity, Prove. 11. 12. and 10. 19. A
foolish head will have a foolish tongue

Dir. 2. Get a deep impression and lively sense of the matters of God upon the
heart. For a man never talks heartily, that talks not from the Heart. He that
is full of the Love of God, possessed of the Spirit of Christ, taken up with
the riches of grace and of glory, will scarce want matter to talk of, nor an
holy disposition to set him a work: For the Word of God will be as a fire in
his heart; he will be weary with forbearing, till the flames burst out, Psalm.
119. 11. and 40. 8. and 57. 7. and 119. 111. and 39. 3. Jer. 20. 9. The hearty
experienced Christian is usually the fruitful Christian in word and deed.

Dir. 3. Preserve a tender conscience, that may check you when you begin to
turn to vanity. The fear of God is the souls preserver, Psalm. 19. 9. Prove. 16.
6. and 23. 17.

Dir. 4. Walk as before the Lord: Live, and think, and speak as in his
presence. If the presence of an Angel would call you off from idle words, what
then should the presence of God himself do! Dare you run on in idle foolish
prating when you remember that he hears you?

Dir. 5. Keep out of the company of idle talkers, lest they entangle you in the
sin: unless when you have a call to be among them, Prove. 13. 20. We are apt to
let our discourse run with the stream.

Direct. 6. When you are with the ungodly, maintain in you a believing
compassion to their souls; And then the sense of their condition will heal your
discourse.

Dir. 7. Provide matter of holy discourse of purpose beforehand. As you will
not travel without money in your purses to defray your charges; so you should
not go into company without a provision of such matter as may be profitable for
the company that you may be cast upon. Study and contrive how to suit your
speeches to the Edification of others, or else to draw good from others, even
as Ministers study for their Sermons

Dir. 8. Speak not till you have considered what is like to be the effect of
it, and weighed the quality of the person, and other circumstances to that end.
Do not speak first, and consider after, but first think, and then speak.

Dir. 9. Be still sensible of the worth of time and opportunity, and then you
will be as loath to cast it away on idle talk, as a good husband will be to cast
away his money for nothing.

Dir. 10. Keep up a sense of your own necessity, which may provoke you to be
better husbands of your tongues and time: and engage those you converse with,
to mind you of your idle talk, and take you off it as soon as you begin.

Dir. 11. See that your heart, and tongue, and all be Absolutely devoted to
God; and then you will question any by-expense of words: and [ Whatsoever you
do in word or deed, you will do all in the name of Christ, and to the glory and
praise of God] Col. 3. 17. 1 Cor. 10. 31.

Dir. 12. Be Resolute for God, and be not ashamed to own him and his cause. A
sinful bashfulness hinders much good. Observe these Directions for this part of
self-denial*

CHAP. XXII. False Stories, Romances, and other tempting Books.
5. ANother point of sensuality to be denied, is, The reading or hearing of
false and tempting Books, and those that*only tend to please an idle fancy, and
not to edify. Such as are Romances, and other feigned histories of that
nature, with Books of tales, and jests, and foolish complements, with which the
world so much abounds, that there is few but may have admittance to this
Library of the Devil. Abundance of old feigned Stories, and new Romances are in
the hands, especially of Children, and idle Gentlemen, and filthy lustful
Gallants, or ^ty persons that savor not greater matters, but have spirits
suitable to such gawds as these. But if they were only toys, I should say the
less; but having seen by long observation the mischief of them, I desire you to
note it in these few particulars.

1. They ensnare us in a world of guilt, by drawing us to the neglect of those
many, those great and necessary things that all of us have to mind and study. O
for a man or woman, that is under a load of sin, unassured of pardon and
salvation, that is near to death, and unready to die, to be seen with a story
or Romance in their hand! what a gross incongruity is this? It Is fitter the
Book of God should be in your hand: It Is that which you must live by and be
judged by. There Is much that you are yet ignorant of, which you have more need
to be acquainted with than Fables. Are you not ignorant of an hundred truths
that you should know, that God has revealed to further your salvation: and can
you lay them all by to read Romances? Are you traveling toward another world
with a Play-book in your hand? O that you did but know what greater matters you
have to mind and to to do? Do all that you have to do first, that is of a
thousand times more worth, and weight, and need; and then come to me, and I
will answer your Objections, What harm is it to read a Play-book? First, Quench
the fire of sin and wrath that is kindled in your souls; and see that you
understand the Laws of God, and read over those profitable Treatises of
Divines, that the world abounds with, and your souls more need, and then tell
me, what mind or time you have for Fables.

2. Moreover it dangerously bewitcheth and corrupts the minds of young and
empty people, to read these books. Nature does so close with them, and delight
in them, that they presently breed an inordinacy of affection, and steal away
the heart from God, and his holy Word, and ways. It cannot be that the Love and
delights of the heart can be let out on such trash as these, and not be taken
off from God and the most needful things. That is the most dangerous thing to
the soul, that works it self deepest into the affections, and is most delighted
in instead of God. And therefore I may well conclude that Play-books, and
History-Fables and Romances, and such like, are the very poison of youth, the
prevention of grace, the fuel of wantonness and lust, and the food and work of
empty, vicious, graceless persons; and it is great pity that they be not
banished out of the Commonwealth.

3. Moreover they rob men of much precious time, in which much better work
might be done: much precious knowledge might be got while they are exercised in
these Fables. Those hours must be answered for: And there* is not the worst of
you but then had rather be able to say, [ I spent those days and hours in
prayer, and meditating on the life to come, and reading the Law and Gospel of
Christ, and the Books which his Servants wrote for my instruction] than to say,
[ I spent it in reading Love-books, and Tale-books, and Play-books] All these
considered, I beseech you throw away these pestilent vanities, and take them
not in your hands, nor suffer them in the hands of your children, or in your
houses, but burn them as you would do a conjuring-book, and as they did, Acts
19. 19. that so they may do no mischief to any others.

CHAP. XXIII. Vain Sports and Pastimes to be denied.
6. ANother part of fleshly interest to be denied, is, vain sports and
pastimes, and all unnecessary Recreations. For this also is one of the harlots
that the flesh is defiled with.

Recreations are lawful and useful if thus qualified. 1. If the matter of them
be not forbidden: For there is no sporting with sin. 2. If we have an holy
Christian end in them, that is, to fit our bodies and minds for the service of
God: and do not do it principally to please the flesh. If without dissembling
our hearts can say, I would not meddle with this recreation, If I thought I
could have my body and mind as ^ell strengthened and fitted for Gods service
without it. 3. If we use not recreations without need, as to the said End; nor
continue them longer than they are useful to that End; and so do not cast away
any of our precious time on them in vain. 4. If they be not uncivil,
excessively costly, cruel, or accompanied with the like unlawful accidents. 5.
If they contain not more probable incentives to vice than to virtue: as to
Covetousness, Lust, Passion, Profaneness, etc. 6. If they are not like to be
more hurtful to the souls of others that join with us, than profitable to us.
7. If they be not like to do more hurt by offending any that are weak or
dislike them, than good to us that use them. 8. If they be used seasonably, in
a time that they hinder not greater duties. 9. If we do it not in company unfit
for us to join with. 10. Especially if we make a right choice of Recreations,
and when diverse are before us, we take the best; that which is least offensive,
least expensive of time and cost, and which best furthereth the health of our
bodies, with the smallest inconvenience.

These Rules being observed, Recreations are as lawful as sleep, or food, or
Physic.

But, alas, they are made another thing by the sensual, ungodly world. Sometime
they must sport themselves with sin it self, in the abuse of Gods Name, and
Servants, and Creatures: Tippling and profane Courses are some men's chiefest
recreations: And though the Law of the Land forbid most of their sports, and
the Law of God commands them to obey all the Laws of men that are not against
the Law of God, yet this is a matter of nothing to their consciences. And let
the matter be never so lawful, they make all impious by a carnal end. It Is none
of their intention to strengthen and fit themselves for the service of God, and
an holy, righteous life, by their recreations: but it is merely because their
fancy and flesh is pleased in them: Even as the Drunkard, Glutton, or
Whoremonger, that have no higher end than Pleasure, and can give you no better
account why they feed their lust, but because they Love it, and it is their
delight: just so is it with sportful youths and gallants. How few of many
thousands can you come to that are at Cards, Dice, or Dancing, that can truly
say, they would not do any of this but for God, and to fit themselves for his
service? Did you ever know such a one? I believe in some better kind of
Recreations you may know some such; but scarce in these. Alas this sin is not
of so small a stature as too many impenitent souls imagine. It Is one of the
crying sins of the Land, and I believe one that brought down the vengeance of
the late war upon us: and yet it is not half cured after all. The Gentry of
England that should have been educated in Learning and the fear of God, and
been the examples of the people in temperance and holiness, have been
lamentably brutified and drowned in this (with other parts of gross)
sensuality. Instead of serious Prayer, and holy Conference, and instructing of
their Families, Cards and Dice took up the time, and cursing and swearing were
the common attendants of them: and their Childrenn and Servants learned of
them, and took the same course. They bestowed more time in these, and in
hunting, hawking, bowling, cocking, Stage Plays, and such like, than they did
in the serious worshipping of God; yea than they did in the works of any lawful
calling: For indeed they lived as without a calling, doing very little else but
rise, and dress them and complement those about them, and drink, and eat, and
so to their sports at home or abroad, and then to eating and drinking again,
and so to their vain discourses, and so to their beds again: and this was the
ordinary course of their lives: They sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to
play, Exodus 32. 6. 1 Cor. 10. 7. In the sins of Sodom did they live, Pride,
fullness of bread, and idleness, Ezekiel. 16. 49. They trod the steps of him that
Christ had told them, did cry in vain for a drop of water to cool his tongue,
Luke 16. 19. gallantly clothed, and fared deliciously every day (or
sumptuously.) Their whole life almost was but a sacrifice to their flesh, to
their belly, their fancies and their lusts: Till God broke in upon them in his
wrath, and found them another employment, and shortened their store, and
diminished their full estates and brought them into contempt and trouble; and
yet how common is the sin to this day? Isa. 5. 11, 12, 13. [ Woe unto them that
rise up early in the morning that they may follow strong drink that continue
till night, till wine inflame them; and the Harp and the Viol, the Tabret and
Pipe, and Wine are in their feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord,
nor consider the operation of his hands: therefore my people are gone into
captivity, because they have no knowledge, and their honorable men are
famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst: therefore Hell has
enlarged her self, and opened her mouth without measure, and their glory, and
their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoices shall descend into it,]
Amos 6. 1, 4, 5, 6. Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, -- that stretch
themselves on their Couches, and eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves
out of the stall, that chant to the sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves
instruments of music -- that drink Wine in Bowls, and anoint themselves with
the chief ointments: but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.]

The precious time that this sort of men lay out in their needless sports and
recreations, is more worth than all their estates; and if their sin had no
other aggravation but this, I confess I should take it for a far greater sin
than any that thieves are usually hanged for at the Gallows! what! for men that
have received more from God than others, and are obliged more to him, and are
capable of doing him more eminent service, for such as these to live like
Epicures! and when they are hastening to an endless life, to waste the most yea
almost all this precious time in Flesh-pleasing sensuality! I think it is one
of the greatest sins in the world! And no wonder that Christ made such choice
of such an one as these, to acquaint them who they are that shall be damned,
Luke 16. And if Conversion make not a wonderful change on them, they must look
undoubtedly to speed as he; and to have the same account of the cause of their
misery [ Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things,
and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art
tormented] Luke 16. 25.

Abundance of them bestowed more upon Hawks and Dogs, than would have
maintained many poor families: And play for large sums at Cards, and Dice, and
Cockings, and Horse-races. Covetousness, and Luxury, and Passion, and Swearing,
and Cursing, were the virtues that their sports did exercise: and others must
be their companions in the same impieties, that they perish not alone.
Unmerciful and oppressing they are in their very sports, treading down the
hedges and corn of poor men, in following their game, and never making them
reparation for their loss, but raging at them if they do but complain. No
fitter company for them, than the most impious Swearers, and ribbald filthy
Speakers, and the like: who was offended at it, they cared not; but made it an
additional part of their sport, to cast a scorn at those that durst not and
would not be as bad as they. And all this is, when they have variety of civil,
cheap, inoffensive recreations at hand, which might better have fitted a
Christians end.

And the youthful part of the vulgar, are, in their degree, of the same spirit
with those Epicures, and of the like practice, as far as their estates and
leisure will allow them: Witness the eagerness of the rabble in following after
Wakes, and May-games, Cock-fightings, Dancing, Dice, and Cards, and such like
exercises. And more pleasure they have in these than in Prayer, or Gods
Praises, or holy Instructions, or Conferences. As much as the most sordid
Whoremonger or Drunkard is enslaved in his proper flesh-pleasing sin, so much
are our voluptuous youth and others addicted to gaming, sports, and pastimes,
and enslaved to this flesh-pleasing sin of theirs. Ah poor people! Does time
run on so fast, and are you hasting to the dreadful bar of God: and do you want
pastime? Is your work so great, and your time so short and utterly uncertain;
and yet must you hunt about for pastime? Must it go with you in heaven or hell
for ever as you spend this hasty inch of time, and yet have you days or hours
to spare for needless recreation? O what a cursed thing is sin, that can so
bereave men of the use of reason, in that one thing for which their reason was
given them! Yea we can scarce convince these poor deluded souls that they do
amiss; but they say, [ What harm is there in cards or dice, or hunting, or
bowling, or such like rerceations? How shall we live without recreation? Answ.
But is there no harm in needless flesh-pleasing, and in the loss of precious
time, to men that are ready to step into eternity? O that ever men should make
such a question! Sppose your recreations were the lawfullest in the world, in
their own nature? Can there be a greater villainy, than to set your hearts on
them, and make a God of them, and cast away precious hours on them, in using
them needlessly? Recreations are your physic, or your sauce; and therefore must
not become your food, nor made a meal of They are only as whetting to the
mower, which must never be used but when there is need: To spend half the day in
needless whetting, deserves no wages. O did you know but what your work, and
time, and what is before you, you would be better husbands; and then you might
so contrive your business, as to lose no time in recreation. For either your
calling puts you on the labor of the mind, as Students, or of the body, as
laboring men. If study be your calling, you need no exercise of recreation but
for your bodies, for variety of studies is the best or sufficient for the mind:
And two hours walking is bodily recreation enough in a day, for almost any
student that is in a capacity to labor: And if you be laboring men, or your
calling lie in bodily motion, then you need no recreation for your bodies
besides your Callings, but only for your mind: And if you love God and his
Word, what better Recreation for your minds can you devise, than thinking of
the Love of God in Christ, and meditating on the Law of God, Psalm. 1. 2. and
calling upon him, and rejoicing in his praises, and the Communion of his
Saints? Is not a day in his Courts, better than a thousand any where else? The
Spirit of God by David said so, Psalm. 84. 10. But alas it is this unmortified
flesh, and tyrannizing sensuality that blinds you, that you cannot see the
truth: or else all this would be as plain to you as the high way.

CHAP. XXIV. Vain Company to he denied.
7. ANother sensual vice to be denied, is, A love to vain ungodly Company. This
is a sin that I think none but utterly graceless men are much carried away
with. For the Godly are all taught of God to love one another, 1 These. 4. 9.
and to delight in the Saints as the most excellent on Earth, Psalm. 16. 2, 3.
and to take pleasure in their communion: and to look on the ungodly with a
differencing belief, as foreseeing their everlasting misery, if they return
not: so that it is the ungodly that I have now to speak to. Some fall in love
with the company of good fellows, as they call them: and some love the company
of harlots, and some of gamesters; and most of merry pleasant companions, and
men that are of their own disposition: and the love of such company, ticeth
them to the frequent committing of the sin. They would not go to gaming but for
company: They would not go to the Alehouse but for company: and when they are
there, perhaps they will swear, and drink, and mock at godliness for company.
But are you willing also to go to hell for company? Is the company of those
sinners, better than the company of God, and his favor? were it not better to
be that while with him in prayer, or about his work? If you love a tippling
fellow better than God, speak out, and say so plainly, and never dissemble any
more, nor say that you love God above all, or that you are Christians. Have you
more delight in the Company of them that would entice to sin, than in the
Company of the godly that would draw you from it? This is a most certain mark,
that yet you are the children of the Devil, and in a state of damnation. It is
not possible for a sanctified child of God to do so. See the description of the
man that shall be saved in Psalm. 15. verse. 4. [ In his eyes a vile person is
contemned, but he honors them that fear the Lord] Birds of a feather will
flock together. The company which you love, shows what courses you love, and
what you are. You delight in the company of those that Christ will judge as his
enemies: and how then will he judge of you? You delight most in the company of
those notorious fools, that know not the plainest and needfullest things in all
the world: that know not that God is better than the world, and holiness than
sin; and know not the way of their own salvation. If you are content to have
the company of the ungodly for ever, you may take it here. But if you would not
dwell in hell with them, do not go on in sin with them. O when you shall see
those very men arrested by death, and haled at the bar of God, and cast into
damnation, then you will have no mind of their company? Then, O that you could
but say, that you were none of them. Like a man that is enticed by thieves to
join with them: but when the hue and cry overtakes them, and they are
apprehended, how glad would he be then to be from among them! I tell you
sinners, if grace recover you, you shall wish in the sorrow of your hearts that
you had never seen the faces of those men that enticed you to evil: but if
grace do not recover you, you shall wish ten thousand times in Hell that you
had never seen their faces: but then your wishes will be in vain. In the name
of God bethink your selves, whether your companions can bear you out at last,
and save you from the wrath of God, and warrant your Salvation? Nay whether
they can save themselves; Alas you know they cannot: God says, If you live
after the flesh, ye shall die, Romans 8. 13. and if these men say (as the Devil
to Eve) you shall not die, are they able think you to make it good? What can
they overcome the God of heaven? O Sirs, away as you love your souls, from such
mad and miserable company as this.

CHAP. XXV. Pleasing Accommodations, Buildings, Gardens, Horses, etc.
8. ANother sensual delight to be denied, is, Pleasing accommodations, in
Buildings, Rooms, Walks, Gardens, Grounds, Cattle, and such like. It Is lawful
to be thus accommodated, and lawful to desire and use such accommodations, with
such cautions as I gave before about recreations. 1. If you do not with Ahab
desire to be accommodated by that which is another man's, coveting your
neighbors possessions, or unlawfully procuring it. 2. If you be not at too
much cost upon such things, expending that upon them that should be laid out on
greater and better things. 3. But especially, if you desire such accommodations
for right ends, sincerely referring all to Gods honor, and desiring them not
principally to please your own fancy, and carnal mind, but for the enabling you
the better and more cheerfully to serve God. Nothing but God may be loved for
it self. When the Pleasing of the flesh and fancy is the utmost thing we look
at in any of our desires, they are wicked and idolatrous. Our houses therefore
must be fitted to Necessary uses, and not to inordinate delights. Our Gardens,
Orchards, Walks, and such like must be first suited to Necessity, and then to
so much Delight as is useful to us for the promoting of our holiness; but not
to any useless tempting Delight.

But worldlings and sensual persons will not be tied to these Christian Rules.
Alas, it is the furthest matter from their minds, to make Heaven the End of all
their earthly possessions and accommodations. They may hypocritically talk of
God and of serving him by their estates: but really it is the pleasing of a
fleshly mind that is the thing which they intend. They have more delight in
their houses, and gardens, and lands, and cattle, than in God and the hopes of
life everlasting. They desire fair houses that they may be thought to be no
mean persons in the world, and that they may please their humors that run
after creatures for felicity and content. I would desire such men to consider
these things.

1. All these are but the baits of Satan to delight you and entangle your
desires, and find you work in seeking after them, while you neglect far greater
matters. Can you have while to look so much after superfluities and delights in
the world, when you have Necessaries yet to look after for your souls? Have you
not greater things to mind than these, which these occasion you to neglect?

2. Do you really find that they conduce to your main end, even to make you
more holy, or more serviceable to God? Nay do not your own Consciences tell
you, that they hinder you and cross those ends? And yet will go against your
experience?

3. If you are humble conscionable Christians, you feel cause enough already to
lament, that your love to God and delight in him, is no more: And yet are you
preparing snares for your souls, to steal away that little remnant of your
affections, which you seemed to reserve for God?

4. If you have any spark of Grace in you, you know that the flesh and the
world are your dangerous enemies; and you know that the way that the world does
undo men, is by ticing them to overvalue it and over-love it; and that those
that love it most, are deepest in a state of condemnation; and the less men
love it, the less they are hurt or endangered by it. And do you not know that
you are liker to over-love a sumptuous house, with gardens, orchards, and such
accommodations, than a mean habitation? Why should you be such enemies to your
own salvation, as to make temptations for your selves? Have you not temptations
enough already? Do you deal with those you have so well, and overcome them so
easily and so constantly, as that you have reason to desire more? If Christ
your General send you upon a hotter service, you may go on with courage, and
expect his help: But if you will so glory in your own strength, as to run into
the hotter battle, and call for more and stronger enemies, it is easy to
conjecture, how you will come off. If you are Christians, know your selves, you
know that in the meanest state, you are too prone to over-love the world, and
that under all Gods medicinal afflictions, you cannot be so weaned from it, as
you ought! Are you not daily constrained to groan and complain to God under the
burden of too much Love of the world, and too much delight in worldly things?
If this be not your case, I see not how you can have any sincerity of saving
grace. And if it be your case, will you be so sotti^^, and hypocritical, as to
complain daily to God of your sin, and in the mean time to love and cherish it?
to groan under your disease, and wilfully eat and drink that which you know
does increase it? What will you think of a man that will pray to God to save
him from uncleanness, and yet will dwell no where but in a Brothel-house? What
do you better, that must needs have the world in the loveliest garb, and must
needs have house, and grounds, and all things in that plight, as are fittest to
entice the heart; and then will complain to God, that you over-love the world,
and love him too little? To your shame you may speak it, when you do it so
wilfully, and cherish the sin which you thus complain of. If God call you into
a state of fullness and temptations, watch the more narrowly over your
affections, and your practices: and use no more of the creatures for your self,
if you have ten thousand pound a year, than if you had but an hundred: but do
not seek and long for temptations: With not for danger, unless you were better
able to pass through it.

4. Remember when your fancies desire such things, not only that it is an enemy
that desires them, and to please your enemy is not safe for you: but also that
it is the way that most have perished by, to have the world before them in too
pleasing and lovely a condition. Remember Nebuchadnezzar's case, Dan. 4. 30.
that for glorying in his pompous buildings, was turned as a mad man among the
Beasts. Remember the rich man's sad example, Luke 12. 20. and 16. and think
whether it be safe to imitate them? If men must perish for loving the creature
more than God, methinks you should long most for that condition, in which the
creature appears least lovely, or is least likely to steal your love from
God, and in which you may love him and enjoy him most.

5. And bethink you how unsuitable it is to your condition, to desire sumptuous
buildings, and enticing accommodations to your flesh. Have you not taken God
for your portion, and Heaven for your home? and are you not strangers and
pilgrims here? and is not God and everlasting glory sufficient for you? You
profess all this, if you profess to be Christians: and if you be not, you
should not profess that you are. And what! do you begin to repent of your
choice? must you yet turn to the pomp and vanity of the world again? and will
you quit your hopes of God and glory? Ah poor souls! what little need have you
of such great matters on earth? you have but a little to do with them! and but
a little while to stay with them! and will not a mean habitation, and shorter
accommodations serve you for so short a time? Stay but a while, and your souls
shall have house-room enough in heaven or hell, and a narrow grave of seven
foot long will serve your bodies till the resurrection. And cannot you make
shift with an ordinary habitation and with small and common things till then?
Naked you came into the world, and naked you must go out: make not then so
great a stir in dressing, and undressing, and feathering a nest, that will be
so soon pulled down.

6. And it is a dangerous sign that your time on earth is short, when you have
most content in outward things. I have told you once in another Discourse
(which I have since seen more of) that people that much set their hearts upon
any earthly thing, do use to be snatched away by death just when they have
attained it, before they can have the comfort of possessing it. Just when their
houses are built; just when their debts are paid, and their estates cleared and
settled; just when they have such or such a thing which they earnestly desired,
then they are gone; as the fool in Luke 12. 20. This night shall thy soul be
required of thee: then whose shall those things be which thou have provided?

7. And you do but prepare for a double sorrow, when you must leave all these.
Do you think that the more you love or delight in any thing below, you will not
be the lother to leave it? Do not think only of the present content, but ask
your hearts; shall I be willinger to part with a sumptuous house, and
commodious gardens, walks, and fields, than with a mean habitation, and less
pleasing things? O how it tears the very heart of the worldling, when he sees
that he must for ever leave all that which he set so much by, and which has
cost him so dear? If he set his heart but on a Horse, or any creature, the loss
of it is a double suffering. Much more will he be wounded with the loss of all,
that his mind was so much set upon.

Remember therefore Christians, that as these accommodations are mercies which
you must faithfully use, when they are cast upon you; so they are snares not to
be sought after; and matter for your self-denial, to neglect. As they are
Provision for the flesh to fulfill its desires, you must not know them. You
have a building of God to mind and look after; a house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens, and it better beseems you, earnestly to groan, to be
so clothed, that mortality may be swallowed up of life, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2, 4.
Possess present things as not possessing them; and use them as not abusing
them, for the form of them passes away.

CHAP. XXVI. Apparel, as used for this Carnal End, etc.
9. ANother Object of sensuality to be denied, is, Apparel, as desired for this
Carnal end. Though clothing be a consequent of sin, yet now to man in this
necessity it is a mercy and a duty, so be it we use it with such cautions as in
the foresaid cases is expressed. 1. That our end be the furnishing our frail
bodies for the work of God, and the preserving them from that shame, and cold,
and hurt which would unfit us for his service. 2. And that our apparel be
fitted as near as we can to these ends; that is, to healthful warmth, and
comeliness: and that under the name of comeliness we do not fit them to carnal
ends, to set us out to the eyes of men, and to raise their esteem of our worth
or comeliness of person: but be satisfied if we avoid the shame of nakedness
and contemptible unhandsomness. 3. To which end we should see that we affect
not to rise above those of our own rank, nor equal our selves in apparel with
our superiors: but go with the lower sort of our condition. 4. And that we
imitate not the fashions of light and vain persons; but keep company in our
attire with the most wise and sober, and grave persons about us. 5. And that we
bestow no needless cost upon our attire, because we must be accountable for all
that God entrusteth us with. 6. And that we change not causlesly. Thus must
apparel be used: the cheapest that is warm and comely, according to the fashion
of the gravest persons of our rank, and the lowest of them.

But, alas, this childish trifle the Devil has made a bait of sensuality. The
care that people have about it, the cost they bestow on superfluities, their
desire to go with the highest of their rank, to say nothing of mutable and
imodest fashions, do show to what end it is that they use it. I desire these
kind of people to think of these few things that I shall say to them.

1. This vanity of apparel, is the certain effect of the vanity of your mind:
you openly proclaim your selves to be persons of a foolish, childish temper,
and poor understanding: Among the most ungodly people, they that have but
common wisdom, do look upon this vanity of inordinate apparel as quite below
them. And therefore it is commonly taken to be the special sin of women, and
children, and lightheaded, silly empty men. Those that have no inward worth to
commend them to the world, are silly souls indeed, if they think any wise folks
will take a silken coat instead of it? It is wisdom, and holiness and
righteousness that are the ornaments of man; and that is his beauty which
beautifieth his soul. And do you think that among wise men fine clothes will go
instead of wisdom, or virtue, or holiness? You may put as fine clothes upon a
fool as upon a wise man: and will that think you make him pass for wise? When a
gallant came into the Shop of Apelles that famous painter, to have his picture
drawn, as long as he stood silent, the Apprentices carried themselves
reverently to him because he shone in gold and silver lace: but when he began
to talk, they perceived that he was a fool, and they left their reverence, and
all fell a laughing at him. When people see you in an extraordinary garb, you
draw their observation toward you, and one asks, Who is yonder that is so
fine? and another asks, Who is yonder? and when they perceive that you are more
witless and worthless than other folks, they will but laugh at you and despise
you. Excess in apparel, is the very sign of folly, that is hanged out to tell
the world what you are, as a Sign at an Inn-door acquaints the passenger that
there he may have entertainment. You draw folks to suspect that all is not well
with you where there needs all this ado. It Is sure a sorry house that needs
many props: and a diseased body that needs so much medicining: And a deformed
face that needs painting: And what is gaudy attire to the body* but such as
painting is to the face? If I see artificial teeth in your heads, I must think
that you want the Natural ones that were better. If I perceive your breath to
be still sweetn'd by art, I shall suspect that it would stink without it. And
if I see people inordinately careful of their apparel, I must needs suspect
that there is some special cause for it: all is not well where all this care
and curiosity is necessary. And what is the deformity that you would hide by
this? Is it that of your mind? Why you bewray it more? you tell all that see
you, that you are empty, silly souls, as plainly as a Morrice-dancer, or a
Stage Player does tell folks what he is by his attire. Is it the deformities of
your bodies that you would hide this way! I confess that is the best excuse that
can be made for this excess: For apparel will do more to hide the deformities
of the body than of the mind. But the shape of your clothes is fittest for this
(so far it is fit to be attempted:) For the bravery of them will do little, but
draw men's observation the more upon your infirmity. If you say that you have no
such extraordinary necessity; then I must say that you do your selves wrong to
tice people to suspect it.

2. And also you make an open ostentation of Pride, or Lust, or both, to all
that look upon you. In other cases you are careful to hide your sin, and take
it for an heinous injury if you be but openly told of it and reproved: How
comes it then to pass that you are here so forward your selves to make it
known, that you must carry the signs of it open in the world! Is it not a
dishonor to Rogues and Thieves, that have been burnt in the hand or forehead,
or must ride about with a paper pined on their backs declaring their crimes to
all that see them; So that every one may see, yonder is a thief, and yonder is
a perjured man? And is it not much like it for you to carry the badge of pride
or lust abroad with you in the open streets and meetings? Why do you desire to
be so fine, or neat, or excessive comely? Is it not to draw the eyes and
observations of men upon you? and to what end? Is it not to be thought either
Rich, or beautiful, or of an handsome person? And to what end desire you these
thoughts of men? Do you not know that this desire is Pride it self? You must
needs be some body; and fain you would be observed and valued; and fain you
would be noted to be of the best or highest rank, that you can expect to be
reckoned of: And what is this but Pride? And I hope you know that Pride is the
Devils sin, the first born of all iniquity; and that which the God of heaven
abhors! so that it were more credit for you in the eyes of men of wisdom to
proclaim your selves beggars, sots, or idiots, than to proclaim your pride. And
too often it shows a pang of lust as well as pride: especially in young persons:
and few are so forward to this sin as they. This bravery and fineness is but
the fruit of a procacious mind; it is plainly a wooing, alluring act: It is not
for nothing that they would fain be eyed, and be thought comely or fair in
others eyes! somewhat they want: you may conjecture what! And even married
people, if they love their credit, should take heed by such means of drawing
suspicion upon themselves. Sirs, if you are guilty of folly, pride and lust,
your best way is to seek of God an effectual cure, and to use such means as
tends to cure it; and not such as tend to cherish it, and increase it; as
certainly fineness in clothing does: But if you will not cure it, for shame
conceal it, and do not tell every one that sees you what is in your heart: what
would you think of one that should go up and down the street, telling all that
meet him, [I am a thief, or I am a fornicator] would you not think that he were
a compound of foolery and knavery? And how little do you come short of this
that write upon your own backs, [ Folly, Pride and Lust] or tell them by your
apparel, [ Take notice of me: I am foolish, Proud, and lustful?]

3. And if you be so silly as to think that bravery is a means of honor, you
should withal consider that it is but a shameful begging of honor from those
that look upon you, when you show them not any thing to purchase or deserve it.
Honor must be forced by desert and worth, and not come by begging; for that is
no honor that is given to the undeserving. It is but the shadow of desert, and
will constantly follow it among the wise and good, but never go without it.
Your bravery does so openly show your desire of esteem and honor, that it
plainly tells all wise men that you are the less worthy of it. For the more a
man desires esteem, the less he deserves it. And you tell the world by your
attire that you desire it: even as plainly and foolishly as if you should say
to folks in the streets [ I pray think well of me, and take me for an handsome
comely person, and for one that is above the common sort.] Would you not laugh
at one that should make such a request to you? Why, what do you less, when by
your attire you beg estimation from them? And for what I pray you, should we
esteem you? Is it for your clothes? Why I can put a silver lace upon a mawkin,
or a silken coat on a post, or on an Ass. Is it for your comely bodies? why a
wicked Absolon was beautiful, and the basest harlots have had as much of this
as you: A comely body, or beautiful face does often betray the soul, but never
saves it from hell. And your bodies are never the comelier for your dress,
whatever* they may seem. Is it for your virtues that you would be esteemed? Why
pride is the greatest enemy to virtue, and as great a deformity to the foul as
the Pox is to the body: And he that will think you ever the honester for a new
suit, or a silver lace, does as little know what honesty is as your selves. For
shame therefore give over beging for esteem, at least by such a means as
inviteth all wise men to deny your suit; But either let honor come without
begging for, or be without it.

4. Consider also that excess of Apparel does quite contradict the End that
proud persons do intend it for. I confess it does sometime ensnare a fool, and
so accomplish the desires of the lustful: But it seldom attaineth the ends of
the proud: For their desire is to be the highlier esteemed, and almost all men
do think the meanlier of them. Wise men have more wit, than to think the Tailor
can make a wise man or woman, or an honest man or woman, or an handsome man or
woman: Good men pity them, and lament their folly and vice, and wish them
wisdom and humility. In the eyes of a wise and gracious man, a poor
self-denying, humble, patient, heavenly Christian, is worth a thousand of these
painted posts and peacocks. And it so falls out that the ungodly themselves do
frustrate the proud persons expectations. For as covetous men do not like
covetousness in another, because they would get most themselves, so Proud
persons like not Pride in others, because they would not have any to vie with
them, or overtop them, and be looked upon and preferred before them. None look
with such scorn and envy at your bravery, as those that are as silly and sinful
as your selves, who cannot endure that you should excel them in vanity; so that
good and bad do ordinarily despise or pity you for that which you think should
procure your esteem.

5. Consider also, that Apparel is the fruit or consequent of sin, that laid
man naked and open unto shame: and is it fit you should be proud of that which
is ordained to hide your ^^ame; and which should humble you by minding you of
the sin that caused the necessity of it?

6. And you should bethink you better than most Gallants do, what account you
mean to make to God for the money that you lay out in excess of bravery, will
it think you be a good and comfortable account, to say, [ Lord, I laid out so
much to feed and manifest my Pride and Lust] when such abundance of pious and
charitable uses did call for all that you could spare? Many a Lord, and Knight,
and Gallant bestows more in one suit of clothes, or in one set of hangings,
or in the superfluous dress of a Daughter, than would keep a family of poor
people for a 12 month, or than would maintain a poor Scholar for higher
service than ever they themselves will do; And many a poor boy or girl goes
without a Bible, or any good books, that they may lay out all they have on
their backs.

7. Lastly, I beseech you do not forget what it is that you are so carefully a
doing; and what those bodies are that you so adorn, and are so proud of, and
set out to the sight of the world in such bravery. Do you not know your selves?
Is it not a lump of warm and thick clay, that you would have men observe and
honor? When the soul that you neglect is once gone from them, hey will be set
out then in another garb That little space of earth that must receive them,
must be defiled with their filthiness and corruption: and the dearest of your
friends will have no more of your company, nor one smell or sight of you more
if they can choose: There is not a carrion in the ditch that is loathsomer than
that gallant painted corpse will be a little after death. And what are you in
the mean time? Even bags of filth, and living graves, in which the carcasses of
your fellowcreatures are daily buried and corrupt. There is scarce a day with
most of you, but some part of a dead carcass is buried in your bodies, in which
as in a filthy grave, they lie and corrupt, and part of them turns into your
substance, and the rest is cast out into filthy excrements. And thus you walk
like painted sepulchers: Your fine clothes are the adorned covers of filth, and
phlegm, and dung. If you did but see what is within the proudest Gallant, you
would say the inside did much differ from the outside. It may be an hundred
worms are crawling in the bowels of that beautiful damsel or adorned fool that
set out themselves to be admired for their bravery. If a little of the filth
within do but turn to the scab or the small pox, you shall see what a piece it
was that was wont to have all that curious trimming.

Away then with these vanities, and be not children all your days; nay be not
proud of that which your children themselves can spare! Be ashamed that ever
you have been guilty of so much dotage, as to think that people should honor
you for a borrowed bravery, which you put off at night, and on in the morning!
O poor deluded dust and worms-meat! lay by your dotage, and know your selves:
Look after that which may procure you deserved and perpetual esteem, and see
that you make sure of the honor that is of God. Away with deceitful ornamens
and gawds, and look after the inward real worth. Grace is not set out and
honored by fine clothes, but clouded, wronged and dishonored by excess. It is
the inward glory that is the real glory. The Image of God must needs be the
chiefest beauty of man: Let that shine forth in the holiness of your lives, and
you will be honorable indeed. Peter tells you of such a conversation of
women as may win their unbelieving husbands without the word: And what is it? [
while they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear: whose adorning,
let it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of
gold, or of putting on of apparel: but the hidden man of the heart, in that
which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit which is
in the sight of God of great price. For after this manner in old time, the holy
women that trusted in God adorned themselves, being in subjection to their
husbands, 1 Per. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

CHAP. XXVII. Ease, Quietness and worldly Peace to be denied.
10. ANother part of Carnal self-interest to be denied, is, Ease, and Quietness
and worldly Peace, which the slothful and selfseekers prefer before the
pleasing of God. Both the ease of the mind and of the body are ^here
comprehended; and slothfulness in Gods nearest service, and also in the works
of our callings to be reprehended.

The same fleshly Power that draws one man to whoredom and drunkenness, and
covetousness, does draw another to sloth and idleness. It is but several ways
of Pleasing the same flesh, and obeying the same sensuality. And because that
Idleness and Sloth is so great and common a sin, and yet made so light of by
the most, I shall briefly tell you the mischiefs of it, and the Reasons that
should make you hate it.

1. Slothfulness does contradict the very end of our creation and preservation,
and the frame of our nature; and so provokes God to cut us off and cast us as
useless into the fire. Who dare so wrong the wisdom of God, as to say or think
that he made us to do nothing! If a man make an house, it is to dwell in; if he
make a watch, it is to tell him the hour of the day, and every thing is for its
proper use: And is man made to be idle? what man, that is the noblest inferior
creature, and an active creature, fitted for work, and the highest work! shall
he be idle? Justly may God then hew him down as a dead and withered tree, and
suffer him no more to cumber his ground.

2. Slothfulness is a sin that loses the precious gifts of God. Our faculties
and our members are his gifts and talents, which he has committed to us to use
for his service; so are our goods and all that we have: and shall we hide them
in a napkin, or idly neglect to use them? O what abundance of excellent mercies
lie useless and idle, because you are idle that should use them? Every hour
that you lose in idleness, what noble faculties, and large provisions are all
laid by? As much as in you lies, you make the whole creation to be, and work
in vain. Why should the Sun shine an hour or minute for you in vain? Why should
the Earth bear you an hour in vain? why should the springs and rivers run for
you an hour in vain? why should the air refresh you an hour in vain? why should
your pulse beat one stroke in vain? or your lungs once breathe a breath in
vain? shall all be at work for you to further your work, and will you think
that idleness is no sin?

3. Moreover, Laziness and sloth is a sin that loses you much precious time.
All the time is lost that you are idle in. Yea when you are at work, if you do
it slothfully, you are losing much of your time. A diligent person will go
further, and do more in an hour than the lazy flesh-pleaser will do in two.
When the slothful is praying, or reading, and working in his calling, he is but
losing half his time, which diligence would redeem. And is our time so ^ort and
precious, and yet is idleness an excusable sin? what, loiter so near night! so
near eternity, when we have but a little time to work! O work while it is day,
for the night is coming when none can work. Were it but for this, that sloth
does steal so much of our time, I must think it no better than an heinous
Thievery.

4. And by this means we rob our selves. We might be getting some good all the
time that we are idle; or doubly advantage our selves, if sloth did not keep us
company in our work. The slothful is brother to him that is a great waster,
Pro. 18. 9. slothfulness is self-murdering; men die while they lie still and
wish. It Is a sin that famisheth soul and body, Prove. 21. 25. The desire of the
slothful kills him, because his hands refuse to labor. It Is the common cause
of beggary and want: and what comfort can you have under such afflictions which
you bring upon your selves? If you want food or raiment, if your wives and
children are in want, how can you think that God should take care of you and
afford you relief, when you bring this on your selves by pleasing your flesh
which is his enemy? If a Soldier get hurt by trucking with the enemy, he may
rather look that his General should hang him than relieve him. And how should
good men be moved to compassionate you? If God do improveri^h you, and you come
to want by innocence or a righteous cause, they must needs be ready to relieve
you: But if Sloth, or Pride, or Gluttony, or Drunkenness bring you to it, till
you repent, I see not how they should relieve you, at least any further than to
keep you alive. For if you are set toplease your flesh by idleness, must I join
with you to please it by such supplies as shall cheri^^ you in your sin? No,
one flesh-pleaser is enough for one man! If you will please it either by
Idleness or by Luxury your selves, expect not that others should please it by
your relief, and make provision for your sin* If I may not make provision for
my own flesh to satisfy its lusts, neither must I do it for another.

But that is not the worst, slothfulness is the common cause of men's damnation;
when they see a temptation and danger before them, slothfulness hinders them
from resisting it* When Heaven is offered them, slothfulness makes them sit
still and lose it. They must Run, and Strive, and Fight, and Conquer, and these
are not works for a slothful person; especially when they must be continued to
the death. So that it is manifest, that most men in the world are undone soul
and body, by the sin of sloth.

5. And by this you rob others as well as your selves: You owe the world the
fruit of your labors: You rob the souls of men to whom you should do good. You
rob the Church that should be bettered by you: You rob the Commonwealth of
which you are a member, and should have benefit by you. You owe your labors to
Church and Commonwealth and the souls of men, and will you not pay so great a
debt? You deserve no room in the Church or Commonwealth, but to be cut off as
an unprofitable member, if you bring no advantage to them. They say the Bees
will not suffer a drone in the Hive. Nay, if you be hired servants, you plainly
rob your Masters if you are slothful, as much as if you stole their money or
goods. If you buy an hundred sheep of a man, and he let you have but fourscore,
does he not rob or cheat you? And if a man buy a years or a days labor of you,
and you let him have but half a years labor, or half a days labor, because of
your sloth, do you not defraud or rob him of the other half? So that the idle
are thieves to themselves, to the Church and the souls of men, to the
Commonwealth and those that they are related to; even to their wives and
children, for whom they should provide due maintenance by their labor.

6. And you are injurious to the honest poor, in that you disable your selves
from relieving them: when God commands you to work with your hands, not only
for your selves, but that you may have to give to them that need, Ephesians. 4. 28.
What if all men should do as you do, how would the poor be maintained, and the
Church and Commonwealth served?

7. Yea worst of all, you are guilty of robbing God himself. It is him that you
owe your labors to, and the improvement of all the talents which he lends
you: And idleness is unsaithfulness to the God of Heaven that sets you on
work: Even in working for men, you must do it ultimately for God, Col. 3. 22,
23. [Not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing
God: and whatsoever ye do, do it heartily as to the Lord, and not unto men;
knowing that of the Lord you shall receive the reward of the inheritance, for
ye serve the Lord: But he that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong which he
has done.] If it be an offense to wrong man, what is it to wrong God? and if
you may not be slothful in the work of a man, what a crime is it to be slothful
in the work of the God of Heaven? The greater your Master is, the more heinous
it is to be lazy in his service. Remember the curse on them that do the work of
the Lord deceitfully, Jer. 48. 10. All work that you have to do, is the work of
the Lord.

8. And consider, That the Idle forfeit the protection and provision of God;
even their daily bread. For must he support and feed you to do nothing? His own
rule is that if any man will not work neither should he eat, 2 These. 3. 10. And
if he may not eat, we may not relieve him.

9. And if idleness had not been an heinous sin, the Apostle would never have
commanded us to avoid the company of such, as if they were unfit to converse
with Christians, 2 These. 3.

10. Consider what abundance of work we have to do, and of how great
importance! O what a deal have we to do for our poor souls, and for many about
us, besides all our bodily employment in the world! Methinks, every man that
knows why he is a man, and what it is, in an inch of time to work for
everlasting, should never find an hour for idleness in his life, but still
cryout, How short and swift is time, and how great and long is the work! A man
that had all the Town on fire about his ears, or a man that were fighting for
his life, or a man that were in a leaking vessel ready to sink under him, might
better be lazy, than a man that is at work for an endless life.

11. Moreover, Idleness is a base kind of vice: It is the imitation of a block
or a stone that lies still, when that which has life will be in action.

12. And it is usually a Continual sin, or at least makes up a great part of
the lives of many that are addicted to it: A drunkard will not always be drunk;
and a liar will not always be lying; But a slothful person will be most
commonly slothful.

And, to conclude, lay all this together, and think what a reckoning a slothful
person is like to have, that by his sin is always running behind-hand, and will
have the neglected time, and means, and mercies of almost all his life to
answer for.

And now you see the greatness of this sin abhor it, and awake from it. You
have much to do, and souls to save; and the ease of your flesh and fleshly
minds is one thing that must be denied, before it can be accomplished. The
slothful is still craving, yet a little slumber, and yet a little ease: and he
is still upon delays, even when he is convinced of his danger and his duty:
when he knows that he must turn or die, yet he is delaying and putting off till
another time: And so the vineyard and garden of the sluggard, are grown over
with nettles and weeds: And he has scarce a duty to do but there is a thorny
hedge or a Lion in the way. Deny this ease, and be up and doing.

And there are three sorts of persons that have especial need of this advice.
The first is those that by the phlegmatic distemper of their bodies, are more
prone to heaviness and slothfulness than others. The more such are disposed to
it, the more should they watch against it, and resist it.

The second sort are Beggars, and other idle wandering persons, that make a
Trade of Idleness, and worse: such also as Ballad-singers, Stage Players,
Juglers, Cheaters, and most Ale-sellers that spend their time in tippling and
talking with their guests; and other idle persons, that will spend whole hours
together in twatling and talking idly, and of other men's matters. All these
live in a course of flesh-pleasing, and of heinous sin: and must better learn
to deny the flesh, before they can be the true Disciples of Christ. This is not
the life that God called you into his vineyard for, no nor that he sent you
into the world for, to waste your short and precious days in potting, and
piping, and prating, and other ways of idleness; Nor should such be suffered in
a Commonwealth.

The third sort, are too many Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, that think because
they have enough to maintain them, that it is lawful to live an idle life. Or
if they do any thing that is profitable to the Commonwealth, it is rather as a
recreation, than as a Calling: Now and then an hour in the midst of their
peasures and idleness, is the most. It is a miserable life that this sort of
persons live: even in the sins of Sodom (which cry for the vengeance of Sodom)
Pride, Fullness of bread, and Idleness. As if these persons that have most wages
should do God the least work: and they that have most of his stock in their
hands should make the least use of it; or those that are obliged to God by the
greatest mercies, should do least in manifesting their thankfulness or
fidelity! what incongruities are these? Who should be so busy and laborious,
as those that have the greatest account to make, and those that are to be
exemplary to the rest? Truly Gentlemen, I must deal plainly with you, that
Idleness and the expression of it among the most of you, in hunting, and
hawking, and bowling, and complementing, and visitations, and vain
discoursings, and excess of drinking, and tedious meals, is become the common
shame of your order; and must be corrected before your honor or consciences
can be recovered: And I am so far from any partiality in this censure of you,
that I must tell you, if I knew one^ of my own profession that were guilty but
of the tenth part of some of your Idleness, I would do my best to rid the
Church of him, and have him cast out among the sensual. And you may do well
sometime to ask your selves, whence it comes to pass that Negligent idle
Ministers must be sequestered and turned out of all, and Idle Magistrates let
alone? One reason is because Gentlemen can better cheap compel a Minister to
painfulness than themselves, and punish Ministers for negligence than
themselves. And another reason is, because all faithful Ministers themselves in
love to the Church are the seekers of this severity: but Magistrates are few of
them so self-denying and forward to seek for such severity against the idle and
negligent of their own order. But does not your calling require diligence as
well as ours? It is a brutish, ungrateful conceit of any man to think that he
may live idly, because he is rich. The richest men in the world are bound to as
diligent labor as the poorest, though not in the same kind. And yet I can
perceive that most of the poor are even of the same mind; and when they labor
hardest, they are idle in Gods account, because they would live idly if they
could. It is no thanks to them that they labor; for it is necessity that does
constrain them. I can hear them say, that they would not work, at least but
little, if they had but money enough. God will judge these as Idle persons,
because he takes the will for the deed. You must labor in obedience to God,
and work as his servants, and that with cheerfulness and delight, and deny that
self and flesh that would have ease, if ever you would have the heavenly reward.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Delight of thriving and Prosperity, etc.
II. ANother selfish Interest to be denied, is A Delight in prosperity, and
seeing our selves thrive, and our designs succeed for worldly things. The
possession of these things does not so much delight, as the Hopes and successes
of our endeavors to attain them. The very thoughts of Prospering in our
undertakings, and of being in a thriving course, and likely to reach some
higher things which are in our eye and hope, is the greatest part of the
content of Worldlings. Men think that the world can do no more for them than it
can, and is sweeter than it is; and therefore they are very eager in seeking
it, and please themselves much with the thoughts of their supposed felicity:
But when they have reached the matter of their desires, they find it is not the
thing they took it for. But in the mean time they feed themselves with fancies
and expectations, and think that though this does not content them, which they
have attained, yet such or such a thing more would do it: and when they have
that, yet somewhat more would do; and still though they come short of the
felicity they expect, yet it pleases them that they think they are in the way
to it, and see their endeavors seem to prosper. The poor man that has a
desire but to reach to a competency, does please himself much when he
perceives that he is fair for it. Much more do the rich in the prospering of
their designs, for the increase o^ their ^iches. And thus the turning away of
the simpl^ (...) and the prosperity of fools does d^st^ (...). If their
Prosperity be such an eye (...) godly in temptation, when they judge according
to the flesh, no wonder if it be a great matter in their own eyes, Psalm. 73. 3.
If the best are in danger of puffing up with carnal delight and confidence in
their seize, and saying in their prosperity, [ we shall never be moved]
Psalm. 30. 6. no wonder if it be much more so with others. Prosperity is as
strong a trial to many as suffering for Christ; O how eager is the flesh upon
this bait; and how close does it cleave to what it does attain!

See then that in this you Deny your selves: Not in refusing Prosperity when
God bestows it on you; but in refusing the sensual Delights which it affords
the fle^^ to satisfy its lust. Not in pulling down your houses, or casting
away your estates, or hindering your increase; but 1. See that you do not
promise your selves too much in the creature; feed not your carnal fancies with
vain hopes. Think not too highly of a prosperous state. Judge not of it as it
accommodateth the flesh, but as it either helps or hinders you for God and
heaven: And then you will perceive that it is an heavy charge and burden to the
best, if not a dangerous temptation. O if you knew but how dear the most do pay
for their prosperity, you would pity them, and have lower thoughts of
prosperity.

2. Seek not after prosperity too eagerly. Seek first the Kingdom of God and
his Righteousness, and then if other things be cast in or added to you, take
them thankfully, but with self-suspicion and holy fear; but run not after them.
Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that which endures to
everlasting life, Joh. 6. 27. and then take your daily bread as from your
Fathers provision. Labor about the world, in obedience to God; but not for the
world as your ultimate end.

3. When Prosperity is given you by God, then above all take heed how you use
it. Let carnal self and corrupt desires fare never the better for it, if you
had all the country, or were Princes in the earth. But as you have it from God,
remember you have it for God, and use it for him. When the flesh would be
pleased and lifted up, whether with delicious meats and drinks, or carnal pomp,
applause or ostentation, or by sports, or idleness, or any other sensual
delight, deny it these desires, as much as if you had no riches, and use
nothing but for health and the service of God; and tell the flesh, [ It was not
for thee, to the pleasing of thy desires, that God has prospered me, but it
was for his own more blessed ends; and therefore I will not serve or please
thee by my prosperity, but him that gave it me.] Do not think you have ever the
more liberty to gratify your appetites in eating or drinking, because you are
rich, or to gratify your flesh in inordinate sleep, or ease, or sports, or
idleness: but let the flesh have as little as if you had the meanest estate, in
which necessity did not deny you that which might fit you for the work of God.

Quest. But may not a Gentleman fare better than a poor man? and may he not
spend more time in ease or recreations? or may he not wear more sumptuous
apparel? Answ. 1. A rich man that has a greater family, must have a greater
quantity of provision than a poor man that has but few: and so must the
poorest too, that has the like number. And for the Quality; many poor are
deprived of that which is most healthful through their necessity; and therefore
here it is lawful for the rich to go beyond them, and to use so much of the
creature as is most healthful and useful to their duties. But for all this, the
R^chest man in England has no more allowance to eat or drink one bit or cup
for the mere pleasing of his carnal appetite without any higher end, than the
poorest man that is: It is a sin to both. It was a Rich man that was tormented
in Hell for taking up his good things in this life, in being clothed in purple
and fine l^nnen, and faring deliciously or sumptuously every day, Luke 16. 2.
And the same answer I must give to the rest of the question, if a poor man want
that ease, or sleep, or recreation, that would sit him for Gods service; a Rich
may take it, but not a jot more. He may not lie one hour in bed, nor spend one
hour in talk, or sports, or long dinners, beyond what is useful to his
Christian ends, let him be never so Rich. Rich men have as much work to do as
the poor, and as much need to watch, pray, and fast, and study to prepare for
death and judgment, which will not spare them because they are rich. If it be
far hardest for a Rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God by Christ's own
testimony; then it is clear, that Rich men have ar greatest need to be painful
to overcome th^^r dangers, and make sure work for their imortal state. 3. And
as for Apparel, I grant, that rich men that are Magistrates or in any Office or
Calling that requires it, may lawfully go in richer apparel than the poor: But
this should not be one jot to please their carnal proud fancies, or gratify
inordinate fleshly desires, but merely for health, and for such ornament as
tends to the honor of their office: so that God and not self must be the end
of all. Take warning therefore by the ruins of so many thousands as Prosperity
has undone, and by so many dreadful Passages of Scripture which show the
danger of it; and see that if you prosper in any worldly thing, you offer it
all to God, and Deny your selves, and prosper not to the flesh.

CHAP. XXIX. Children and Relations how to be denied.
12. ANother selfish interest is in friends and children, and other near and
dear Relations, and this is also to be denied.

Not that you should imitate those unnatural Heretics that tell us that
Fathers and Mothers, and Brethren, and Sisters, and Husbands, and Princes, and
Wives, and Subjects, are all Carnal Relations that must be disowned any further
than Justice binds us to a retribution to parents or others that have been at
pains or cost upon us: No, this is worse than heathenish impiety, and not only
against the fifth Commandment, but abundance of the plainest passages through
the Scripture: To be without natural affection, and disobedient to parents, is
part of the Character of those impious professors of whom Paul prophesied, 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3. If Christian servants have Heathens to their Masters, they must
not therefore cast off the yoke, but count them worthy of all honor, that the
name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed: And if they have believing
Masters, they must not despise them because they are brethren, but the rather
do them service because they are faithful. This is the doctrine of the Gospel,
which stablisheth and not dissolveth our Relations: and if any teach otherwise,
he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words,
1 Timothy 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. Believing wives must stay even with unbelieving husbands,
and win them to Christ by an eminent subjection, chastity, modesty, and piety,
1 Pet. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6. 1 Cor. 7. 13, 14. And the like may be said of other
relations. God calls us not as Popish votaries conceive, to renounce and
separate from our natural or other near relations, on pretense of being devoted
to him. The words of Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 16. are abused by them. It Is true, we must
know no man after the flesh, no not Christ himself; that is, as esteeming them
principally for carnal excellencies (as personage, greatness, birth, etc.) or
to carnal advantages and ends, or preferring the body and common relations
before the inward spiritual worth and spiritual relations: And thus we must not
know either parents, or children, or husbands, or wives after the flesh; nor
should a Christian know or do any thing after the flesh as a Carnal man: but
yet as we still continue our Relation to Christ as his Disciples, and Servants,
and Members, and Redeemed ones, for all that we know him not after the flesh;
so must we continue our Relations to others, and be faithful in the duties of
those Relations, and this after the Spirit and for God.

So that by this you may see, that it is our Relations, carnally considered
that are the fleshly interest which we must not know; that is, As they are
looked upon as any part of that self, or of the Interest of that self which
would be its own End and God, and which is opposite to God, or not subordinate
to him. To look upon your children more as yours than as God's, is a carnal
selfish*thought: To love them inordinately, and more because they are your own,
than because they are Gods, and to love your own interest in your children more
than Gods interest in them, is a selfish regarding them after the flesh: Grace
does not destroy nature, nor natural Relations or affections; but it
sanctifies them all to God and carries us above it, and destroys it as
glorious intuition destroys gracious knowing in part, that is, by perfecting
it. Before Sanctification we know, esteem, regard, and love our parents,
children, husbands, wives, merely as thus related to us, and in these Carnal
respects, and rise no higher: and if we had converst with Christ himself, and
eat and drank in his presence, and loved him accordingly, it would have been
but by a selfish, carnal knowledge, esteem, and love: But now we are
sanctified, as God is exalted, and self denied and annihilated, as opposed or
separated from God, so are all things that belong to self: And therefore if we
had loved parents or Christ himself but with such a carnal selfish love before,
yet now we love them with higher love, that carries self and all to God. And
thus even self is so destroyed (as opposite to God and separate from him) as
thereby to be exalted as united and subservient to him. And so is the love of
friends, Relations, or Christ himself (if we had loved him as a natural Kinsman
or brother, as some did that yet believed not in him) it is destroyed, but by an
exalting, perfecting destruction. Just so far as self is dead, so far Carnal
knowledge and self-interest in friends is dead, and their dearness to us for
that interest, and self and they are all advanced and dedicated unto God. And
thus it is that the Apostle would be understood, and thus it is that self must
be denied in your Relations; but because much duty consists herein, I shall
moreover tell you the several parts of it in a few Directions which shall
mostly extend to other Relations, but principally to parents, because they are
aptest to exceed.

1. See that it be God more than your selves that you love in your Children,
and other Relations. And to that End, see what of God is in them, as they are
his creatures, as devoted to him, as any way gifted by him for his service, and
as sanctified if they are such. He that loves any creature for it self, and
does not principally love God in them, loves them but carnally.

2. See therefore that you value and love those most that have most of God in
them, and the best of his endowments. Love a crooked, deformed child, that is
Godly, better than the most comely, or beautiful, or witty, that is ungodly.
When Parents have a humorous, unreasonable love to one child above the rest
without desert, or to a worse before a better, this is but a carnal selfish
Love.

3. Love none excessively, but with a moderate love: such as shall allow God
and holiness the pre-eminence; so that when you have the most love for your
Relations, you may have more for God, at least in the Estimation, Resolution,
Adhesion of your souls to him, if not in the passionate part of Love.

4. See that you subject them to the Government of Christ: Labor to win all
other relations to him: and devote your children to him betimes that they may
be his as soon as yours. Whiles they have no wills of their own to use, they
are to choose with your wills: that is, you are to make choice for them. And
therefore if you unfeignedly Dedicate them to God, you have small reason to
doubt of his acceptance. This all parents do virtually, that are Godly: For he
that is himself devoted to God by sanctification, does with himself devote all
that he has, and virtually all that ever he shall have. And if he understand
himself, he will do it actually. And hence it is that the Seed of Believers
(yea of one Believer) are said to be Holy: Not only or chiefly, because they
are yours, born of your bodies; nor merely from a promise of God, that has no
presupposed reason from the subject: But because they are the children of one
that has devoted himself, and all that he has, to God; and if he understand
himself, does actually offer, devote and dedicate his child to God in the
solemn Baptism, Ordinance and Covenant. And God will sure accept all that upon
his own invitation is consecrated and offered to him.

5. See that you submit them heartily to the dispose of God. So that whatever
he do with them, for sickness or health, for poverty or riches, for honor or
dishonor, for life or death, you can patiently bear it, and say as Eli, It is
the Lord, let him do as seems him good, 1 Samuel 3. 18. Murmur not if God
afflict and take them away, even at once, as he did the sons of Job, or if he
should afflict you in them as he did David in Amnon and Absalom. Remember that
as the Resignation of Life it self is the point by which Christ under the
Gospel does try men's faith, so it was the resignation of an only son, which was
next to life, by which he would try Abraham the Father of the faithful, before
the Incarnation of Christ. If therefore you will be children of Abraham, you
must walk in the steps of faithful Abraham, and remember that your children are
not your own; and be content that God do with his own as he pleases.

6. Make God their portion, as much as in you lies, and seek more for a
spiritual than temporal felicity for them, and acquaint them with their Creator
in the days of their youth: as believing that those of them that are the
Holiest are the Happiest.

7. Devote your children to such callings and employments in which they are
likeliest to be most serviceable to God: Consider their dispositions and parts;
and then never ask what kind of life is the most honorable or gainful for
them, but in what way and course of life they may most serve God, and be most
useful to his Church: And to that let them be devoted.

8. Favor them not in sin: and suffer them not to dishonor God that they are
devoted to: Remember Eli's example. Gentle reproofs instead of necessary severe
correction, is called by God, A despising him, and preferring his sons before
him: 1 Samuel 2. 29, 30. even because his sons made themselves vile, and he
restrained them not, 1 Samuel 3. 13. Take heed as you love your selves or them,
of taking their parts against God, or against correction, and excusing the sins
by which they do dishonor him.

9. Give them not for their carnal advancement in the world that part of your
estate which is due to God. You owe it all to him: and in the disposing of it,
he has limited you to begin at home, and provide so for your children that
they may have their daily bread, and so much more as they are in likelihood the
fittest stewards to improve for God. But if you see the public state of the
Church or Commonweal to stand in need of your assistance, and you shall then
give almost all to your children to make them rich and great in the world, and
put off the works of greater moment with some poor inconsiderable alms or
Legacy, this is to prefer self before the Lord; even as it is imagined to
survive in your progeny, even when natural self can no longer enjoy it. It Is a
wonder, how so many men seeming holy and devoted to God, can quiet their
consciences in such a palpable sin as this. If one of them have two hundred, or
three hundred pound a year, it is a wonder if he leave an hundred a year of it
to any pious or charitable use; but if he leave forty or fifty pound to the
poor, or build some small Almes-house, he thinks he has done well; all the
rest must go to leave his son in equal dignity and riches in the world as
himself. But of this I spoke before.

10. Lastly, be sure that you be very suspicious of self when the case of your
children or any dear Relation is before you. For self is near you, and will
stick close, and will not easily be thrust out of your Counsels, nor ^^aken
off: And therefore in your own case, and your Childrens case, or the case of
your near friends, you will have much ado to overcome the cunning and strong
temptations to Partiality, if you were the holiest Saint on earth: (though
overcome them you will in the main if you have true grace:) But if you are dead
professors, it is twenty to one but they will overcome you; and you will show
the world that you are selfish hypocrites, and more for your Children and
Friends than God.

Let me here give a few instances in this warning. 1. How often have we seen it
here and elsewhere, that people that make some show of Religion, and are
forward to have vice punished, and discipline exercised, yet when it falls on
any children, or near relations of their own, they are as much against it as
they are for it on others; yea rise up with passion and bitter reproaches of
Officers, Ministers, or others that are the causes of it. As one Hypocrite is
tried when he denies to suffer for Christ himself, so others show themselves
Hypocrites sooner, by preferring their children, yea their sinful children, yea
the present ease, or profit, or credit of their children, before their duty and
the honor of God: And they will rather have God provoked, sin unpunished, and
their childrens own salvation hazarded, than they will have them justly and
regularly chastised: yea some of them rise up as malignant enemies against them
that do it.

2. Again, When God has convinced you of duty, if a carnal friend, a husband
or a parent do but contradict it, and persuade you from a known duty or a holy
life, how commonly do men obey, because forsooth they are their friends that do
persuade them?

3. Moreover, When the case falls out that a man cannot follow God and his
duty, and be true to his soul, but he is like to lose his friends; how commonly
is God denied, that friends may not be denied, and conscience wounded, and duty
bawk'd, that the favor of friends may not be lost. O says one, they are the
friends that I live by, my livelihood is in their hands, I am undone if they
cast me off! Well! take them, and make thy best of them, and keep them as long
as thou can; if thou can live better without God than them, or can spare
Gods favor better than theirs, and they are better friends to thee than Christ
is, and would be, take thy course, and judge at last whether the friend that
thou did choose, or that thou did neglect and abuse, was the better, and
would have stood thee in more stead in thy deepest ex^remities. Christ has
resolved you once for all, that he that loves Father, or Mother more than him,
is not worthy of him, and cannot be his Disciple: Nay if he hate not Father,
Mother, and all; that is, If he will not cast them all away, and forsake them
as men do hated things, rather than forsake Christ and the glory which he has
promised, Luke 14. 26. 33. And therefore seeing Christ has thought meet to
instance in the forsaking of carnal friends for his sake, as a duty of all that
will be his Disciples, you may see that this is a very considerable part of
your self-denial. And doubtless it is a point that Christians are usually put
to the trial in or else Christ would not have instanced in it. Few turn to
Christ, but their carnal friends will turn from them. No greater enemies to a
man in the matters of his salvation (except carnal self) than carnal friends:
and therefore either God or they must be denied. For when God is for holiness
and they against it; when they are for sinful pleasures and gain, and God
against it, both cannot be pleased; and therefore one of them must be denied,
God or they.

CHAP. XXX. Revengeful passions to be denied.
13. ANother part of self-denial consists in the denying of Revengeful
Passions that provoke us against those that have done us wrong, or that we
judge to be our enemies. It is the common saying of such persons as are
disposed to this sin, that Revenge is sweet: it eases the minds of malicious
persons to have their will upon their adversaries, and to see them at their
feet. Nothing of all his honors and prosperity could satisfy ^aman till he
was revenged of Mordecai. As a burning f^stering ^o^l or ap^steme is eased by
opening and vent, so is a boiling pa^^ionate mind, when by railing speeches, or
revengeful actions it venteth it self against them that they hate. But in this
also self must be denied by all that will be Christ's Disciples: for he
forgiveth none but those that can heartily forgive another: And that we may
know that this is a part of self-denial of great necessity, he has put it into
our prayers, and will not have us so much as ask for forgiveness our selves, if
we cannot forgive; that we may know, that seeing it is not to be asked for on
lower terms, it is not to be hoped for. The forgiving grace of God in Christ
does so melt and overcome the hearts of all true Christians, that it disposes
them in their measure to imitate him in forgiving: And they cannot find in
their heart to take another by the throat for an hundred pence, when their Lord
has forgiven them ten thousand talents, Mat. 18. 24. 28. The grace that is
most gloriously manifested in the Gospel must needs make the deepest imprestion
on the soul, and consequently conform the soul into its image: and doubtless
this is love, and compassion, and forgiving mercy: and therefore he that cannot
love his enemy, bless them that curse him, and pray for them that hate and
persecute him, and return good for evil, can be no child of God, Mat. 5. 44,
45, 46. It is an inhumane oblivion of our own condition for a man to seek
revenge of another for a trifle, (for it can be no greater as it is against
such simple worms as we) when so many and heinous sins have been forgiven us.
Does God remit to us the everlasting torments, and shall we inflict on another
the venom of our private spleen? I know the furious Bedlams and malicious
wretches do take all this but for unsatisfactory talk, and it is not words that
will serve their turns to repair their honor, and ease their devilish
rancorous minds. Flesh and blood say they, cannot endure it. Answ. And
therefore flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, nor corruption
inherit incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. 50. Grace can do more than flesh and blood;
and if you cannot forgive, you cannot be forgiven. If it be so hard to you to
sorbear, yea to love an enemy, it shall be as hard for you to be saved, and
escape the portion of the enemies of God; and if the word of Gods command be
but wind with you, the word of his promise shall be as uneffectual to your
salvation, as the word of his precept and persuasion was uneffectual to your
conversion and obedience. As God is Love, so his sanctified ones are turned
into Love. Love is their new nature: and Love is not of a Revengeful
disposition. Love is the Divine Nature in us; and malice provoking to Revenge
is the Devilish nature. And a believer is more afraid of the anger of God, than
to take his sword of Revenge out of his hand. He has learned, 1 Pet. 2. 21,
23. 1 These. 4. 6. Romans 12. 19. [ Avenge not your selves, but give place to
wrath: vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the Lord. Be not overcome of
evil, but overcome evil with good.

CHAP. XXXI. New, Vain Histories, and other Men's Matters, etc.
14. ANother piece of Carnal pleasure to be denied, is, the Delight men have in
reading unprofitable Histories, and hearing News that do not concern us, and
meddling with other men's matters where we have no Call.

With some fancies this is a notable part of carnal delight: Many Schoolboys,
and young effeminate wits are as much poisoned and carried away with reading
Romances, feigned histories and tale-books, and play-books, as by almost any
piece of sensuality. O the precious hours that have been lost upon this trash
and trumpery; but of this I spoke before: that which now I speak is, even true
History and Reports, as matter of mere News, to please a busy ranging mind.
History is a very profitable study if it be used for right ends, and be rightly
chosen. It Is a very great help to understand the Scriptures, and to know the
former and present state of the Church; and see the wonderful works of
providence, that otherwise would be as lost to us. It is not fit that the
wondrous works of God should die with those that have seen them, and not be
transmitted to posterity. God should have the honor of his glorious works,
from generation to genetion: and how shall that be if all be forgotten? He that
knows nothing of any age but that which he lives in, is as fooli as he that
knows nothing of any Country or Town but that which he lives in. Some History
is essential to our faith; and much more is integral to it; and yet much more
is very serviceable to it. He that has not some competent acquaintance with
Church History, will be at great disadvantages in the holding and defending his
^aith it self against an Infidel, or the purity of Religion against a Papist.
And he that knows not the present state of the world, and of the Church
through the world, does scarce know how to order his affections, or compose his
prayers even in those greatest petitions, about the honor and Kingdom and will
of God. They cannot grieve with the Church in grief, nor mourn with it when it
mourns: so that it is a great duty of a Christian to labor to understand by
History the former and present state of the Church: And it is a great mark of a
gracious soul that longs to hear of the prosperity of the Saints, and free
progress of the Gospel; and a mark of a graceless person that cares not for
these things.

But when History is not used to acquaint us with the matters of God, or to
surnish us with useful knowledge, but to please a ranging carnal mind, then it
is but sinful sensuality or vanity. Many persons have no such delight to read
the useful History of Church Affairs, as they have to read the curiously
penned, though less useful History of other matters. Though I know that the
History of the whole world is very serviceable to the knowledge of Divine
things: yet they that use it to holy ends, will make choice accordingly, and be
no more in it than may suit with those ends. It is the most humane, with the
most light, ridiculous passages that are most pleasing to vain unsanctified
wits; but the godly delight in it so far as it shows them something of God, and
leads them to him. In the very reading of Scripture, a carnal reader may be
much pleased with the History, that has no savor in the Doctrine, but is
weary to read it: and yet I must add this caution by the way; If we find a
carnal kind of delight in Scripture-history or any other that is profitable, we
must not therefore cast off the History, but seek after the cure of our
disease, that we may spiritually take pleasure in all for God, and he may be
the beginning, and end, and the life, and the All of our studies and delights:
And though our carnal delight in News and History be a sin in us; yet God does
sometime make it an occasion of Good by leading us to that holy truth, which
after may be the means of our sanctification, though at first we received it
but as a Novelty.

And so the carnal pleasure that many have in hearing News, and sitting with
folks that will talk of other men's matters, or things that concern them not, is
nothing but a sinful pleasing of the fancy, and loss of time, and neglect of
greater matters which call for all our time and care. It was the voice of the
Athenians, Act. 17. 21. [ for all the Athenians and strangers that were there,
spent their time in nothing else but either to tell or to hear some new thing]
yea novelty of Doctrine and Religion, and Teachers, is a snare and bait to
carnal fancies, which many are taken by, that are forsaken of God, having first
forsaken him, and proved false to the truth received.

CHAP. XXXII. Unnecessary Knowledge, and Deligh therein
15. ANother part of Carnal Pleasure which self must be denied in, is, A desire
after unnecessary Knowledge, and Delight therein. This is the common sin of
man, but not of all alike. Even they that can live without the Knowledge of the
saving Principles of Religion, do yet itch to know unprofitable things: and
many a foolish question they will be asking about matters unrevealed, or that
concern them not, when they overlook that which their salvation lies on: but
the learneder sort, and especially more prying wits, and those that are bred up
among disputes, are the pronest to this sin: and though it be an odious vice,
yet it so befooleth many, that they reckon it confidently among their virtues:

God cannot be known too much, nor can any man be too much in love with the
true knowledge of God in Jesus Christ: without this knowledge the mind is not
good, nor can the heart be sanctified, or the man be saved: Nor can any man
know too much of the will and word of God; nor yet of his works in which he
reveals himself to the world. But the Carnal knowledge which is to be denied,
is of another nature than the sanctified knowledge of believers. I shall show
you the difference in certain particular respects.

1. This desire to know, which is in the unsanctified, is, partly from mere
nature, and partly from a distempered fantasy, which is like a crorupt enraged
appetite, that chooses that which is unwholsom, and yet is overgreedy after
it. But the desire after knowledge in the sanctified, is kindled by the love of
God, and the love of those holy and heavenly things which they are inquiring
after. It is not the Love of God that sets ungodly men upon their studies, but
a common and carnal desire to know; and this appears in the end, which is next.

2. This carnal knowledge is but to feed and furnish and please a carnal fancy;
because it is some adding to our understandings, and because it is naturally
pleasant to know, and because it brings in some novelty and variety, and
because it makes us seem wiser than other men, and furnishes us with matter of
discourse and ostentation, and rids the mind of some troublesome doubts;
therefore even the worst have a mind to know. But this is the knowledge that
must be denied: that which must be valued and sought after, is, To know God,
that we may love, and reverence, and trust, and admire, and honor him, and
enjoy him: To know Christ, that we may have more Communion with him: To know
the word and works of God, that in them we may know his nature and his will:
and knowing his will, may serve him and please him: These must be the ends of
Christian knowledge. There is nothing in the world that God has revealed, but
in its place we may be willing to know, so that we stick not in the creature,
or sense of the words, or common verities, but use every thing as a book or
looking-glass: we love not a book so much for the letters as for the matter
which they contain: and we love not a Glass for it self so much as for its use
to show us the face which we would see in it: so if we go to the creatures but
as a book in which we may read the mind of God, and see his nature, and as a
glass in which his glory does shine forth, our study and knowledge will be
sanctified and divine. And thus as Paul would know nothing but Christ
Crucified, so every Christian should be able to say, that he would know nothing
but God in Christ: for though we know a thousand matters, and that of the
lowest nature in themselves, yet as long as we study them not for themselves
but for God, it is not them that we know so much, as God in them; and so all is
but the knowing of God: even as in our duty, though the works may be many and
mean that we are employed in, yet all is but the serving of God, as long as we
do them all for him: this is the main difference between an unsanctified
scholar and a servant of God in all their studies: One of them is but
recreating his curious fancy or inquisitive mind, and seeking matter of honor
and applause, or some way or other studying for himself: but the other is
searching after the nature and will of his Creator, and learning how to do his
work in that manner as may please and honor him most. So that when they are
reading the same books, and studying the same subjects, they are upon quite
different works, as having contrary ends in all their studies: the one is
content with bare speculation and aerie knowledge which puffs up; and the
other studieth and knows practically to feed the holy fire of love in his
heart, and to guide, and quicken; and strengthen him for obedience.

3. Moreover there is a difference commonly in the subject which they most
desire to know: for though there is no truth but a wicked man may know, which a
true Christian knows, and also but few truths but what he may for selfish
ends be desirous to know; yet ordinarily a carnal heart is much more forward to
study common Sciences than Divinity; and in Divinity to study least the
practical part, and to be most in points that exercise the brain, and lie
further from the heart: but the sanctified man delights most in knowing the
mystery of Redemption, the riches of grace, the glory which he hops for, the
nature and will of God, the way of duty, the temptations that are before him,
and his danger by them, and the way to escape, with such other useful truths
which he must live upon. One feeds but upon the air and chaff of words and
notions, or common truths; and the other is taken up with the most spiritual,
heavenly and necessary matters: yea it is not so much the truth as the matter
or thing revealed by it which the Christian looks after: it is not only to
understand the meaning of the Scripture; but to find, and love, and enjoy that
God, that Christ, that Spirit, that Life which is revealed in those words of
Scripture; but the hypocrite sticks most in a Grammatical superficial kind of
knowledge.

5. Carnal knowledge would break Gods bounds, and would needs know that which
else they might know, and cannot see the strength of a reason, which the wise
can see; yet will they sooner quarrel with the light than with their eyes, and
suspect the reasons and words of God rather than their purblind minds. But
spiritual knowledge is modest, and humble, and obedient; and presumes not to
climb any higher than the ladder, lest he lose more by such a step too high,
than he got by all his labor hitherto; and find himself all in pieces at the
bottom while he would needs climb above the top. He finds work enough in what
God has commanded him to study in his word; and therefore has no leisure to
look after things that God has hid from him: It is for the use of knowledge
that he would know; and therefore he has no great mind of that which is
useless; and he knows that God is the best Judge of that; and therefore he
takes that to be best for him which is prescribed him.

6. Carnal Students are apt to learn in the ways which their interests and
fancies lead them to: but holy Students learn of God in his prescribed way;
that is, 1. In his Church, which is his School. 2. And in and by his holy
Scripture, which is the book he sets us to learn. And 3. By his Ministers whom
he commands to teach us. 4. And in obedience to his spirit that must make all
effectual. And 5. In fervent prayer to God for that spirit and a blessing. This
is Gods way in which he will bring men to saving knowledge.

7. Also Carnal Students observe not (commonly) Gods order in their learning*
but they begin at that which suteth best with their carnal interest or
disposition, as being least against it; and they catch here and there a little,
and make what their list of it, and force it to their carnal sense, and to
speak for that which their minds are most affected to. But the sanctified
student, begins at the bottom, and first seeks to know the Essentials of
Religion, and Points that life lies most upon: and so he proceeds in order,
and takes the lesson which God and his Teachers set him, and takes up truths as
they lie in order of necessity and use.

8. And in the manner also the difference is great. The Carnal student
searches presumptuously, selfconceitedly, and unreverently, and speaks of holy
things accordingly, and censureth them, when he should censure himself and
actions by them, and bends the words of God to his own carnal interest and
will. But the spiritual student searches meekly with fear and reverence, with
self-suspicion and consciousness of his exceeding darkness, and with a
willingness and resolution to submit to the light, for conviction and for the
guidance of his conversation.

And now you see what carnal studies are, remember that to avoid them is part
of your self-denial. Restrain your ranging fantasies and understanding, as you
would do a ranging appetite. If you have a mind that would fain reach higher
than God has given you light in Scripture, or a mind that must needs be
satisfied of the reasons of all Gods ways, and murmureth if any of its doubts
be unresolved, remember that this is self that must be denied; and if any be
wise in his own eyes, he must become a fool, that he may be wise, 1 Cor. 3. 18.
and as little children must you come to the School of Christ, if you will
indeed be his Disciples And remember that this Intellectual voluptuousness,
licentiousness, and presumption of Carnal minds, is a higher, and in some
respects greater, and more dangerous vice, than brutish sensuality. And you may
cheat and undo your souls in a civil course of carnal selfish studies, as well
as in a course of more gross and sensual v^luptuonsness.

CHAP. XXXIII. Factious Desire of the success of our own Opinions and Parties,
as such, etc.
16. ANother selfish Interest to be denied, is, The factious desire of the
success of any odd opinions which we have espoused, and of the increase and
prosperity of any dividing party in the Church which we have addicted our
selves unto.

It exceedingly delights a Carnal mind that his Judgment should be admired,
and he should be taken as the light of the Country round about him, and
therefore when he has hatched any opinions of his own, or espoused any whereby
his singularity may be manifested, or by which his selfish interest may be
promoted, he is as careful to promote these opinions, and the party that
holds with him, as a Covetous man is to promote his gain. There is indeed as
much of self in many men's Heresies and Church-divisions, as any Sensualist has
in his way. And hence it is that a zeal for selfish opinions is easily got and
easily maintained; when zeal for the saving truths of God is hardly kindled,
and hardly kept alive. Yea multitudes in the world do make the very truth to be
the matter of their carnal interest in it; while they some way get a seeming
peculiar interest, and promote it but as an opinion of their own, or of their
party, and use it for selfish carnal ends. And hence it is that many that are
called Orthodox, can easily get and keep a burning zeal for their Orthodox
opinions, when Practical Christians do find it a very hard matter to be zealous
for the same truths in a Practical way. Many ungodly men will be hot in
Disputing for the truth, and crying down all that are against it, and perhaps
so far exceed their bounds, that the godly dare not follow them! And the reason
is clear. Whether it be Truth or Error that a man holds, if he hold it but as a
conceit of his Own, or as the opinion of his party, or to be noted in the
world, as one that has found out more truth than others, or any way make it
but the matter of his selfish interest, nature and corruption will furnish him
with a zeal for it: It Is easy to go where sin and Satan drives; and to be
zealous where zeal has so small resistance: and to swim down the stream of
corrupted nature. But it is not so easy to be zealous in the practical saving
entertainment of the truth, and exercising that faith and love to God and holy
obedience which truth is sent to work in us. A schismatical or Opinionative use
of truth it self, is but an using it for self against the God of truth: and it
is no more wonder to see men zealous in this, than to see men forward and hot
in any evil: We cannot tell how to quench or restrain this selfish carnal kind
of zeal. But when men should use the truth for God, and their salvation against
Satan, and sin, and self, then it is hard to make them zealous: They are like
green wood or wet fuel on the fire, that will not burn without much blowing,
and soon goes out when it seemed to be kindled, if once you leave it to it
self: Paul spoke not nonsense when he said [ For ye are yet Carnal: for
whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not
carnal and walk as men? For while one says, I am of Paul, and another I am of
Apollo, are ye not Carnal? 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4, 5. How secretly soever it may lurk,
there is doubtless much of self and flesh in Heresies and unjust Divisions. I
know that most of them little perceive it. James and John in their zeal, which
would have called for fire from heaven, did not know what spirit they were of.
But God would not have spoke it, if it were not true, Romans 16. 17. [ Now I
beseech you brethren, mark them which cause Divisions, and offenses, contrary
to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them: For they that are such,
serve not our Lord Jesus Christ but their own belly, and by good words and fair
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.] Though they little believe that
that there is any such wickedness in them as this, yet the Spirit of God, that
is the searcher of hearts is acquainted with it: and assures us that both at
the bottom and the End, Church-dividing courses have a carnal selfish nature:
It is some secret interest of self, (though scarce discerned) that kindles the
zeal, and carries on the work: It is not God that is served by the divisions
of his Church. Many Sects now among us, do put a face of Truth and Zeal upon
their cause: But self is the more dangerously powerful with them, by how much
the less suspected or observed. The Papists under the pretense of the Churches
Union, are the great dividers of the Christian world, unchurching the far
greatest part of the Church, and separating from all that be not Subjects of
the Pope of Rome: And do you think it is self and flesh that is the Principle
and Life, and End of this their Schism? were it not for the upholding of this
usurped power and worldly immunities, and greatness of the Clergy, it is
morally impossible that so many men of reason and learning could concur in such
a schism, and in so many gross conceits as go along with it. It is not the Pope
that they are principally united in: For the far greatest part of them, it it
too evident that it is selfish and fleshly interest that is their Center, to
which the Pope is but a means. Hence it is that many of their Jesuits and
Friars are carried abroad the world, with such a fire of zeal, to promote their
cause, that they will compass sea and land for it, and day and night are busy
at the work, to plot, and contrive, and insinuate, and deceive, and think no
cost or pains too great. For a selfish sinful zeal and diligence has so many
friends, and so little hindrance, that it is easily maintained: but so is not
the healing peaceable, practical, and holy zeal of true believers.

Well! Consider what I say to you from the Word of the Lord: There is a selfish
dividing Zeal in Religion, which must be denied as well as whoredom or
drunkenness. If you ask me how it is known: Briefly now I shallonly tell you
this much of it: 1. That it is usually for either an Error or a particular
Truth, against the interest and advantage of the body of unquestionable
Christian verities. They can let Religion suffer by it, so their opinion do but
thrive. 2. It is usually for an Opinion by reason of some special endearment or
interest of their own in it. 3. They cry up that opinion with a zeal and
diligence much exceeding that which they bestow upon other opinions of equal
weight; and lay a greater stress upon it, than any show of reason will allow
them. 4. They usually are zealous for a party and division, against the Unity
of the Catholic Church. 5. Their Zeal is most commonly turned against the
faithful Pastors of the Church: For it is hard to keep in with schism, and with
faithful Pastors too: And if the Ministers will not own their sin and error,
they will disown the Ministers. The Anabaptists and other Sects of late, would
never have been so much against Christ's Ministers, if the Ministers had not
been against their way. 6. Their course does in the conclusion, bring down
Religion, and hinder the thriving of the Gospel and of Godliness. Mark, what is
the issue of most of those ways, that these men are so hot for? Does it go
better or worse with the Church and cause of Christ in general, where they are,
than it did before? Is Religion in more strength, and beauty, and life, and
honor? or does real holiness more abound? If so, be not too hasty to censure
their Zeal. But usually all these dividing ways, are the diseases of the
Church: which cause its languishing, decay, and dissolution. 7. Lastly, This
selfish zeal is commonly censorious, and uncharitable, and diminishes
Christian Love, and sets those a reproaching and despising each other, that
should have lived in the Union and Communion of Saints. Where you find these
properties of your zeal and desire, for the promoting of your Opinions or
parties in Religion, you have great reason to make it presently your business
to find out that insinuating self, which makes your Religion Carnal, and to
deny and mortify it.

CHAP. XXXIV. Carnal Liberty to be denied: What.
17. ANother selfish interest to be denied, is Carnal Liberty. A thing that
selfishness has strangely brought of late into so much credit, that abundance
among us think they are doing some special service to God, their Country, the
Church and their own souls, when they are but deeply engaged for the Devil, by
a self-seeking spirit, in a Carnal Course. For the discovery of this dangerous
common disease, I must first tell you, that there is a threefold Liberty which
must carefully be differenced. 1. There is an Holy, Blessed Liberty which no
man must deny. 2. There is a wicked Liberty, which no man should desire. 3. And
between these two there is a Common, Natural, and Civil Liberty, which is good
in its place, as other worldly matters are, but must be denied, when it stands
in competition with higher and better things; and, as all other worldly
matters, is Holy when it is Holily esteemed and used; that is, for God; but
sinful when it is sinfully esteemed and used, and that is for Carnal self.

I. The first of these is not to be denied, but all other Liberty to be denied
for it. This Holy Liberty consists in these following Particulars. 1. To be
freed from the Power of sin, which is the disability, the deformity, the death
of the soul. 2. From the Guilt of sin, and the wrath of God, and the Curse of
the Law. 3. To be restored to God by Christ, in Union, Reconciliation, and
Sanctification; and our enthralled spirits set free, to know, and love, and
serve him, and delight in him. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Libert
y, 2 Cor. 3. 17. God is the souls freedom, who is its Lord, and life, and end,
and all. 4. To be delivered from Satan as a Deceiver, and enemy, and
executioner of the wrath of God. 5. To be freed from that Law or Covenant of
Works, which requires that which to us is become impossible. 6. To be freed
from the burdensome task of useless Ceremonies, imposed on the Church in the
times of infancy and darkness. 7. To be freed from the accusations of a guilty
conscience, and those self-tormentings which in the wicked are the fore-tastes
of hell. 8. To be freed from such temporal judgments here as might hinder our
salvation, or our service of God. 9. To be free from the condemning sentence at
the last day, and the everlasting Torments which the wicked must endure. 10.
And to be delivered into the blessed sight of God, and the perfect fruition and
pleasing of him, in Perfect Love, and Joy, and Praise, to all eternity. This is
the Liberty which you must not deny, which I therefore name, that by the way
you may see, that it is not for nothing that the other sorts of Liberty are to
be denied.

II. The second sort of Liberty is, that which is wicked and directly evil,
which all men should deny: And this is a freedom from Righteousness, as the
Apostle calls it, Romans 6. 20. To be free from a voluntary subjection to God,
and free from his severe and holy Laws, and free from the thoughts of holiness,
and of the life to come, and free from those sighs and groans for sin, and that
godly sorrow which the sanctified undergo; and to be free from all those
spiritual motions and changing works upon their hearts, which the Spirit does
work on all the Saints: to be free from holy speeches, and holy prayer, and
other duties, and from that strict and holy manner of living which God
commands; to be at liberty to sin against God, and to please the flesh, and
follow their own imaginations and wills, let God say what he will to the
contrary: to be free to eat and drink what we love and have a mind of, and to
be merry, and wanton, and lustful, and worldly, and take our course without
being curbed by so precise a Law, as God has given us: to be free from an
heavenly conversation, and those preparations for death, and that Communion
with God which the Saints partake of: This is the wicked Liberty of the world,
which the worst of carnal men desire: And the next beyond this, is a Liberty to
lie in the fire of hell, and a freedom from salvation, and from the everlasting
Joy and Praises of the Saints. If freedom from Grace and Holiness deserve the
name of Freedom, then you may next call Damnation a Freedom.

And it is part also of this sinful miserable Liberty to be free from the
Government, and Officers, and good Laws which rule the Church and Commonwealth.
And such wretches there are in the world, that seriously judge it a desirable
Liberty to be free from these. They think that their Country is Free, when
every man may do what he list, and they have no King or other Governors, or
none that will look after them, and punish their miscarriages: And they think
the Church is free, when they have no Pastors, or when Pastors have least power
over them, and they may do what they list. And indeed if they were rid of
Magistrates and Ministers, they were free! As a School is free that has shut
out the Master, or have rejected him, and teach and rule one another! And as a
Ship is free when the Master and Pilot are thrown overboard; and as an Army is
free when they have cast off or lost their commanders: or to speak more fitly,
as an Hospital is free when they are delivered from their Physician; and as the
madmen in Bedlam are free when they have killed, or escaped from their Keepers.
As Infidels keep their Freedom, by refusing Christ in himself: so carnal
Dividers and Heretics keep their Freedom, by refusing his Officers, and Christ
in those Officers: For he that hears them hears him; and he that despises
them, despises him; and he that despises, despises not man but God, Luke 10.
16. 1 These. 4. 8.

And another part of this ungodly Liberty is, to be free from the exercise at
least of this power of Magistrates and Ministers so far as not to be restrained
from sin, though they be not free from the state of subjects. To swear, and be
drunk, and live as most Ale-sellers on the damning sins of others, and make a
trade of selling men their damnation, and to have no Magistrate punish them, no
Officer trouble them, and no neighbor accuse them; this is their Liberty. To
game, and roar, and revel, and have no body say to them, Why do you so, is part
of their Liberty. To have leave without Restraint to make all others as bad as
themselves, and if they are Infidels or Heretics, to persuade other men to it:
If they hold any opinion against the God that made them, against Christ,
against the Spirit of God, against the Word and Laws of God, against his
Ministers, his Church, his Ordinances, against any necessary point of Faith, or
if they have any false conceit that leads straight to Hell, that they may have
full power, license, and authority, to bring as many as they can to be of the
same mind, that they may not be unprofitable servants to the Devil, nor go to
Hell alone, this is a great part of their impious Liberty: And because the name
of Conscience is become honorable, they call this by the name of Liberty of
Conscience: when indeed it is Liberty of Practice that they mean, and not
Liberty of Conscience: For their Conscience cannot be altered by force, nor
touched by the Sword. It Is they that deprive men of the Liberty of their
Consciences, whilst by false teaching they put out the eye of conscience, and
enslave it to sinful false conceits. And Conscience is science: and Error is
not science but ignorance: And therefore as Error is not Conscience, but the
destruction of Conscience; so Liberty to error, is no Liberty of Conscience,
but a Liberty to destroy Conscience: Much less is it Liberty of Conscience to
sin against God, and draw others from Conscience into error, and poison men's
souls, and hinder the Gospel, and promote the work and Kingdom of the Devil.

And many of our miserable sottish people take it for a part of their desired
Liberty to be free from Ministers Spiritual Oversight and Government, and not
to be Carechised or called to an account, or examined about the state of their
souls, nor questioned about their lives, but that they may do what they will,
and have Sacraments, and all Ordinances on what terms and in what manner they
will, and to have Ministers bow their Judgments to theirs, and lay their
Consciences at the feet of every carnal ignorant wretch, and be but their
servants to do what they would have them: this is the Liberty that Satan's
servants do desire.

And withal, that they may be free from necessary payments for the safety of
the Commonwealth, and from the necessary retribution to God, for the Church and
poor, yea from giving but the Ministers their own; all this they take for part
of their liberty. But they are all such liberties as Christ never purchased,
and the Gospel never bestowed, and never made the Owners happy: It is a liberty
to starve their own souls, and go quietly to everlasting torment, and not be
molested by Preachers and Puritans, but to sin against God, and damn
themselves, and be let alone, and have no body tell them of it, or ask them,
Why will you do so? In a word, it is that liberty that Christ died to save his
people from, and which the Gospel would take down, and the spirit, ministry,
and Ordinances would overthrow, and which no wise or good man has reason to
desire: and it is that liberty which God will save all those from, whom he will
save from the flames of hell.

III. The third sort of Liberty is that which is in it self Indifferent, or to
be reckoned among the common transitory benefits of this life, which with Gods
blessing is a mercy; and well used may do good, but otherwise is hurtful or
little worth. This Liberty is not the Natural Liberty of the will, which in
regard of its own elicite Acts is nothing but the power of self-determination;
and in regard of internal imperate acts, is nothing but a power or freedom to
do what we will. For these are so our own, if not our selves, that no man can
take them from us; at least the first. Nor is it the Ethical Liberty of the
soul from sin by gracious Habits: for this is ever good, as was said before.
Nor is it a Political Liberty from those tyrannous Laws or practices of men
that would root out the Gospel and pull down the Kingdom of Christ, and set up
iniquity. This Liberty must be desired, and not denied, even when we submit our
selves to persecution: but it is 1. The Civil Liberty of being from under the
Government of others, and of having a hand in Government our selves. 2. The
Liberty of being from under the Government of Strangers, Conquerors, or
enemies. 3. The Liberty of choosing our own Governors, and having them not by
other men's election set over us. 4. A Liberty from burdensome payments and taxes
which are of no necessity to our good. 5. A liberty from arbitrary Government,
and from being liable to the mere will and passions of men. 6. A protection
from the abuses and injuries of others. 7. And a liberty for o foolish conceits
that makes imprisonment so grievous to the most. It is the same earth that they
tread on, and the same air that they breath in as before. The great trouble is
that they have not their wills: for when their own wills do as much confine
them, it is then no trouble. I can confine my self to one room, to one chair,
the far greatest part of the year for my studies: and why should I not bear as
well to be so confined by another, if my own will could but comply with it?
Never grudge at restraint or imprisonment then, but find out some employment in
it, whereby you may be serviceable to God, or at least serve him by your
sufferings, and then rejoice in it, and bring your minds to your condition, and
so you may set your selves at liberty in spite of the greatest Tyrant in the
world. Imprisonment is but a penal restraint: and if, it be not Involuntary,
it is scarcely penal: it is therefore in your power whether you will be
Prisoners or not, because it is in your power whether it shall be involuntary
or not. Be but willing of your confinement, and you are at liberty; and though
you are not out of the place, you are out of the prison. The same room that is
a prison to the rest, is none to the keeper that guards them, because
apprehending it to be for his commodity, he is willing of it, and their prison
is his home. And if you do but apprehend how you are called from temptations,
and have an opportunity of honoring God, or at least of being more humbled and
mortified, and so bring your mind to consent to your habitation, it is become
your home and place of freedom: however he is unworthy of the liberty of the
Saints, that cannot deny the liberty of his habitation or bodily abode for the
attaining of it.

And for thethings that men make such a stir about in the world, under the name
of their ^^^il liberties, some of them are no liberties, but fancies or
miseries, and the rest of them are no further to be valued than they are
subservient to the Kingdom of Christ and the good of souls. Conceited people
call it their liberty to be governed rather by four hundred than by one, or by
Popularity than by other forms of Government, and a great stir they make about
this, as if their felicity did consist in it: When as the true liberty of a
Commonwealth consists in the fullest conformity of their Laws and their
execution to the will of God: in being free from all Laws or Passions of men
that encourage iniquity, and are against the Gospel or the common good, and
peace and welfare of the body: In a word, to have Government best fitted to the
ends of Government, which is such a temporal safety and prosperity as most
conduces to the service and honor of God: But the species of Government is
none of this liberty in it self considered. A people may be at much more
liberty under a pious Monarch than an impious or unskilful Democracy. The free
choice of the most when they are bad (as where is it better?) may enslave the
best: and the awe and interest of the Rich is commonly such upon the people,
that a free choice is somewhat strange. And that sort of Government may be
fittest for One people, that is unfit for another: And their happiness lies
not in the species of Government, let them stretch their wits to invent new
forms as long as they will; but in the Predominancy of God and his Interest in
the hearts of the Governors, and in their Laws, their Officers, and Execution.
This is it, and nothing but this, in Government, that will give the
Commonwealth that desirable liberty, in which their welfare does consist.

And therefore those persons are Enemies to the Liberty of their Country, that
under that Name would advance such kind of Popular interest as is plainly
against the interest of Christ: and must have Magistrates and Ministers
restrained from doing the Work of the Omnipotent Sovereign, the one from
punishing sin (if it be against the first Table, or come but under the name of
conscience) and the other from exercising Churchdiscipline, and all under
pretense of the Peoples Liberties. All these are carnal Liberties to be Denied.

CHAP. XXXV. Our Native Country and Habitations denied.
18. ANother part of Carnal self-interest to be denied, is, Our Native Country,
or place of habitation, with all the Comforts and Accommodations they afford
us. It is lawful to have some special Love to our own Country; but not such as
shall prevail against the love of Christ, or seem sufficient to entangle us in
sin. We must show our Love to it principally by desiring and endeavoring, that
Gods name may be hallowed, and his Kingdom maintained, and his will fulfilled
among and by our Countrymen: But if they should turn enemies to the Gospel or
to Godliness, we must love the servants of God abroad much better than his
enemies at home; and wish the success of his servants though of other
Countries, against his enemies, though they were of our own. And if we cannot
serve God or enjoy the freedom of a good conscience at home, another Nation,
though it were in the utmost parts of the Earth, where we may better serve God,
must seem a better place to us. And if we be banished or necessitated to
forsake our Country, we must not stick at it, for the cause of Christ. It is
none of the greatest trials to be put to remove from one Country to another, as
long as we have necessaries, wherever we come. We have the same God to be with
us, and take care of us, beyond sea, as at home: the same earth, and air, and
sun to shine upon us: The same Spirit, and grace, and promises do accompany us:
The same Saints of God, and Ordinances of Worship may be had in other Countries
as our own. It Is a kind of childishness to make such a matter of being driven
out of one Kingdom into another, when we have the same or greater mercies in
the other. All is but our Fathers house; and we do but remove from room to
room. The Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof. As I said before of
Imprisonment, so I say of Banishment; It is in our own Wills by consenting to
it, to make it no banishment. If you will make an affliction and a great matter
of it, you may. A Merchant or Factor can live for his commodity, far from home,
even among Turks and Infidels, and take it for no banishment: Much more should
you do so, for the sake of Christ. Every place is our own Country where our
Masters work lies. We are but pilgrims; and as long as we are not out of our
way, we need not complain much for being out of our Country. Indeed we are here
but strangers, and this is not our Country, and therefore let us not overlove
it upon a mistake. The Apostles of Christ did purposely leave their Countries,
and travel about the Countries of the World, to bring them the Doctrine of
salvation by Christ. And is it not better be walking Lights to illuminate the
world, than Candles shut up within the walls of our own habitation? Heb. 11. 8,
9, 19. [ By faith Abraham when he was called to go into a place which he should
after receive for an inheritance, obeyed, and he went out, not knowing whither
he went. By faith he sojourned in the Land of promise as in a strange Country,
dwelling in Tahernacles -- for he looked for a City which had foundations,
whose builder and maker is God, ver. 13, 14, 15, 16. They confessed that they
were strangers and pilgrims on the earth; For they that say such things,
declare plainly that they seek a Country: And truly if they had been mindful of
that Country from whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have
returned: But now they desire a better Country, that is, an heavenly: wherefore
God is not ashamed to be called their God; for he has prepared for them a
City.] It was the sorest kind of banishment that the Saints endured, that is
mentioned, Heb. 11. 37, 38. and yet they patiently underwent it. [ They wandered
about in sheepskins and goatskins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented: Of
whom the world was not warthy: they wondered in deserts and mountains, and in
dens and caves of the earth.] We judge our selves unworthy of Christ and the
new Jerusalem and our Heavenly Country, if we cannot deny an earthly sinful
Country for them.

CHAP. XXXVI. Bodily health and ease from torments.
19. BUt a far greater Interest of self to be denied, does consist in our
bodily health and ease and from those pains and torments, which persecutors use
to inflict upon the godly. An averseness to suffering, is natural to man, and
in it self no sin, but an excessive averseness, does signify too much
tenderness of the flesh, and too little power of Reason, which should quiet the
mind, when it cannot abate the pain of the body; and must use to submit to a
lesser evil, to avoid a greater: or to obtain a greater good than it depriveth
us of: Paul and Silas could sing with their bodies sore, and their feet in the
stocks. To be joyful in tribulation should be no strange matter to a Saint:
much more with a patient submission to undergo it. We may not thrust our selves
into the fire, nor choose suffering without a call; but we must suffer rather
than sin, and choose the wounds and hurts of the body before the wounds and
losses of the soul. But because flesh and blood will draw back, and make too
great a matter of sufferings, I shall briefly give you ten Considerations that
may persuade you herein to deny your selves; and in two cases I desire you to
make use of them: First, in case you have no way to escape suffering, but by
sinning: then deny your selves and choose to suffer. Secondly, in case of Gods
afflictions which unavoidably lie upon you: then deny your selves by a quiet
and patient submission: And for both consider.

1. That is the best condition for us, in which we may be most serviceable to
God. And if we suffer for Righteousness, we may serve God as well in such
suffering as in a prosperous state: Or if God himself afflict us, we may serve
him in our affliction: Our patience then is the service that we are called to.
The sufferings of the Saints have done very much to the promoting of the Gospel
and building of the Church: Men will see that there is somewhat worth the
suffering for, in the Christian Religion, and see that Heaven is taken by
believers for a certain thing, when they can let go earth for it: They will be
moved to enquire, what it is that moves you to such constancy and patience. And
why should we not be willing of that condition, in which we do our Master the
best service, what ever the doing of it shall cost us? The commodity of our end
is the chiefest commodity.

2. That is the best condition for us in which we may have most of God. But
certainly we may have as much and usually more of God in suffering, especially
for his cause, than we can have in prosperity; especially when we sin to escape
these sufferings. Is it bodily ease, or God that you set most by? It will be
seen by your choice. If you prefer your ease before him, you must expect to
have no better than you choose. If you prefer him before your ease and
prosperity, you must be gladder of God with adversity and pain, than of
prosperity and ease without him. A beast has health and ease as well as you,
and yet you will not think him as happy. If you are tormented or lose your
health for Christ, you lose nothing but what a Turk or Infidel has, yea but
what a beast has, as well as you! But you may have that of God by the
advantage of your suffering, that none but Saints have. And God's presence can
make a suffering state as sweet as a prosperous. And he has given you ground
in his promises to expect it, Isa. 43. 1, 2, 3. [ When thou passest through the
fire, I will be with thee -- ] 1 Cor. 10. 13. [ There has no temptation taken
you, but what is common to man: but God is faithful who will not suffer you to
be tempted above that your able; but will with the temptation also make a way
to escape, that you may be able to bear it.] 1 Pet. 4. 14. [ If ye be
reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye: for the spirit of glory and of
God rests upon you: On their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he
is glorified] ver. 16. [ If any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be
ashamed, but let him glorify God on this behalf.] What is the Scripture fuller
of, than comforting promises to the sufferers for Christ? To fly from such
sufferings then, is but to fly from the presence of God, and our own
consolations.

3. At least these sufferings further our sanctification, and make us better.
And is not that our best condition that makes us best? Common experience as
well as Scripture may satisfy us that a suffering state does very much further
humiliation and mortification, and bring men to a deeper sense of sin, and help
all the truths of God to work, and make them more sensible and serious than in
prosperity. Then we do not only hear but feel, that sin is evil, and that the
world is vain, and that the threatenings of God are true. Why Christian, if thou
did but know that thou should have more of the spirit and its graces, and
less of sin, in a suffering estate, than in ease and plenty, would thou not
even choose it and be glad of it? Is not sin worse than suffering to thee, and
holiness better than ease and peace? Alas, what senseless, careless persons
should we be, if it were not for the help of suffering! Grace uses to work by
means: and this is the common means.

4. Consider, that pain and suffering we shall have, whether for Christ or not:
The worst men undergo almost as much by ordinary sicknesses and losses and
crosses, as the Martyrs do that suffer for Christ; sin will bring suffering:
and it is better have that which is sanctified by the interest of Christ, than
that which is not.

5. And a Christian that has so much ado to curb and rule the flesh in
prosperity, me thinks should the more patiently bear adversity, because God
sets in by it, and helps him to subdue the flesh, and tame the body and bring
it in subjection: And as it is but this burdensome flesh that suffers, which
has been the cause of so much suffering to our minds; so our warfare against
this flesh, which we manage through the course of our lives, goes on more
prosperously in the time of its sufferings, than in prosperity. A weakened enemy
is easilier conquered. Do not therefore too much take part with the suffering
flesh, but self-denyingly justify the proceedings of the Lord.

6. And consider that the pains and suffering will be but short. It is but a
little while, and you shall feel no more than if you had felt nothing. And that
which shortly will not be, is next to that which is not. As it makes all the
pleasures and glory of the world, to be a dream and next to nothing, because
it is but a while, and they are gone, and never return again: So it makes our
sufferings next to nothing that they are passing away, and almost over. And
then all tears will be wiped from your eyes; and pain will be forgotten, or
remembered only to increase your joy. When you are past the brunt and safe with
Christ, you will never repent of your sufferings on earth, nor will it trouble
you then to think of the shame or sickness or pain and torment that here you
were put to undergo. Yet a little while and all will be over.

7. In the mean time, consider also, that they are all Deserved sufferings. You
deserve them from God, though not from man: Nay they are a thousand fold less
than your deservings: If free grace have pardoned you the main, and rescued you
from the torments of Hell, me thinks the remembrance of this wonderful mercy,
should make you patiently bear the Fatherly chastisements that tend to the
perfecting your deliverance.

8. And so much the rather because They are sufferings more gainful to you,
than the greatest prosperity is to the world. When you have suffered for Christ
as much as your natures are able to bear, you need not fear being losers by
him: As he is engaged by promise to make you amends, and to give you the reward
of inheritance of glory, so he is easily able to accomplish it: All the Saints
of God are in the way to glory: but his suffering Saints are in the nearest
way. All his servants are unspeakably gainers by him: but his sufferers are in
the most thriving way: They shall have an eminency of Reward, or a Reward above
the common Reward, Rev. 7. 14. [ These are they that come out of great
tribulation, and have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of
the Lamb. Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him day and
night in his Temple, and he that suteth on the Throne shall dwell among them.]
The Churches therefore glory in their Martyrs, and for the patience and faith
of Christians in all the persecutions and tribulations which they endure; A
manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, that they may be counted
worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which they suffer: seeing it is a righteous
thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble them; and to them
that are troubled, Rest with the Saints, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 4, 5, 6. Mat. 19. 27, 28,
29. Peter said Behold we have for saken all and followed thee; what shall we
have therefore? And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, that ye which
have followed me in the Regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the
Throne of his glory, ye shall also sit on twelve Thrones judging the twelve
Tribes of Israel: and every one that has for saken houses, or brethren, or
Sisters, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for my names sake shall receive an
hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life.] And is it not better suffer
under these temrs of unconceivable advantage, than to suffer in a natural way
for nothing?

9. And consider, that if suffering seem so great a matter to you that you are
resoved though by the way of sin to avoid it, you will escape it at so dear a
rate that you will wish a thousand times you had endured i^. There is no
scaping of Christian suffering when you are called to it, but by running into
eternal suffering. There is no scaping the Prison and torment and fire of
Martyrdom, when you are called to it, but by running into the fire of Hell. God
can deliver you indeed on easier terms, by forbearing to call you to it, or
rescuing by his power: But you cannot rescue your selves by refusing to suffer
and yielding to sin, without paying dearer for your freedom than it is worth.
And therefore deny your selves and bear what God shall call you to, lest Christ
deny you and make you suffer a thousand fold more to all eternity.

10. Lastly, consider also, that this part of self-denial is it that Christ
has fully and purposely taught us, by his own example. Are you better than the
Lord of life? And did they not use him worse than you are used? Do they slander
you? and did they not so by him, calling him a gluttonous person and a
wine-bibber, and a friend of Publicans and sinners, a Sabbath-breaker, an enemy
to Caesar, a Deceiver, yea one that had a Devil, and cast out Devils by
Beelzebub? Do they put a Fools Coat on you, and a Reed in your hand, and make a
laughing stock of you? Remember what they did by Christ. They mixed scorn and
cruelty together, when they crowned him with a Crown of Thorns, and struck him
when they had covered his eyes, and bid him read who smote him. And do they
worse than this by you? They spit in his face, and saved a Murderer, that he
might be sure to die. And do they worse than this by you? [ Run therefore with
patience the race that is set before you, looking to Jesus the Author and
Finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of
God: For consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against
himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your mind,] Heb. 12. 1, 2, 3. [ If
when ye do well and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable
with God; for even hereunto were ye called; because Christ also suffered for
us, leaving us an example that ye should follow his steps, who did no sin,
neither was guile found in his mouth: Who when he was reviled, reviled not
again; when he suffered threatened not, but committed himself to him that
judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23.

Upon all these considerations you may see that in the greatest afflictions or
torments of the flesh, we have reason enough for the practice of self-denial!
And therefore as Christ used Peter, Mat. 16. when he persuaded him to have
favored himself, and to have avoided suffering when it was necessary for us,
bidding him [ Get behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me; for thou
savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men] ver. 23. so
do you deal by carnal self; when it would persuade you to favor your selves
and put by suffering by yielding to sin: take this self, to be but a Satan to
you, that savoureth not heavenly things but earthly, and command it to be
silent and to get behind you; and do not so much as make your flesh of your
Counsel, nor hearken to any of its advice, in case of suffering for Christ.

CHAP. XXXVII. Natural Life to be denied.
20. BUt the greatest point of self-denial is yet behind: Nothing is so near to
Self as Life. Nothing that nature does so highly value, and dearly love, and
tenderly look to, and unwillingly let go. And yet this also must be denied for
Christ. All other parts of selfish interest are as it were summed up and
contracted in this. And many a one can yield in other points, that when he
comes to this, is utterly stalled and will go away sorrowful, rather than
follow Christ to the Death. Nothing in this world is so dear to natural man as
his life. And therefore death is a thing that he knows not how to choose, nor
to submit to, if he could avoid it.

In three cases only I remember that Heathens themselves have chosen death.
First in case of some extreme torment or other misery, which they had no other
hope to prevent or end. But this was but a choosing a speedier or easier Death
before a more grievous death, though remote; or before a death that had so
great a misery for its forerunner: or at least before such a life as is a
continual death. And so the conquered Heathens would frequently kill
themselves, to prevent a more dishonorable cruel death from the hand of the
Conqueror; And so many a one in uncurable misery wi^^eth rather to die than
endure it; partly because that the suffering is so great as to overcome all the
comforts of life. (For I yield that some degrees of misery with life are more
terrible to nature than death;) and partly because that they know they must die
at last however. Secondly, in a desire of fame, that they may leave behind them
an honorable name when they are dead. But this is not to desire death but
life. Fain they would live for ever: and because they know that it cannot be
obtained (on earth,) they had rather die some honorable death a little sooner,
that their names may live, when they are dead, than to die ignominiously
shortly after. Thirdly, And some have chosen to die for the public good of
their Country. But as it is very uncertain whether the desire of a living Name
were not their greater motive, so it was but a choosing a present death for
their Country, before a latter unavoidable death without any such advantage. In
all these cases a natural man may venture on death, that knows he cannot escape
it long, but must shortly die, whether he will or no. But if they could avoid
it, there is very few would submit to death, but believers: and none but in one
of these cases. 1. To end or avoid some extreme intolerable, uncurable misery.
2. To deliver their Country or friends. 3. And whether any would do it upon
their ungrounded hopes of better things in the life to come, I leave to
consideration. But if it be taken for granted that a natural man may love, 1.
The comforts of life above it self; 2. And the good of his Country, or the
world, or his children above his life; 3. Or some carnal felicity falsely
conceited to be had in another life; yet it is certain that none but a
sanctified believer can Love God better than his Life, or can prefer those
spiritual heavenly joys which consist in the holy Love and Fruition of God,
before his life: And therefore he that for these can deny his Life, is indeed a
Christian: and none but be. Though it be an ungrateful word to the ears of
some, I must say it again, and none but he. For this is the very point in which
Christ for instance, does put our self-denial to the trial. He that will save
his life, shall lose it] Whether you Love an immortal holy life with God, or
this earthly fleshly life better, is the great question on which it will be
resolved whether you are Christians or Infidels at the heart, and whether you
are heirs of heaven or hell. Some Love to God may be in the unsanctified; but
not a love to him above their lives: and in some cases they may submit to
death; but not for the Love of God. But both these set together, that is, a
submitting to Death for the Love of God, or a Loving of God above this life, is
the most infallible proof of your sincerity.

I confess, flesh and blood must needs think this is a very hard saying; and
though they might consent to acknowledge it a Duty, and a Reasonable thing to
die for Christ, and a note of excellency, and a commendable qualification of
some few extrordinary Saints, yet it goes very hardly down with them, that it
should be the lowest measure of saving grace, and that the weakest Christian
must have it that will be saved; For say they, What can the strongest do more
than die for Christ? But to this I answer, 1. There is no rom for objections
against so plain a Word of God. It is the wisdom of God, and not our Reason
that disposes of the Crown of life: and therefore it is his Wisdom and not our
Reason must determine by what we shall attain it. And if God say plainly, that
If any man come to Christ, and hate not his own life, (that is, love it not so
much less than Christ, that for his sake he can use it as a hated thing is
used) he cannot be his Disciple,] Luke 14. 26. it is too late for the vote of
man, or all the clamor of foolish reason to recall this resolution. The word of
God will stand, when they have talked against it never so long: we may destroy
our selves by dashing against it, but we cannot destroy or frustrate it. 2. And
whereas men ask, What can the strongest do more than die for Christ? I answer,
Abundance more: They can die for him with far greater Love, and Zeal, and
Readiness, and Joy, than the weak can do: and so bring much more honor to him
by their death. Though there be no higher way of outward expressing our Love to
Christ, than by dying for him; yet the inward work of Love may be in very
different degrees in persons that use the same expression of it. Some may come
to the stake with a little Love comparatively, and some with fervent hot
affections: Some have much ado to yield to die; and some die so cheerfully,
that they rejoice in the opportunity of honoring God, and passing to him. Yea
and in the Expressions there is much difference in the manner: Some give up
themselves with so much readiness as works more on the standers by than their
mere patience or the death it self. And some are drawn so hardly to it, as
drowneth much of the honor and fruit of their martyrdom. Of this read Mr.
Pinks Sermon. on Luke 14. 26.

Obj. But Nature is of God: and Nature teaches us to Love and save our Lives:
and is it like that the God of Nature will command and teach us to cast them
away, and so contradict his own Law of Nature? Answ. 1. As Nature teaches you
to love your lives, so God does not forbid you. But 2. Is it Natural to man to
be Reasonable, as well as to be sensitive and animate? To have a reasonable
soul, as to have a temporal life? 3. And does not Reason tell us by the light
of Nature, that God should be loved better than our Lives? If it did not, yet
by the help of supernatural light, even Reason clearly tells us this. And it is
no contradiction for God to bid you, [Love your lives, but love him better.]
And he that bids you seek the preservation of your lives, does plainly except,
that you resign them to his dispose, and that you seek not to save them from
him, when he commands you to lay them down. So that it is not simply against
Nature, to consent to die: but when it is for him that is the Lord and end of
life, it is agreeable to Nature; that is, though it be against our natural
inclination as we are Animate, and Sensitive; yet is it agreeable to our true
nature as reasonable: And therefore lay all together, and it is to be said to
be agreeable to Nature simply in such a case; because it is agreeable to the
Principal part in nature, which should be predominant; It is agreeable to
nature also, that Reason should dispose of the inferior powers of the soul.

Object. But when you have said all that you can, as long as you plead against
my nature, I cannot consent to what you say; words are but wind: To persuade me
to consent to die, is as much as to persuade me not to feel when I am hurt, or
to be hungry or thirsty or sleepy, which are not in my power, because these
things are Natural. Answ. 1. Though hunger and thirst and other natural and
sensitive appetites or passions, be not in your power, yet a consent of the
will to deny these is in your power. As natural as it is to hunger and thirst,
your superior faculty of Reason can prevail with you to suffer hunger and
thirst in a Siege or sickness, when the suffering of it will save your life.
You will be ruled by your Physician to forbear not only many a dish but many a
meal which your appetite desires. And your Reason can persuade you to suffer
the opening of a vein, and the drawing out of your own blood, yea or the
cutting off a member, when it is to save your life, for all that feeling and
self-love is natural to you. And you are not acquainted with the nature of
Friendship if you would not suffer much for a friend; nor with humane
affections if you would not suffer much for parents, or children, or your
Country; so that your will is free, though your sense be not free, nor your
natural appetite. Though you cannot choose but feel when you are hurt, you
might consent to that feeling for a greater good. 2. And according to the
tenor of this Objection, you may as wisely and honestly plead for most of the
wickedness of the world, and say It is natural to me to lust, and therefore I
may play the Adulterer and fulfill it: It is natural to me to desire meat and
drink, and therefore I may eat and drink as long as I desire it. It is natural
to me to seek to hurt those that I am much angry with, or hate: and therefore I
may beat or kill them.] If you must deny the Passions and sensitive appetite,
and the inferior faculties of nature in one thing, why not in another? These
lower powers were made to be ruled by reason, as beasts are made to be ruled by
men, and more. And therefore seeing this Argument from Nature is but from the
brutish part of Nature, it is but a brutish Argument. And if yet you say, that
for all these words, Death is so great an enemy to you, that you cannot choose
it; I answer, that is because your reason is not illuminated and elevated by
faith, to see the Necessity of choosing it; and to see those higher and better
things, which by this means you may obtain. Had you that heavenly life of faith
and love which the spirit works in the Saints, it would carry you above this
present life, and take you up with higher matters, and show you that (and so
show it you) as should procure your own consent to die.

But because this is the great point that Christ does purposely here try our
self-denial by, and a point of such great necessity to be looked after, I shall
stay a little longer on it, while I give you first some Reasons to move you,
and 2. Some Directions to assist you, to get a self-denying submission to Death
when Christ requires it.

The many lamentable defects in grace which the inordinate fear of death does
intimate, I have already opened in the fourth part of the Saints Rest: and
therefore may not now repeat them, but shall add some few Considerations more.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Twenty Reasons for denying Life.
1. COnsider, that Our Lives are not our Own; but God that does require them is
the Absolute Lord of them. More truly than you are owner of any thing that you
have in the world, is he the Owner of your lives and you. And therefore both in
Reason and Justice we should be content that he dispose of his own. If he may
notfreely dispose of you and your lives, you may as well deny him the dispose
of any thing, and so deny him to be God: for he has the same right to you as
to any thing else, and the same power over you. And therefore if you consent
that he shall be God (for which he needs not your consent) you must consent
that he be the Owner and Disposer of all, and of you as well as all things
else: Otherwise he is not God.

2. You can be content that the lives of others, yea that all the world be at
Gods dispose: In reason you cannot wish it should be otherwise. You are content
that the lives of Emperors and Kings that are greater than you, should be at
his Dispose? And is there not the same Reason that he dispose of your life as
of theirs? Are you better than they? or more your own? or has the world more
need of you than them? or rather is it not unreasonable selfishness that makes
so unreasonable a difference with you? If Reason might serve, the case is plain.

3. You are contented that far greater matters than your lives should be at
Gods dispose: The Sun in its course, the frame of nature, Heaven and Earth and
all therein are at his dispose, and would you wish it otherwise? Days and
Nights, and Summer and Winter, and times and seasons are at his dispose; and
you dare not murmur that all the year is not Summer or daylight, and that
there is any Night or Winter. The Angels of Heaven are at his dispose to do his
will, and are content to be used on earth for your service, and they desire not
to be from under his dispose? And should you desire it? or rather desire that
his will may be done on earth as it is in Heaven! If you would not have the
Crowns and Kingdoms of the world at his Dispose, and Heaven and Earth are at
his Dispose, you would not have him to be God: But if you would have these
greatest things at his dispose, what are you then, that your lives should be
excepted?

4. Whom would you have to be the Disposer of men's Lives but God? Is any other
fit for the undertaking? No other can give life but he! And no other can
preserve and continue it but he! If your life had been in any creatures hand,
you had been dead long ago: For no creature is able to uphold it self, much
less another also. Is any Creature wise enough to order the world and the
affairs thereof? Is any Creature powerful enough, to dispose of the world and
all things in it? Is any Creature good enough to do it without the
communication of its imperfection which would disorder and destroy all? I know
you make no doubt of any of these things. No Creature is fit to be God; and
therefore none is fit to undertake the work of God; And therefore it must be
God or none that must have the Disposal of your lives and you.

But I know what it is that self would have! You would have the Disposal of
your own lives, or else have God to dispose of them as you would have him,
which comes all to one. But how unreasonable is this? Would you alone have the
Disposal of your own lives? or would you have all men else in the world also to
have the Disposal of theirs? If all should have this Privilege, what a
miserable Privilege would it prove? No man then would die, and then either you
must forbear marriage, or what would you do with your posterity, when there
were no room on earth? And then you could not punish a Malefactor with death!
And what a world would it be, if all men were Disposers of themselves, when
there would be as many different ends and minds as men? every man would be for
himself, and an enemy to others; and the world would run every man on his own
head; and a madder confusion than can be imagined, would seize on all. If you
would have every man have the dispose of his own life, you would have as many
Gods as Men, and so have no God; and you would have as many Kings or Rulers as
men, and so have no Ruler? and you would have the world to be no world, when
God were to them as no God. And if you would not have it thus with all, what
reason have you to desire it for your self? What are you more than all the
world, that you should be exempted from the common state of mortals, and be at
your own disposal more than they, and be instead of God unto your selves?

5. You think it neither cruelty or injustice, that the lives of bruits should
be much at your dispose! Your poor fellow creatures must die when you require
it. Birds and Beasts and Fishes, even multitudes of them must die to feed you,
yea often for your delight, to make you a Feast, when you have no necessity.
The most harmless sheep you will not spare; The most laborious Ox, the most
beautiful Bird, must give up their lives to satisfy your pleasure. And is not
God ten thousand thousand times even infinitely more above you, than you are
above your fellow creatures? Is one creature fitter to kill another, and
afterward devour it, and becomes its grave, than God to dispose of the Lives
of all?

6. Where could you wish your Lives to be better, than in the hand of the most
wise and gracious God? If you may rest content, or have confidence in any, it
is in him. You neednot doubt of his Goodness, for he is goodness and Love it
self. And therefore though you see not the world to come that you are passing
to, yet as long as you know that you are in the hands of Love it self, what
cause have you of disquiet or distrust? And that you know that he is wise as
well as Good, and Almighty as well as Wise, and therefore as he means you no
harm, (if you are his children) so he will not mistake, nor fail in the
performance: You need not fear lest your happiness should miscarry for want of
skill in him that is Omniscient, or for want of will in him that is your
Father, or for want of Power in him that is Omnipotent. You may far better
trust God with your lives, than your selves. For you have not wisdom enough to
know what is best for you; nor skill to accomplish it, nor Power to go through
with it: Nay, you love not you selves so well as God does love you. Did you but
believe this, you would better trust him. You can trust your selves in a narrow
Ship, upon ^he wide and raging Seas, when you never saw the Country that you
are g^ing to; and all because you believe that the voyage is for your commodity
and that you have a skilful Pilot. And cannot you commend your souls into the
hand of God, to convey you through death to the invisible glory, as confidently
as you dare commit your lives to the conduct of a man, and to a tottering Ship
in a hazardous Ocean? You can trust your lives on the skill of a Physician; And
cannot you trust them on the will of God? If you had your choice whether your
lives should be at your own dispose, or Gods, you should far rather choose that
God might dispose of them than your selves: As it is better for an Infant to be
guided and disposed of, by the Parents than by it self. A Good King will not
kill his own Subjects needlessly: And a natural Father or Mother will not not
needlessly kill their own Children: yea a very brute will tenderly cherish their
young: And do you think that God who is infinitely good, will causelessly
orinjuriously take your lives? or that he does not mean you good even in your
death?

Object. But how can I think it for my good to die? and to have my nature
dissolved? Answ. Paul did desire to depart or be dissolved, and to be with
Christ as best of all, Phil. 1. 23. And did not he know what was for his good
as well as you? He was willing rather to be absent from the body and present
with the Lord, than at home in the body and absent from the Lord; and therefore
groaned earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with his house which is from
heaven that mortality might be swallowed up of life, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2, 4, 6, 8.
When the Hen has sat to hatch her young ones, they must leave the shell as
good for nothing, and must come into a world which they never saw before. And
what of that? Should they murmur at the breaking of t^^^r former habitation? or
fear the passag^ in^^ so (...)* ^^ wide, so strange a place, in (...) ^f (...)
which they were in before? No more (...) the breaking of these bodies, and
(...) the (...) of flesh, and passing under the conduct of Angels, into the
presence of our Lord. God is but hatching us here by his spirit, that he may
bring us out into the light of glory. And should we grudge at this?

7. And what if God call you to sacrifice your lives to him, as he called
Abraham to sacrifice his Son? What if he call you to come to him by a
persecutors hand? or at least to be willing of your natural death? He calls you
but to give up a life which you cannot keep; and to do that willingly, which
else you must do whether you will or not: Willing or unwilling, die you must!
How loath soever you are, you are sure to die. You may turn you every way, and
look about you on the right hand and the left, to all the friends and means in
the world, and you will never find a medicine that will here procure
immortality, nor ever escape the hands of death. It is appointed to all men once
to die, and after that the Judgment, Heb. 9. 27. And no man can change the
Decrees of Heaven. And seeing all your turnings and unwillingness cannot avoid
it, is it not better to submit to it willingly than unwillingly? God does
impose it on you as a necessity. Your willingness may make a virtue of
Necessity, and out of Necessity extract a reward: but your unwillingness may
turn your suffering into your sin, and a Necessary death unto an unnecessary
misery now (and hereafter if you be not true believers) as Paul says of his
Ministerial labors, 1 Cor. 9. 16, 17. If I do this thing willingly, I have a
reward: but if against my will, a dispensation is committed to me: for
necessity is laid upon me -- ] So I may say in the present case: If you give up
your lives willingly in the love of God, you have a Reward; but if you do not
Necessity is upon you, and die you must whether you will or no. You may escape
the Reward by your unwillingness, but death you cannot escape. And me thinks
you should see that it is little thanks to you, to give up that life which you
cannot keep; And yet this is all that God requires. Perhaps you think, that
though you cannot keep it still, yet somewhat longer you may keep it. But you
be not sure of that. The next hour may God deprive you of it. And O what a
dreadful thing it were, if as soon as you have denied God your lives, he should
snatch them from you in his fury, and cast you into Hell! and if he should
distrain for his own as soon as you have denied it him! and you should die as
enemies that would not die as Martyrs, and as his Friends! And in this sense
has my Text been many a time fulfilled, He that will save his Life shall lose
it.

8. Consider also that it is upon terms of the highest advantage imaginable to
your selves, that God calls you to resign and lay down your lives. It is not
indeed to lose them, but to save them, as my Text does promise you [ He that
loses his life shall save it.] No more than you lose your clothes which you
put off at Night and put on again in the Morning: Or rather, no more than you
lose your lousie rotten rags, when you put them off at Night, and are to have
in the Morning a Suit of Princely attire in their stead. Will any man say,
these rags are lost? At least they will not say that the man is a loser by the
change. That is not lost that is committed to God, upon the ground of a
promise. Nor that which is laid out in his Servive, at his command. Reason will
tell us, that no man can be a loser by a course of submissive Obedience to God.
You cannot be at so much cost for him, or offer him so dear a service, which he
is not able and willing to satisfy you for a thousand fold. God will not be
beholden to any man. You cannot bring him in your debt, beyond what he does by
his bountiful promise: But if you could, he would not continue in your debt.
You Will make nothing of your death, if you do not either undergo it for Christ,
or bear it submissively by the power of heavenly love constraining you. Merely
to die whether you will or no, as a fruit of sin, is common to the most ungodly
men: But if the love of God can make you voluntarily submit to death (whether
natural, or violent from persecutors) what a glorious advantage may you make of
it? You will 1. Put your salvation more out of doubt ^han any other course in
this world could do. For whosoever perishes, it is most certain that such as
these all be saved* 2. And therefore you may die with the greatest confidence
and joy, as having seen the matter of your doubts removed, and dying in the
very exercise of those graces that have the promise of salvation: and in such a
(...) as has the fullest and most frequent promises in the Gospel. 3. And then
the Crown of Martyrdom is the most glorious Crown. You will not have an
ordinary place in heaven. These are that part of the Heavenly Host that si and
nearest to the Throne of God, and that praise him with the highest joys, who
has brought them through tribulations, and redeemed them by his blood. If a
man should make a motion to you to exchange your cottage for a Palace and a
Kingdom, you would not stick at it* as if it were against you, because you must
leave your ancient home: And how much less should you be against it, when you
are but moved to step out of your ruinous cottage into glory, when it would
shortly fall upon your heads, and you must leave it whether you will or no, for
nothing.

9. What reason have you to be so tender of the flesh? Is it the greatness of
its suffering that you stick at? Why, you put poor Beasts and Birds to as much,
and so do the Butchers daily for your use: and they must suffer it. And why
should the body be so dear to you? for the matter of it, what is it but earth?
and wherein is it more excellent than the beasts that perish? I think God has
purposely clothed your soul with so poor a dress, that you should be the less
unwilling to be unclothed, and might learn to set more by your souls than by
your bodies, and to make more carefully provision for them. It seems he has
purposely lodged you in so poor a cottage, that you should not be at too much
care for it, nor be too loath to leave it. You have its daily Necessities and
Infirmities and pains, and somewhat of its filth and lothsomeness, to tell you
of its meanness: And why should you be so loath that so poor a cottage, so frail
a body should be turned to dust? Dust it is, and to dust it is sentenced. When
the soul has left it but a week, men can scarce endure to see it or smell it?
And should the breaking of such an earthen Vessel be so unpleasing a thing to
you? And for its usesulness, though so far as it is obedient it was serviceable
to your souls, and God, yet was it so refractory, ill disposed, and
disobedient, that it proved no better than your enemy. Many a temptation it
has entertained and cherished; and many a sin has it drawn you to commit;
Those senses have let in a world of vanity; Those wandering eyes have called in
covetousness, and pride, and lust. Those greedy appetites have been so eager on
the bait, that they have too often born down your faith and reason, and drawn you
to excess in meats and drinks, for matter or manner, for quality or quantity,
or both. Many a groan those sins have cost you, and many a smarting day they
have caused you, and a sad uncomfortable life you have had by reason of them,
in comparison of what you might have had. And this flesh has been the Mother
or the Nurse of all. You were engaged by your Baptismal Covenant to fight
against it, when you entered into the Church; and if you are Christians, this
combat has been your daily work, and much of the business of your lives. And
yet are you loath to have the victory, and see your enemy under feet? Do you
fight against it as for the life of your souls, and yet are you afraid lest
death should hurt it or break it down? Have you fought your selves friends with
it, that you are so tender of it? when you are the greatest friends to it, it
will be the most dangerous enemy to you. And do not think that it is only sin,
and not the body, that is the flesh, that is called your enemy in Scripture.
For though it be not the body as such, or as obedient to the soul, yet is it
the Body as inclining to creatures, from which the sinful soul cannot restrain
it; and it is the body as having an inordinate sensitive appetite and
imagination, and so distempered, as that it rebels against the Spirit, and
casts off the rule of Reason, and would not be curbed of its desires, but
have the rule of all it self. Was it not the very flesh it self that Paul says
he fought against, and kept under, and brought into subjection, lest he should
be a cast a-way? 1 Cor. 9. 26, 27. Why should sin be called [ Flesh and Body]
but that it is the Body of Flesh that is the principal-seat of those sins that
are so called. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall live, Romans 8. 13. If ye sow
to the flesh, of the flesh ye shall reap corruption, Gal. 6. 8. That which is
first in Being, is first in sin: But it is the Flesh or Embryo endued with
sense that is first in being. Be not therefore too tender of that which
corruption has made your prison and your enemy: Many a time you have been put
to resist it, and watch and strive against it; and when you have been at the
best, it has been hindering you to be better; and when the spirit was willing,
the flesh was weak: And quickly has it caused your cooling and declension.
Many a blessed hours communion between God and your souls, that flesh has
deprived you of. And therefore though still you must love it, yet you should the
less grieve or be troubled at its sufferings, seeing they are but the fruits of
its sin, and a holy contentedness should possess your minds, that God should
thus castigatorily revenge his own quarrel and yours upon it.

10. But yet consider, that were you never so tender of the body it self, yet
faith and reason should persuade you to be content; For God is but preparing
even for its felicity; His undoing it but to make it up again. As in the new
birth he broke your hearts and false hopes, that he might heal your hearts, and
give you sounder hopes instead of them: so at death he breaks your flesh and
worldly hopes, not to undo you, and leave it in corruption, but to raise it
again another manner of body than now it is, and give it a part in the
blessedness which you hoped for. If in good sadness you believe the
Resurrection, what cause is there for so much fear of death? You can be content
that your Roses die, and your sweetest Flowers fall and perish, and the green
and beauteous complexion of the earth, be turned into a bleak and withered hue,
because you expect a kind of Resurrection in the Spring. You can boldly lie
down at night to sleep, though sleep be a kind of death to the body, and more
to the soul; and all because you shall rise again in the morning. And if every
nights sleep (or one at least) were a gentle death, if you were sure to rise
again the next morning, you would make no great matter of it. Were it as common
to men to die every night, and rise again in the morning, as it is to sleep
every night and rise in the morning, death would not seem such a dreadful
thing. Those poor men that have the falling sickness, do once in a day or in a
few days, lie as dead men, and have as much pain as many that die: And yet
because they use to be up and well again in a little time, they can go merrily
about their business, the rest of the day, and little fear their approaching
fall. How much more should the belief of a Resurrection unto life, confirm us
against the fears of death? And why should we not as quietly commit our bodies
to the dust, when we have the promise of the God of heaven, that the Earth
shall deliver up her dead, and that this body that is sown in corruption, shall
be raisedin incorruption? It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory: it is
sown in weakness, it is raised in power: it is sown a natural body, it is
raised a spiritual body] So great and wonderful the change will be, as now is
unconceivable! we have now a drossie l^mp of flesh, an aggravation of the
Elements to a seed of life, which out of them forms it self a body, by the
Divine influx. Like the Silkworm which in the Winter is but a seed, which in
the Summer does move and attract that matter from which it gets a larger body,
by a kind of Resurrection: But it is another manner of body (I will not say of
flesh) which at the Resurrection we shall have. Not flesh and blood, nor a
natural body, but of a nature so spiritual, sublime and pure, that it shall be
indeed a spiritual body. And think not that this is a contradiction, and that
spirituality and corporeity are inconsistent. For [ There is a Natural Body,
and there is a Spiritual body] The root of the fleshly Natural body was the
first man Adam, who was made a living soul, to be the Root of living souls. The
root of the spiritual Body is Christ, who being a quickening Spirit, does
quicken all his members by his Spirit; which Spirit of Grace is the seed of
Glory; and as from an holy and gracious Savior we receive an holy and gracious
nature: so from a Glorified Savior we shall receive a glorious nature: we are
now changed from glory to Glory in the beginning, as by the spirit of the Lord:
But it is another kind of Glory that this does tend to. Howbeit that is not
first which is spiritual, but the natural; and afterward the spiritual; The
first man was of the Earth, Earthy: The second man is the Lord from heaven. And
from each of them we partake of an answerable Nature. As is the Earthy, such
are they that are earthy, even all of us in our fleshly state, having earthy
bodies from an earthy Adam, and natural bodies from the natural Adam. And as is
the heavenly, such are they that are heavenly: for Christ makes men like
himself, even first gracious and then glorious as Adam begets us like himself,
that is, natural (and sinful.) And therefore all those that have followed
Christ in the Regeneration, shall follow him into Glory, and having conquered
by him, shall reign by him and with him: and having received the holy nature
here which is the seed of glory, they shall receive the glorious nature there
which is the perfection of that Grace; And so as Christ has an heavenly
spiritual body, and ^^^ an earthy natural body, so shall his Members have, that
they may be like him. And as we have here born the image of the earthy, in
having first a natural, fleshly body; we shall also bear the Image of the
Heavenly Adam, in having a spiritual body, that is not fle^^. Now, lest any
doubt of it (says the Spirit of God) [ this I say, that Flesh and Blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God; neither does Corruption inherit incorruption] 1
Cor. 15. 42. to 51.

Object. If there were but as much likelihood of a Resurrection as there is of
the Reviving of the plants in the Spring, I could believe it; for there is a
life remaining in the Root or Seed: but the body of man has neither Root nor
seed of life, and therefore it is contrary to nature that it should revive.

Answ. 1. If it be above nature, that is all, it is not contrary to it; Or not
so contrary as to be above the power of the Lord of nature. Will you allow no
greater works for God than such as you can see a reason of, and can assign a
natural cause of? what did Nature in the creation of nature! It was not
certainly any cause of it self! If Christ rose without a natural cause, even so
shall we. 2. But why may I not say that the dead body of man has a living
Root, as truly as the plants in winter. The soul is the Root of the body, and
the soul is still alive: And Christ is the Root of the soul, and he is still
alive. For though we are dead, yet our Life is hid with Christ in God: and when
Christ who is our life shall appear (at the Spring of Resurrection) then we
shall also appear with him in Glory, Col. 3. 3, 4. And though there be no
Physical contact between this living soul and the body, yet there is a Relative
Union, and a deep rooted Love of the soul to its body, and inclination to it:
so that it is mindful of it: and waits with longing for that hour when the
command of God shall send it to revive that body. It is not incredible that a
silly snail should by its natural life and power make for it self a beautiful
habitation. Or that the life of a Rose-tree that was buried in the root, should
fabricate a sweet and beauteous Rose by which it may make an ostentation of its
invisible self to the world. In how small a room does the life of a silkworm
lie (of which I spoke before) in the winter! That little grain or seed is such
as yields no sign of life to the beholder: yet does it form it self a larger
body, and that body spin its silken web out of its own substance, and in that,
house it self in a husk, and take to it self another shape, and thence become a
winged Fly, and so generate more. But nearer us, in the generation of man, the
vital principle in the seed, does quickly with concurrent causes form it self a
body. The warmth of the body of the Hen or other Bird, can turn the egg into a
Chicken. Why then may not the living s^ul, that is the Root and life of the
body in the dust, be the instrument of God to reform its own body? as certainly
it will be the principle that shall reinform it. But you say, the body being
dead has no natural root, nor way of recess to life again, because the
privation is total. To which I answer, First the Relative union between the
soul and it, and the souls disposition to the Return into its body, is as
potent a cause of its reviving, as the natural union of the Root and branches:
if withal you consider that Christ is the Root of the soul. Rational agents if
perfect, will work as certainly as Natural. For natural causes do nothing but
by a Power communicated to them from an Intellectual cause, even God himself.
Why should Nature do any of these things but because God that makes and rules
all, will have it to be so? Now Jesus Christ is the Political Head of the
Church. The body in the grave has its own Relation to him: Christ is still
living, and resolved, and engaged by promise, and inclined by Love, to revive
that body. And as Christ is the life of the soul, so the soul is the life of
the body; and this soul, as I said, is waiting to be sent again into it. And
when the hour comes, what can hinder? The Love of the soul to its body, and its
desire to be reunited, is a kind of natural cause of the Resurrection: A candle
not lighted, is as far from light, and as much without it, as a dead body is
without life. And yet one touch of a lighted candle will light that which never
was lighted before. And so may one touch of the living soul that is now with
Christ, put life into the body that lies in the dust. And as the lighted
candle makes the other like it, and communicates of its own nature to it; so
does the glorified soul communicate a new kind of excellency to the body, which
it never had before: even to be a spiritual, glorious, incorruptible, and
immortal body. In the first creating of man, the new formed body as to the
matter of it, was no better than the body of a Beast or any common piece of
earth. But the soul made the difference: when a Rational Soul was breathed into
that Body, it advanced the very body to a dignity beyond the bodies of brutes,
even such as the natural body of man had before sin. When Christ was about to
repair fallen man, it was the spirit of Christ informing: the soul that caused
the renewed soul to communicate again a dignity to the bodies of sanctified men
above other bodies. And so when the body was dead because of sin, (having the
root of sin and death within it, and being mortal therefore) yet the spirit was
life because of Righteousness (being the Root of holy and Righteous
dispositions, and the new life in man himself) Romans 8. 10. For Christ the
principal root of life, and the spirit and holiness, are first in order of
nature in the soul, and but by communication and secondarily in the Body: But
contrarily, sin made its entrance first by the Body, and has its Root and
Seat* first in order of nature in the body; and it is so communicated to the
soul: Thus sin comes in at the backdoor, even at the wrong end, and by the
baser part: But Grace comes in the right way by the Nobler part; sin has its
Root in the viler part: but Christ has his seat first in the better part. And
yet I must add 1. That sin is not ripe till it reach the will, though it enter
by the flesh and senses: it is not formed, nor to be called sin, till it reach
the will, and as there it is situated: but yet the thing it self is first in
and by the flesh. 2. And the will is truly the seat of Original sin it self, as
well as the sensitive part: but not the first Root of the corruption. Though
sin be Worst in the Rational part, because the corruption of the best is the
worst, yet it is not first there. But Holiness is first also in the soul, and
so communicated to the body. And so also Glory it self will be. And therefore
take notice of the wise and gracious providence of God, that takes the soul to
heaven beforehand that it may be first Glorified, and so may be fit to
communicate glory to the body: And so as the Natural Soul dignified the Natural
Body, and the Sanctified Soul did Sanctify the body, so the Glorified Soul by
reunion with the body, shall communicate its Nature to the body at the
Resurrection, and so it will be made spiritual, immortal, and incorruptible by
the soul; and soul and body, are made such by Christ.

So that by this time you may see that there is more Reason for the
Resurrection for all the body is turned to earth, than there is Reason that a
Candle that is gone out should be lighted again by another; or than there is
Reason that I should put on my clothes in the morning which I put off at night.
It Is true, those clothes have no power to put on themselves; nor is there any
natural necessitating cause of it: but yet there is a Free cause in me, that
will infallibly (if I live and be able) produce it: For nature disposes me to
abhor nakedness, and desire my clothes, and therefore in the morning I will put
them on. And so nature teaches the separated soul to desire a reunion with its
body; and therefore when the Resurrection morning comes, it will gladly take
the word from Christ, and give that vital touch to the body that shall revive
it, and so put on its ancient garment; but wonderfully changed from fleshly to
spiritual, from dishonorable into glorious.

And now I hope you see, that you may put off these cloths with patience and
submission, and that it is no wrong to the flesh it self to be put off, but
tends to its highest advancement at the last: Though the first cause of sin,
and the nest of sin shall be so broken first, that it shall first be seen what
sin has done, before it be seen what Grace will do; and the fruit of our own
ways must first be tasted, before we shall fully feed and live upon the
blessed fruit of the grace of Christ.

11. Moreover, as there is a Resurrection for the body it self, and that to a
more perfect estate than it can here attain, so the whole nature shall be
perfected beyond our present comprehension. This life was not intended to be
the place of our perfection, but the preparation for it. As the fruit is far
from ripeness in the first appearance, or the flower while it is but in the
husk or bud; or the Oak when it is but an acorn; or any plant when it is but in
the seed; no more is the very nature of man on earth: As the Infant is not
perfect in the Womb, nor the Chicken in the shell, no more are our natures
perfect in this world. Methinks for the sake of the body it self, much more of
the soul, if we are believers, we should submit contentedly to death. While you
are here you know that creatures will fail you, enemies will hate you, friends
will grieve you, neighbors will wrong you, Satan will tempt you and molest
you; the world is changeable and will deceive you; all your comforts are mixed
with discomforts; the body carries about with it calamities enough of its own
to weary it: What daily pains must it be at for the sustentation of its self in
its present state; and yet what grief and sorrow must it undergo? Every member
has either its disease, or a disposition thereto: What abundance of passages
can pain and sickness find to enter at; and how many rooms that are ready to
receive them! As every member has its use, so every one is capable of sorrow;
and the sorrow of one is at least as much communicated to the whole, as the
usefulness is: The pain of the simplest member, even of a tooth can make the
whole body a weary of it self. What is the daily condition of our flesh, but
weakness and suffering with care and labor to prevent much worse, which yet we
know cannot long be avoided: The sorrow of many a man's life has made him wish
he had never been born: and why then should he not wish as much to die, which
does ten thousand fold more for him if he be a Christian, than to be unborn
would have done. Not a Relation so comfortable but has its discomforts: Not a
friend so suitable, but has some discordancy: nor any so amiable and sweet,
but has somewhat loathsome, troublesome, and bitter. Not a place so pleasant
and commodious, but has its unfitness and discommodities: Not a Society so
good and regular, but has its corruptions and irregularities. And should we be
so loath to leave (whether naturally or violently) such a life as this? When the
fruit is ripe, should it not be gathered? When the corn is ripe, would you have
it grow there and not be cut? When the spirit has hatched us for heaven,
should we be so loath to leave the shell or nest? When we are begotten again to
the hopes of immortality, should we be so desirous to stay in the womb? O Sirs,
it is another kind of life that we shall have with God? They are purer
comforts, that stay for us above! But if you will not have the Grapes to be
gathered and pressed, how can you expect to have the Wine? Me thinks our fle^h
should have enough e're this time, of sickness, and pain, and want, and
crosses, and should be content to lie down in hope of the day when these shall
be no more.

Little would an unbeliever think what a Body God will make of this, that now
is corruptible flesh and blood! It shall then be loathsome and troublesome no
more. It shall be hungry, or thirsty, or weary, or cold, or pained no more. As
the stars of heaven do differ from a clod of earth, or from a carrion in a
ditch, so will our glorified immortal bodies differ from this mortal
corruptible flesh. If a skilful workman can turn a little earth and ashes into
such curious transparent glasses, as we daily see: and if a little seed that
bears no show of such a thing, can produce the more beautiful flowers of the
earth; and if a little acorn can bring forth the greatest Oak; why should we
once doubt whether the seed of everlasting life and glory which is now in the
blessed souls with Christ, can by him communicate a perfection to the flesh
that is dissolved into its elements? There Is no true beauty but that which is
there received from the face of God: And if a glympse made Moses face to shine;
what glory will Gods glory communicate to us, when we have the fullest endless
intuition of it? There only is the strength, and there is the riches, and
there is the honor, and there is the pleasure; and here are but the shadows, and
dreams, and names, and images of these precious things.

And the perfection of the soul that is now imperfect, will be such as cannot
now be known. The very nature and manner of Intellection, Memory, Volition, and
Affections, will be unconceivably altered and elevated, even as the soul it
self will be, and much more, because of the change on the corruptible body,
which in these acts it now makes use of. But of these things I have spoke so
much in the Saints Rest, that I shall say no more of them now, but this; that
in a Believer that expects this blessed change, and knows that he shall never
till then be perfect, there is much unreasonableness in the inordinate
unwillingness and fears of death.

12. You know that fears and unwillingness can do no good, but much increase
your suffering, and make your death a double death. If it be bitter naturally,
make it not more bitter wilfully. I speak this of a violent death for Christ as
well as of a natural death; For as the one cannot be avoided if we would, so
the other cannot be avoided when Christ calls us to it, without the loss of
our Salvation: and therefore it may be called Necessary as well as the other.
Necessary suffering and death is enough without the addition of unnecessary
fears.

13. Nay were it but to put an end to the inordinate fears of death, even death
it self should be the less fearful to us. These very fears are troublesome to
many an upright soul: and should we not desire to be past them! As a woman with
Child is in fear of the pain and danger of her travel; but joyful when it is
over; so is the true believer himself too often afraid of the departing hour: but
death puts an end to all those fears. Is it the pain that you fear? Why how
soon will it be over? Is it the strangeness of your souls to God, and the place
that you are passing to? This also will be quickly over; and one moment will
give you such full acquaintance with the blessed God, and the Celestial
inhabitants, and the world in which you are to live, that you will find your
self no stranger there; but be more joyfully familiar and content than ever you
were in the bosom of your dearest friend. The Infant in the Womb is a stranger
to this lighter open world and all the inhabitants of it; and yet it is nor
best stay there. You can fail for commodity to a Country that you never saw:
and why cannot you pass with peace and joy to a God, a Christ, a Heaven that
you never saw? But yet you are not wholly a stranger there; Is it not that God
that you have loved, and that has first loved you? Have you not been brought
into the world by him, and lived by him, and been preserved and provided for by
him? and do you not know him? Is it not your Father, and he that has given you
his Son and his Spirit? have you not found an inclination toward him, desires
after him, and some taste of his love, and communion with him, and yet are you
wholly unacquainted with him? Know ye not him whom you have loved above all? in
whom you have trusted? and whom you have daily served in the world? Who have
you lived to but him? for whom else have you laid out your time and labor? and
yet do you not know him? And know you not that Christ that has purposely come
down into flesh that you might know him? and that has showed himself to you in
a holy life, and bitter death, and in abundant precious Gospel mercies, and in
Sacramental representations, that so he might entertain a familiarity with you,
and infinite distance might not leave you too strange to God? Know you not that
Spirit that has made so many a motion to your soul? that has sanctified you,
and formed the image of God upon you, and has dwelt in you so long? and made
your hearts his very workhouse, where he has been daily doing somewhat for
God? It is not possible that you should be utterly strange to him that you Live
to, and Live from, and Live in; and not know him, by whom you know your selves
and all things, nor see that Light by which you see whatever you see.

O but, you say, you never saw him, and have no distinct apprehension of his
essence. Answ. What! Would you make a Creature of him, that can be limited,
comprehended or seen with fleshly mortal eyes? Take heed of such imaginations.
It is the understanding that must see him: You know that he is most Wise, and
Good, and Great; and that he is the Creator, and Sustainer, and Ruler of the
world, and that he is your Reconciled Father in Christ; and is this no knowledge
of him? And then, the Heaven that you are to go to, is it that you are an Heir
of, where you have laid up your treasure, and where your hearts and
conversation has so long been; and yet do you not know it? You have had many a
thought of it, and bestowed many a days labor for it, and yet do you not know
it? O but you never saw it for all this? Answ. It is a spiritual blessedness
that flesh and blood can neither enjoy nor see: But by the eye of the mind you
have often seen, at least some glimpse of it; You know that it is the present
intuition and full fruition of God himself and your glorified Redeemer with his
blessed Angels and Saints in perfect Love and Joy and Praise. And if you know
this, you are not altogether strangers to heaven. And for the Saints and
heavenly Inhabitants, you are not wholly strangers to them. Some of them you
have known in the flesh, and others of them you have known in the spirit: You
are fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, and therefore
cannot be utterly unacquainted with them.

But me thinks the stranger you are to God and to Heaven, and to the Saints,
the more you should desire to be there where there is no strangeness; This is
not the time or place of most intimate acquaintance. If you would be
acquainted, you should draw nearer and not draw back. It Is death that must open
you the door into that presence where strangeness will be no more.

And if it be the doubts of your interest in Christ and life that makes you
shrink and loath to die: Consider, that to refuse to die for Christ, is the way
above all to increase those doubts; but to give up your lives for him, or
cheerfully to surrender your souls to him at his call, is the readiest surest
way in the world to prove you at present in a state of grace; besides that you
will be hastened into a state of glory, where you shall be quickly and fully
past all doubts of your state of former grace. In a word, as all the fears and
sorrows of this life will then be at an end, so with the rest will our fears of
death: And therefore death should be the more welcome, because it is the end,
as of all other troubles, so of these disturbing fears.

14. Consider also what a multitude have trod this bloody way before you.
Almost all that ever were born have died, and are now in the world that you are
passing to. You are not the first that entered at this narrow gate. The dearest
Saints of God have died. If Abraham, Moses, Joshua, David, Peter and Paul could
not escape the stroke of death, what are you that you should murmur to follow
such and so many that have gone before you? You need not fear being solitary in
heaven. There are millions and millions more of Saints, than there are on
earth: Many that you knew; and millions more that will then be as dear to you
as if you had known them. Is it not better be among innocent souls, than a
defiled guilty world? Is it not better be where no sin enters, and never a
h^st or passion comes, than to live as among Wild beasts, with furious
unreasonable sinners? Is it not better be where Light is perfect, and all your
doubts are fully resolved, than in darkness, and perplexity, and among an
ignorant blind generation, that are enemies to the light which you desire! Is
it not better be where is nothing but the perfect love of the Infinite God, in
perfect Saints and blessed Angels, than to live among perverse ungodly men that
make you almost weary of your lives? If it be a delight to us to read the
writings of the illuminated Saints of God, and we think them such Jewels and
Ornaments in our Libraries; what a pleasure would it be to converse with them
that wrote these Books, and that in their celestial perfection, where they have
attained a thousand times more light than before they had; and where all the
doubts are resolved which their books could not resolve. O blessed Society, in
comparison of that we now converse with!

15. Nay more, lest the bloody way of death should seem too strange and
terrible to us, the Lord Jesus our Head has trod that path; and that of
purpose to conquer death, by taking away the sting and principal cause of
terrors, and making that a passage to felicity, that was a passage to
everlasting misery: So that ever since Christ has gone this way, there is no
such danger in it to his followers. Where the Captain of our salvation goes,
his Soldiers may boldly follow him. For as much as the children were partakers
of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part with them, that he might
destroy by death him that had the power of death, that is the Devil; and might
deliver them that through fear of death, were all their life time subject to
bondage] Heb. 2. 14, 15. He has cleared our way, and taken out of it the
forest thorns, and has prepared us an habitation with himself. And shall we
fear to go the way that Christ has gone, and purposely gone to clear it for us?

16. Moreover Consider, that the Celestial inhabitants have purposely made
themselves familiar with us in this lower world, that they might acquaint us
with themselves, and lead us upto their blessed habitation, and fit us for it;
No man of common reason can doubt but that those more capacious glorious parts
of the Universe, are stored with inhabitants answerable to their glory; when we
see every corner of the lower world to be replenished with inhabitants. And
Scripture and some experience tells us, that those Angels of God are conversant
here about us men: They bear us up in their hands, that we dash not our foot
against a stone, they pitch their tents and encamp about us, as an appointed
guard for our security: It is their very office: for what are they but
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them that shall be heirs of
salvation? Heb. 1. 14. They converse with us, though we see them not, and are
about us night and day; They are among us in our holy assemblies, observing our
behavior before the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 10. and they are witnesses of our good
and evil, Eccles. 5. 6. From them, as the Servants of God, was the Law
received, Acts 7. 53. Gal. 3. 19. Heb. 2. 2. They read our books, and study
with us the Mysteries of the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1. 12. And as near as they are to
God, they are glad to make the Church their book in which to read his manifold
wisdom, and know it by beholding it in us as in a glass, Ephesians. 3. 10. The
Nations have their Angels: The Churches have their Angels; and the particular
Saints also have their Angels; Dan. 10. 13, 20, 21, Rev. 1. 20. Acts 12. 15.
Mat. 18. 10. They are not strangers with us, but have charge of us to keep us
in all our ways, Psalm. 91. 10, 11, 12. They rejoice in our conversion, Luke 15.
10. They are part of the heavenly Society that we are already listed in, Heb.
12. 22. They ascend and descend as ordinary passengers between heaven and
earth, Genesis 28. 12. They are round about us, and we live as in their Camp,
Psalm. 34. 7. Before them we must be confessed or denied, Luke 12. 8, 9. They
convoy our departed souls to Christ, Luke 16. 22. They shall attend Christ at
his second coming, as they prcolaimed his first, and attended him on earth,
Matthew. 25. 31. Mar. 8. 38. They shall be his Heralds to call up the dead to
judgment, Mat. 13. 39, 49. and 24. 31. And at last we shall be their
companions and equal to them, Luke 20. 36. So that you see we have the same
Society invisible, which we shall have in heaven: Yea and sometime when God is
pleased, they manifest their presence by visible or audible apparitions. And
shall we fear to remove into the presence of these blessed spirits that now
attend us, and are still about us, and the instruments of so much of our good?

Yea the Lord Jesus Christ came down to be familiar with us, and to bring us
into a state of friendship, and holy boldness with God himself: And yet shall
we draw back?

17. I would put this question to you for your serious answer, Can you be
contented, yea do you desire, to have no more of God than here you have? Is
this much of the knowledge of him, and his will and works sufficient for you?
Would you be no nearer him, and enjoy no more of him? What ever your flesh say,
sure the love of God in your hearts will not suffer you considerately to say
so. Consult with your new nature, with the holy principle that is in you; Me
thinks you should not be content to remain for ever at such a distance from God
as you are? If you can, I blame you not to be afraid of death. If not; Why then
are you loath to go to him?

18. And I would ask you also, Whether you are content with the measure of
sanctification which you have, or which is to be attained in this life? Are you
content to live for ever with no more knowledge or love of God? No more faith
or love to Christ? No more sense of the worth of Grace? No more righteousness
or peace or joy in the Holy Ghost? No more meekness, humility, or heavenly
mindedness? Are you contented rather to live for ever under all the pride and
ignorance and passion, and selfishness and lust and worldliness, and all other
sins that here beset you, rather than to remove to the place of perfection, and
yield that death shall break the vessel and nest of your corruptions? If you
care so little for the grace of God, and see so little beauty in his image, and
see so little odiousness in sin, that you had rather keep it for ever, than go
to God by the passage of death, I blame you not to be afraid to die: But if
otherwise; Why do you desire perfection and deliverance, and yet be so loath to
come and receive it? When you know that it is not to be had on earth.

19. Moreover, are you contented to remain for ever as unserviceable to God as
here you are? Alas! how little do you for him: how much do you to displease
him? lay together all the service of your lives, and how small and poor a
matter is it? And would you still live at these rates? Will this content you?
Me thinks it should not if you have grace in your hearts. Why then do you not
desire to depart and to be with Christ? There you shall be perfectly fitted for
his service, and therefore perfectly perform it. What other service God will
have for us, we cannot yet tell; but Love and Praise we are sure will be the
chief, and the rest will be good and holy and honorable, what ever it be. If
you are Christians, me thinks the sense of your unprofitableness and of your
unpleasing frame of heart and life, should be your daily grief! and therefore
you should desire the state where you may be more serviceable, and not be so
unwilling of it.

20. Lastly, I would ask you, Are you contented to attain no other end of all
your life and labors and sufferings than here you do attain? What is it that
you pray for, and seek and strive for? is it for no more than is to be had on
earth? If you have no higher design, intentions or desires, I cannot much blame
you to be loath to die. But if you have, me thinks no man should be unwilling to
attain his end. What have you done and suffered so much for heaven, and now
would you not go to it? Had you rather all your labor were lost? Do you desire
to be happy, or do you not? If you do, (as certainly you do) would you not go
where happiness it to be had, when you are sure that it is not not to be had on
earth? What say you! is there not plain reason in all this that I propound to
you? It is a sad case, when men seek not God and Heaven as their felicity, but
only as a lesser evil than hell, which they would endure, rather than enjoy,
when they can keep no longer this earthly life which they account their
felicity; where this is the case, it is a sad case. And were not this a common
case, there would not be so much unwillingness to depart.

And now Christian Reader, I beseech thee weigh these foregoing Considerations,
and judge whether it be not a contradiction to thy profession, and unseemly for
a believer to be unwilling to die when God shall call him: Much more to cast
away evelasting life, for the saving of his temporal life but a little longer!
O learn the needful lesson of self-denial, especially in this point of denying
your lives! He that can do this, can do all; and may be sure that he is
mortified indeed: And he that can do all the rest, and sticks but at this, and
could part with any thing for Christ save his life, does indeed do nothing, nor
is it esteemed self-denying. It is a lesson therefore that is exceeding
necessary to be learned, and worthy all your time and diligence, even to deny
your Lives for the love of Christ.

Perhaps you will say, We live in days of peace and liberty, and therefore are
not like to be called to Martyrdom: What need then have we to learn this
lesson? I answer, 1. You are uncertain what changes you may see: but if you
never suffer, yet you must be sure that you have a heart that would suffer if
God did call you to it: For though you may be saved without suffering, where
you are not called to it, yet you cannot be saved without a heart that would
suffer if you were put upon it. 2. And if you cannot deny your lives for
Christ, you will not sincerely deny your pleasures, or profits or honors for
him. If you would not suffer death for him if he called you to it, you will not
sincerely suffer losses and wrongs and reproaches for him, which almost every
Christian must expect. So that to try your own sincerity, you should look after
it. 3. And it is certain that death will shortly come; and then if you have not
learnt this lesson, to deny your selves even in case of life, you will die
unwillingly and uncomfortably.

At least me thinks, I might reason thus with any man of you, good or bad.
Either death is indeed terrible, or not. If it be not, why do you so fear it
when it comes! If it be, why do you not as well fear it before it comes, even
in your youth and health? For you are sure then that you must die, as if it
were upon you. A wonderful thing it is, that man's heart should be so
unreasonably insensible; and that there should be so great a difference in the
affections of most in regard of death. It Is no matter of doubt or controversy
whether they shall die. He is a block and not a man, that knows it not as
certainly now, as he shall do in his sickness. And yet, in health these
wretches will not be awakened so much to fear it, as may restrain them from
sin, and help them to prepare for it. It Is troublesome precise talk with them,
to talk of making ready to die: Either they slight it, or love not to hear or
think of it. And yet the same men when death is coming, and they see they must
away, are even amazed with fear and horror: And I cannot blame them unless they
were in a better case. But this I must blame them for, as most unreasonable,
that they can make such a lamentable complaint when death and Hell are near
hand, and yet make so light of it all their life time.

CHAP. XXXIX. Answer to their doubts that fear death.
BUt because this is the hardest part of self-denial, and yet most necessary,
and the particular subject of my Text, I shall stay upon it yet so much longer
as to resolve a question of some doubting Christians, and to give you some
Directions for the furtherance of selfdenial herein.

Object. If it be a necessary part of self-denial to deny our own lives; I am
much afraid that I am no Disciple of Christ, as having no true self-denial? For
I find that for all these Reasons I cannot be willing to die, but when you have
said all that can be said, death is the most terrible thing in the world to me.
Answ. I pray you lay together these following particulars for answer to this
great and common doubt. 1. Death as death, is naturally dreadful to all, and
the best men as men are naturally averse to it and abhor it. No man can desire
death as death, nor ought to do it. If it had not been an evil to nature, it
had not been fit to be the matter of Gods punishment, and to be Threatened to
the world. Threatenings would not do their work if that which is threatened were
not naturally evil, or hurtful and dreadful to the subject. To threaten men
with a benefit is a contradiction, as much as to promise him a mischief, and
more. 2. It is not therefore a simple. Displacency or Averseness to die, that
God requires you to lay by. Self-denial consists not in reconciling us to
Death as death; For then he might as well persuade us to become Angels, as to
deny our selves, and Preachers had as hard a work to do as to persuade men to
cease to be men. Death will be an enemy as long as it is death. Even the
separated soul has so natural an inclination to union with its Body, that the
separation is part of the penalty to it: And though heaven be their joy, and
Christ their life and fullness, yet the separation from the body which they have
even with Christ is a penalty; and they have not that perfect measure of Joy
and Glory as they shall have when they are joined in the body again. So that
separation as such is penal to the soul in blessedness. And even the separated
soul of Jesus Christ that was more blessed than ours, was, as separated, in a
state of penalty, when his body was in the grave (Of which see my Appendix to
the Reformed Pastor, about the Descent into Hell.) 3. That which you have to
look after therefore in your souls, is not a love to death, or willingness to
death as death, which no man has or should have; but it is, 1. A Submission to
it as a less evil than sin and Hell and the Displeasure of God: and a choosing
rather to die than wilfully to sin and forsake the Lord. 2. And a Love to that
glory in the fruition of God, which death is the passage to. Seeing we cannot
obtain the end of our faith and patience by any easier passage than death, you
must rather be content to go this strait and grievous way, than miss of the
state of eternal blessedness: Let death be never so odious and dreadful to you,
if you had but rather die than forsake Christ by sin, or miss of everlasting
life with God, you have that true self-denial, even of life it self, which is
required in my Text. 4. And yet even a gracious soul may be so much unprepared
as to desire to stay yet longer on earth, though he be absent from the Lord
while he is present in the body; that so a better preparation may be made: And
also the love of God may make a man desire to stay yet longer for the service
of the Church, or to be with Paul in a strait between two, Phil. 1. 21, 22, 23.
5. Have you not such pleasant apprehensions of the New Jerusalem, and the
coming of Christ in glory, and the blessed state of the Saints in heaven, as
that you could most gladly enter into that blessed state by any other way than
death: And had you not rather die, than miss of that felicity? At least, when
you know that die you must, had you not rather die sooner, even a violent death
by persecution, than miss of your eternal life, by saving your lives a little
longer? 6. And for your unwillingness to die, as death is the last enemy to be
conquered by Christ, at the Resurrection, so the fears of death and the power
of it, is the last evil that we shall be troubled with; and you must not expect
to be fully freed from these fears, in this life: for death will be death, and
man will be man. But yet let me tell you that before you die, God may very much
abate your fears; and very ordinarily does so with his servants; 1. By giving
them that grace that is suited to a dying state; and 2. By the help of sickness
and pain it self: And that is one great reason why sickness shall usually go
before death, that pain and misery may make the flesh even a weary of it self,
and make the soul a weary of its companion, and both a weary of this miserable
life.

And now I shall briefly name some few Directions which if you will practice,
you will more easily submit to death.

CHAP. XL. Directions to be willing to die.
Direct. 1. BY all means endeavor the strengthening of your Belief of the
Reality of eternal life, and the truth of the promise of Christ concerning it.
For if you Believe it not, you cannot die for it; nor cheerfully submit to a
natural death, through the hopes of it. This is the sum or principal work of
the Christian faith, to Believe the everlasting life as procured for us by the
love of the Father, the Obedience, Death, Resurrection and Intercession of the
Son, and the Sanctification of the Holy Ghost. It is the unsoundness or the
weakness of this Belief, that is the principal cause of our unwillingness to
die.

Direct. 2. By all means endeavor to get and maintain the Assurance of your
Title to this Promise and Felicity. Get sound evidence, and keep it clear:
Expunge all blots without delay. Take heed of such sin as wounds Conscience,
and wastes comfort, and grieveth the spirit of Adoption by which you are
sealed to the day of Redemption, and by which you have your peace and comforts.
If by such sin your souls are clouded and estranged from God, be diligent in
seeking for healing and reconciliation; and rest not till your peace be made
with God. For while you think of him as displeased, you will be afraid of
coming to him, and this will double the fears of Death.

Direct. 3. Deny your selves first in the carnal and worldly comforts of this
life, or else you are unlikely to deny your selves in the matter of Life it
self. Disuse your selves from unnecessary pleasures of the flesh: And learn to
endure dishonor, contempt and reproach from the world, and sickness and
poverty when it is inflicted on you by the hand of God. Till you can deny your
ease, and profit, and appetite, and honor, and all the delight of this present
world, you are never likely to deny your lives sincerely. To deny your lives
does contain the denying of all these and more; and therefore you must learn
the lesser, if you would do the greater. These are the parts of life as it
were; and it is easier thus to overcome it in its parts than in the whole; when
particular Soldiers are destroyed, the Army is the weaker.

And the use of suffering the Afflictions of this life, will make you hardy,
and make death seem a smaller matter. For when you thus Die Daily, you will the
more easily die once.

Besides, Death is half disarmed when the Pleasures and Interests of the flesh
are first denied. For the leaving of fleshly contents and pleasures, is much of
the reason of men's unwillingness to die. And therefore when these are denied
beforehand, the Reasons of your unwillingness are taken away. If you pull down
the Nest, the Birds will be gone. Men that are loath to leave their Country,
would willingly be gone, if their houses were fired, or they were turned out of
doors, and their friends and goods were all sent away. This is it that makes
men so unwilling to die, because they practice not Mortification in their
health, but contrarily study to live as Pleasingly as may be to the flesh, and
think it part of their Christian Liberty, thus making Christ a carnal Savior
as the Jews conceive of their expected Messiah; and taking up with a carnal
false salvation, not purchased by Christ, but given by Satan in the name of
Christ, and assumed by themselves. They make it their business to have
buildings, and lands, and meats, and drinks, and honors, and all things as
pleasing as may be to the flesh, and then they complain that they are unwilling
to die: and I easily believe him: it is no wonder! They make it the work of
their lives to feather their nests, and make Provision for the flesh; and then
complain, that they are loath to leave those nests that they have been
feathering so long, and loath to scatter all the heap and treasure which they
have been gathering. And did you think that gathering it was the way to make
you willing to leave it? Men load themselves with the lumber and baggage of the
world, and then complain that they cannot travel on their journey, but had
rather sit down. They fall a building them habitations in their way, when they
should have none but Inns or Tents; and when they have bestowed all their time,
and cost, and charges on them, they complain of their hearts for being loath to
leave them. Such mad doings as these are not the way to be willing to die: To
provide for self and flesh in your Lifetime, is not the way to Deny your
Lives. Sirs, the way is this, if you will learn it, and stick not at the cost
and trouble: Self must be here stripped naked of all its carnal comforts, so that
it shall have nothing left o fly to or trust upon, nor nothing lest that it can
take delight in, and then it will away. If you would drive ou^ ^n ill Tenant,
you will cast out all their goods, and leave them nothing but the bare walls,
and not so much as a bed to lie on, and uncover the house over their heads, and
then they will be gone. So if you cast out all your sensual commodities and
delights, that when the flesh looks about, it shall see nothing but the bare
walls, and cannot find a resting place, then death will be less grievous and
less unwelcome. Or rather indeed even the flesh and self must be mortified; and
in the sense in which it must be denied, it must have no being or life, (that
is, as it is withdrawn from its subordination to God) And then there will be
nothing to rise up against your submission to Death. Though nature as nature
will keep you from Loving death as death, yet were but self-denial perfect,
there would be nothing to keep you from submitting to it, and desiring to pass
through it to immortality. O that you would but try such a self-denying life,
and you would certainly die an easy, comfortable Death.

Direct. 4. Suffer not unworthy thoughts of God to abide in your soul. Think
not of his Infinite Love and Goodness with doubtfulness or diminution. You will
never be willing to come to God, while you think of him as cruel, or as a
despiser of his creatures, or unwilling to do Good. But when once you think of
him as the surest greatest Good, and your fastest friend, and the most lovely
object that can be conceived of, and these thoughts are deep and wrought into
the very nature of your soul, then you will be ready more cheerfully to die. No
man can love the presence of a tyrant or an enemy, or of him that is so far
above him, that there is no communion with him to be had. If you entertain such
blasphemous thoughts of God, you are unlikely ever to desire his presence. See
you think as honorably and magnificently of the Goodness and Love of God, as
you do of his Knowledge or his Power; and as you would abhor any extenuating
conceptions of the one, so do of the other; And then the Loveliness and glory
of his face, will draw out your desires and make you long to be with God.

Direct. 5. And by such means as this aforesaid, Labor to bring up your souls
to live in the Love of God. It is love that is the Divine and heavenly nature
in us: and therefore must needs incline us heaven-wards. The nature of love is
to long after communion with him that we love. The more Love, the more of God
in the soul, and the more desire after God. This is the grace that must live
for ever, and therefore bends toward the place of its perfection. It Is want
of Love to God, that makes most of us so contented to be from him. Strengthen
and exercise all other graces, as far as in you lies: but above all live in
the exercise of this enjoying, heavenly grace.

Direct. 6. Consider of all the burdens that are here upon you, which should
make you long to be with God. One would think the feeling of them should force
you to consideration and weariness of them, and make the thoughts of rest to be
sweet to you. Have you yet not sin enough, and sorrow, and fear, and trouble
enough? Or must God lay a greater load on you, to make you desire to be
disburdened? Every hour you spend, and every creature you have to do with,
afford you some occasion of renewing your desires to depart from these and be
with Christ.

Direct. 7. Observe and magnify that of God which is here revealed to you in
his word and works. Study him and admire him in Scripture, study and admire him
in the frame of nature; And when you look toward Sun, or Moon, or Sea, or
Land, and perceive how little it is that you know, and how desirable it is to
know them perfectly, think then of that estate, where you shall know them all,
in God himself who is more than all. Study and admire him in the course of
Providence: study and admire him in the person of Christ; in the frame of his
holy life; in the work of Redemption; in the holy frame of his Laws and
Covenants; study and admire him in his Saints and the frame of his holy Image
on their souls. This life of studying and admiring God, and dwelling upon him
with all our souls, will exceedingly dispose us to be willing to come to him,
and to submit to death.

Direct. 8. Live also in the daily exercise of holy Joy and Praise to God;
which is the heavenly Employment. For if you use your selves to this heavenly
life, it will much incline you to desire to be there. Exercise fear, and godly
sorrow, and care in their places: but especially after Faith and Love, be sure
to live in holy Joy and Praise. Be much in the consideration of all that Riches
of grace in Christ, communicated and to be communicated to you. And be much in
Thanks to God for his mercies; and chearing and comforting your soul, in the
Lord your God: And thus the Joy of Grace will much dispose you to the Joys of
glory; and the Peace which the Kingdom of God consists in, will incline you
to the peace of the everlasting Kingdom: and the cheerful Praising of God on
Earth, in Psalms or other ways of Praise, will prepare and dispose you to the
heavenly Praises. And therefore, Christians exceedingly wrong their souls, and
hinder themselves from a willingness to be with God in spending all their days
in drooping, or doubting, or worldly dullness, and laying by so much the Joy of
the Saints, and the Praises of God.

Direct. 9. Dwell on the believing fore-thoughts of the everlasting glory which
you must possess. Think what it is that others are enjoying while you are here;
and what you must be, and possess, and do for ever. Daily think of the
Certainty, Perfection, and Perperuity of your Blessedness. What a life it will
be, to see the blessed God in his Glory, and taste of the fullness of his love,
and to see the glorified Son of God, and with a perfected soul and body to be
perfectly taken up in the Love, and Joy, and Praises of the Lord, among all his
holy Saints and Angels, in the heavenly Jerusalem. You must by the exercise of
Faith and Love, in holy Meditation and Prayer even dwell in the Spirit, and
converse in Heaven, while your bodies are on earth, if you would entertain the
news of death as beseems a Christian. But of this at large elsewhere.

Direct. 10. Lastly, if you would be willing to submit to death, resign up your
own understandings and wills to the wisdom and the will of God; and Know not
good and evil for your carnal selves: but wholly trust your lives and souls to
the Wisdom and Love of your dearest Lord. Must you be carking and caring for
your selves when you have an Infinite God engaged to care for you? O says
self, I am not able to bear the terrors and pangs of death. O says Faith, My
Lord is easily able to support me, and it is his undertaken work to do it: My
work is but to Please him; and it is his work to take care of me in life and
death; and therefore though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,
yet will I fear no evil. O says Self, I am utterly a stranger to another
world! I know not what I shall see, nor what I shall be, nor whither I shall go
the next minute after death: None come from the dead to satisfy us of these
things! O but says Faith, My blessed Father and Redeemer is not a stranger to
the place that I must go to! He knows it, though I do not! He knows what I
shall be and do, and whither I shall go; and all is in his power: And seeing it
belongs not to me but to him to dispose of me, and give me the promised reward,
it is meet that I rest in his understanding; And it is better for me, that his
Infinite Wisdom dispose of my departing soul, than my shallow insufficient
knowledge. I may much more acquiesce in his knowledge than my own. O but says
self, I fear it may prove a change of darkness and confusion to my soul! what
will become of me, I cannot tell. O but says Faith, I am sure I am in the
hands of Love! and such Love as is Omnipotent and engaged for my good! and how
can it then go ill with me! If I had my own will, I should not fear: And how
much less should I fear when I am at the will of God, even of most Wise,
Almighty Love.

There is no true Center for the soul to Rest in but the Will of God. It is our
business to Obey and Please his Will, as dutiful Children; and to commit our
selves contentedly to his Will for the absolute disposal of us. It is not
possible that the Will of an Heavenly Father should be against his Children,
whose desire and sincere endeavor has been to Obey and Please his Will. And
therefore learn this as your great and necessary Lesson, with Joyful Confidence
to Commit your selves, and your departing souls to your Fathers Will, as
knowing that your Death is but the execution of that Will, which is engaged to
cause all things to work together for your good, Romans 8. 28. And say with Paul,
I suffer, but am not ashamed [ for I know whom I have believed, and I am
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against
that day, 2 Timothy 1. 12. and 1 Timothy 4. 10. [ Therefore we labor and suffer --
because we trust in the living God, who is the Savior of all men, especially
of those that believe] say therefore as Job, [ Though he kill me, yet will I
trust in him] Or rather as Christ, [ Father, into thy hands I commend my
Spirit] Luke 23. 46. If the hands and Will of the Father was the Rock and
comfort of Christ in his suffering and death, so also it must be to us. See
therefore that in your health you Kill your own wills, that when Death comes,
self may have no will to strive against the Will of God; but as your Heaven it
self will be your Rest in the Will of God; so Rest in it in death, that you may
have a taste of Heaven in Death, and sure that will sweeten it, if any thing
will.

II. I Have hitherto showed you wherein self-denial does consist, first as to
the heart and root of it, which is the Mortification of the selfish Inclination
or Disposition: and then, as to the first of the three parts of its Objective
Interest, which is sensitive Pleasure: I should now proceed to the other two
parts of its objective Interest: And the second is, Worldly Gain or Profit,
which the Apostle John calls [the Lust of the Eyes] and puts next to the
[Lust of the Flesh.] But I have already written a Treatise of this by it self,
viz. Of our Crucifixion of the World; and therefore I may well forbear it here.

CHAP. XLI. Honor and Pride; And 1. Climbing high, etc.
III. THe third part of the Objective Interest of Self, is that which goes
commonly under the name of Honor; and is called by the Apostle, [Pride of
Life] and put by him in the third place. And of this, I intend, if God will
give me time and strength, to write also a Treatise by it self, and therefore
should say nothing of it here; but only lest I should not have time to do that
which I desire, I shall briefly name you ten of the particulars under this head
of Honor, which you must deny: that is, Ten ways wherein men exercise their
Pride.

1. One work of Pride is to climb higher into places of superiority and honor
and command. Poor men that are out of hope, and in no capacity for rising, feel
not much of this, though the Disposition to it be in them as well as others,
because it is not drawn forth by temptations. But where opportunity serves,
there is nothing wherein selfishness and Pride does more constantly and
obstinately show it self than in this. It is the Nature of selfishness to
aspire after the highest exaltation in the world that can be attained. We may
easily observe in Kingdoms and Corporations, and all Societies of men, what
Christ observed at their feasts, that [they choose out the chief rooms, and sit
with the highest] Luke 14. 7, 8. What eager desires have they to be above other
men? If any office or seat of Honor be void, there is few that apprehend any
possibility of attaining it, that want a will to it; Yea few that will not seek
and strive for it, and envy those that carry it before them; and hate, or bear
a grudge to those that were against their rising: yea few but venture on the
most unlawful means to accomplish their desires, and yet will scarce believe
that they are unlawful, because they think them necessary to their ends. There
is few, if they had the choice of a man to any vacant place of honor, that
would choose any other but themselves; unless their unfitness were likely more
to dishonor them, or some way to make their honors too burdensome to them. No
man in their eyes is so fit as themselves, or so worthy as themselves: Or if it
be their Children or Kinsmen that stand for it, or any that self has special
interest in, they seem the worthiest for the place, because they are related to
them. Especially if it be any eminent Dignity or command, that seems to them a
prey that is worth the hunting after. O the blinding, bewitching, befooling
power of Pride and Selfishness! How commonly does it rule! How few are those
holy, happy men, that have escaped and overcome it! How few Societies be there
in the world, whether Corporations, Colleges, or the like, but Pride and
Selfishness makes their Governors? How few Nations on the Earth, where Pride
and Selfishness makes not their Kings or Sovereigns? And is it any wonder if
they be all ill-governed then, where the Devil does so much to choose the
Governors? I know that God over-ruleth all, and restrains the lusts of men,
and crosses their designs; but yet their lusts and the Devil may Rule to their
destruction for all that.

Object. But is it not lawful to seek for dignity and superiority?

Answ. No: not for self; but for God it is. You have warnings enough, and plain
enough from Christ, if warnings would serve turn: He has bid you [ sit not
down in the highest room:] he has sharply rebuked them that strive for
precedence, and who shall be the greatest: He has told you, he that will be
the greatest, must be the servant of all: and has told you of stooping to the
feet of the meanest, and condescending to men of low degree; and has set
little children before you to be your Teachers, and assured you that there is
no entrance into his Kingdom in any other posture. He has told you that God
resists and abhors the Proud, and that he that humbles himself shall be
exalted, and he that exalts himself shall be brought low.

Object. But how shall I know whether I seek preferment for God or my self? I
hope it is God that I seek it for.

Answ. 1. How shall a man know his own mind? you have dark hearts indeed if you
cannot know your own Intentions, if you are but observant, and diligent, and
willing to know them. 2. He that seeks not Dignities for himself, but for
God, will never seek to put by another that is as able and likely to do God
service in the place as he: Nor will he seek it at all, if he see that God may
be served as well without his seeking it: but will stay till God call him to
it, and then he may expect his help and blessing. Few do intend God in it, that
are Exalters of themselves. Indeed if you see that an enemy of the Gospel, or
some unworthy, ungodly man is like to come into the place if you seek it not,
by which the Church or the Commonwealth, is like to be much injured, then you
may seek it by lawful means; so that you can truly say, I would not do it for
my self; but it is to serve God for his peoples good. 3. Nay he that seeks
not the Dignity for himself, will seek first and more to get in another, if he
know another that is fitter than himself, and likely to do God more service:
and this he will do heartily, and not dissemblingly. If you had not rather a
worthier and more useful man were preferred before you, and seek not more for
such than for your selves, you are plain self-seekers, whatever you may
pretend. If a man should come to almost any of the Rulers of Nations, Churches,
Colleges or Corporations that have scrued themselves into the place of
Government, and ask them, Did you know no man fitter for this place than your
self, and have you sought first to get in a fitter man? what can they for shame
say to it? If they say, No; they proclaim themselves notorious self-seekers!
For it is very seldom, that an humble man is allowed to judge himself the
fittest. 4. And he that seeks Dignities for God and not for himself, will use
them for God, and not for himself. For the Intention will command the use. He
will deny himself in his superiority as well as if he were in the lowest place;
and will contrive how he may most serve and honor God: and this will be easily
seen in his endeavors, whether it be God or self that he serves and lives to.

And now I advise all that love their souls, to take heed of this aspiring act
of selfishness. If you will needs seek your selves, and be your own Exalters,
you must trust to your selves, and be your own defenders: And then you will
find that the lowest condition in the hand of God, is more safe and comfortable
than the highest in your own hand. If God should lift you up to the top of the
highest mountains, you may expect either a calm, or his protection in the
storm, and to be as safe as those below: but if you lift up your selves, and
Satan carry you to the pinnacle of the Temple, take heed lest you thence cast
down your selves by his temptations that did lift you up. Dignities and
Honors, are not indeed the things that they seem to be to carnal eyes that see
not the inside, but judge by the outward glittering show. There is most holy
Duty and work to be done, where is the greatest dignity. And certainly the life
of greatest work and labor is not the life of greatest ease, or carnal
pleasure: especially when it is the work of God that you must do: a work which
all the world is against, and which Satan and all his power will resist: and
which must meet with enmity and abundance of enmity, when ever you set about
it: Though you are Commanders, yet you are Soldiers; and you that are Leaders
have the hottest standing, and must expect the sharpest conflicts. Do you think
of your Dignities and Offices as places of mere superiority and honor and
accommodation to your carnal selves? then are you Carnal men, and enter upon
you know not what, and make your selves Traitors and Enemies to God, whom he is
engaged to bring down and be avenged on at last: you debase the sacred coin
which bears the stamp and name of God. Magistracy is holy, and the Image of
God, and you basely turn it into the Image of the flesh; and blot out Gods name
from it, and stamp upon it the name of self, and traitorously make it your own,
which was eminently his. Believe it, whoever you are, if you seek for places of
Rule and Dignity with carnal selfish expectations, you must either use them
accordingly when you have them, which is the readiest way to damnation in the
world, or else you must find your expectations crossed, and mifs of all your
carnal Ends; and find that the greatest toil and burden, which you expected
should have been your chief content. God has annexed the Honor and outward
greatness, partly to encourage you to so hard a work, lest the burden should be
too heavy, and partly to enable you to perform it, and give you some advantages
against opposition. But though the clothing of Authority and Rule be splendid,
the substance thus covered is extraordinary Labor, and duty, and suffering. It
is Honorable, but it is an honorable burden, and an honorable painful
difficult work. So that if men understood what Office and Authority is in
Church or Commonwealth, and looked after the substance as well as the
ornaments; the work as well as the Honor and Greatness; it would be an eminent
piece of selfdenial for a man to submit to the call of God, to be a Prince, a
Judge, a Justice, or but a Constable: and men would as hardly be drawn to take
the Office, as they are now to do the work of the Office in faithfulness and
with courage and zeal for God; and that is almost as hard as an offender is
drawn to the stocks: Offices and high places, are not intended to accommodate
the flesh; nor are they things to be ambitiously desired and sought for, by
such as understand the Ends and use of them: but they are such laborious,
hazardous ways of serving God, which a wise man knows must cost him more, than
the honor will repay, and which a Good man will not run away from, when God
calls him thereto; but will so far Deny himself as to submit to them; but not
thrust himself into them, as the Proud and selfish do. It is a work of Patience
to a Godly man to be thus exalted; but it is a work of Pride and self-seeking
in others. Deny your selves so far as to submit to Government and dignity, and
bear it patiently if it be cast upon you, as being an excellent opportunity of
serving God: But wi^^ not for it, because of the Honor and advantages to the
flesh: much less contend for it, or set your hearts on it. He that seeks an
Office or Honor for himself, must have another heart before he will use it for
God. It Is better with Saul to hide our selves from honor, than with Absalom to
contrive and seek it: but best of all with David to stay till God call us, and
then obey.

CHAP. XLII. The Love and good Word of others denied.
2. ANother part of selfish Interest to be Denied, is the Love, and good Will,
and Word of others. This is a thing that may and must be desired to good ends;
but not for carnal self. When Paul looked at Gods honor and the good of souls,
he [ became all things to all men that he might by all means save some; and
this he did, not for self but for the Gospels sake, and yet for himself in
subordination to God, that he might be partaker of it with them] He would give
no offense to Jew or Gentile, or the Church of God: but pleased all men in all
things (that tended to their good) not seeking his own profit, but the profit
of many that they may be saved] 1 Cor. 10. 32, 33. And he has left it as the
duty of the strongest Christians, [ not to please themselves, but every one to
please his neighbor for his good to edification.] But when Paul looked at
himself, and his esteem among men, then he says [ With me it is a very small
thing, that I should be judged of you or of man's judgment] 1 Cor. 4. 3. And
Gal. 1. 10. [ Do I seek to please men? For if I yet pleased men, I should not
be the Servant of Christ.] Good natures are loath to provoke others to
displeasure: and Grace moves us to Please men for the saving of their souls.
But it is Pride and Self-seeking to desire to set up our selves in men's esteem,
and to endear our selves for our selves into their affections. It is Gods
highest honor to be highliest esteemed, and dearliest beloved, as being the
most perfect and transcendent Good. And Proud men in this world aspire to his
Prerogative; and much affect to be beloved of all: and fain they would sit near
men's hearts, and be the darlings of the world. This is a fine, but dangerous
sin: and I doubt many that are guilty of it, never well considered that it is a
sin, and so great a sin as indeed it is. Deny your selves in this. It is God
that must be Loved of all, and not you: You must be content to be hated of all
men for his name sake, that he may be beloved. Men's hearts were not made to be
your throne, but Gods. Your work is to Love, and not ambitiously to seek for
love. So far as your interest in men's affections does conduce to Gods honor,
and service, and their good, desire it, and spare not: But see that these be
really your ends. But for your selves take heed of desiring or seeking for men's
Love. They are apt enough to have inordinate affections to the creature without
your temptations. To Love God in you, and Love you for God, is their duty which
you may provoke them to in season: But seek not for any nearer interest in
them, nor for such a love as terminateth in your selves. Nature is exceeding
ambitious of being beloved: but steal not Gods due. You are to be suitors and
sollicitors for him, to win the hearts of as many as you can: and not to speak
for your selves in his stead. Thankfully accept of men's Ordinate Love to you,
if you have it: but if they deny it for you, or for the sake of Christ, and
turn it into hatred, do you deny your selves herein, and remember that it is no
more than you were forewarned of; and no more than your Lord and his worthiest
servants have endured: What a Pattern is Paul that tells his converts, he seeks
not theirs but them, as parents lay up for the children, and not children for
the parents, and would gladly spend, and be spent for them, though the more he
love, the less he were beloved] 2 Cor. 12. 14, 15. See that you Love God and
them, and that is your duty: do that and you need not take care for the Love of
men to you. Their Love is none of your felicity, and therefore their hatred
depriveth you not of your felicity: for that lies only in the Love of God.
Here therefore self must be denied.

CHAP. XLIII. The Reputation of Riches to be denied.
3 ANother part of the Honor which self must be denied in, is, The Reputation
of your Riches. For wealth is one thing that men are proud of. Some desire to
be esteemed richer than they are; and therefore go in the best apparel they can
get, that they may not be thought to be persons of the lowest poorest sort. And
some that are Rich, do glory in their Riches, and think they are much more to
be honored than the poor. But alas, if they had well read and considered what
Christ has said of the danger of the rich, particularly in Luke 12. and 16.
and 18. and 8. 14. Mat. 13. 22. Mark 10. 23. and what James says to them,
James 5. 1, 2. etc. they would see that Riches is not a thing to be Proud of.
Not many great and noble are called. God has chosen the poor of this world,
Rich in faith, to be heirs of the Kingdom. The talents for which we must give
such an account at the bar of Christ, should be rather the matter of our fear
and trembling than of our Pride. That which makes our passage to heaven to be
as the Camels through a needle's eye, I think should not much lift us up. All
the Riches of the world do make you never the better thought of with God, or
any wise man: Nor will they cause you to live a month the longer, or quiet
your Consciences, or save you from death, or the wrath of God. The only worth
of Riches, is, that you are better furnished than others to do God some good
service, by relieving the poor, and helping the Church, and furthering many
such good works: And for the sake of these good ends, you must patiently bear a
state of Riches, yea, and thankfully receive them, if they are given you by
God; though the care and labor in a faithful distribution of them, and the
danger of abusing them, and the reckoning to be made for them, are so great, as
may deter a wise man from a greedy seeking them, or glorying in them.

CHAP. XLIV. Comeliness and Beauty to be denied.
4. ANother part of the Honor that self must be denied in, is, The Reputation
of your personal comeliness or beauty: For such fools and children sin has
made folks, that many much set by the Reputation of these. And hence is most
commonly the abuse of Apparel. Every proud person is desirous of that which
will make them seem the handsomest or beautifullest persons unto others; and
make it their care to set forth themselves to the eyes of beholders. What they
indeed are, we can see as well in the meanest attire: but what they would be
thought to be, we may best see in this. But of this I spoke before; yea some
think that they are not Proud of their comeliness, yet cannot endure to be
esteemed ill-favored or uncomely, and so show that Pride which they would
deny. I confess these are commonly but the temptations of women, and procacious
youth. But one would think it should be easy for a few sober thoughts to cut
their combs, and let them see how little cause they have to be proud of beauty
or comeliness of the flesh. Alas what is that body that you are proud of! Filth
and corruption covered with a cleaner skin than some of your neighbors. Ah,
but the skin is thin, and if that be all you have to glory in, it is as frail,
as contemptible. There Is many a pretty flower in the common field that is
trodden down by the feet of beasts, that have a gloss and hue incomparably
beyond your beauty. I asked you before, what beauty you will have to glory of,
when you have dwelt but a few months in the grave; or if the small Pox, or
Leprosy, should clothe you with another colored skin: or if a Cancer should
but seize upon your face, and turn it into such an ugly shape, as makes men
tremble to behold it: or when wrinkled age has made you as another person: or
when death has deprived you of that soul, which was your beauty, and laid you
out as a prey and sacrifice to corruption. Ah that ever such a skin full of
dirt, such a bag of filth, should yet be proud, that is carried about by a
living soul, and by it kept a little while from falling down as a senseless
clod, and turning into a stinking corpse! They are short-sighted, and
short-witted as well as graceless, that cannot look so far before them or
within them, as to see that which may take them down from being proud of any
comeliness of the flesh. One would think this should be so easy a part of
selfdenial as any graceless one might reach, by a little use of the Reason that
is left them.

CHAP. XLV. Strength and Valor to be denied.
5. ANother piece of Vainglory to be Denied, is in the Reputation of strength
and valor. The witless part of men, especially in their procacious humors, do
use to be carried away with this, as witless women with the former. Hence
commonly are their matches of Running and Wrestling, and many exercises of
activity and strength: yea and hence commonly are their duels and murders: It
seems such a dishonorable thing to them, to be thought a Coward, or unable to
defend themselves, and to be crow'd over by their enemy, that they will venture
body and soul upon it, rather than they will put up such indignities, or lie
under the dishonor of being Cowards. Yea, and (would one think it) some
Jesuits are such Carnal Doctors that they te^ch men, that if they be
challenged, and their honor lie upon it, they may meet the challenger there in
a defensive posture, and fight with him to defend their honor: yea and in many
other cases, they may kill another for their Honor, seeing their honor is
more to them than their lives. O miserable Teachers, and miserable souls that
do obey them! Christ has taught you another lesson, even to despise the shame,
Heb. 12. 2, 3. and to humble your selves, and intimates that such cannot be
believers, which receive honor of one another, and seek not the honor that
comes from God only, Joh. 5. 44. It Is more Honor to obey God in suffering,
than be so valiant as to murder another man. The day is near when he will
appear the Honorable man, that was likest to Jesus Christ, that when he was
reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2. 23. Blind sinners! do you
think it more honorable to do hurt, than to suffer hurt? yea to be like the
Devil, who is a murderer, than to Christ that was a sufferer, and came not to
destroy men's lives, but to save them and lay down his own. Can any thing be
more Honorable than to be the children of the heavenly Father? and if you be
such, you must Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them that despightfully use you and persecute you]
Mat. 5. 44. What a Case are those men's understandings in that think it their
Honor to revenge themselves when God has so forbidden it? Romans 12. 19.

CHAP. XLVI. Wisdom and Learning to be denied.
6. ANother piece of Vainglory to be denied, is in the Reputation of Wisdom
and Learning. The things themselves are very excellent, and to be desired and
much sought after: but not for our own Honor, but the Service and Honor of
the Lord. And the greater is the worth of the thing, the greater is the
temptation to vainglory in them that have it, and the harder it is to deny
themselves herein. This part of self-denial consists not in a contempt of
Learning or Wisdom, nor a neglect of it: for this were a sin: but in a neglect
of self that would make an advantage of it, for its own carnal exaltation; and
in a contempt of the Honor and vainglory which may redound by it to our
selves, further than such honor is serviceable to God. O how sinful and
miserable a li^e do abundance of Learned men live in the world! Their whole
life is but one continued vice, and that a sin of a most heinous nature, even
the exercise of Pride and Self-seeking, when yet they take themselves for
Saints, because they are not such as are accounted scandalous sinners in the
world. They sacrifice their precious time and studies to their Pride and
Phansies, and not to God: Too many hours and years are spent to gain the
Reputation of being Learned men: Too many disputations are managed; yea (odious
sacrilege) too many Sermons are preached, and too many learned Books are
written, to gain the Reputation of being Learned men! Ah miserable, low,
unworthy studies! Profane Sermons! ungodly labors! and poor reward! O how it
netleth some Proud spirits if they hear that they are taken to be no Scholars!
And how many take their University Degrees, to be merely the wings of this part
of their vainglory. Learning and Degrees, and the Reputation of it, are all
good, if they be valued and used but for God: But they are so much the worse
when they are sacrificed to self and and made the food and fuel of Pride. Learn
therefore this part of self-denial.

CHAP. XLVII. Reputation of Gifts and spiritual Abilities, etc.
7. ANother piece of vainglory to be denied, is, The Reputation of our Gifts
and spiritual Abilities: I mean such as Praying, and Preaching, and Disputing,
and good Conference, to have readiness for words, and liveliness of expression,
and exactness of method: to be esteemed in all these a very able man by others,
is an high part of self-interest to be denied. The duties themselves must be
denied by none, for they are the service of God, commanded us by his word: But
it is the Honor that self presumes to hunt after in these holy things. And it
is a double sin here to seek our selves, when we are specially commanded to
seek God! and where the work is instituted for that end! and when we pretend to
seek God, and to deny our selves! The greater are our abilities to do God
service, the more resolutely and thankfully we should improve them in his
service. But we must remember that they are given us to save others by our
improvement, and not to destroy our selves by our Pride. Get as great abilities
as you can, and when you have them, thank God for them, and use them for him to
the uttermost of your Power: but take heed lest Pride should sacrifice them to
your selves and pervert them from your Masters service.

The persons that have most need of this advice are especially these following.
1. Young unexperienced Professors, that are but lately turned to a Profession
of a Godly life; that have so much illumination as shows them much that
before they knew not, and raises them above the vulgar measure, but yet has
made them but smatterers and half-knowing men; These are they that the Apostle
requires should not be made Bishops or Pastors of the Church, because of their
pronenefs to this very sin, that now we are speaking of, 1 Timothy 3. 6. [ Not a
Novice, lest being lifted up with Pride, he fall into the condemnation of the
Devil] the spirit of God here intimates to us, that Novices are the likest to
be lifted up with Pride, and that this Pride is the way to the Condemnation of
the Devil.

2. And men of great abilities, natural or acquired, that have withal
unsanctified hearts, are ordinarily transported with this odious vice. A strong
wit and a voluble tongue, and learning to furnish it with matter, are notable
servants to Pride of heart, where that spiritual illumination and holiness is
wanting, that should abase the Proud, and turn men's Parts a better way. To all
that are apt to be tainted with this odious vice, I would recommend these
following considerations.

1. Consider what a dangerous sign it is of a graceless hypocritical heart,
where Pride of Gifts does much prevail. It is as inseparable from a child of
God, to be humble and little in his own esteem, as from a newborn Child to be
really lesser than men at age. No more sincerity, than humility in any.

2. Consider, what cause of deep humiliation you carry about you in every duty!
Besides all the wants and loathsome corruptions of your souls, which follow you
wherever you go, the very sins of your duties, one would think, should humble
you. Oh to have such low conceptions, such dull apprehensions, such heartless,
unreverent poor expressions of such a God, such a Christ, such a glory, and
such holy truth, should make us ashamed to open our Lips before the Lord, and
wonder that he does not tread us into hell, instead of regarding us or our
services, and that fire does not come forth from his jealousy and consume us!
It should make us so far from glorying in our performances, that it should
drive us to Christ in every duty, to take him with us to shelter us from the
flames of holy jealousy; so that we should not dare to go any further than he
goes before us, and stands between us and the wrath of God, nor to speak a word
but in his name, nor to expect any welcome but on his account. Shall a wretch
be Proud of that performance whose failings deserve everlasting torments! Must
you be beholden to Christ to save you from the Hell that the sins of your
performances deserve, and yet dare you be proud of them? Let a Papist run that
desperate path, that rails at us for saying that our best duties are mixed with
sin, and that this sin deserves the wrath of God; Let them refuse a Physician
that think not themselves sick; and let them tell Christ they will not be
beholden to him for a pardon for the sins of their prayers and other duties:
but for shame let not us be guilty of this, who profess to be better acquainted
with our infirmities.

3. Consider also that you have to do with so Holy and Glorious a God, that to
be Proud before Him, and that in and of our very service of him, is a sin whose
greatness surpasses our apprehensions. Had you to do with a man like your
selves, you might better lift up your selves against him. There is nothing
comparatively in the presence of the greatest Prince, to humble and abase you:
But to be Proud before the God of heaven, and that in and of our lamentably
weak addresses to him, O what an horridly impious, unreasonable thing is this?
O man, if thy eyes were opened to see a little, a very little of the glory of
that blessed God thou speak to, how flat would thou fall down? how would
thou fear and tremble? and cry out as the Prophet, Isa. 6. 5. [ Woe is me, for I
am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and dwell in the midst of a
people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts] Or
as Job 40. 4. [ Behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand
upon my mouth. And Chap. 42. 5, 6. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the
ear: but now mine eye sees thee: wherefore I abhor my self and repent in dust
and ashes] One glimpse of Gods Majesty would take down thy self-exalting
thoughts, and humble thee with a witness.

4. Consider the examples of the holiest of Gods servants. The example of Job
and Isaiah I have now mentioned. Moses himself did think himself unmeet to
speak in Gods message, Exodus 4. 10. He said unto the Lord, I am not eloquent,
neither heretofore, nor since thou have spoken to thy servant: but I am of slow
speech and of a slow tongue.] And ver. 13. He said O, my Lord, send I pray thee
by the hand of him whom thou will send] When God sent Jer. 1. 6. he said, Ah
Lord God, behold I cannot speak: for I am a child] And Paul cries out [ Who is
sufficient for these things! 2 Cor. 2. 16.] So that it has been the course of
the most Seraphical Prophets, and holy Apostles to have low thoughts of their
own abilities for duty: And yet have you enough to be Proud of?

5. And consider that the Nature of the holy employment that you are upon, one
would think, should be enough to humble you. It is a confessing of sin,
unworthiness and guilt, and will you be Proud of this? It is a confessing that
you deserve everlasting torment; And will you be Proud of such a confession as
this? The Lord be merciful to us, and save us from this unreasonable vice; who
would think that it should be thus with a man in his wits? To confess that he
deserves Hellfire; And to be Proud of that Confession! your Petitions are all
humbling, if they be according to the word; you are beggars for your lives, for
pardon of many and heinous sins, and should come as with the rope about your
necks: you beg for deliverance from eternal misery: and should you be proud of
such requests! should beggars be Proud, yea such needy miserable beggars, and
be proud of their very begging? Nay, your very thanksgiving it self is
humbling. For what do you give thanks for, but for salvation from these odious
sins, and the damnation which you have deserved? And shall a thief be proud
that he is pardoned and taken from the gallows? Pride is contrary to the very
Nature and meaning of all those holy duties that you are Proud of.

6. Yea the Gifts themselves that you are Proud of, should humble you. For 1.
They are from God, and not your selves. 1 Cor. 4. 7. [ For who makes thee to
differ? and what have thou that thou did not receive? Now if thou did
receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had not received it? 2. You
received them not for your selves, but for God: and therefore have no reason
your selves to be lifted up by them. 3. All Gifts are for labor and duty, and
must be once accounted for: and therefore should keep you in humility and fear.
To be Proud of Gods Gifts, is to be Proud of that which is given you to destroy
Pride in your selves and others: For this is the End of them.

7. And it is a sign that you want exceeding much of that which you are Proud
of. You are Proud of Knowledge: when as if it were not for want of Knowledge of
that which should humble you, you would not be so Proud. You are Proud of your
worth: and it is for want of real worth that you are Proud. More light and
grace, and parts would show you that which would make you blush at the things
that you were Proud of.

8. And consider that you take the Course to provoke God to bereave you of his
Gifts. He gave them to you for another use. If you will turn them against his
face by Pride, when he gave them to keep you humble: when you will exalt your
carnal selves by it, which he gave you to exalt his Majesty, what can you
expect but he should take them from you? And it is an easy matter with him to
do it, yea to take away your very understandings, and leave you to the heavy
plague of Madness, seeing you were Proud of your understandings, when alas,
poor worms, you had so little cause.

9. If once you grow Proud of your parts and gifts, you are in the high way to
be given over to some fearful fall; at best to particular scandals, if not to
some damnable heresy or Apostasy. God may prevent it by your Humiliation: but
you are in the common road that leads to it. It Is much to be feared that God
will so far leave you to your selves, as to let you fall into the dirt of some
notorious sin, that your shame may fly abroad the world, instead of the
vainglorious fame which you desired: and that you may have somewhat to humble
you that shall be written in your foreheads, and cannot be denied or hid. Or if
you be hypocrites, and for damnation, it is most likely that you are in the
ready way to some desperate Heresy, or flat Apostasy. For we see that these
are too frequently the consequents of spiritual Pride.

10. Lastly, Consider that the Gifts that you are Proud of, are in danger of
being unsuccessful to the Church; God may I confess do good to others by them,
though they do but choke your selves; but ordinarily he denies success to the
Proud, and blesses weaker endeavors of the humble. Yea often such men and all
their parts become a plague and trouble to the Church. For they use them to
forment the Heresies and Divisions which they are given over to: and do more
hurt than the ignorant or the common sortt of the Profane. Learn therefore to
deny your selves in the Reputation of your performances. If you feel any
tickling delight when you are applauded, cast water on it suddenly as on a fire
kindled in your souls from Hell. If you perceive the least stirring of
discontent or envy, when the Preaching or prayers of another are preferred, and
yours less set by, take heed, and quench it; for you are entertaining a
dangerous temptation. But if you should be so far lifted up, as to set up your
Judgments above their worth, and rise against your Teachers and the Church of
Christ, and desire to step beyond your callings, that your parts may be taken
notice of, and you may be somebody in the Church, and verify the Prophecy of
Paul, Acts 20. 30. [ Also of your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse
things, to draw away Disciples after them] I say, when once you come to this,
it is time to fear lest you be utterly forsaken, and become the shame and scorn
of men, as you became the scourge and troublers of the Church, and lest your
self-exalting lay you as low as hell.

CHAP. XLVIII. Reputation of being Orthodox, how far --
8. ANother piece of vainglory to be denied, is, The Reputation of being
Orthodox, or of the right religion. The thing it self is in the Essentials of
absolute necessity to salvation: But the Reputation of it, is a thing that we
must much deny our selves in. For it commonly falls out in most of the world,
that the thing it self, and the Reputation of it, are inconsistent: and no man
can be Orthodox and of the right Religion, but he must be taken to be heterodox
and of the wrong Religion: For the wrong is in most places taken for the right.
But through the great Mercy of God, it is not commonly so in England, nor in
the Reformed Churches abroad, in any great and necessary points. Among us Truth
has the advantage of Reputation! and so may it continue while the Sun
endures! But yet there is use for this part of self-denial even with us. We
converse among many Sects and Parties of various Opinions; and all of them are
Confident that they are in the right, and that we are Erroneous and against the
Truth: so say the Papists; and so say the Libertines, and many others* And
there is no way to gain the Reputation of being sound and Orthodox with any of
these men but by turning to them, and forsaking the truth, and ceasing to be
Orthodox indeed. In Spain, or Italy, or with English Papists, you must be
accounted Heretics, or yield to heresy, you must either cease to be true
Catholics, or be content to be esteemed no Catholics: You have your choice
whether you will re^lly be Schismatics, or be esteemed and called
Schismatics. And so you will be used among most Sects, who judge of Truth and
Error according to their own deluded apprehensions. Yea, and among the Orthrdox
^^deed, because they also have their errors, and are not Orthodox in all
things, you must look for the same measure in those particulars wherein they
are mistaken. For thinking themselves in the right, they will too often take it
for their duty to let fly at others, as erroneous or dangerous persons that are
not of their mind: And in this mistake, they think they do God service to
defame dissenters, and raise jealousies and suspicions of them, and bid men
take heed of them, as of men that hold some dangerous opinions; when it is
themselves that are deceived, and should turn those jealousies and cautions
homewards. In such Cases as these it is a hard strait that a servant of Christ
is put to; when he must either err or be supposed to err. But the principal
temptation lies in those Countries, where Error has got the major vote, and
is patronized both by Book and Sword, and custom has fixed the name of Truth
upon the foulest Heresies, and the name of Heresy upon saving Truths: Here a
poor Christian is sorely tempted and put to a lamentable strait. O says he, if
I were reputed but to be base, or beggarly, or contemptible, I could bear it;
but Heresy and Schism are such odious things that no man should be patient
under the imputation of them. Answ. Are they such odious things? Take heed of
them then lest out of your own-mouths you be judged. If you think the matter so
small that you will rather be an Heretic or Scismatick than be called or
accounted one, it seems you take it for no odious thing. Is the name or the
thing more odious to you? Had you rather be erroneous, or be thought to be so?
If the Thing be most odious to you, the Name will be the more tolerable. But if
the Name be most odious to you, it is Dishonor and not Error or Schism that
you are against. Had you rather part with Truth and Religion, or with the name
and Reputation of them? If you set so much by self and so little by Truth, as
to let go Truth for fear of being thought to let it go; for shame do not take
on you to be Lovers of Truth but of your selves; nor haters of Error, but of
Dishonor.

And consider further that you may lose the Reputation of being Orthodox, and
Catholic, and of the right Religion, without losing any of the favor of God;
nay it may be a suffering for his sake that may advance you in his favor, and
assure you of the Reward of Martyrs. For says Christ, Mat. 5. 11, 12. [
Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad,
for great is your Reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the Prophets that
were before you] So that you see the thing that you so abhor, is matter of
exceeding joy: Even to be falsely counted an Heretic or Erroneous for the sake
of Christ and Truth: we are blessed when we are falsely reviled as Erroneous,
and have all these evil sayings against us. But to be such indeed, is to be
accursed: Though the name of Heresy will stand with the special Love of God,
yet Heresy it self he utterly abhors. And whether do you think it is better to
part with truth and the Favor of God with it; or with the name and Reputation
of Truth, while we keep both Truth and the favor of God? Deny your selves then
even as to the Reputation of Faith and Orthodoxness; For you will certainly
deny the Faith, if you cannot deny the name of it, to preserve it.

CHAP. XLIX. Reputation of Godliness and Honesty how far --
9. ANother piece of Honor that self must be denied in, is, The Reputation of
Godliness and Honesty. Concerning both the former and this I must say, by way
of caution, that the Reputation both of Faith and Godliness is a great Mercy,
and not to be despised, nor prodigally cast away by our own negligence or
miscarriages; nor unthankfully to be received: But yet 1. It is not to be
desired for it self, but for God, that it may help and advantage us to serve
him, or as it is a Mercy that brings the report of his love. 2. And the greater
the Mercy is, the greater is our temptation, when it would deprive us of a far
greater mercy than it self: I have often thought it was a very high passage for
an Heathen to say as Seneca did, that [No man does show a higher esteem of
goodness, than he that can let go the Name or Reputation of being a good man,
rather than let go his goodness it self.] The world is so much unacquainted
with goodness, that they know it not when they see it; but call it by those
odious names that least agree with it. Their Judgments follow their Natures,
dispositions and interests: And therefore they cannot take that to be good
which is contrary to these. A feather-bed is no better to a swine than a
mire-lake: A banquet is not so good to a Cow as a green pasture. As the person
is himself, so do all things seem good or evil to him. The Toad or Snake has
no such odious apprehensions of it self as men have. And hence it is that to
ungodly men the best men and best actions seem to be the worst. And hence also
it is, that in all Ages Godliness ha^h been matter of reproach: and the best
have been laden with the he aviest calumnies. David had enemies that laid to
his charge the things that he never thought of. And it seems by the strain of
Shimei in his railing, that they took him to be but a Traitor, because King
Saul was against him; and to be a bloody man, because he had been engaged in
the wars, 2 Samuel 16. 7, 8. [ Come out, come out, thou bloody man, and thou man
of Belial: the Lord has returned upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul
in whose stead thou have raigned] See what a wicked person David was esteemed
by such fellows as this! And yet he so far denied himself here, as that he
would not hear of revenge upon the railer, but makes it as a trial sent from
God. And two special reasons moved him to bear it. One was the remembrance of
that sin against God and his Servant Uriah, which he knew God was now
chastising him for: And therefore being under the rod of the Lord, he durst not
think of revenge upon the instrument; and being sensible that he had brought
all this upon himself, he durst not let fly too much at others. The other was
that God had raised up (by permissive providence) the Son of his bowels against
him: and therefore he thought it an unseemly thing to be much offended with a
stranger for less. And such Reasons as these have we also to persuade us to
Patience and Self-denial in the like Case. The Lord Jesus himself who had no
sin at all, escaped not these censures of malicious men. He was esteemed a
friend or Companion of Publicans and Sinners, yea a gluttonous person, and a
wine bibber; yea a deceiver; yea a conjurer that did his works by the help of
the Devil, Mat. 11. 19. Luk 7. 34. Mat. 27. 63. Job. 7. 12. Mat. 12. 27. What
usage the holy Apostles themselves had, and how they behaved themselves under
all, you may conjecture by that one passage, (to mention no more) 1 Cor. 4. 9,
10, 11, 12, 13. [ For I think God has set forth us the Apostles last, as it
were men appointed to death: For we are made a spectacle to the world, and to
Angels, and to men: we are fools for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ;
we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honorable, but we are despised; Even to
this present hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted,
and have no certain dwelling place; and labor working with our own hands;
being reviled, we bless; being persecuted we suffer it: being defamed, we
entreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all
things to this day] The like usage had the Christians after the Apostles days.
They were slandered by the Pagans as if they sacrificed, and eat their own
children, and putting out the lights had commonly been unclean together after
their holy exercises: And when they cast them to the Lions to be devoured, and
many ways tormented them, it was as ungodly men, for preaching against the
Heathen Gods, and refusing to offer sacrifice to them. And therefore the rabble
was wont thus to cry for Judgment against them, [ Tollite impios] [ Tollite
impios] Away with the ungodly Christians! The wicked multitude that were
drowned in filthiness and ungodliness, did think themselves Religious men, and
the Christians to be ungodly. So that they were fain to live and die under a
Reputation as contrary to the truth, as darkness is contrary to light.

And this usage has still been the attendant of true Godliness. When the
Papists burn Gods servants at the stake, it is for supposed Heresy and
impiety: they put a painted cap and coat upon them, made of paper, on which the
Images of Devils are pictur d to make the people believe that they are ungodly
persons, the servants of the Devil, and possessed by him already, and unworthy
to live any longer among men. When they butchered the poor Waldenses and
Albigenses by thousands, it was under the name of ungodly heretics. The
ignorant ungodly rabble among us now, that hate and revile those that seek
after God more diligently than themselves, have yet more devilish wit than to
oppose them directly under the name of honest godly men; but they first make
the world believe that they are Hypocrites, and Proud, and Self-conceited, and
Covetous, and secretly are as bad as others, and these are the things, if you
will believe them, that they hate and speak against them for. But then how
comes it to pass that it is their Praying and Preciseness that is so much in
the scorners mouths? Does that signify Hypocrisy or Pride? Why do they not
commend the good while they speak against the evil? and join with them in the
holy Worship and ways of God, while they oppose their supposed viciousness?
Does the name ( Puritan] signify a covetous man, or a vicious person? or
rather one that will not be content to venture his soul in the common, impure,
ungodly courses of the world! And how comes it to pass that a man may quietly
enough follow such vices, if he will but forbear the profession of Godliness?
But (to leave these wretches in the dirt where we find them) by this you may
see the common measure that is to be expected from the world: If you will be
truly godly, you must be taken for ungodly, or for hypocrites, that seem to be
godly when you are not.

But it is easy to bear this charge when it falls upon a whole society, and
takes us but in the crowd among the rest, and when we have so much honorable
company to suffer with us: But it goes nearer us when we are singled out by
name, and noted and talked of all about as Hypocrites, or Proud, or worse than
others. But that also must be born by those that will be Christians.

But the greatest trial of all is, when the Servants of God that should help us
in our suffering, have got a hard report of us, and by misinformation we have
lost our credit even with them. Under all these false and injurious reports,
direct and stablish your own minds by the help of these Considerations
following.

1. It may be there is some special cause that you should try and judge your
selves: and so God does suffer other men to judge you, to awaken you to
selfjudging. However make this use of it, and you are sure to be no losers by
the reproach. Enter into your hearts, and search them thoroughly as before the
Lord, and see if there be any way of wickedness in them which hitherto you have
not discovered: Try whether there be Hypocrisy and Pride or not; Especially
when it is the servants of God that think hardly of you, and above all, if it
be wise, impartial men that are acquainted with you, it is then your duty to be
very jealous of your hearts and ways, and to fear lest you are guilty, and to
search the more diligently, and not be quiet till you either find out your sin,
or be sure that you are clear. And if you be clear in that point, yet suspect
and search lest there be some other secret or allowed sin, which God would
detect to you, or excite you against by the injurious censures of those that
have reproached you.

2. When you have searched and cleared your own Consciences, then consider
further, that though you are not such as you are censured to be, yet sinners
you are, and you know your sins in other kinds are so many and so great that
you should bear the more patiently to be hardly thought of, when you know your
selves to be so bad. If indeed you are godly, you have seen a sink of
uncleanness in your selves, and have condemned your selves often, and loathed
your selves for your abominations, and bewailed them before the Lord. And is it
suitable for such a spirit to be eager after the Reputation of sincerity, and
to be much troubled that you are taken by others to be naught?

3. And consider also that your Case may be as David's was, and God may possibly
make this reproach a chastisement for some former sin, and a means to humble
you for it more thoroughly, and to reclaim you from it. Perhaps he bids (by
permissive providence) some Shimei curse you. It may be the voice of a
slanderer must do that which the voice of a Preacher could not do. And then it
is your work to look behind you and within you, more than without you, and to
hearken more to the voice of God and Conscience, than of the slanderer: and to
take it as the rod of God, and a call to a more serious Repentance.

4. And consider that when you are under the false Censures of the world, you
may have the inward peace of a good conscience, which is better than all the
applause of men: And this being a continual feast, they cannot do much against
your quietness, as long as they cannot deprive you of this.

5. Yea moreover, you have the Approbation of God himself, and that should
satisfy against the censure of all the world. Even a Proud man if he have any
wit, can bear the Contempt of the ignorant vulgar, if he have but the applause
of great and wise, and learned men: As that Orator that valued the judgment of
Socrates above all the rest of his auditory. But all the wisest men in the
world are fools in comparison of God. Having his Approbation, you have the
Greatest, the Best, and the Wisest on your side; and a Judgment for you that
will weigh down the judgment of ten thousand worlds.

7. And if you value not Gods approbation above man's, it is a sign that you are
hypocrites indeed, and so the censure is not unjust: But if you do, then you
will acquiesce in it, though man condemn you; and say as the Apostle, Romans 8.
33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect; It is God that
Justifies, who is he that condemns? And as 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4. [ With me it is a
very small thing, that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment -- but he
that judges me is the Lord.]

And remember that the great day of Judgment is near at hand, that will set all
straight which the slanderous tongues of men made crooked. Stay but a while,
and the Glory of Christ, and the sentence of your judge, will dispel all the
unjust reproaches that were on you, and wash off all the blots that were falsely
laid on your good name: and he will bring forth your righteousness as the
light, and your judgment as the noonday: for there is nothing hid that shall
not be then revealed.

8. In the mean time God will take care of your name: He will make the very
tongues that slander you to honor you; in the blindness of their reproaches,
crossing themselves. As the Papists by the poor Waldenses, saying they were the
more dangerous heretics, because they held all the Articles of faith, and
lived godly and honestly, and were reputed holy, but only that they were
against the Church of Rome. As you trust God with your health, and wealth, so
must you do with your Reputation, even in point of Honesty, and be satisfied
that he can clear you when he pleases.

9. And it is not Gods ordinary way to leave the Reputation of his servants
wholly uncleared even in this world. If one condemn them, another shall
Justify them: and commonly the wisest and best men Justify them; and the most
foolish and ungodly are they that condemn them: And cannot you bear the words
of fools and children? The proudest man can pass by a contempt or slander from
a drunken man, an idiot, or a mad man, as being no dishonor to him: and cannot
you bear the censures of the distracted world? Or if they are better men that
slander you, it is two to one but it is the more foolish or passionate sort of
them; and that the judgment of the more wise and sober is against them, and
vindicateth your Reputation. Or if at the present they do not, it is ten to one
but Providence shall work to the clearing of your Reputation, either in your
lifetime, or when you are dead. Most of the Servants of God that were most
hated and slandered, while they lived on earth, are cleared and honored now
they are dead. God is not dis-regardful of his Servants names.

10. But however it go, you are secured of the main; that which you expected or
covenanted for with God, you shall be sure of. If you have the Thing, you may
easily bear the want of the name. Has the Spirit of God renewed and sanctified
you? are you made the living members of Christ, and the Sons of God, and the
heirs of Heaven? I hope you may well spare then the applause of men, and easily
bear it, if you be reputed to be destitute of what you have. If you are in
health, it will not much trouble you if it be reported that you are sick: And
if you are alive, you can bear it if the report go that you are dead: For as
long as you have the thing you can spare the name: And if you have Christ, and
Grace, and Pardon, and Justification, and Title to eternal life, cannot you
endure to have men think that you are without them? How basely do you
undervalue th^se inestimable things, when the thoughts of a man's mind, or the
words of a man's mouth can blast the comforts of them all? As if you said to the
world, It is not Christ, and Grace, and Pardon, and Salvation, that will serve
me, without the applause of men! How basely think you of God, and how highly of
men, if this be your mind! It is more excusable for a Haman to say of all his
honor and wealth that they satisfy him not, or do him no good, as long as he
wants but Mordecai's obeisance, than for a Christian to say of God, of Christ,
of Glory, All this will not serve my turn as long as men take me for an
hypocrite or ungodly. For there is not a satisfying sufficiency in Honors and
wealth, as there is in God and glory. As long as you have the precious
treasure, methinks you may give losers leave to talk. It was not for the good
words of men that you became Christians, and Covenanted with God, but for
pardon and salvation: and these you shall have: God will perform his Covenant
to you, and give you both his Kingdom, and so much of worldly things as
overplus, as is truly good for you; and what would you have more? You shall
have the Inheritance and Crown of blessedness; and will not that serve your
turn without a few good words from silly man! I hope you would be loath to
change Rewards with the Hypocrite! Why then do you so much desire his Reward,
and so much undervalue your own! Though his be present, and yours be future, I
hope you think it but a doleful hearing, to have Christ say [ Verily they have
their Reward] in comparison of his promise to his reproached servants [ Verily
great is your Reward in Heaven] Mat. 6. 2. Mat. 5. 12.

And now I hope in all these ten particular considerations you may see reason
enough for self-denial in the very Reputation of your Godliness and Honesty;
and why you should endure joyfully to be esteemed ungodly and dishonest rather
than to be so.

CHAP. L. A Renowned and Perpetuated Name to be denied.
10. THe last point of Honor which self must be denied in, is, A Renowed and
Perpetuated Name. For to that height does Pride aspire, that no less will
satisfy, where there is any apparent hope of this: though in those that sit so
low that they see no ground to hope for such a thing, the desires after it are
not so kindled as they be in others, that think the prey is within their reach.
Fain men would be famous and talked of through the world: They would have their
real and supposed worth made known as far as may be. And when they die, they
would fain have their names survive, that they may be great in the estimation
of posterity, and magnified by all that mention them. And so deeply are men
possessed with this dangerous sin, that they account this perpetuated fame for
their felicity. And there was nothing that most of the Heathens did prefer
before it: but when they seemed to be most virtuous, heroical, and patient, it
was but to be thus esteemed of after they were dead.

If you ask me, How far a surviving reputation may be regarded? I answer. 1. So
far as the interest of God, or his Gospel, Church, or Cause, or the public
good, or the good of our posterity is concerned in it, and may be promoted by
it, thus far it is lawful and a duty to value it, desire it, and seek it. For
if we have thoroughly searched our hearts, and can say unfeignedly that it is
God, and his cause and honor that we principally intend, and desire our own
honor but as a Means to his, and therefore desire it no further than it is
such a means; then we may justly desire both the extension and surviving of our
reputation if we are groundedly persuaded that it is like to conduce to these
happy ends. As for example: A Prince that owns the cause of God, and makes such
Laws for the common good as may exceedingly promote it, if they be observed by
posterity, must have a great regard to his present and surviving fame, because
the honor of his Laws will depend much upon the honor of his name: and if
once the people vilify him, they will be likely to vilify and cast off his
Laws, to the hurt of Church and Commonwealth, and their own undoing. And even
as to the success of their present Government, they should be very careful of
their fame: so also a Minister of the Gospel must be very careful of his
present and future reputation. For at present, the saving good of his auditors
does much depend upon it. For if they have a base esteem of the Pastor, they
will be unlikely to give diligent intention to his Doctrine, but disesteem it
as they do the speaker, and it is not likely to go to their hearts: Nor will
they seek his advice in the great matters of salvation, and the difficult cases
and dangers that they meet with; but to the great hazard of their souls will
slight the necessary assistance of him that is appointed to be their guide to
heaven, and will set light by all the Ordinances of God. And therefore the
Pastors Reputation is ten thousand times more beneficial and necessary to the
people than to himself. For alas it is but their good thoughts and words that
he receives; which add little to his happiness: but it is everlasting life
which they may receive by that Word of God and help from him, which is
furthered by his Reputation. And therefore as Ministers should be exceeding
watchful against Pride, that they desire not Honor for themselves; so when they
are sure that God is their end, they must be exceeding careful of their own
Reputation, and avoid all occasions and appearances of evil, and purchase it by
all just means: For though honor be worth little, yet the Cause of God and the
souls of men are worth much; and we must not be prodigal of our Masters
Talents, and such as are very useful to his service: Our Reputation is Gods and
the Churches due, and to be cherished for their use. Especially those Ministers
must be careful of their Reputation, that by Reformation or Public useful
writings are capable of profiting Posterity: and they may desire the surviving
of their honors, which for it self might not be desired: because their works
and writings, and Doctrine are like to be much blasted by their own
defamations, and do little good to any that come after: Nay the precious truths
and cause of God may be most dangerously wronged and disadvantaged by it; and
get such a blot and dishonor by their dishonor, that any that shall seek the
promoting of it hereafter may be greatly hindered and disadvantaged thereby:
For it will seem enough to cast off such a Doctrine for ever, that by the
dishonor of the maintainers it was once dishonorable and rejected as an
error. And doubtless some things have been thus made Heresies, and so will be
long rejected as Heresies in many parts of the Christian world, because they
were once called by that name; and that was because the Person that did own
them had some such dishonor or disadvantage as left his Doctrine open to this
reproach. And therefore you may here see what a Potent instrument Reputation is
in the Devils hand, to do his work; and what abundance of advantage he gets by
defaming Gods servants. Principally by this means did he long keep the world
from the entertainment of the Gospel, the servants of Christ being contemptible
in their eyes, and the preaching of the cross but foolishness to them. By this
means did the Pharisees hinder the Jews from believing in Christ: And by this
means is Heathenism, Infidelity, and Mahometanism continued in possession of
most of the world to this day. By this means it is that Popery keeps the common
people in thraldom: as the voluminous lies of Cochlaeus, Bolsecus, and many
others concerning Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, and other of our Reformers and
Writers, do fully testify. And by personal reproaches and dishonours it is
that the Doctrine of the Reformed Divines is made so odious among the
Lutherans; and the like instances might be given in others. If now any weighty
Christian Verity should be asserted by any Pastor of the Church, in a sounder
and clearer manner, than is commonly known or owned, if the person that does
it, should but fall under any reproach (which he shall be sure of if the Devil
can procure it) it is two to one but for his sake his Doctine will be
stigmatized with the name of error, and so lie buried for ever, till Divine
Omnipotency commands its Resurrection. And hence it is that there is not one
Instrument that ever God raises up to vindicate any truth, or ordinance, or do
him any special service, but Satan raises up tongues and pens if not hands and
swords against him, and an Army of reproachers will presently be on the back of
him.

Now in all such cases as these, it is a great duty for any servant of Christ
to be very regardful of his Reputation even with Posterity: For his good name
may much promote the Truth, as we know the Name of Austin, Calvin, and many
another does at this day. And if it be our great duty to extend our service of
God as far as we can, to all Countries, and to all posterity, to do them good;
then is it our duty to endeavor that a good Reputation should go along with
our labors to further the success, or remove impediments. And thus while we
are sincere, and intend all for God, we may and must regard our honor; and yet
in so doing we Deny our selves, because we do it not for our selves but for God
and his Church.

2. And if honor be given in to us this way, even as we partake of it our
selves, as a Means to Gods honor, we must thankfully accept it, esteem it, and
rejoice in it. And therefore it is made the matter of many promises, and spoken
of in Scripture as a blessing, Prove. 22. 1. A good name is rather to be chosen
than great riches] and 10. 7. The memory of the Just is blessed: but the name
of the wicked shall rot] Eccles. 7. 1. A good name is better than precious
oyntment] with many the like.

Thus much I have said to prevent a mis-application of that which follows;
and to help you so to understand me on this point of Honor, as not to run from
extreme into extreme, and to sin by seeking to avoid sin.

But alas, this kind of seeking our Honor for God and his Church, and not for
our selves, and as our own, I doubt is more rare than the neglect of honor.
The sin that I dissuade you from, is in these two points. 1. That you do not
Affect and seek after Extending or surviving Reputation for your selves; and
out of a Proud desire to be still some body in the estimation of the world: 2.
That if God deny you even that honor which in the lawfullest manner you
desire, that you submit to his pleasure, and take it patiently; and in these
two respects you must here deny your selves.

Above all others, these sorts of persons following are in danger of this
odious Pride, in desiring for themselves an extended and surviving Name. 1.
Princes and Soldiers that have the management of the great affairs of the
world; Fain would they be Renowned to Posterity: And hence are their aspiring
ambitious designs. For this are their Wars and Conquests, that they may be
famous when they are dead as well as while they live: And thus they make their
Noble Conquests to be but Murders of the vilest sort, and worse than any
Cutthroats and Robbers by the high way, while they intend them but for
themselves and their own vainglory; and better might they seek honor by
whoredom, drunkenness, or theft which are far smaller sins: Whereas if their
wars had been undertaken for God, and managed according to his Will, they had
made them truly honorable and renowned. And from this odious Pride it is, that
Absaloms Pillars must be erected, and Monuments must be built to perpetuate
their names, and tell the world what need they have of means to keep alive
their memories, and how destitute they are of nobler means, when Marbles and
Monuments must be the great preservers of their fame. Yea it were well if this
Pride and selfishness did not corrupt the noblest of their works, and turn them
into deadly sins: if they did not build their Hospitals, Colleges or Churches,
and endow them with Revenues to perpetuate their own Names, rather than to do
good. Though the works themselves are so good and so rare, that I would not
cast any dishonor upon them, seeing all that can be said is too little to
provoke men to do the like: yet am I bound in duty to tell them, that if self
should be the End instead of God, and Pride the cause instead of charity, Hell
would be the Reward instead of Heaven: so great a matter it is to have an
honest heart and right intentions in the most excellent and noble works. In so
much that a poor man that has a heart to build a College or an Hospital, if
he had but means, shall be Rewarded by God, as if he had done it, if God were
the End, and Charity the Principle; when a rich man that does the work it self,
shall have but a poor and temporary reward, if self be the End and Pride the
Principle.

2. Another sort, that are specially in danger of this sin, are, all Rich men,
who would be the great in the world, and perpetuate their names and memory in
their houses, lands and posterity* and therefore they would purchase Towns and
Lordships that their Houses may be famous when they are gone. For it seems a
kind of life to them if their Greatness do but live in their posterity. Psalm.
49. 11, 12. [ Their inward thought is that their houses shall continue for
ever, and their dwelling places to all generations: they call their lands after
their own names -- This their way is their folly: yet their posterity approve
their sayings.] Hence also is that ostentation of Escucheons, and Arms, and of
Ancient Gentility or Nobility, and much more such proud and selfish vanity.

3. Another sort that are in danger of this sin, are Divines and Learned men in
all Professions, who make their Writings but a means to perpetuate their own
Names to Posterity. Temptations to this sin may be offered to the best, and too
much entertainment they may have with our natures, because of the remnants of
selfishness and Pride. But yet they do not prevail with the sanctified so far
as to aim more at their own honor than at Gods. The Labors that in themselves
are excellent and a blessing to the Church, are lost to him that was the Author
of them, if self be the End, and Pride the fountain. And exceeding great need
have the godliest men to watch their hearts in this particular; for they are
very deceitsul, and selfishness will too often interpose, where nothing but God
and public good is discerned. And now because that the sin is very great and
dangerous, I shall here annex a few Considerations, which by opening the evil
of it, may help you to abhor it.

1. These Proud desires of a great and surviving Name, do show that you
lamentably overlook the true eternal honor of the Saints. Must you have
Honor? choose that which lies in the esteem of God: Must you be great and
glorious? why you may be so, and God would have you be so; if you will but know
where Greatness and Glory is to be had, even in that blessedness that Christ
has purchased. Must you have your greatness and honor perpeuated? why you may
have that which will never have an end: And when God has set before you such
an endless glory, are you looking after a Name among mortal men, to leave
behind you on the Earth? Do you think to be saved indeed or not? If you do,
what need have you of the smoke of man's applause, when you are with God? what
unworthythoughts have you of heaven, if you think when you are there, you shall
have need of men's good thoughts or words on earth? But it is a dangerous sign
that you are indeed unbelievers, and lay not up your treasure in heaven, when
you are so careful to perpetuate your names and shaddows here with men. The
true reli^h of Heavenly honor would put you out of love with this.

2. And do you not plainly see in your own desires the vanity of all these
Earthly things, when you are put at last to take up with such a shadow, such a
Nothing, as is a surviving name? Is this all that the world can do for you? And
do you not see here the wondrous deceitfulness of the world, and the
foolishness of unsanctified men, that they will d^^s stick to the world for
very nothing! when they know that they shall have no more from it, they are
contriving for a name when they are dead. Wonderful blindness! that experience
and the approach and thoughts of death, should no more open your eyes: surely
if this be all that the world will do for you at the last, you should even
renounce it and use it accordingly at the first.

3. You cannot but know that when you are dead and gone, the Honor of the
world is none of yours, nor can it do you any good, any further than it
relates to your eternal blessedness, and your honor is serviceable to the
honor of God. What good will it do you to be magnified by men, when you neither
know nor feel it? what the better is a Tree or House if men commend it? And for
your souls, if they be with God, they will be far above the praise of men.

4. Nay as such a design is a dangerous sign of your Damnation, so I beseech
you think, what comfort it will be to your soul in Hell to be extolled and well
spoken of on earth? Will you cast away your souls, to leave a Name of renown
behind you? And how unsuitable will such Honor be to your condition? surely if
you be there acquainted with it, you must needs be more tormented, both to
remember that you were seeking the fame of the world, instead of the eternal
glory, and to consider what a miserable wretch it is that men are praising and
magnifying on earth. Ah then you will think with your selves [ Little do the
poor inhabitants of the earth know what I am suffering while they are extolling
me. Is the applause of mortals suitable to a poor tormented soul? Alas that at
one and the same time, men should be extolling me, and Devils tormenting me?
How little ease do all their acclamations afford this poor distressed soul!]
How honorable are the names of Alexander the Great, and Caesar, and Aristotle
here on earth! but alas what cause have we to fear that they are lamenting
their misery, while we are speaking of their glory!

5. And the sin is much the greater, because it is not a mis-chosen means, but
a mistaken end, that your souls have fastened on: For it seems your very hearts
are set upon your Honors, and deeply and desperately set upon them, when you
dare contrive the continuation of them when you are dead. Were it not a matter
exceeding dear to you, undoubtedly you durst not lay such a design for it.

6. And consider whether there be not a Love of the deadly sin of Pride, and a
final impenitency employed in this ambition of a surviving name. For you ^^a
design that is supposed to be executed after death. And as if you desired an
eternity of wickedness, because your Pride it self can live no where but with
your self, you would have it leave those tokens behind it, by which the world
may know that you are Proud; and the effects of it you would have perpetuated
on earth? And had not the world enough of your Pride while you were alive? and
had not you enough of it? Is this your Repentance, that you would leave the
Monuments of your Pride unto Posterity, as if you were afraid there would be no
surviving witness against you to condemn you? This is a certain transcendency
of sin! The common wicked ones would fain die the death of the Righteous, and
wish their last end were like to his: But these men would have their Pride to
live for ever; and when they themselves are in another world, they would have
the demonstrations of their iniquity survive them.

7. And I beseech you consider what a fearful thing it is to die in contrived
beloved sin! when men have none but a deathbed Repentance, we have much cause
to fear, lest it be but fear that is the life of their Repentance: But when
they have not this much, but are desirous to leave the Monuments of their vice
to all Generations, from whence then shall we fetch our hopes of their
forgiveness? And O what a power has Pride in that soul, where the thoughts of
Death it self will give no stop to it, but still they are desirous that Pride
may over-live them! One would think that the serious thoughts of a grave, much
more of our passage into another world, should level all such thoughts of a
surviving honor, even in an unsanctified soul! But I much fear lest it be
infidelity it self that is the root of all; and that men do not soundly believe
an everlasting life with ^d, which makes them desire to have somewhat like
(...) Immortality here on earth.

8. And consider what a silly immortality you desire. The honor can be no
greater than the persons are that honor you, nor no longer. And it is but poor
mortals that will magnify your Names, and what can they add to you? and it
will be but a very little while; for it is not long that the world is to
continue.

9. And consider what a wickedness is here commonly included. Proud men desire
to be thought better than they are, and spoken of accordingly; They limit not
men's estimation to the truth of their deserts. Otherwise if the best and
greatest of you all were thought no better or greater than you are, alas, how
far would men be from admiring you? what would you be thought but worms and
sinners; and such as after all your glory, cannot forbid a crawling worm to
feed upon your face or heart? and such as deserve no less than hell; and have
many a secret sin that the world was unacquainted with. But it is not a true,
but false Esteem that the Proud desire: They care not how great, or how good,
or how wise and learned the world and succeeding ages think them: And thus they
desire to cheat men's understandings, and to leave a false History of themselves
on earth, and to have all men believe and report untruths, to magnify men,
whose souls, it is much to be doubted, are in hell, or if they be not, must
needs abhor such doings. And thus every Proud and selfish man would be a false
Historian and cheater of the world.

10. Yea, which is yet the worst of all, they would continue sacrilegiously to
rob the Lord of his honor even when they are dead. It is an undue honor,
which is stolen from God, which they so much seek for (For were it but such as
is a useful means to his honor, he would not be offended with them) And when
the Saints say [ Not unto us Lord, but unto thy name give the glory] these
sinners are not content to rob God of his honor as long as they live, but they
would do it even after death. If we had not certainly known the truth of it, we
should have thought it an incredible thing, that ever any man should come to
that impiety, pride and madness, as to desire to be worshipped as a God when he
was dead. Much more, that the most of the world should be so far distracted as
to do it. And yet so it has been, and so it is in too great a measure. And
truly the wicked or Proud disposition that is predominant in the hearts of all
the unsanctified, does take up no snorter where it has but hopes of success to
actuate it. Not a man of them but would be honored as Gods when they are dead:
Though I know those of them that feel not this much in themselves, will hardly
believe it. Consider what an heinous injury this is to God, and to the souls of
men, that you should leave your Names as Idols to the world, to entice so many
thousand men to sin, and to be a standing enemy to the honor of God, by
encroaching on his right, and turning the eye of men's observation and
admiration from him to you.

11. Consider also, how that by these desires of earthly honor to your selves,
and making this the End of your endeavors, you corrupt abundance of excellent
works (materially considered) and turn them into mortal sins. If Princes rule
and fight for themselves, I have told you already what they do: but if this
were done for God, it would have another form, and another reward, as it had
another End. What a doleful case is it that such excellent works, as
alms-deeds, and acts of bounty to Church, or poor, or Commonwealth, in
buildings, lands, or any the like works, should be all turned into sin and
death, by such a selfish vainglorious intent? And that their souls should be
suffering for those works that others receive much good by! What a sad case is
it, that Historians, Lawyers, Physicians, Philosophers, Linguists, and the
Professors of all the Sciences, should undo themselves for ever by those
excellent works that edify the world! Nay what can be more lamentable to think
of, than that able and learned Divines themselves should lose their own souls
in the studying, and preaching those precious truths, that are saving unto
others; and that such excellent writings as remain a standing blessing to the
Church should be the Authors of mortal sin! And yet so it is, if the renown and
immortality of a name on Earth be the End that all this work is done for.

12. Lastly, Consider that if Honor be good for you, it is better attained by
minding your duty for the Honor of God, and denying your own Honor, than by
seeking it: For Honor is the shadow that will follow you if you fly from it,
and fly from you if you follow it. What Christ here says of Life, is true of
Honor: He that seeks and saves it shall lose it, and he that loses it for
Christ shall find it. The greatest Honor is to deny our selves, and our own
honor, and to do most for the Honor of God; and to be contented to be nothing
that God may be all. For you have his promise, that them that honor him he
will honor, but they that despise him shall be lightly esteemed.

THough I have endeavored by a right limitation and exposition of the
foregoing parts of self-denial, to prevent mistakes, and give you those grounds
by which objections may be answered, yet the stir that is made in the world
about this point, by Papists and many other mistaking Sects, does persuade me
to give a more distinct Resolution of some of the principal doubts that are
before us, and therein to show you that selfdenial consists not in all things
that by some are pretended to be parts of it; but that there is a great deal of
sin that goes under the name of self-denial among many of these sorts of
mistaken persons.

CHAP. LI. Q. Whether Self-denial lie in renouncing Propriety?
Quest. 1. WHether does self-denial require us to renounce Propriety, and to
know nothing as our own (as the Monks among the Papists swear to do, as part of
their state of perfection: and a book called The way to the Sabbath of Rest,
dothteach us?)

Answ. 1. That there should be no Propriety in goods, or estate among men, is
contrary to the will of God, who has made men his Stewards, and trusted
several persons with several talents and forbidden stealing, and commanded men
to labor that they may have to give to him that needs; and he that has this
worlds goods and sees his brother have need, must not shut up the bowels of
his compassion. It is a standing duty to give to the poor; and we shall
therefore have the poor always with us for this exercise of our Charity. And he
that has nothing, can give nothing, nor use it for God. Why did Paul require
them to give to the distressed Saints, and maintain the Ministry, and gather
for such uses every first day of the week, if he would have men have nothing to
give? This therefore is a conceit that needs nothing but Reason and the reading
and belief of Scripture to confute it.

2. But as no man is a Proprietary, or has any thing of his Own in the strict
and Absolute sense, because all is Gods, and we are but Stewards; so no man may
retain his humane analogical propriety, when God calls him to give it up: No
man may retain any thing from Gods Use and service which he has a propriety
in. We have so much Propriety as that no man must rob us; and so much as our
works of charity are rewardable, though it be but giving a cup of cold water,
which could not be without propriety; for who will reward him that gives that
which is none of his own? yea it is made the matter of the last judgment [ I
was hungry, and ye fed me,; I was naked, and ye clothed me, etc.] Which they
could not have done if they had not had food and clothing to bestow. So that
the denial of propriety would destroy all exercise of charity in such kinds,
and destroy all Societies and orderly converse and industry in the world.

But yet when God calls for any thing from us, we must presently obey, and quit
all title to it, and resign it freely and gladly to his will.

And 3. There must be so much vigor of charity, and sense of our neighbors
wants, as that no man must shut up the bowels of compassion: but as we must
love our neighbors as our selves, so must we relieve them as a second self;
yea and before our selves, if Gods service or honor should require it. If we
must lay down our lives for the brethren, much more our estates. So that
Levelling Community is abominable; but Charitable Community is a Christian
duty, and the great Character of sincere Love to Christ in his members. And
therefore in the Primitive Church there was no forbidding of Propriety; but
there was 1. A resignation of all to God, to signify that they were contented
to forsake all for him, and did prefer Christ and the Kingdom of God before
all: and 2. There was so great vigor of true Charity, as that all men
voluntarily supplied the wants of the Church and poor, and voluntarily made all
things as common, that is, Common by voluntary Communication for use, though
not common in primary title: And so no man took any thing as his Own, when God,
and his Churches, and his Brethrens wants did call for it. O that we had more
of that Christian Love that should cause a Charitable Community which is the
true Mean between the Monkish Community, and the selfish tenacious Propriety!
Levelling has not destroyed one soul for ten thousand that an inordinate love
of Propriety has destroyed.

CHAP. LII. Q. Whether it lie in renouncing Marriage?
Quest. 2. WHether Self-denial consists in the forswearing or renouncing of
Marriage, or the natural use of it by those that are married?

Answ. To forbid Marriage simply, is called by the holy Ghost a Doctrine of
Devils, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 3, and was one of the Heresies that the Apostles were
called out to encounter in their own days. But yet a Married state does
ordinarily (not always) call men off from that free attendance on the service
of God without distraction which is very desirable: And therefore those that
are capable of doing God any notable service, which Marriage is like to hinder
them from, should avoid it, if they can without a greater evil. And therefore
the Church did think it for many ages, so fit for Ministers to be single, that
they might have the less of worldly affairs and cares to call them off from the
work of God, and their carnal relations might not hinder them from more public
duties or charitable works. The Papists therefore mistakingly take the Vow of
Chastity to be an entering into a state of Perfection, and sinfully condemn the
Marriage of Priests: when the Apostle expressly says [ A Bishop must be
blameless, the Husband of one Wife -- having his children in subjection] 1 Timothy
3. 24. And so of Deacons, verse. 12. And others run into the other extreme. But
the true Mean is this: 1. Ordinarily Marriage is more distracting and hindering
to us in the service of God than a single life, Especially to Ministers, and
such as should wholly addict themselves to the public service of the Church.
2. But yet all men are not alike obliged to it or from it. Some may be
necessitated to it by the temper of their bodies to avoid a greater evil, even
sin it self; and some may have no such necessity: some may have their worldly
estate and affairs in such a plight, that they can far better manage them with
freedom for Gods service in a married than a single state: but with others it
is not so: and especially with very few Ministers. So that a single or married
life is in it self indifferent: but as a means to Gods service, that is a Duty
to one that is a sin to another, but because that a single life is more
commonly free and fittest for this great end, therefore the Apostle prefers
it as better, because more suitable to the state of the most, (at least in those
times) though to some, marriage may be a duty. So that every one should
impartially enquire, in which state they may do God the greatest service, and
that they should choose, not on Popish ground, as if it were Commended to that
particular person to whom it is not Commanded, and were an Evangelical counsel
of perfection, and to be vowed; but in a prudent ordering of our lives,
applying the general rules of Scripture to our several estates. And thus
according to the command of Christ, He that can receive this saying, let him.]

CHAP. LIII. Q. Or in solitude and renouncing secular affairs?
Quest. 3. WHether Self-denial consist in solitude, and avaiding secular
affairs, as trades, merchandise, labor, etc?

Answ. 1. It is the standing Rule of the Apostle, of all that are able [ That
if any man will not work neither should he eat] 2 These. 3. 10. and he calls
those disorderly walkers that work not at all, 2 These. 3. 11. and requires us
to have no company with such, commanding men, with quietness to work and eat
their own bread* ver. 12. 14. But yet there are several sorts of Labor: some
labor with the body, which is usually more private, as to the extent (if not
the intent) of the benefit: and some labor with the mind, which is usually
more for public good: as Princes, Judges, Magistrates of all sorts, Lawyers,
Physicians, Ministers, etc. Now men are to consider whether by the Labor of
the mind or of the body they are like to be more serviceable to God, and which
they are fittest for and called to; and that they ought to set themselves to,
and that in true self-denial, and for God. To be Idle, is so far from being a
part of self-denial, that it is a sinful part of flesh-pleasing. And so is it
to choose any calling or employment principally for fleshly case and
accommodation. The Apostles were some Fishermen, and some of other callings,
and none of them renounced worldly labor, or affairs, save only so far as they
hindered them from the work of God, to which they (and all Ministers) were
wholly to addict themselves, as appears, 1 Timothy 4. 15. 2 Timothy 2. 4. To do
therefore as many Monks do, to be employed in no calling for the public good,
under pretense of being Religious for themselves, is to be burdens to the
Earth, and gross violators of the Laws of God.

CHAP. LIVE. Or in renouncing Public Offices and Honors?
Quest. 4. WHether Self-denial require men to renounce all public offices, and
honors, and not to be Magistrates, Ministers, or the like?

Answ. It requires us not to have such carnal thoughts of these offices, as to
look on them only as places of honor, and power, and ease; nor yet to desire
them for such carnal ends* Nor yet to thrust our selves upon them without a
call, as being the Judges of our own sufficiency. But self-denial is so far
from forbidding the offices and employments themselves, as that it is a great
point of self-denial for a man that understands them well, to undertake them,
if he mean to manage them sincerely and faithfully. For were it not that the
sweetness of Gods interest and his acceptance, and the benefits of the Church,
our brethren and our souls, did ingratiate these offices and employments to an
honest mind, they would be so very burdensome, that flesh and blood would either
make them carnal by abuse, or never endure them. And therefore has God given
them an addition of honor to encourage them, and to put an honor on their
work, for the furthering of its success. Experience certifieth me that the work
of the Ministry is far more troublesome to the flesh, than the bodily labor of
a poor artificer or plowman is: so that without great self-denial no man will
be a Minister, that does not carnally mistake the function for another thing
than indeed it is. And I think I may say the like in its degree, by the
Magistracy: Especially by them in highest Power, who have the greatest work.
Certain I am, if they faithfully do their duties, they will find more burden to
the flesh and mind, than poor men that have only a Family to provide for.
Though many ignorant ungodly poor people that sit at home in peace, and little
know the care, and grief, and trouble of their Rulers, do wickedly murmur at
their very calling, as if they had nothing but honor, and idleness, and
excess, yet if they had tried and tasted their care and trouble a few months,
they would think a private life the easier, and confess that there is need of
much self-denial for a man to accept of Magistracy or Ministry, that
understands them, and resolves to use them accordingly.

Moreover, these Offices are of necessity to the Common good, and established
to that End by God himself. And the fifth Commandment requires us to pay our
Superiors their honor and obedience: And therefore ^o imagine that it is any
part of self-denial to refuse the Office of Magistracy or Ministry, is to make
it self-denial to destroy the Church and Commonwealth, and be a cruel enemy to
mankind, and to our Country, and to rebel against the Powers that are ordained
of God, and thereby to receive damnation to our selves, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3. Heb.
13. 17.

But yet this I must say: that if a worthy person stand in competition with us,
self-denial requires us to prefer them before our selves, and to refuse
honors and dignities, when the good of the public does not call us to deny
our selves more in the accepting them.

CHAP. LV. Q. Whether it be a denying our Relations?
Quest. 5. WHether Self-denial consist in denying of Natural or Contracted
Relations, as of Father and Mother to Sons and Daughters, of Brothers and
Sisters Husband and Wife, Master and Servant, Prince and People, Pastor and
Flock?

Answ. You might as wisely imagine that self-denial lies in hating or denying
any of Gods Works, even the frame of nature: or in denying food and raiment to
our bodies, or in denying our own lives so as to cut our throats. For the same
Law of Nature that made me a man, and requires me to preserve my life, did
make me a son, and require me to love and honor my parents: And it is in the
Decalogue; the first Commandment with promise, as the Apostle calls it,
Ephesians. 6. 2. It is frequently and expressly commanded in Scripture, that
children love, honor, obey their parents; and terrible curses are pronounced
on the breakers of these Commands, Ephesians. 6. 1. 4. and 5. 22, 5. Colos. 3. 20,
21, 22. and 4. 1. Exodus 21. 17. Levit. 20. 9. Deuteron. 21. 18, 19. and 27. 16.
Prove. 30. 17. Mat. 15. 4. and 19. 19. And if children were not bound to
parents, then parents should not be bound to educate children, and then they
would be exposed to misery and perish. One would think that there should never
such a Sect have risen up, that should be worse than the very brutes, who by
the instinct of nature love their young ones, and their dams. But the Spirit
foretold us, that which is come to pass, that in the last and perilous times,
there should be men that are disobedient to parents without natural affection,
2 Timothy 3. 3.

And for contracted Relations, they are the express institution of God, so
frequently owned by him in Scripture, and the duties of them so frequently
commanded, that I will not trouble you with the recital of the passages. And as
for the Adversaries objections, they are frivolous. The meaning of the Apostles
words, [ that we know no man after the flesh] I have told you before: The words
of Christ to his Mother, Joh. 2. 4. [ Woman, what have I to do with thee!]
which they allege, are nothing for their wicked cause; they being no more but
Christ's due Reprehension of his Mothers mistake, who would prescribe him the
time and manner of doing Miracles* and have him do them in a way of
ostentation, which things did not belong to her, but to the Spirit of God, and
the Lord himself. And whereas they allege that Text, Luke 14. 26. that father,
mother, brother, sisters, etc. are to be hated, for Christ; I answer, Even as
our own lives are to be hated, which are also numbered with them: that is, They
must be all forsaken rather than Christ should be forsaken, and therefore loved
less than he, and but for his sake. If therefore this Text require you not at
all to cut your own throats, or some way kill your selves, then it does not
require you to withdraw your due affections from Natural or Contracted
Relations. I must crave the Readers pardon that I trouble him with confuting
such unnatural opinions, and desire him to believe that it is not before I am
urged to it by the arguments of some deluded souls that are not unlikely to do
hurt by them with some.

CHAP. LVI. Q. Or Relieving Strangers before Kindred?
Quest 6. WHether self-denial require that we should relieve godly strangers,
before our natural Kindred, especially that are ungodly? Or that we love them
better?

Answ. 1. Where our Natural Kindred are as holy and as needy as others, there
is a double obligation on us, both natural and spiritual, to love and relieve
them. 2. Where they are as Holy as others, but less needy, there may lie a
double obligation on us, to love them, and yet not to give to them. 3. If they
be more needy, or as needy as others, though withal they be ungodly, we are not
thereby excused from natural affections or charitable relief. 4. We must
distinguish between children, or such kindred as nature casts upon our care
for provision, and such kindred as are by nature cast upon others. If parents
were not obliged to relieve and provide for their own children, they would be
exposed to misery, and man should be more unnatural than brutes. So that even
when by ungodliness, they are less amiable than others, yet God has bound men
to provide for them more. 5. Natural love and spiritual are much different; you
may have a stronger Natural Love to an ungodly child, than to a Godly stranger,
but you must have a spiritual Love to that Godly stranger, more than to your
child; And that spiritual Love must be (at least as to the Rational and
Estimative part) much greater than the other Natural Love: And yet you may be
bound to Give more, where you are not bound to Love more. For it is not Love
only that is the cause of giving; but we are Gods Stewards, and must dispose of
what we have as he prescribes us: and his standing Law of Nature for the
preservation of mankind, is, that parents take care of their children, as such.

6. The will and service of God, being it that should dispose of all that we
have, we must in all such doubts look to these two things for our direction:
First to the particular Precepts of the Word: and there we find the foresaid
duty of parents expressed, and withal the duty of relieving all that are needy
to our power: Secondly to the General Precept: and there we find, that we must
honor God with our substance, and lay out all our talents to his service. And
so the duty lies plain before us. If you have a child that is wicked, yet as
prents provide him his daily bread; and leave him enough for daily bread when
you die. But more he should not have from me: but the rest (had I ten thousand
pound a year) I would lay out that way that my conscience told me may be most
serviceable to God. For 1. I am not bound to strengthen an enemy of Christ, and
enable him to do the greater mischief. 2. Nor to cast away the mercies of God.
3. If the Law required the parents to cause such a Rebellious son to be put to
death, Deuteronomy. 21. 18. then surely to provide him daily bread, is now as much as
a parent is obliged to. And if it be an express Command, that he that will not
labor shall not eat, 2 These. 3. 10. such useless members forseiting their very
sustenance, then surely he that is such or worse, speeds fair if you leave him
food and raiment. 4. And the great command of doing all to Gods Glory, and
serving him with our substance, will not be obeyed, if you leave your Riches
and Estates in the hands of such persons merely because they are your Children.
No doubt but that is a selfish and unconscionable course, and the thing that
sets up the ungodly to disturb the Church, and Lord it over the world, while
parents furnish them with Riches to do the Devil eminent service with.

Object. But who knows but God may convert them? Answ. You cannot guide your
actions by things unknown. You have no promise of their conversion; nor much
probability, when they have frustrated all your Counsels and means of their
good education; and grace is supernatural: and therefore you must proceed upon
grounds that are known.

And for remoter Kindred, if they may be as serviceable to God with what I give
them as others, nature teaches me to prefer them before others: but otherwise
Grace teaches me, both to love a godly stranger better than ungodly kindred,
and to lay out all that I have as may be most serviceable to God.

CHAP. LVII. Q. How we must love our Neighbors as our selves.
Quest. 7. HOw is it that Self-denial requires us to love our neighbor as our
selves: Is it with the same degree of Love?

Answ. I answered this on the by, before: Briefly, 1. The chief part of the
precept is Negative: thus q. d. [ Set not up thy self against the welfare of
thy neighbor: Draw not from him, or covet not that which is his to thy self,
and confine not thy love and care of thyself] 2. And it comprehends this
positive, and that as to the kind of Love, we should love both our selves and
neighbors as means to God, and for the interest of God; and in that respect
there is an equality: we must appretiative or estimatively love a better and
more serviceable man that has more of Gods Spirit in him, above our selves:
and an equal person equally with our selves, with this Rational Love, which
intends all for God. 3. But Natural Love which is put into a man for
self-preservation will be stronger to self than to another, and allows us
caeteris paribus to prefer, and first preserve and provide for our selves. And
in this regard, our neighbor must be loved but as a second self, or next our
selves. 4. But this Natural Love in the exercise of it, at least in imperate
acts, is to be subservient to our Rational spiritual Love, and to be
over-mastered by it. And therefore it is that as Reason teaches an Heathen to
prefer his Country before his life, (though the instinct of Nature incline us
more to life) so faith teaches a Christian much more, to prefer Gods honor,
and the Gospel, Church, Commonwealth, and his neighbors good when it more
conduces to these ends, than his own, before himself, his liberty or life.

CHAP. LVIII. Q. Is Self-revenge and Penance self-denial?
Quest. 8. WHether self-denial require us after sin, to use vindictive penance
or punishment of the flesh, by fasting, watching, going barefoot, lying hard,
wearing hair-cloth, or to do this ordinarily? as some of the Papists, Monks,
and Friars do?

Answ. The easiness of this case may allow a brief decision. 1. The Body must
be so far afflicted, as is needful to humble it, and subdue it to the spirit,
and tame its Rebellion, and fit it for the service of God. 2. The exercise of a
holy revenge on our selves may be a lower end, subservient to this. 3. It must
also be so far humbled as is necessary to express Repentance to the Church when
Absolution is expected upon public Repentance. 4. As also to concur with the
soul in secret or open humiliation.

But 1. He that shall think that whippings, or sackcloth, or going barefoot or
other self-punishing, are of themselves good works, and meritorious with God,
or satisfy his Justice, or are a state of perfection, does offer God a heinous
sin, under the name and conceit of a good work. 2. And he that shall by such
self-afflicting unfit his Body for the service of God, yea that does not
cherish it so far as is necessary to fit it for duty, is guilty of self-murder,
and defrauding God of his service, and abusing his creature, and depriving
others of the help we owe them: so that i^ one word, the Body must be so used
as may best fit it for Gods service. And to think that self-afflicting is a
good work, merely as it is penalty or suffering to the body, or that we may go
further herein, is to think 1. That we should use our Body worse than our
beast; for we will no further afflict him than is necessary to tame him, or
serve our selves by him, and not to disable him for service. 2. And it will
teach men to kill themselves: for that is a greater penalty to the body than
whipping or fasting. 3. And it is an offering God a sacrifice of cruelty and
Robbery, which we commit against himself and man.

But I must needs add, that though some Friars and Melancholy people are apt to
go too far in this, and pine their bodies or misuse them with conceits of merit
and satisfaction; yet almost all the common people run into the contrary
extreme, and pamper and please their flesh, to the displeasing of God, and the
ruin of their souls. And I know but few that have need to be restrained from
afflicting or taking down the flesh too much.

CHAP. LIX. Q. Is self-denial to be without Passion?
Quest. 9. WHether self-denial consist in the laying by of all Passions, and
bringing the soul to an impassionate serenity?

Answ. The Stoics and some Behmenists think so: But so does not God or any
well informed man. For 1. God would not have made the Affections in vain: It is
not the Passions, but the disorder of them that is sinful, or the fruit of sin.
2. We are commanded to exercise all the Affections or Passions for God, and on
other suitable objects. We must Love God with all the heart, and soul, and
might, which is not without affection, or passion. We must Love his servants,
his Church, his Word, his ways: We must fear him above them that can kill us:
we must hunger and thirst after his Righteousness, and pant after him as the
Heart does after the Waterbrooks: We must be angry and sin not. A zeal for God
is the life of our Graces: we must always be zealous in a good matter; fervent
in Spirit, serving the Lord. We must hate evil, and sorrow for it, when we are
guilty, and grieve under the sense of our miscarriages, and Gods displeasure.
And all these (expressly commanded in the Word) are holy Affections or Passions
of the soul.

3. Yea it is the Work of the Holy Ghost to sanctify all these Passions that
they may be used for God; and they are called by the names of the several
graces of the Spirit. And it is not Passion, but disordered Passion that must
be denied.

CHAP. LX. How far must we deny our own Reason?
Quest. 10. HOw far must we deny our own Reason? Answ. 1. We must not be
unreasonable, nor live unreasonably, nor believe unreasonably, nor love, or
choose, or let out any affection unreasonably. We are commanded to be ready to
give a reason of our hopes. It is our Rational faculty that proves us men, and
is essential to us: And without it we can neither understand the things of God
or man: For how should we understand without an understanding?

But yet Reason must thus far be denied. 1. We must not think highlier of our
Reason than it deserves either in it self, or as compared to others. 2. We must
not satisfy its curiosity in prying into unrevealed things. 3. Nor must we
satisfy or suffer its presumption in judging our Brethren, or censuring men's
hearts or ways uncharitably. 4. Nor must we endure it to rise up against the
Word or ways of God, or contradict or quarrel with Divine Revelations, though
we cannot see the particular Evidence or Reason of each Truth, nor reconcile
them together in our apprehensions. Though we may not take any thing to be the
Word of God without Reason; yet when he have Reason to it take to be his Word,
we must believe and submit to all that is in it, without any more Reason for our
belief. For the formal Reason of our belief, is, because God is true that did
reveal this Word: And we have the greatest Reason in the world to believe all
that he reveals.

CHAP. LXI. Q. Must we be content with affiictions, permitted sin, etc.
Quest. 11. IF Self-denial require us to Content our souls in the Will of God,
then whether must we be content with his afflictions, or permission of sin, or
the Churches sufferings; and 1. How will this stand with our due sense of Gods
displcasure and chastisements. 2. And with our praying against them. 3. And our
use of means for their removal?

Answ. 1. The Will of God is one thing, and the Hurt which he wills us is
another: and the Good En for which he wills it, is a third. The afflicting
Will of God is good, and must be Loved as good: and the End and Benefit of
Chastisement is good and must be loved: But the hurt as hurt must not be loved.
It is not Gods Will that we must resist, or seek to change; nor yet is it the
End or Benefit of the Chastisement; but only the hurt, which our folly has
made a suitable means. And we may not seek to remove this hurt, till the effect
be procured, or on terms that may consist with the End of it. And this is not
against the Will of God, that when the good is attained, the Affliction be
removed.

2. And you must distinguish between his Pleased, and Displeased Will! his
complacency and acceptance, and his Displacency and Rejecting Will. Every act
of Gods Will must be approved and loved as Good in God; but it is not every one
that we may Rest and Rejoice in as Good to us, and as our felicity. We must be
grieved for Gods Displeasure, and yet Love even that holy will that is
displeased with us; and we must be sensible of Gods judgments, and yet Love the
Will that does inflict them. But it is only the Love of God and Pleasure of his
Will to us, that can be the Rest and felicity of our souls.

3. Some acts of Gods Will are about the Means, and have a tendency to a
further end; and some are about the End it self. His Commanding Will we must
Love and obey: his forbidding Will must have the same affections: his
threatening Will we must love and fear; his Rewarding Will we must Love and
Rejoice in: His full Accepting Will, that is, his Love and Complacency in us,
we must Rest and Delight our souls in for ever. And thus we must comply with
the Will of God.

CHAP. LXII. Q. May God be finally Loved as our Felicity and Portion?
Quest. 12. YOu tell us that we must seek our selves but as Means to God: How
then may we make our salvation our End; or desire the fruition of God, when
fruition is for our selves, of somewhat that may make us happy? Does he not
desire God as a Means for himself as the End, that desires him as his Portion,
Treasure, Refuge, and Felicity?

Answ. There are such abundance of abstruse Philosophical Controversies de
anima and fine that stand here in the way, that I must only decide this briefly
and imperfectly for vulgar capacities. Schoolmen and other Philosophers are not
so much as agreed what a final Cause is. But this much briefly may give some
degree of satisfaction to the Moderate. 1. No fleshly Profits, Pleasures, or
Honors must be made our End. This we are agreed on. 2. The Ultimate End of all
the Saints, is an End that is suitable to the Nature of Love: and that is,
perfectly to love God, and Please him, and serve him, and to be perfectly
beloved of him, and behold his glory. So that it is not an End of selflove, or
Love of Concupiscence, or for our Commodity only; but it is the End of the Love
of Friendship: Now all Love of friendship does take in both the party Loving,
and the party beloved into the End: For the End is a perfect Union of both,
according to their capacities. And it being Intentio amantis, the End of Love,
both God and our selves must be comprehended in it, as the parties to be
united; and so it is both for him, and for our selves.

3. But yet though both parties as united be comprised in the End, it is not
equally, but with great inequality. For 1. God being Infinite Goodness it self,
must appreciative in estimation and affection, be preferred exceedingly before
our selves; so that in desiring this blessed Union, we must more desire it to
Please and Praise him, and give him his due, for which he Created, Redeemed,
and Glorified us, than to be our selves happy in him. 2. And God being not a
mere friend, but our Absolute Lord of Infinite Power and Glory, it must be more
in our Intention to bring to him eternally, than to receive from him; (though
both must be comprised:) For Receiving is for our selves, further than we
intend it for Returns; but Returning is for God; Not to add to his blessedness;
but to Please his Will, and give him his own; For he made all things for
himself. And so that in union with him we may give him his own in fullest love
and Praise, and service, and thus please him, must be the higest part of our
Intention, about our own felicity in enjoying him.

So that you may see, that self-denial teaches no man to ask, [ Whether he
could be content to be damned for Christ?] For this is contrary to our
propounded End, in the whole. For a damned man has no union of Love with God,
and gives him not his own in Love or Praises.

Object. What say you then by the wishes of Moses and Paul?

Answ. 1. The saying of Moses is very plain, Exodus 32. 32. He does not desire
that his soul might be made a ransom for Israel, but that if God would not
pardon them, but destroy them and cast them off, he would blot out Moses name
from his Book, that is, from among the number of the living; so that his saying
is no other than such as Elias or Jonas was [ What good will my life do me, if
I live to see thy people cast off, and all thy wonders for them buried?
therefore either let them live in thy sight or kill me with them] This is the
plain meaning of Moses request.

And for Paul's, the difficulty is somewhat greater: 1. Some think that Paul
means ( Romans 9. 3.) that he once wished himself to be no Christan in the days
of his ignorance, and all through his Zeal for the Jewith Nation. But this is
improbable. 2. Some think that he means only, I could wish to be given up to
death for them, as the accursed under the Law.

3. Some think he means only, I could wish my self yet unconverted to Christ,
so they were converted.

4. Some think, the meaning is, [ I could wish my self cast out of the Church,
and given up to Satan for any bodily suffering.]

5. Some say it is only to have his salvation deferred.

6. And some that it is damnation for a time.

But 7. The plain meaning seems to be this; [ so great is my Love to my
Countrymen the Jews, that if it were offered to my choice whether they or I
without them should enjoy Christ; I would yield to be cast out of his sight for
ever, rather than they should] where mark; 1. That it is not a wish that it
were so: for he knew that this was no means to promote their salvation: but
it is a discovery of his affection that would with or choose this if it were a
means to that End. 2. And it is not the sin of not Loving Christ, that he would
choose, but only the misery of being deprived of his blessed presence. 3. And
the Reasons of this his choice are these two conjunct; 1. Because the souls of
so many thousands is in impartial Reason more to be valed than the soul of one;
2. And principally because by the conversion and salvation of a whole Nation
God may be more honored and served than by one.

And note farther, 1. That this is not set as a mark for every Christian to try
the truth of his Love by: 2. But yet no doubt but it is a duty and degree of
Grace that every one should aim at. For 1. We see among Heathens that nature it
self teaches them that a man should lay down his life for his Country; because
a Country is better than a man. And proportionably, Reason tells us that the
salvation of a Country being a greater good than of any one, it should be more
preferred: And Self-love goes against plain Reason when it contradicts this.
What man's Reason does not tell him that it were better he should die, than the
world should be destroyed, or the Sun turned into darkness; yea or that one
Church or Country perish? And so of salvation.

2. And it is agreeable to the nature of Love to desire that most that most
Pleases him whom we Love: and therefore to desire rather that God may have
multitudes than one, and be served and Praised by them. So much about the
Matter of self-denial.

III. I Have finished the two first things which I promised you under the use
of Exhortation, viz. the trial of your self-denial, and the particulars in
which it consists, and must be exercised; and there I have showed you 1. In
what respect self must be denied, 2. What that selfishness is that must be
denied, as to the inward Disposition; and 3. What is that objective
self-interest that must be denied, which consists in so many Particulars that
I cannot undertake to enumerate all: but I have mentioned twenty Particulars
under the general head of Pleasure, and ten under the general Head of Honor,
and have referred you to another Treatise for that which consists in worldly
profits. And now I come to the third part of my work, which is to show you a
little more fully the Greatness of the sin of selfishness, and give you thence
such moving reasons as may conduce to the cure of it: which are these that
follow.

CHAP. LXIII. Motives: 1. Selfishness the grand Idolatry of the world.
1. SElfishness is the grand Idolatry of the world, and self the worlds Idol,
as I have told you before. It usurpeth the Place of God himself in men's
Judgments, wills, affections and endeavors. It was the work of the ten
Discoveries in the Beginning of the Book to demonstrate this: and therefore I
shall say but little more. But self-denial destroys the worlds great Idol,
and gives God his own again. The selfish lean most to their own
understandings: but the self-denying trust the Wisdom of God. The selfish are
careful principally, for themselves, and their own felicity, even a terrene and
carnal kind of felicity: But the self-denying are principally careful how they
may Please and Honor God, and promote the welfare of his Church, and in this
way attain the spiritual everlasting felicity of the Saints. The selfish must
have their own humors pleased, and their own wills accomplished, and their own
desires granted: But the self-denying do slay their own carnal wills, desires,
and conceits, and lay them dead at the feet of Christ, that his will alone may
be exalted. The selfish would have all men love them, admire them, and commend
them. But the self-denying would have all men to Love, Admire, and Glorify the
Lord, above himself and all the world. The selfish can bear with Gods enemies,
but not with their Own: and they can suffer men to wrong Cod, and sin against
him, more patiently than they can suffer them to wrong themselves. But it is
contrary with the self-denying: A wrong to God and his Church seems far
greater to them than a wrong against themselves. In a word, the selfish intend
themselves, and live to themselves, and the self-denying intend God, and live
to him, in the course of their lives. And therefore when the selfish are
troubled about many things, the self-denying are minding the One thing
Necessary: And when the selfish are seeking to know what is good or evil to
their flesh; the self-denying are seeking to Please the Lord, and desire to
know nothing but him in Christ crucified; and they could part with all the
knowledge of the creatures, as useful to themselves, if they could but know
more of God in Christ. The selfish would be in his own hands, at his own
dispose and government, and the self-denying would be in the hands of God, and
at his dispose and Government.

And doubtless, the very state of man's Apostasy did lie in turning from Cod to
self, and to the creature for self: so that he now studyeth, and uses, and
loves the Creature but for himself: And so he would have himself, and all as
far out of the hands of God in his own, as possibly he can. I gave you my
thoughts in the beginning, that this was the meaning of man's knowing Good and
Evil by the Fall: And since I wrote that, I meet with the same Exposition in
Damascene, do Orthodox. fid. li. 11. c. 11. p. (mihi) 113. part of whose words
I shall here translate [In the midst of Paradise, God planted the Tree of Life,
and the Tree of Knowledge: And the Tree of Knowledge was for the trial, and
proof and the exercise of man's obedience and disobedience. And therefore it is
called the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil: Or because it gave man a power
to Know his Own nature; which indeed to the perfect is good, but to the infirm
is evil; and to them that are yet prone to concupiscence, as strong meats to
the weak and those that need milk. For the Lord that created us, would not have
us careful and troubled about many things, nor to become Contrivers and
Providers for our own lives: into which it was that Adam fell. For when he had
eaten, he knew that he was naked, and made hmself an apron of fig leaves to
cover his nakedness. But before both Adam and Eve were naked and not ashamed.
And God would have had us insensible of (or not to suffer by) such things: For
this is but an insensibility or impassibility. But we had One work only to do
without vexation and care, which is the work of Angels, unweariedly and
continually to praise our Creator, and to delight in the contemplation of him,
and to cast all our care on him, as he taught us by the Prophet David, saying,
Cast thy care on the Lord, and he shall nourish thee; and the Lord taught his
own Disciples in the Gospel, Take no care what you shall eat, nor wherewith you
shall be clothed; and again, Seek first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, and these things shall be added to you; and to Martha: Martha,
thou art careful and troubled about many things, but one thing is needful: Mary
has chosen best part which shall not be taken from her;] that is, to sit at
his feet, and hear his word; and this is the tree of Life.] So far Damascene,
who you see drives at the same sense, though it be not clearly and fully
expressed by him.

And as man by his Fall, desired to know what was good and evil for himself,
that is, to his own Nature, for his daily provision and safety, that he might
be able to choose for himself, and not trust himself wholly on the Provision of
God; so accordingly God in judgment has given him over to himself according to
his desire, of which more anon.

And accordingly our Restoration from this lapsed state, consists in
retiring from our selves to God; and giving up to him again those minds, those
thoughts, those wills, those affections that have been, all this while detained
from him, and mis-imployed by self; Down then with this Idol and set up God.
Did you make your selves? or redeem your selves? or do you sustain your selves,
or are you sufficient for your selves? Let him that does all this for you be
acknowledged to have the only Title to you; And consider what an odious crime
it i; for such worms to exalt themselves as Gods, and so deny the Lord to be
their God.

CHAP. LXIV. Enemy to all Morality: Faith: Prayer: Obedience.
2. MOreover, this Self is the Enemy as of God himself, so also of all the
frame of Morality: Of Every Article of your Belief, and Every Petition in the
Lords Prayer, and of every one of the ten Commandments, and of the whole Word
of God.

1. For your Belief, it advances your own Reason against it, as to the Truth
of it: so that you cannot discern these things of God, because they are
spiritually discerned. It shuts up your understandings against the Meaning
of it; so that when you know the Grammatical sense of the words, you know not
ha^ the meaning yet for all that. The words are written to signify the
spiritual apprehensions and affections which the holy inditers had of the
matter signified by them: And till you come by the help of those words to have
the same impress upon your souls, the same apprehensions and affections which
the inditers had, and intended to express by them, you have not the perfect
understanding of the Scriptures; And therefore while you are wholly without
their spiritual Apprehensions and Affections, you do not so much as sincerely
or truly understand them; however you may be able to speak as good Grammarians,
and true Expositors in the explaining of them to others. And also selfishness
in the Will does make you disrelish the Doctrine which you should believe,
because that being Practical, either the Doctrine, or its consequence, or the
Practice that it puts you on, is against your carnal self and interest.

2. And for Prayer, I might easily show you, that self contradicts all the
parts of it. You should first Pray that the Name of God may be Hallowed, making
his Glory the End of your desires: But self must be its Own End, and seek the
Honor of its Own Name, and less regards the Hallowing of Gods.

You must pray that the Kingdom of God may come: But this Kingdom treads down
self as an enemy, and therefore no marvel if self be unwilling of it. Would you
be deposed, and subjected to a spiritual government, and do nothing nor have
nothing but at the pleasure of Christ? The Reign of self is contrary to his
reign.

You must pray that the Will of God may be done. But self has a Will that is
contrary to Gods Will; and every carnal man would be a Lawgiver to himself, and
unto others, and had rather have his Own will done, than Gods. O^ else whence
come all the sins of your lives, which are nothing but the doing of your own
wills, and the not doing the Will of God!

You must pray each day for your daily bread, as children that live not on
their own provision, but on their Fathers love and bounty, and have their
address to him for all they want, desiring but such supplies as are necessary
or useful to them for his service. But self desires more than daily bread, and
desires not so much to strengthen you for Gods service, as to delight and
gratify the flesh; and had rather have its stock in its own possession, than
daily to fetch it as you use it from God.

You must pray daily for the forgiveness of your sins, as people that are
grieved for them, and weary of them, and hate them, and are sensible of the
want and worth of pardon, and of the abundant Grace of Christ that purchased
it, and the preciousness of the Gospel-promises that conveigh it, and of your
own Unworthiness by reason of this sin. But self is not easily so far abased as
to be heavy-laden, and sick of sin; nor is it easily drawn to value Grace, or
feel how much you are unworthy of it, or need it; nor easily driven to renounce
all sufficiency and conceits of a Righteousness of your own, and wholly to go
out of your selves to Christ for life: Self cannot spare sin: for it is its
darling and play-fellow, its food, its recreation and its life.

You must daily pray to be saved from temptation, and delivered from Evil; even
the Evil of sin, as well as of punishment. But self does Love the sin, and
therefore cannot long to be delivered from it, and therefore Loves the
temptation that leads to it, and indeed is a continual tempter to it self.
Would the Covetous worldling be delivered from his worldliness? Would the
Ambitious Proud person be delivered from his Pride or Honors? or the sensual
person from his sensual delights? No, they do not Love the Preacher or people
that are against them in these ways: nor the holy self-denial that is contrary
to them; nor the Scripture that condemns them; nor indeed the Lord himself
that forbids them, and is the author of all these Laws and holy ways which they
abhor. So that you see how self is an enemy to every Petition in the Lords
Prayer.

3. And it is a violation of all the ten Commandments. The first and second it
is most directly against, and is the very thing forbidden in them: and all the
rest it is against consequentially, and is the virtual breach of them, as
disposing and drawing the soul thereunto.

The two Tables have two Great Commands, which are the sum of the whole Law,
and all the other Commandments are consequents or particulars from these. The
sum of the first Table is [ Thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart] or above all] This is the first Commandment] Thou shall have none other
Gods before me] which is put first as being the Fundamental Law, commanding
subjection it self to the sovereign Power of God, which necessarily goes before
all actual obedience to particular precepts. But self is directly against this,
and sets up man as a God to himself: And all the unsanctified Love themselves
better than God, and therefore cannot Love him above all.

And therefore neither second, third or fourth command can be sincerely kept by
such: For when self is set up, and God denied, in stead of the right
worshipping of God, they are worshipping themselves, or suiting God worship to
the conceit and will of self. Instead of the Reverent use of his name, they are
setting up their own names, and will venture on the grossest abuse of Gods
name, rather than self shall suffer or be crossed. And instead of hallowing the
Lords day, they devote both that and every day to themselves.

The sum of the second Table is, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self] and
this is the meaning of the tenth Commandment, which forbids us to covet any
thing from him to our selves: that is, that we set not up self and its interest
against our neighbor and his good; and be not like a bruised or inflamed part
of the body, that draws the blood or humors to it self, or like a Wen or
other Tumor, that is sucking from the body for its own nutrition: so that it is
but plainly this [ Be not selfish, or drawing, or desiring any thing to thy
self, which is not thy due, but belongs to another: but let Love run by even
proportions, between thy neighbor and thy self, in order to God and the
public good.] And this Commandment brings up the rear, that it may summarily
comprehend and gather up all other particulars that be not instanced in, in the
foregoing Commandments. Now selfishness being the very sin that is here
forbidden, I need to say no more to tell you that self is the breaker of this
Law.

Next to this summary concluding Precept, the greatest in the second Table (if
not one of the first) is the fifth Commandment; which requires the
preservation of Relations and Societies, and the duties of those Relations,
especially of inferiors to superiors, for the Honor of God and the Common
good. And this is set before the rest, because the public good is preferred to
the personal good of any; and Magistrates and Superiors being Gods Officers,
and for the Public good, are to be prefered before the subjects. But what an
enemy selfishness is to this Commandment, I intend anon to show you distinctly,
and therefore now pass it by.

And for the following Commandments, who ever murdered another but out of some
inordinate respect to himself, either to remove that other (...) of his selfish
Ends, or to be revenged on ^riving self of profit, or honor, or some it would
have had, or in some way or other ^in your Own Ends by another blood?

And what is it but the satisfaction of your Own ^^^thy lusts, that causes
Adultery and all uncleanness? And what is it but the furnishing and providing
for self that provokes any man to Rob another? And what is it but some selfish
End that causes any man to pervert Justice, or slander, or bear false witness
against his neighbor? so that nothing is more plain than that selfishness is
all sin and villainy against God and man, comprised in one word.

And therefore you need not ask me, which Commandment it is that does forbid
it: For it is forbidden in every one of the ten Commandments. The first
condemns self as it is the Idol set up, and Loved, trusted, and served before
God: the second condemns it as the Enemy of his worship; and the third
condemns it as the Prophaner of his Name; and the fourth, as the Prophaner of
his Hallowed time: The second Table in the tenth Commandment condemns self as
it is the Tumor and gulf that is contrary to the Love of our neighbor, and
would draw all to it self. The fifth Commandment condemns it as the Enemy of
Authority and Society: the sixth as the Enemy to our Neighbors life; the
seventh, eighth, and ninth condemn it as the enemy to our neighbors chastity,
Estates, and Cause, or Name.

So that if you see any mischief done in Persons, Families, Towns, Countries,
Courts, Armies, or any where in the world, you need not send out Hue and Cry to
find out and apprehend the actor: It is selfishness that is the Author of all.
If the poor be oppressed by the rich, and their lives made almost like the life
of a laboring Ox or Horse, till the Cry of the oppressed reach to heaven, who
is it that does all this but self? The Landlords and rich men must Rule and be
served by them. I warrant you they would not do thus by themselves.

If the poor be discontented and murmur at their condition, and steal from
others, who is it that is the cause of this but self? If another were in
poverty, they would not murmur nor steal for him.

It is selfishness that blemisheth Judges, and Justices and Officers with the
stains of partiality, avarice, and injustice: It is this that disturbeth the
peace of Nations; that will not let Princes Rule for God, and consequently
overthrows their Thrones: that will not let subjects Obey them in the Lord, but
lets in wars and miseries upon them: that sets the Nations together by the
ears, and so continues them: yea it is self that will not let neighbors live
together in Peace: that provokes people to disobey their Teachers, and
Teachers to be man-pleasers, and neglect the people; that will not let Masters
and Servants, Parents and Children, Husband and Wife, live peaceably and
lovingly one with other; It is the common makebate and troubler of the world.

Nay it is self that causes most of the new Opinions and practices in
Religion: that sets up Popery, and most other Sects; and causes the Pastors to
contend for superiority to the troubling of the Church after all the plain
prohibitions of Christ.

In a word, selfishness is the grand enemy of God and man; the Disease of
Depraved lapsed nature: the very heart of Original sin, and the old man; the
root of all the Iniquity in the world: the breach of every Commandment of the
Law; the enemy of every Article of Faith, and every Petition in the Lords
Prayer; and by that time we have added the rest of its deformity, you will see
whether it be not the very Image of the Devil, as the Love of God and our
neighbor which is its contrary, is the image of God.

But now on the contrary side Self-denial complyeth with all Divine
Revelations, and disposes the soul to all holy Requests, and to the
observation of every Command of God.

It humbly stoopeth to the mysteries of Faith, which others proudly quarrel
with in the dark. It makes a man say, O what am I that I should set my wit
against the Lord, and make my Reason the Touchstone of his truth, and think to
Comprehend his judgments that are incomprehensible! It causes a man to sit as
a little child, at the feet of Christ to learn his will, and say, Speak Lord,
for thy servant hears. It silenceth the carpings of an unsatisfied
understanding, and limiteth the enquiries of a busy, prying, presumptuous wit;
and subdueth the contradictions of flesh and blood: It casts off that Pride
and self-conceitedness that hinders others from believing.

In Prayer it brings an emptied soul, that is not stopped up against the
grace and blessings of God; It lays us low in a receiving posture: It
emptieth us of our selves, that we may be filled with God: It has nothing to
say against any one of those Requests which Christ has put into our mouths,
but subscribeth to them all. It is the highest ambition, the greatest desire of
a self-denying soul, that Gods Name may be hallowed and honored, whatever
become of his own Name or honor; and that the Kingdom of God may flourish, in
which he desires to be a subject; and that the will of God may be done, and
the will of himself and all the world conformed and subjected to it: And so of
the rest of the Petitions. Self-denial is half the life of Prayer.

And it is a dutiful observer of all the Commandments. It gives up our Love to
God as his Own, and consequently worshippeth him in Love, and Reverenceth his
name, and observes his time, and indeed is wholly devoted to him. And it
gives our neighbor that part of our Love which belongs to him; and
therefore will not dishonor superiors, or encroach upon the possessions of
others, or injure them for his own ends.

And indeed what should draw a self-denying man to sin, (were he but perfect in
self-denial?) when the poise is taken off, the wheels all stand still:
Self-denial does frustrate Temptations, and leave them little to work upon.
What should move a self-denying man to be Proud, or covetous, or injurious to
others? no man does evil, but it seems good, and for some good that he
imagines it will do him: And this seeming good is to carnal self: And
therefore a self-denying man has taken off the bias of sin, and turned out
the deceiver, and when Satan comes he has little in him to make advantage of.
O how easily may you take sin out of the hands of the self-denying, and make
them cast it away with lamentation, when other men will hold it as fast as
their lives! O try this speedy way of Mortification. Would you but destroy this
Original breeding sin, you would destroy all. All the sins of your lives are
the fruits of your selfishness; kill them at the heart and root, if you would
go the nearest way to work. What abundance of sin does self-denial kill at
once? Indeed it is the sum of mortification. And therefore be sure that you
deny your selves.

CHAP. LXV. Contrary to the State of Holiness and Happiness.
3. MOreover, Selfishness is contrary to the State of Holiness and Happiness:
contrary to every grace, and contrary to the life of Glory. For it is the use
of all grace to recover the soul from selfishness to God: that God may be
Loved, and Self-love may be overcome: that God may be trusted, and pleased, and
his service may be our care and business, when before our care was to Please
our selves.

And the very felicity of the soul consists in a closing and communion with
God. The soul that will be happy, must be conscious of self-insufficiency, and
must go out of it self, and seek after life in God; It must forsake it self,
and apply it self to him. Men lose their labor till they deny themselves, by
going to a broken empty cistern, and forsaking the fountain of living waters.
The nearer men are to God, and the more fully they are conformed to him, and
close with him, and know him, and love him, the happyer they are. Glory it self
is but the nearest and fullest intuition and fruition of God: And he that has
most of him here in his soul, and in the creatures, providence, and
ordinances, is the happiest man on Earth, and likest to the glorified. And
there is no approach to God but by departing from carnal self. I know
self-seeking men do think of finding more peace and comfort in that way: but
they are always deceived of their hopes: It is self-denial that is the way to
peace and comfort. While we rest on our selves, or are taken up with anxious
caring for our selves, we are but tossed up and down as on a tempestuous sea, and
are seeking Rest but never find it: but when we retire from our selves to God,
we are presently at the harbor, and find that Peace which before we sought in
vain. I confess, in the too-little experience that I have my self of the way of
peace and quiet to the soul, I must needs say, there is none to this: There is
none but this. Never can I step out, but self meets with somewhat that is
vexatious and displeasing to it: This business goes cross, and that business is
troublesome: this person is troublesome, and that person is abusive and
injurious: One is false and treacherous, or slanderous; and another is
imprudent, and weak, and burdensome: what between the baits of prosperity, and
the troubles of affliction, the perverseness of adversaries, and the weakness
of friends, and the changes that all States and persons are liable to; the
multitudes that would be pleased, and the labor and the cost that it will
stand us in to please them, and the multitudes that will be displeased when we
have done our best; and the murmurings, reproaches, and false accusations that
we shall be sure of from the displeased; and which is worst of all, the
burdensome weaknesses and corruptions of our own souls, and the sins of our
lives, and the daily vexation that our dark and shattered condition does
occasion to our selves; I say, between all these disquieting perplexities,
enough to rack and tear in pieces the heart of man, I have no way but to shut
up the eyes of sense, and forget all self-interest, and withdraw from the
creature, as if there were no self or creature for it in the world, and to
retire into God and satisfy my soul with his Goodness and All Sufficiency, and
faithfulness, and immutability. And in him is nothing to disquiet or
discontent, unless you will call his enmity to our own diseases and unhappiness
a discontenting thing. And this is not my own experience alone, but all that
know what Christian Peace and Comfort is, do know that they lose it, and are
torn in pieces while they are caring and contriving for themselves; and that
Retiring into God, and casting all their care on him, and satisfying themselves
with him alone, though all the creatures should turn against them, is the way
to their content and quietness of mind. The Example of David is exceeding
observable, 1 Samuel 30. 6. When besides the distressed estate that he was before
in, the City where he left his family and the families of his followers, was
taken and burnt down, and their wives and children carried away, and all gone,
so that David and the people that were with him, lift up their voice and wept,
until they had no more power to weep; and to make up his calamity, the
Soldiers that were with him talked of stoning him because of the loss of their
wives and children; in this desolate condition, says the Text [ but David
encouraged (or comforted) himself in the Lord his God] And it is good for us
sometime to have nothing in this world left us that will afford us comfort,
that we may be driven to God for it: Till the house be as on fire over our
heads, and we are as it were fired out of every room of it, we will hardly be
gone, and betake our selves to God our only Rest. Try it Christians when you
will, and you shall find it true, that selfish contents do but tice you to
straggle away from your true comfort; and when you have done all, it is in
returning unto God that you must find the comfort which you lost by seeking it
abroad. It is only in the God of Peace, that your souls will find peace, and
therefore away from self and creatures, and retire into God.

CHAP. LXVI. Self-seeking is self-losing: self-denying our safety.
4. MOreover, consider that self-seeking is self-destroying, and self-denial is
the only way to our safety. We were well when we were in the hands of God, and
had no need to care for our selves. But we were lost as soon as we left him and
turned to our selves. If God care for you, infinite Wisdom cares for you; whom
no enemy is able to over-wit or circumvent; who can foresee all your dangers,
and is acquainted with all the ways of your enemies, and with all that is
necessary to your preservation. But if you be at your own care, you are at the
care of fools, and short-witted people, that are not acquainted with the depths
of Satan, the subtilties of men, nor the way of your escape, but may easily be
overreached to your undoing. If you are in your own hands, you are in the
hands of bad men, that though they have self-love, yet are so blinded by
impiety that they will live like self haters; And this experience fully
manifests, in that all sinners are selfdestroyers: No enemy could do so much
against us as the best of us does against himself: Did a man hate himself as
bad as the Devil hates him, he could show it by no worse a way than sin; nor
do himself a greater mischief than by neglecting God, and the life to come, and
undoing his own soul, as the ungodly do. Should you sit down of purpose to
study how to do all the hurt to your selves that you can, and to play the part
of your deadliest enemies, I know not what you could do more than is ordinary
with ungodly men to do, except to go a little further in the same way. Nothing
but sin could alienate you from God, or make you liable to his heavy wrath: and
this no man else could make you guilty of, if you did not voluntarily choose to
be evil. If you could ask any man that is this day in Hell, or that will ever
be there, what brought him thither, and who it was long of that he came to such
a miserable end, he must needs tell you it was himself. If you come to any in
earthly misery, and ask them, who brought this upon them? If they speak truly
they must say, it was themselves. And this will be a great aggravation of their
misery, and the fuel that will feed the unquenchable fire, to think that all
this was their own doing, and that they had not been deprived of the heavenly
Glory but for their own refusal or neglect. It will fill the soul with an
everlasting indignation against it self to consider that it has cast it self
wilfully into such misery! that, when Satan could not, and men could not, and
God would not, if he had not done it himself, he should be so witless and
graceless as to be the chooser of sin, the refuser of holiness, and his own
undoer. So that the experience of all the world tells you, how unsafe man is
in his own hands: the experience of those in Hell may tell us, whither it is
that self would lead us, if we follow its conduct. Whither did self lead Adam
when he hearkened to it, but to sin and death? what work has it made over all
the earth? Do we not see a whole world of people, not one excepted, wounded,
and slain, and brought into so low and sad a state, and all this by themselves!
and yet shall we go on in selfishness still? Of all the enemies you have in the
world, pray God to save you from your selves; escape your selves and you escape
all. You will never miscarry by any other hands. The Devil and wicked men will
do their worst; but without you they can do nothing. Never will you come to
Hell if you run not your selves thither: Never will you be shut out of Heaven
if you run not from it by your own neglect, and prefer not the prosperity of
the world before it. And therefore you see that we are nowhere more unsafe than
in our own hands. Gods Will is good, and would make a good choice for us: but
our wills are bad, and will make a bad choice for themselves. God is
unchangeable, and the same for ever; but we are giddy and uncertain, and if we
are in a good mind to day, are in danger of being in a bad to morrow. God is
able to secure us against all the subtilty, and rage, and power of Earth or
Hell: but we are silly impotent worms, and unable to defend our selves, or to
accomplish our own desires. So that our safety consists in forsaking our
selves and cleaving to the Lord. The more of your happiness lies on your own
hands, the greater is your danger: and the more of it is on the hands of God,
the greater is your safety. Fly therefore from your selves to God, as you would
fly out of a torn or sinking Vessel into the strongest ship; or as you would
haste away from a tottering House that is ready to fall upon your heads: so
haste away from self to God. Study his Love, and fall in Love with him; and
that will be more gainful to you, than studying and carnally Loving your
selves. Forget your selves, and remember him; and he will remember you to your
greater advantage than if you had remembered your selves. When any interest of
your Own, rises up against the Interest or will of God, care not then for your
selves or for your own; set as light by it as if it were nothing worth; and say
as the three witnesses of God in Dan. 3. 16, 17. when they were ready to be
cast into a flaming furnace [ We are not careful to answer thee in this matter:
If it be so, the God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand O King: But if not, be it known
unto thee O King, that we will not serve thy gods or worship the golden Image
which thou have set up] Care you for your Duty, and God will care for your
safety better than you can do: you are safer under Gods care in the midst of a
flaming fire, than under your own care in the greatest prosperity, or honor in
the world. While Abraham and Isaac depended upon God, they were safe, though in
the midst of dangers: but when they fell upon carnal shifting for themselves,
to say their Wives were their Sisters, they brought themselves but into a snare
and double danger; when you have cared, and contrived, and shifted for your
selves as long as you can, it is God that must do the deed, and defend and
deliver you, and provide for you when all is done. Is it wise, or safe, or
profitable for your child to be casting for provision of meat, and drink, and
clothes for it self? Cannot you do it better? and is it not your work? and had
you not rather your child would trust you with it, and meddle with his own
business, and be careful to please you, and then to depend on your care and
love? What good will it do a simple patient, to know the ingredients of every
medicine compounded for him, and given by his Physician? or to desire to be
acquainted with his Physic himself that so he may be tampering with his own
body, and have the doing of the business himself, till by his unskilfulness he
has undone himself, when he had a wise and faithful Physician that he might
have trusted to! O that men knew how ready a way it is to their undoing, when
they must be satisfied of all the Reasons of the ways of God! and when they
must have their own wills and ways, and must see a ground of safety in the
creature! and must take that course that self tells them is the best! when they
are resolved to look to their estates, and honors, and lives, and dare not
cast them on the wisdom, and care and will of God! O that men knew how sure and
near a way it is to their felicity, to be contented to be Nothing that God may
be all; and then they would be More in God than they could have been in
themselves: and to be contented to Die, that they may Live in God; and to lose
their lives that they may find them in him. Let go your Reputation with men,
and you will find it made up a thousand-fold in the approbation of God. Let men
condemn you, so that God may but Justify you! Let Riches go, and see whether
you will not find more in God, than you could possibly lose for him. Can any
man be a loser by God? or can he make an ill bargain that makes sure of Heaven?
Do you think there is any want of Riches or Honor there? O Sirs, win God and
win all: win Heaven and never fear being losers. It seems a great loss to flesh
and blood to lay down your estates, and honor, and life, for Christ and the
hopes of a life to come: But it is because the flesh is blind, and cannot see
so far off as everlasting is. The loss is not so great as to exchange your
brass, your dirt, for gold and jewels: or to exchange your sickness for health.
It is the most profitable Usury to make God your debtor, by putting all your
stock into his hand, and venturing it all on his service upon the confidence of
his promise.

But if you will go about to shift for your selves, you will lose your selves:
and if you will save your selves, you will undo your selves; and if you will
keep your Riches or Honors, you do but cast them away: For all is lost that is
saved from God: and that is best saved that is lost for God.

CHAP. LXVII. Selfishness the powerful Enemy of all Ordinances.
5. MOreover it is self that is the most powerful resister of all the
Ordinances of God; and it is self-denial that boweth the soul to that holy
compliance with them, which wonderfully furthereth their success.

Were it not for this one prevailing eneny, what work would the Gospel make in
the world! O with what confidence should we come into the Pulpit, and speak the
word of God to our hearers, had we any to deal with but this Carnal self! God
can overcome it by his victorious grace; but it is so blind, so wilful, so near
men, and so constant with them, that it will overcome us, and all that we can
say or do, till God set in. When I come to convince a sinner of his guilt, and
show him the heinous nature of his sin, because it is his Own, he will be
convinced of it: when I tell them of their misery, they will not be convinced
of it, because it is their own. Were I to speak all this to another, and tell
another of his sin and misery, I might have these men's consent, so it reflected
not upon themselves. Were I to wring the unlawful gains out of the hands of
another, I might have their consent: or were I to persuade another from his
Pride, or lust, or passion, they would give me free leave, because it is not
self that is concerned in it, nor self-denial that is necessary to it in them.
But when we come to themselves, there is no dealing with them, till God by
Grace or Judgment deal with them. They cannot endure to know the worst by
themselves: much less to come out of it. If we tell them of their sin and
danger, they say, we speak against them! And therefore they say, It is out of
malice, or humor, or pride. And as well might all diseased persons say so of
their Physicians, that when they tell them of their disease and danger, they
speak against them, and speak out of malice or ill will. It is natural for men
to think well of all that they love, and of all that they do: and whom do they
love better than themselves? Pride will not let men think so meanly and hardly
of themselves as the Scripture speaks of them, and Ministers must plainly tell
them. The Prophet wept that foresaw the cruelty of Hazael; but he had so good a
conceit of himself that he would not believe he should be so cruel, 2 Kings 8.
13. Is thy servant a dog that he should do this?] The false Prophet Zedekiah
could not forbear, but struck Micaiah, when he made it known that he was a
lying Prophet, 1 Kings 22. 24. And Ahab hated him, because he prophesied not
good of him but evil. It was all the Proud men that rose up against Jeremiah,
and contradicted his prophecy, and rejected his word, Jer. 43. 2. The word of
God is quick and powerful, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart; and it is the plain word of that God, that fears not the faces of the
Proudest sinners on earth, and will not flatter, nor daub with any of them all,
but will tell them to their faces what they are, and what will become of them
if they do not turn, and what they must trust to: This is the word that God
has put into our mouths, and commanded us to preach to them: not the
flattering words of an inferior, nor the tender language of a man-pleaser, but
the commanding words of the God of heaven, and the peremptory threatenings of
everlasting fire, against all unconverted, unsanctified men, denounced from him
that fears none of them all, but will make them all stoop at last to him, and
fear, and tremble before his Majesty. And is it any wonder if Proud and selfish
sinners are displeased with such a word as this? They stand all the while they
are hearing a plain and powerful Preacher, as prisoners arraigned at the bar;
and sometime are ready to tremble as Felix did, when he heard Paul dilating of
righteousness, and temperance and the judgment to come, Acts 24. 25. And can
self endure to be thus used and arraigned for its life? especially when they
think it is but by a man? For they have not the understanding to know that it
is Christ that owneth all that his Messengers speak by his Commission. Hence it
is that men hate those Ministers that they feel thus to judge them in their
Doctrine, and take them for their enemies for telling them the truth, Gal. 4.
16. and think they are but the troublers of the Country, as Ahab called Elijah
the troubler of Israel, which he had troubled himself, 1 Kings 18. 17. and meet
them as he did the same Prophet, 1 Kings 21. 20. Have thou found me O mine
Enemy? They meet not a Minister as the Messenger of God that calls them to
repentance, but as an enemy in the field, to strive against him, and raise up
all the reasonings and passions of their souls against him, because he
condemns their unregenerate state, tells them but what God has charged him
to tell them: when the poor sinners consider not, that before God has done
with them, as sure as they breathe, he will make them either by grace or
Judgment, condemn themselves as much as any of his Ministers condemned them,
(from the word of God) at whom they were most offended. Ah little do these
Proud worms that rage at us now for faithful dealing, and for telling them that
which they will shortly find true, little do they think that they shall shortly
say the very same against themselves which they hated us for saying: Nay with
an hundred times more bitterness and self-revenge will they speak these things
against themselves, than ever we spoke them. Hence it is that faithful
plain-dealing Ministers are commonly hated and persecuted by the ungodly,
especially by the great ones and honorable sinners. For their message is
against self, and therefore self will rise up against them, and so many selfish
unmortified persons as there be in the Congregation, so many enemies usually
has such a Minister. And therefore the Lords of Israel petition the King that
Jeremy may be put to death, Jer. 38. 4. And Amaziah the Priest calls Amos a
conspirator against the King, and tells the King that the Land was not able to
bear his words, and commands him to preach no more at the Kings Chapel or his
Court, Amos 7. 10, 11, 12, 13. And what was the matter that deserved all this,
yea and the death of almost all the Prophets and Apostles of Christ? why, it
was for speaking against self and its carnal interest: But was it not a truth
that was spoken? True or false, if it be against self, it cannot be born! As
the Bishop of Ments that Luther speaks of, meeting with a Bible, and reading an
hour in it, [ I know not, says he, what book this is, but I am sure it is
against us] Meaning the Popish Clergy. So these men say by our preaching and by
the word of God it self, Be it never so true, we are sure it is against us: Or
rather [we will not believe it, because it is against us] But if these men had
their wits about them, they would see that this is for them, which they think
is against them. It is for their healing and salvation, had they hearts to
entertain it, though it be for the troubling of them at the present by
humiliation. O how tender are carnal persons of this self! How quickly do they
feel, if a Minister do but touch them! How impatiently do they smart, if he
meddle with the galled place, and plainly open their most disgraceful sins, and
most dangerous courses, as one that had rather be guilty of displeasing them,
than of silently permitting them to displease God, and undo their souls! They
fret and fume at the Sermon, and go home with passion in their hearts and
reproaches in their mouths against the Ministers: And are of the mind of the
desperate Sodomites, Genesis 19. 9. that said to Lot when he exhorted them, [
Stand back: This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a Judge:
now will we deal worse with thee than with them] what, say they, can he not
preach and let me alone? has he none to rebuke before the Congregation but me!
And thus will every ungodly person reject the Word as they are selfish, and
self must be let alone in all. But why must you be let alone? will you be ever
the safer or better for that! will God let you alone if we should let you
alone? No, he will not be frightened from dealing with you as you are: whatever
his word has said against you, he will certainly make good, though you should
never more be told of it by Ministers. You have not silenced your Judge, when
you have silenced his Messengers. He will handle you in another manner than
Ministers do. O how easy is it to hear a Preacher threatening the everlasting
wrath, in comparison of hearing the sentence of the Judge and feeling the
execution! If we should yield to your desires, and let you alone, God would
neither let you nor us alone; you would but go the quietlier to hell; and your
blood will be required also at our hands, Ezekiel. 33. 6, 7, 8, 9. and then what
would become both of us and you?

O were it not for the Powerful resistance of this selfishness, what work would
every Sermon make that we preach to you? O what abundance would be converted at
a Sermon! for what should hinder it? I should make no doubt of persuading you
all to close with the Lord upon his reasonable terms, and to become a holy and
heavenly people, and presently to forsake your former sin, even this hour. Nay
some ordinances there are that selfishness has almost shut out of the Church:
as most of the exercise of the ancient Discipline, in open and personal
admonitions, and public confessions and lamentation of sin, with rejection of
the impenitent, and the Absolution of the penitent: Besides most of that
private address to Pastors for their advice in case of falls, and spiritual
decays, or weaknesses, and difficulties that meet them in doctrine or duty.
Self will not suffer men to stoop to most of these! What, will they be brought
to open confessions and lamentations of sin, and to follow the guidance and
persuasions of a Priest? no, all the Priests in England shall not make such
fools of them: so wise are these selfish men for a little while! But how long
will this hold! and how long will madness go for wisdom! when they are dying,
then they will send for the Minister and confess: and when some of them come to
the Gallows, they will confess: And every one of them shall confess at last
whether they will or no; and God will indite their confession for them, and
open their shame to all the world in another manner than Ministers required
them to open it: But then Confession will do nothing for Remission, and the
preventing of execution, as now it might have done.

So also the duty of brotherly reproof and admonition of offenders, is almost
quite cast out by selfishness: and especially, the patient and thankful
receiving of it: And those ordinances that are continued, are very much
frustrated by the opposition of selfishness. It is a very hard task that
Scripture and good books, and preachers have to do; when we speak every word to
enemies of the Doctrine which we preach, and we can do them no good but by
their own consent: And who will consent to that which he is an enemy to? Our
work is to subdue their Flesh and Carnal wills to Christ: and this flesh is so
dear to them that it is themselves: so that they take all that Doctrine to be
against them which should save them: And we have as many Enemies as unconverted
hearers in our Assemblies: No wonder therefore if they carp, and quarrel, and
strive, when the selfdenying humbly submit and obey.

Self-denial opens the heart to Christ, and gives the Ordinances leave to
work: It takes down all opposition and contradiction; so that though the soul
may stay to search the Scripture, and see whether the things that are taught be
so, yet it searches with a childlike charitableness, and willingness to learn,
and know, and obey. It has no mind to quarrel with God; how easily will a
self-denying man submit to those duties which another man abhors? How easily
will he be persuaded to forgive a wrong, to part with his right for a greater
good to others, to let go a gainful Trade that is unlawful, or any sinful way
of thriving: How easily is he brought to ask forgiveness of those that he has
wronged, to make a public confession of his sins, if the greatness of them, or
his duty to God, or the good of others, do require it; to make restitution of
all that he has gotten wrongfully; to bear a plain and sharp reproof; to part
with his own for the relief of the poor; to lay out his estate to the best
advantage of the Cause and Church of God, and the common good; to let go any
unlawful vanity; any excess in meat, and drink, or sport, or sleep, or any
vanity in apparel or other work of Pride: How easily can he bear all rebukes,
reproaches, and neglects, and undervaluing ingratitude from others! But what
ado shall we have with carnal, unsanctified wretches to persuade them to all or
any of this? From them a Preacher has such a work to pull their beloved
profitable sins (they seem profitable to them till the reckoning comes) as a
man has to pull the prey from the jaws of a hungry Wolf, or meat from the
mouth of a greedy Dog: But when we require the self-denying to do the same
thing, it is but as to bid a child obey his Father whom he loves and
honors. The doing of these duties, and forsaking these sins, is to an
ungodly man as the parting with a right hand, or a right eye, or the skin from
his back, or the flesh from his bones, as we see by the rarity, and the
unsuccessfulness of the plainest reasons, and great Authority of God himself,
and the few works of Piety, charity, or self-denial that are done by such at
any great cost. But to the self-denying, it is but as the casting away a
handful of earth, or casting off an upper garment, for the doing of their work.

CHAP. LXVIII. Enemy of all Society, Relations and Common good.
6. MOreover, this selfishness is the enemy to all Societies, and Relations,
and consequently to the common good. And it is not only indirectly and
consequentially, but directly that it strikes at the very foundation of all.
For the manifesting of this, consider in what respects this selfishness is at
enmity with Societies.

1. The End of Societies is essential to them: and this End is the Common good
of the Society: and therefore a Republic has its name from hence, because it
is constituted and to be administered for the Commonweal, or the good of all.
Now selfishness is contrary to this common good which is the End of all
Societies. Every selfish person is his Own End; and cares not to hinder the
common good if he do but think it will promote his own: And how is that Family,
Church, or Commonwealth like to prosper, where most (alas, most indeed) have an
End of their own, that is set up against the End and being of the Society? For
though the real good of particular persons is usually comprehended in the
common good, yet that is but in subserviency to the public good, and is not
observed usually by these persons who principally look at themselves. And it
commonly falls out that the public welfare cannot be obtained but by such
self-denial of the Members, which these men will not submit to; though they
incur a greater hurt by their selfishness. Little do they think of the common
good: it is their own matters that they regard and mind. So it go well with
them, let Church and Commonwealth do what it will: They can bear any ones
trouble or losses save their own. They are every man as a Church, as a
Commonwealth, as a world to themselves. If they be well, all is well with them:
If they prosper, they think it is a good world, what ever others undergo. If
they be poor, or sick, or under any other suffering, it is all one to them as
if calamity had covered the earth: and if they see that they must die, they
take it as if it were the dissolution of the world, (unless as they leave
either name or posterity behind them in which a shadow of them may survive.).
And therefore they use to say [when I am gone, all the world is gone with me.]

2. Moreover selfishness is contrary to that Disposition and spirit that every
Member of a Society should be possessed with. The public good will not be
attained without a Public spirit, to which a Private spirit is contrary. Men
must be disposed to the work that they must be employed in. The work of every
Member of a Society, is such as Mordecai is approved for, Esther 10. 3. [
seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed] Every
true Member of the Church must have such a spirit as Nehemiah, that in the
midst of his own prosperity and honors is cast down in fasting, tears, and
Prayers, when he hears of the affliction, reproach, and ruins of Jerusalem,
and says [ Why should not my countenance be sad, when the City the place of my
fathers sepulchers lies waste?] Neh. 1. 3. and 2. 3, 4. And as the captivated
Jews, Psalm. 137. that lay by all their mirth and music, and sit down and weep
at the remembrance of Zion. A private, selfish disposition is quite contrary to
this; and is busy about his own matters, and principally looks to his own
ends and interests, what ever come of the Church; and falls under the reproof
that Baruch had from God, Jer. 45. 4, 5. [ Behold that which I have built will
I break down, and that which I have planted I will pluck up, even this whole
Land; and seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not.] This Private
disposition makes men so foolish as to lose themselves, by seeking themselves;
looking to their own goods or cabbins when the ship is sinking in which they
are; and to their own rooms, when the House is all on fire. But a Public
Spirit says [ If I forget thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her
cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief Joy] Psalm. 137. 5, 6. His love
is to the Church as the Spouse of Christ, and as to the body of which he is
himself a member, and his Prayers and endeavors are for its prosperity and
peace, Psalm. 122. 6, 7, 8, 9. [ Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall
prosper that love thee: Peace be within thy walls and prosperity within thy
Palaces: For my Brethren and companions sake I will now say, Peace be within
thee: because of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good] The body
of Christ, is all animated by one spirit, that it might aim at one end; and it
is so tempered by God, that there should be no Schism in it, but that the
members should have the same care one for another, that if one member suffer
all the members should suffer with it, or if one member be honored, all should
rejoice with it] 1 Cor. 12. 13, 24, 25, 26, 27. There is no serving Public
ends with a Private selfish spirit.

3. Moreover sefishness is an Enemy to the Laws of Societies, whether it be the
Laws of God or man. For it would have them all bended to their private
interest, and fitted to their selfish disposition. And therefore for the
immutable Laws of God, which they cannot change, they corrupt them by
misinterpretations, expounding them according to the dictates of the flesh, and
putting such a sense on all as self can bear with. And what they cannot
misinterpret, they murmur at and disobey. And for the Laws of men, where
selfish persons are the makers of them, you shall perceive by the warping of
them, who they were made for. Hence it is that Princes and Parliaments have
looked at the Laws, and Church, and Ministers of Christ, with an eye of
Jealousy as if they had been some enemies that they stood in danger of, and
all for fear lest the personal, selfish, fleshly interest of Noblemen, and
Gentlemen, and others, should be incroacht upon by the Laws and Government of
Christ. And hence it is that so much endeavors and hopes of a Reformation have
been so long frustrated, and even among wise and Pious Lawmakers there has
been so much pains to keep Ministers from doing their duty in Governing the
Churches, and laying such restrictions on them, that Pastors might be no
Pastors, that is, no Guides and Overseers of the Church in the worship of God.
And when good Laws are made, they have as many enemies as selfish men. If the
Law were not hated, the execution of it would not be hated so much.

4. Also selfishness is an enemy to the very being of Magistracy, and to all
public Officers and their work. For the very End of the Magistracy is the
Public benefit, as I said before of the end of a Commonwealth: and therefore
this selfishness is contrary to this end: and such men will not value a
Magistrate as a public Officer, but only as one that is able to help them, or
to hurt them; which is but to fear him as a potent enemy, and not to love or
honor him as a Ruler. They look at Magistrates as at Tyrants that are too
strong for them; and as a Cur will crouch to a Mastiff Dog, so they will crouch
to them to save themselves: and this is their love, and honor, and obedience;
(even such as Hobbs has taught them in his Leviathan.) But they do not
reverence that beam of Divinity which God has communicated to them in their
Authority; nor love their Governors as the Fathers of the Church and
Commonwealth, for the common good and the honor of God which they are
appointed to promote.

5. And this selfishness is the deadly enemy of all right Administrations of
Justice, and the due exercise of Authority in Church or Commonwealth. If a
Minister be selfish, he will be shifting off the troublesome part of his duty,
and will overruled his understanding to believe that it is no duty, because
dis-believing is easier than obeying. He will be forward in those duties that
are necessary to his maintenance and applause, and are imposed on him by the
Laws of men, but out of the Pulpit it is little that he will do: As if it were
the Pulpit only that were Gods Vineyard where he is set to labor. Flesh and
blood shall be consulted, and men shall be pleased and all that the interest of
self may be maintained.

And if the People be selfish, they will rebel against their faithfullest
Guides, and kick against their Doctrine and reproofs, and fly from Discipline,
which seems to their distempered minds to be against them. Let but one most
notorious, lamentable instance suffice. The greater part of our Parishioners in
most places of the Land are lamentably ignorant and careless in the matters of
their Salvation, and all that we can do is too little to bring them to
understand the matters of absolute Necessity: and yet almost all of them are so
much wiser in their own conceits than the ablest of their Teachers, that if we
do not humor them, and be not Ruled by them in our Doctrine and
Administrations, about Sacraments, Prayers, Burial, and the rest, yea if we
obey them not in gestures and forms, they turn their backs upon Officers, and
Ordinances, and the Church it self, and pour out their reproach upon their
Teachers, as if we were ignorant in comparison of them (even of them that know
not so much as children of seven or eight year old should know.) See here the
wonderful, bewitched power of a selfish disposition.

And in matters of the Commonwealth, what is it more than this! nay what is it
besides this, that makes Princes become Tyrants, and Rulers keep under the
Ordinances and interest of Christ, or fearfully neglect them, and look after
the Church in the last place, when they have no business of their own to call
them off, and to begin to build Gods House when they have first built their
own, not imitating Nehemiah's laborers that had the sword in one hand, and the
Trewel in the other, and builded in their arms! what else makes them give God
but their leavings who gives them all! And what else could make them such
enemies to Truth, as to side with those parties what ever they be that side
most with them, and promote their interest?

And alas what work does selfishness make with inferior Magistrates? It is this
only that opens the hand to a Reward, and the ear to the solicitations of their
friends; and its this that perverteth the judgment, and this that oppresses
the poor and innocent, and this that ^yeth the tongues and hands of Justices,
so that abundance of them do little more than possess the room, and stand like
an armed statue or a sign-post, which hurts none; Alehouses do what their
list for them, and drunkards and swearers are bold at their noses, and they are
no terror to evil doers, nor revengers to execute wrath upon them, nor
Ministers that use their power for much good, but bear the Sword almost in
vain, contrary to the very nature of their Office, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4.

And it is selfishness in the people that causes the trouble of faithful
Magistrates: Every man would do what his list. The worst offender abhors him
that would punish him: And those that will commend Justice, and cry down vice
in the general, yet when they fall under Justice themselves, they take all that
they suffer to be injury, and will do all that they can against Justice and the
Officers of it, when it is to defend themselves or theirs from the execution of
it: so rare a thing is it to meet with a man that is a friend to Laws and
Justice, when themselves must suffer by it.

6. Selfishness also makes men withdraw from all those necessary burdens and
duties that are for the preservation of Church or Commonwealth. Such wretches
had rather the Gospel were thrust out of doors than it should cost them much:
and had rather have the unworthiest man that would be their Teacher for a
little, than allow the best that maintenance that the Gospel does command, or
give them what the Law has made their Own. They would venture the ruin of
Church and State, and let all fall into the hands of the common enemies, rather
than hazard their persons, or lay out their estates for the common
preservation. So that if the hand of violence did not sometimes squeeze those
Spunges, and force these leeches to disgorge themselves, they would but
impoverish the Commonwealth by their Riches, and weaken the body like wens or
impostumes by drawing to themselves.

7. And then the selfish are such causes of Division, that if they did no other
harm, they would break both Church and State into pieces, if their humor were
predominant, and not restrained or purged out. And in this regard selfishness
is the direct enemy of Societies, and is always at work to dissolve them into
Independent individuals. A Society is a Political Body which must have but one
Head, and one Interest, and one End: But when selfishness prevails, there are
as many Heads, and Ends, and Interests as Persons: If they be in a Church,
every one is the Teacher and Ruler: and every one must have his opinion
countenanced, and his humor satisfied; Every one must have his way and will:
And how is this possible, when their minds are so various and contrary to one
another; and their Interests so inconsistent, and there are as many Rulers as
persons: when every man is drawing to himself, and there is no center in which
they can unite, what work is there like to be in the Church? What progress
could be made in the building of Babel, when no man was ruled by another, but
every man ran confusedly after his single imagination? what an Army will it be,
and how are they like to speed in fight, where every Soldier is instead of a
Captain and General to himself, and one runs this way, and another that way,
and one will have one course taken, and another another course, and every one
fights on his own head: such work does selfishness make in the Church* It is
this that has broken it into so many parcels, and would crumble it all to dust
if it should prevail.

And it is this also that causes the Divisions of the Commonwealth; Faction
rising up against Faction, and Prince and people living in jealousies of each
other as having contradictory interests; which would not be if the Pleasing of
God, and the common good were the principal End and Interest of them all, and
selfishness did not prevail.

And this is it that keeps Christian Princes in most ungodly wars, to the
shedding of Christian blood, and the weakening of the common interest, and the
strengthening of the common enemy, whom they should all join together to resist.

This also keeps up so many parties on Religious pretenses to seek the
undermining and ruin of each other, when they should all join together against
the common profaneness of the world; and all their conjunct endeavors would
be too little. Thus selfishness is the grand Enemy that by Divisions and
Subdivisions is still at work for the Dissolution and Ruin of Church and
State, and the Confusion of the World, and the disturbance and destruction of
order and government.

8. Yea Selfishness makes men false and treacherous, so that they are not to be
trusted, and are unmeet materials for any Society. For what ever they promise,
pretend, or seem, they are all for themselves, and will be no further true and
faithful to the Society, or any Member of it, than suiteth with their own Ends:
Never trust a selfish person, if it be your own Brother, further than you can
accommodate and please him, and so oblige him to you upon his Own account. It
is the Complication of Interests, that makes Husband and Wife so much agree and
love each other: because that which one has the other has: But if their
Interests fall out to be any whit divided, it is two to one but selfishness
will divide their affections. One would think that the bond of nature should be
so strong to constrain a Son to love his Father, that nothing could dissolve
it: And yet sad experience tells us that even here, it is an unity of
Interest that does more with many children than either nature or grace: and
that when they have no more dependence upon their Parents for their commodity,
their affections and respects are gone; and if they shall gain much by their
death, they can bear it without much sorrow, if not desire it. So potent is
selfishness, that it makes not men unfaithful only to their friends, and
treacherous to their Governors, and false to all they have to do with, but also
unnatural to their nearest Relations.

And therefore (next to true Piety which leads up all to an Unity in God, and
therefore is the most perfect Polity) the chief point of humane Polity, for the
preservation of Commonwealths and all Societies, is, a Complication of
Interest: when the Constitution makes the Governor and the Governed as Husband
and Wife, that have nothing dividely as their own, but all in common, and take
each other for better or worse, and know they must stand or fall together, and
that the good or hurt of one is the good or hurt of both, and that there is no
manner of hope that either of them should thrive by the ruin of the other. If
Politicians had the skill and will to make such an union of Interests between
the Sovereign and the Subject, and to make it visible that all might understand
it, their Republics would be Immortal, till either the wrath of a Neglected
God, or the Power of a foreign enemy should dissolve them: For nothing else but
self could do it; and self will not do it when it sees its own interest lie in
the preservation of the present State.

CHAP. LXIX. Corrupts and debaseth all that it disposes of.
7. ANother aggravation of the evil of selfishness is, that it corrupts and
debaseth every thing that it disposes of. And on the contrary it is the
excellency of self-denial (as joined with the Love of God) that it rectifieth
and ennobleth all your actions.

Let the work be never so Holy in its own nature, yet if you do it but for your
selves, you make a profane employment of it; and to you it is not Holy. A
selfish carnal person is serving himself even in Preaching, and hearing, and
praying, and Sacraments, and other acts of worship and Church Communion: Much
more in the common business of his life. Even when he thinks he is serving God,
he is but serving himself of God, and provoking God by this abuse: when he
thinks he is very holy because of his services, he is doubly unholy, in that he
even prophaneth holy things. And as it is not God indeed that he serves, so
from God he must not expect a Reward. And as far as a man's self and flesh is
below the blessed God, so far, in a sort, is the work of selfish men debased,
in comparison of those works of the Saints that are performed purely for God.
They make but a low unprofitable drudgery of that which in the hands of others
is the highest and noblest work on earth. For the action can be no better than
the End; and therefore is base as it is base.

But on the other side, self-denial makes noble the actions that in themselves
seem base. If you are gone out of your selves, and can truly say, that it is
God you serve and seek in your employments, you may be sure that God will take
them for his service, and set them on your account among the works that he has
promised to Reward (supposing that the Matter be such as he allows of, and
that you think not by good Intentions to turn sin to holiness, and make him a
service of that which he forbids.) O what an honor, what an encouragement,
what a comfort is this, to every Christian! The actions of a Prince or
Conqueror are base, if self be their End, and the respect to God do not ennoble
them. And the work of the poorest person is honorable that is done for God. It
is a great temptation to some poor Christians to grudge at their condition,
because they are so unserviceable to God. Alas thinks a poor Tradesman, or
Plowman, or Servant, What do I but drudge in the world? I have neither parts
not place to do God service with! But such d^ very much mistake the matter. It
is not the parts and place but the hearty performance of your works for God
that makes them such as he will take for service. O thinks a poor woman or
toiling servant; I can do nothing either for the Conversion of Souls, or the
good of Church or Commonwealth, but am made unserviceable: But do you not know
that any thing is acceptable service which God commands, and is heartily
intended to his honor and his Pleasure: It is not the mettle but the stamp of
the Prince that makes a piece to be current money. If the Kings stamp were put
by his appointment on a piece of Brass or Copper, it would pass for Coin.
Believe it sirs, if your study be to Please the Lord in your Callings, and you
can but get above your selves, and do the basest servile works, as commanded
you by God, that you may be Accepted by him, and offer your selves and all your
labors purely to him, and to his honor, and his will, God will take these for
honorable services; and you are as truly at his work even in your shops and
fields as Princes are in Ruling, or Pastors in teaching or guiding the flock:
you that are poor, and cannot set so much time apart for reading and other holy
duties as some other do, see that you neglect no holy opportunity that you can
take, and then consider, that if God set you to do him service even by washing
dishes, or sweeping channels, or the meanest drudgery, he will accept it; and
the more, by how much the more humble submission and self-denial is found in
it. Take him as the only Lord and Master of your souls and lives, and all that
you have, and when you are called to your daily labor, look but to your hearts
that God be your End, and that you can truly say, [I do not this principally to
provide for my self, but as an obedient child in my Fathers service, because he
bids me do it, and it is pleasing to him through Christ; I do it not
principally from self-love, but from the Love of God that commands me my
work; and as a traveller that labors in his way for the love of his home, so
I am here at labor in this world in the place that God has set me, that I may
in his appointed way attain the everlasting glory that he has promised] I say,
do but see to it, that thus you dedicate your labors to God, and you may take
comfort in the daily labors of your lives, even the meanest and most
contemptible, as well as Princes and Preachers may in their more honorable
works. Nay all your labors are honored and sanctified by this: For all is
Holy that is heartily devoted to God, upon his invitation. And thus all things
are pure to the pure. For it is Gods interest in your work that is the holiness
and excellency of them. Were servants and laboring people more Holy and
self-denying, they might have more true comfort in their daily labor, than the
best of the unsanctified can have from their prayers or other worship of God.
Not that worship may be therefore neglected, but that a Christian must do
nothing at all but for God; and then he may be sure of Gods Acceptance.

CHAP. LXX. Deny Self or you will deny Christ.
8. MOreover, the selfish will never suffer as Christians, but deny Christ in a
day of trial; when the self-denying will go through all, and be saved. Nothing
does so througly try whether self or God be best beloved, as suffering for his
cause. In this it is that Christ uses to try men's self-denial: and it is a
principal use of persecution. When you hear of coming before Rulers and Judges,
and being hated of all men for Christ's name sake, then self rises up to plead
for its interest, and never makes more ado than when it sees the flames. The
flesh cannot Reason, but it can strive against Reason, and draw it to its side.
No Reason seems sufficient to it, to persuade it to choose a suffering state.
If you persuade a Carnal man to let go his estate, to be poor and despised in
the world, and to give up life it self if it be called for, and all this for
the hope of an invisible felicity, you lose your labor (till God set in,) and
all such reasoning seems to him most unreasonable. And what a dreadful case
such souls are in, my Text and many another passage in Scripture may convince
you. If you cannot drink of his cup, and be baptized with his baptism, you
cannot be advanced with him to glory. Through many tribulations we must enter
into the Kingdom of God. The pleasing of the flesh is the high way to misery by
displeasing God: and the voluntary submission to the suffering of the flesh for
the cause of Christ, is the high way to felicity, 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. [ It is a
faithful saying: for if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him; if we
suffer, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he also will deny us]
Romans 8. 17. [ Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution] 2 Timothy 3. 12. The day of trial is a kind of Judgment day to the
selfish unsanctified man: For it discovers his hypocrisy, and shows him to
be but dross, and separateth him from the suffering servants of Christ.

But self-denial makes suffering light, and will make you wish that you had
any thing worth the resigning unto Christ, and any thing by the denial whereof
you might serve him. For him you would suffer the loss of all things, and
account them dross and dung that you may win him, Phil. 3. 8. He will count us
worthy of the Kingdom for which we suffer, 2 These. 1. 5. As the Captain of our
salvation was made perfect by suffering, Heb. 2. 10. so also must his members,
by filling up the measure, and being made partakers of his sufferings, and
knowing the fellowship of them, 2 Cor. 1. 5, 6, 7. Phil. 3. 10. And the God of
all grace, who has called us into his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after we
have suffered a while, will make us perfect, stable, strengthen and settle us,
1 Pet. 5. 10.

If therefore you would not prove Apostates, and deny Christ in a day of trial,
and be denied by him before his Father and the holy Angels, see that you now
learn this needful Lesson of self-denial.

CHAP. LXXI. The selfish deal worse with God than with Satan.
9. COnsider also that selfish Carnal men deal worse with God, than they do
with the Devil and sin it self. God offers them Christ and pardon, and
eternal life if they will but deny themselves in a thing of naught, and they
will not be ruled or persuaded by him: The Devil offers them but the delights
of the flesh, and the pleasures of sin for a season, and they will deny ten
thousand sold more for this. They will deny God their Maker and Redeemer, their
Lord and Judge, their Preserver and their hope: though he have the only Title
to them, and their lives and souls be in his hand: They will for the sake of a
filthy lust, or of a short and miserable life, deny him that never did them
wrong, nay that has always showed them kindness, even all the kindness that
ever they received; and that when they know that their everlasting state must
stand or fall according to his judgment. They will deny the Lord Jesus the
Redeemer of their souls: They will deny and resist the holy spirit of God: They
will deny his Laws, his Gospel-promises, and all his Mercies: They will deny
his Ministers and all their persuasions and daily labors: They will deny their
dearest Christian friends, and deny their own Consciences and Convictions; and
deny themselves the Peace and Joy which they might find in a holy walking with
God: Yea they will deny themselves everlasting life, and the favor of God, and
cast themselves into endless misery; and all this for a thing that is ten
thousand times worse than nothing, or for a very sensual brutish Pleasure. And
yet these men cannot deny themselves in life, or liberty, in gain, or honor,
no nor in the filthiest lusts, for the sake of Christ and their own salvation:
Even when they may know that they most deny themselves when they will not deny
themselves. They deny themselves eternal glory, because they will not deny
themselves in temporal vanity. Heaven and earth will witness against such
sottish and unrighteous dealing as this, if true Conversion do not prevent it.
Has God, has Christ, has your own salvation deserved no better at your hands
than this? O miserable souls! All things can be easily denied save sin and
Carnal self, and these cannot be denied. God can be denied, Christ and
Scripture and Heaven it self can be denied, for flesh and sin; and flesh and
sin cannot be denied for God and for eternal Glory. Do you think that this will
look like wise or righteous dealing when you stand in judgment? Ask now any
stander by that is impartial, whether God or the flesh should be denied?
Whether Heaven or Earth should be denied, seeing one of them you must deny? And
if any impartial man will be now against you, what think you will God be, who
is not only impartial, but wronged by you, and a hater of your unrighteous
dealing?

CHAP. LXXII. To be left to self, is the sorest plague.
10. LAstly, remember, that to be given over to our selves is the heaviest
plague on this side Hell: And therefore he that delights not to be miserable
should not desire to be selfish. To be given over to the Love of your selves,
is to turn from the Love of the blessed God to the Love of a filthy sinner, and
so to forfeit Gods love to you. To be given over to care for your selves, is to
forfeit the fatherly care of God, and to be at the care of a silly insufficient
improvident sinner. To be given over to your own Conceits or Wisdom, is to be
forsaken of the Sun, and left in darkness, and spend the rest of your days in a
Dungeon, the beginning of the endless utter darkness. To be given over to your
own wills, is to be at the choice and disposal of a fool and of an enemy; and
to be in such hands as will certainly undo you, and to be cast out of the hands
of God: To be given over to seek your selves, is to lose your selves and God,
and your salvation. To be given over to live as your own, is to forfeit the
Protection of God, without which you cannot be kept an hour out of hell. To be
given over to the defending of your selves, and delivering your selves in
danger of soul and body, is even to be exposed to certain and perpetual
perdition. To be given over to be ruled by your selves, is to be relinquished
as Rebels, and exposed to the tyranny of sin and Satan. So that in all things
it is most certain, that you are never well but in the hands of God, and never
so ill as when you are most in your own hands. In Paradise innocent man was
wholly at the Government of God: and when by casting off his Government he had
forfeited the benefit of it, the most of the world became even brutish: And
when God had owned the Government of Israel above other Nations, and kept the
choice of the Sovereign under him in his own hands, at last the foolish people
in imitation of the Nations must needs have a King, and extort the Nomination
out of the hands of special extraordinary Providence, that they might have more
of it in their own; and this was an increase of their misery. Woe to that man
that ever he was born, that is finally given over to himself: For this is a
sign that God has forsaken them, and they stand at the brink of eternal death.
O think of this you that are self-conceited, and selfwilled, and self-lovers,
and self-seekers, and know not how to deny your selves: Must self be so
regarded and tenderly used? Take heed, you may have enough of self with
everlasting vengeance, if God once give you over to your selves, and say of you
as of them, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. [ But my people would not hearken unto my voice;
and Israel would none of them: So I gave them up to their own hearts lust, and
they walked in their own Counsel.] So much for the Aggravations.

CHAP. LXXIII. Ten Directions to get self-denial.
IV. I Come now to the last part of my task, which is to tell you, what course
you should take to procure self-denial. For though it be the gift of God, yet
there are certain means appointed us for the attainment of it, and God uses to
give it men in the use of his means, and by those means must it be confirmed
and continued.

Direction 1. Set faith a work upon the promises of God and upon everlasting
life: For the Flesh will not be taken off these lower things till you have
found out better, and such as will be sure to save you harmless. The most
covetous man would let go silver if he may have gold instead of it Set faith a
pleading the case with the flesh: and urge your own hearts with the Certainty,
the Nearness, the Glory, the Eternity of the Kingdom which by self-denial you
may attain; and if they will not yield to such a change as this, they are
unreasonable unbelieving hearts.

Direct. 2. Never be deluded to forget the vanity, the brevity, and the
emptiness and insufficiency, of all these earthly things, which self so
adhereth to as to neglect the promised life of blessedness. Acquaint your own
hearts what a nothing it is that they make so much of, and follow so greedily
and hold so fast: show them in the Sanctuary the glass of the word of God,
which will tell them what will be the end of all, and where all their worldly
prosperity will leave them? Ask your hearts, [Can I keep these things for ever;
or not? If not? Is it not better let them go for something, than for nothing;
and to part with them as a child at the command of my heavenly father, than to
part with them as a thief does with his prize, at the Gallows? Is it not better
let them go to ease me* and to secure my eternal peace, than let them go to
wound me and torment me! And while I keep them, what will they do for me, that
I should buy them at so dear a rate! O how dear must I pay for my ease, and
honor and gluttony and drunkenness and sensual delights, if I part not with
them when God commands? How cheap is a holy blessed life in comparison of
this which I must pay so dear for!]

Direct. 3. To promote your self-denial, Consider freque^tly and seriously, who
God is, and to what end he made, redeemed, sustaineth, and governs the world:
And then bethink you, whether it be meet that this glorious God should be
neglected, and frustrated of the end of all these works! and whether any thing
besides him be fit to be the creatures end. You think it meet that every
workman should have the use of his own work. Does any man make a House for its
own sake, or for his use to dwell in? Is it for the things sake that any man
makes an Instrument, or for his service by it? Do you think that God made you
for your selves: and not for himself and service? give therefore to God the
things that are Gods: All souls are his, and therefore all should acknowledge
him, and submit to his dispose and pleasure. Shall the pot quarrel with the
Potter, or claim title to it self and say, I am mine own? It is against the
clearest reason in the world, that any but the Creator, Redeemer and Perserver
of the world should be Lord, and the Governor and the end of it* and that men
should prefer themselves before him.

Direct. 4. Moreover it will further your self-denial to remember what you will
get by selfishness: God will have his Ends and Honor out of you one way or
other, whether you will or no; He will have your goods from you, and your lives
from you; and the faster you hold them, the more you will suffer when he
wringeth them out of your hands. The most covetous man would part with his
money to buy a Lordship, if he knew it would else be taken from him: A worldly
treasure is obnoxious to rust, and mothes, and Thieves: and if you exchange it
not for the heavenly treasure in time, and remove not your riches to the world
that you must for ever live in, what will you do when you must remove your
selves? And all your self-denial is but such an exchange or removal which all
should be glad of that know they must be gone themselves; Nay more, consider
still that selfishness makes you an Idol to your self, and therefore you do but
set up your s^lves as a Mark for the jealous God to shoot at, and every hour
you have reason to expect, that the terrible hand of Justice should lay hold
upon you, and tr^ you at the bar of that God whose Prerogative you did Usurp.

Direct. 5. And it may much further your selfdenial to take a considerate
survey of all the world, and see but what self-seeking has already done, and
is still doing in it. What a doleful sight of wickedness, confusion and misery
must you see, which way ever you look: and all is most evidently the fruit of
selfishness. Me thinks it should awaken every sober man against it, that does
but observe what work it has made; that sees. Families disordered and ruined
by it; Neighbors set in dissension by it; Churches divided by it; Religion
dishonored by it; and multitudes of them that seem to be religious, to be so
lamentably deceived and enslaved by it: Princes and great men blinded by it;
Judges and Learned men befooled by it; and the Nations of the world almost all
set together by the ears by it: So that it has turned the world into the
Confusion of Babel, that no man can understand a word of the Language that
tends to Unity, Peace and building up: Princes understand it not: too many
Preachers understand it not; but the Language of scorn and strife and
dissension they understand: so that the world is cast all into a hurly burly,
and every man's hand is against his Brother when he scarce knows why. No Church
or State can stand without disturbance: No truths without contradiction: Under
pretense of coming in to Christ, they are busily uncovering his House, when the
door is wide open, and there are more to invite them than to hinder them. Me
thinks as a man that observes the carriage of mad men or drunken men, should
never have any mind to be mad or drunken; so he that observes but what
self-seeking has done in the world, should have little mind to be
self-conceited, selfwilled, or self-seeking, but should love and honor
selfdenial.

Direct. 6. If you would promote self-denial, keep with you the continual
feeling of your own unworthiness and insufficiency: No man will trust upon a
broken staff if he know it; nor be so foolish as to go about to walk upon the
water, which he knows will not bear him. One would think this should be an
easy and an effectual remedy. Should it not be easy for such wretched sinners
as we to carry about with us a sense of our unworthiness? For such Lepers to
carry about us a sense of our uncleanness? Me thinks so many and great Diseases
should make us feel them. O then consider, as creatures you are utterly
insufficient for your selves; and as sinners much more. God never made you to
live upon or to your selves; or without him, or without the help of others.
There are few beasts when they are first brought forth into the world, but are
more able to help themselves than man; When he is newly born, he can do nothing
to help himself. And when he comes to Age he is naturally formed to a sociable
life; so that if he should retire from the world, and live only by and of
himself, he would soon find what it is to be selfish: Much more if he be left
to himself by God, or forsake God, and trust to and depend upon himself. But if
ever innocent man had been sufficient for himself: yet sinful man can have no
pretense to such a privilege, while he bears about him so many convincing
evidences of the contrary, every day. Do you not feel sin as a heavy burden
pressing you down, and perceive how easily it entangleth and besetteth you?
sure you do, if you be not past feelin And do you not know enough of the nature
and desert of sin, to drive you out of your selves, and bring you to him that
calls the weary and heavy laden to come to him for ease and rest, Mat. 11.
28. Do you not feel a continual burden of infirmities? and does not experience
tell you that you are not sufficient to relieve your selves in any pain or
sickness that does befall you? you cannot support your selves a moment: you are
still in the hands of that invisible God whom you abuse by your self-seeking.
You would drop into Hell if he withdrew the hand of his patience and support,
as sure as a stone would fall to the earth that were loose in the Air! As truly
as the earth bears you so truly does he bear the earth and you. It is easier
for Houses and Towns and Mountains to stand in the Air without the Earth; than
for you or any thing to subsist a moment without the Lord. Who keeps your heart
and pulse still beating, and your blood and spirits in continual motion, and
warm in your veins? Is it God or you? Who is it that causes your lungs to
breathe, your stomach to turn your meat to nourishment; and that nourishment
into blood and spirits and strength? Is it God or you? Who is it that causes
the Sun to rise upon you in the morning to light you to your labors, and to
set upon you at night, that the Curtains of darkness may be drawn about you,
and you may quietly repose your selves to rest? Who gives you strength to
labor in the day, and refe^^eth you with sleep at night, and provideth all the
creatures for your assistance? Is it you or God? O Sirs, me thinks such silly
worms, that cannot live a minute of themselves, and cannot fetch a breath of
themselves, should easily see that they should not live to themselves, but to
him from whom and by whom they live.

Direct. 7. If you would live in self-denial, be sure that you keep the mastery
of your senses: and do not let them be ungoverned, but shut them up when reason
does require it. It is your Appetite and senses that feed this carnal selfish
vice: but reason and faith are both against it. Whenever you consult with
sense, you may know what brutish advice you may expect. Ask not therefore what
is delightful, nor what is for your carnal ease and peace; but what is
necessary to please the Lord, and for your everlasting peace. And if the
tempter tell you, [This is the easier and the broader way] tell him that it is
not the honester nor the safer way: And the question is not which is the
fairest way? but, which is the way to Heaven? It Is better go the hardest way to
glory, than the smoothest to damnation. If you cannot keep under your sensitive
appetite, and subdue the eager desires of the flesh, and learn to want as well
as to abound, to be empty as well as to be full, you will never attain to
self-denial.

Direct. 8. To promote your self-denial, me thinks it should be effectual to
understand the great advantage that you have by the Communion and Society which
you enter into when you deny your selves. Though a Prince or Lord would be loath
to enter into a College, or Monastery where there is no Propriety, and yet
withal, no care or want; yet a poor laboring man or a beggar would be glad of
such a life. So you that cannot live of your selves, me thinks should be glad
of such a Community.

1. Consider that the Lord Jesus is the Head of the Society, who has
undertaken to make provision for the whole, and is engaged for their security,
and to save them harmless: and all the Riches of his grace and love belong to
that Society, and will be yours; which is more than all that you can part with
of your own, yea more than all the treasures of the world. It is therefore the
noblest and richest Society in the world that you shall live in communion with,
if you will deny your selves.

2. And the Saints that are the Members of that Society are the Brethren of
Christ and the Heirs of Heaven. And all these are your Brethren; endeared in
special love to you, engaged to assist you, by prayers, and counsel, and pains
and purse, and every way that you can: so that well might Christ say that he
that forsakes any thing for him, shall receive even an hundred fold in this
life, and in the world to come eternal life. For this one sorry self that you
forsake, and it is poor accommodations, you have God for your Father, and Christ
for your Head, and the Holy Ghost for your Sanctifier and Comforter, and the
Sripture for your guide, and Saints for your Brethren, Companions and
Assistants, engaged to you in truer and dearer love than your unsanctified
friends that cast you off for the sake of Christ. And had you rather be toiling
and caring for your selves, than let go self and enter into so blessed a
Community, where you may cast all your care away upon God, who has promised to
care for you; and may feed your selves in the daily delightful fore-thoughts of
life eternal?

Direct. 9. And me thinks it should much promote your self-denial, to study
well the self-denying example of Christ, and his eminent servants that have
trodden in his steps. Christ had no sinful self to deny; nor any corrupted flesh
to mortify or subdue. And yet he had a self-denial in which we must imitate
him: Romans 15. 3. [ For even Christ pleased not himself, but as it is written,
The reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me.] We are told
therefore by Christ's example, that it is not only the pleasing of self as
corrupted by sin, but also a pleasing of natural self in things where God may
lay a restraint on it, or put it to the trial, that we must avoid, and in which
we must deny our selves: Even as Adam was to have denied his natural appetite
before sin had corrupted it, and Christ had an innocent natural will of which
yet he says, [ Not my will, but thine be done.] His whole life was a wonderful
example of self-denial: He lived in a low esta^^ and denied himself of the
Glory and Riches of the world, and became poor, though he were Lord of all,
that by his poverty we might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8. 9. He lived under the
reproach of sinners; of sinners that he created: of sinners whom he dyed for:
He would wear no Crown, but a Crown of Thorns: He would wear no Robes but the
Robes of their reproach: He yielded his cheeks to be smitten, and his face to
be spit upon, by the vilest sinners, whom he could with a word have turned into
Hell. And at last he gave himself for us on the Cross in suffering a
reproachful cursed death, Heb. 7. 27. Tit. 2. 14. Ephesians. 5. 2. 2. 25. Gal. 1. 4.
And can you read such an example of selfdenial, given you by the Lord of glory,
and not be transformed into the image of it? I think the study of a
self-denying Christ is one of the most excellent helps to self-denial. Take it
from the Apostle himself, Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. [ Fulfill ye my joy,
that ye be like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind;
let nothing be done through strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind let
each esteem other better than themselves: Look not every man on his own things,
but every man also on the things of others. Let this mind be in you, which was
also in Christ Jesus; who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God; but made himself of no reputation and took upon him the form of
a servant, and was made in the likeness of men, and being found in fashion as a
man, he humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross: Wherefore God also has highly exalted him] [ Look therefore unto Jesus
the Author and Finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him
endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the Throne of God: Consider him that endured such contradictions of sinners
against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds,] Heb. 12. 2, 3, 4.

Direct. 10. But the greatest help to self-denial is, To retire from the
Creature into God, and live in the love of him, and employ the soul continually
upon him. Men will not be frightened from self love. It must be another more
powerful Love that must draw them from it. And that can be none but the Love of
God. When you have soundly discerned a surer friend than self, a wiser, a
better, an abler Governor and Defender, and one that much more deserves all
your Love and Care; then you will turn away from self, and never till then. See
therefore that you espouse no Interest but God's; and then you will have nothing
to call you from him: Let love so close you with him and unite you to him, that
you may know no Happiness but his Love and Glory, and see with no other Light
than his: and know no will but the will of God; nor meddle with any work which
for matter and end you cannot call the work of God. Then you have indeed denied
your selves, when you are nothing, have nothing, and do nothing, but as from
God, and by him and for him: Own not any self but in and for God, and then you
may love and seek it freely; or this is to be called a loving and seeking of
God and not of self. Own not any Knowledge, but that which is from the Light of
God, by his word, works, Spirit and Ordinances, and which leads you to God in
Holiness and Peace, and guides you in his service, and then you need not
condemn your selves of self-conceitedness, or a selfish understanding. Know not
any will in your selves, but that which is caused by the will of God, and
directed by it, and intended to sulfil it; So that you maybe able to say of
every desire of your soul, I desire this because that God would have me desire
it, and I am resolved to follow his will in the seeking of it, and the end of
my desire is that I may please him, and his will may be done,] and then you may
say, you have conquered self-will. O see then that you be more with God: and
study his Mind and Will, his Excellency, Sufficiency and Love, and remember
that you are a dependent being, that are nothing but in and by him, and
therefore should know no interest but him and his interest, nor possess any
thing but for him, nor know any will or way but his will and way, and so let
his be yours, and yours be his, by a holy resignation, conformity, and
subserviency unto his; and this is the true rectitude and holiness of man, this
is a finding our selves by losing our selves, and the only saving and exalting
of our selves by denying our selves. Nothing but the Light of God will master
self-conceitedness: and nothing but the love of God will overcome self-love:
and nothing but an union and closure with the will of God will overcome
self-will: and nothing but an espousing and intending God and his interest will
cause a true denial of carnal self-interest: and nothing but a seeking of God,
conversing as with him, and living to him, will cure the soul of self-seeking
and an ungodly and unprofitable living to our selves.

One other Direction I should add, which is to be always jealous and suspicious
of self; but this will fall in the Conclusion.

The Conclusion.
I Have now finished what I had to say to you on this great and needful
subject: And I have stayed the longer on it, that I might occasion your own
thoughts to be the longer on it: For it is not a few hasty running thoughts
that will make any great impression on the soul. And now, Christian friends,
whoever you are that hear or read these words, I earnestly entreat you in the
name of God that you will set your hearts to the deep consideration of the
nature and odiousness of this sin of selfishness; and of the nature and
necessity of self-denial. You will never effectually hate and resist the sin
which you think lightly of, and is not in any great discredit with you; nor
will you fly from it with fear and care and vigilance, till you apprehend the
dangerousness of it. I have not only told you, but proved it to you; that this
is one of the most odious and dangerous sins in the world, even the sum of all
iniquity, that contains a thousand sins in the bowels of it: This is it that
generateth all other vices, and fills the world with swarms of mischief. It is
this selfishness that corrupts all estates, and distracteth all Societies,
and disturbeth all affairs. Never look further for the cause of our calamities:
It is self that causes the miscarriages and negligence of the Princes,
Governors and ^istrates of the world, while they look all at their ^nterest,
and little at the things of Jesus Christ, or at least prefer themselves before
him. It is self that causes the disobedience of subjects, while they judge
themselves capable of censuring their Rulers for matters that are beyond their
reach; and grudge at all necessary burdens for the common good, because they
are a little pinched by them. It is self that has kindled the miserable Wars
that are laying waste so many Countries, and that makes such woeful havoc in the
World. It is self that has so lamentably abused Religion, and introduced so
many fantastical self-conceits under the name of high Scholastical subtilties:
and that has let in so many errors in Doctrine and Worship, and defiled Gods
Ordinances, and corrupted and almost extinguished the Discipline of Christ in
the Church. It is self that has caused the Leaders of the Assemblies, that
should be exemplary in Unity and Holiness, and Industry, to be some of them
idle and negligent, and some of them carnal and vicious, and so many of them in
discord and fierce opposition of one another: So that every man that is grown
up to a high degree of wisdom in his own eyes (and such Degrees are soon
attained) is presently venting his own conceits, and perhaps publishing them to
the world, and seeking out an Adversary to show his Manhood upon, and reviling
all that are not of his Opinion; as if there were no difficulty in the matter
but he is Learned and Wise, and they are are all unlearned and ignorant: he is
Orthodox, and they are Heretics, or what his Pride and self-conceitedness is
pleased to call them. It is this selfishness that makes even Godly Ministers
the Dividers of the Church, the reproach of their Holy Calling, the occasion of
the increase of triumph of the Adversaries, and the causes of no small part of
all our unreformedness, distractions and calamity; and the refusers and
resisters of the Remedies that are tendered for Healing and Reformation. I dare
boldly say, if this one sin were but rooted out of the hears of the Ministers
themselves that are the Preachers of self-denial, it would make so sudden and
wonderful a change in the Church, as would be the glory of our Profession, the
Joy of the godly, and the admiration of all! O happy and honorable Magistrates
at Court and Country, if self were but thoroughly conquered and denied! O happy
and Reverend Ministry, the pillars of Religion, the honor of the Church, if it
were not for the shameful prevalency of self! O happy Churches, happy Cities,
Corporations, Societies and Countries were it not for self! But alas, this is it
that saddeth our hearts, and makes us look for more and more sad tidings
concerning the affairs of the Church, from all parts of the world; or
frustrates our hopes, when we look for better. For we know on the one side,
that without selfdenial there will never be true Reformation or Unity; neither
sin nor division will ever be overcome; and on the other side we see that
selfishness is so natural and common and obstinate, that so many men as are
born into the world, so many enemies are there to Holiness and Peace, till
grace ^^ all change them; and that all endeavors, persuasions, convictions, do
little prevail against this deadly rooted sin: so that men will preach against
it, and yet most shamefully live in it; and after all rebukes, chastisements
and heavy judgments of God, the Church is still bleeding, and Princes, Pastors
and People are self-conceited, selfwilled and self-seekers still. Alas for the
cause and Church of Christ! Must we give it up to the lusts of self? Must we
sit down and look on its miserable torn condition, with lamentation and
despair? and shall we deliver down this despair to our Posterity? Were not our
hope only in the Omnipotent God, it must be so. When we look at men, at
Magistrates or Ministers, we see no hope: What higher professions can be made
by those in succeeding Ages, than have now been made? And yet what negligence
of Magistrates, and what contentiousness of Ministers, destroy all hopes? So
that we look at the Restoration of the Church, as at the Resurrection, that
must be done by Omnipotency: God must raise up another Generation of more
self-denying, prudent, zealous Magistrates, and of more self-studying,
peaceable, Humble, Zealous, Industristous Ministers, before the Healing work be
done. The selfish spirit that prevails now in the most, is neither fit to be
the Matter or Instrument of the Reformed Peaceable state which we expect. While
the enemies are destroying us by secret fraud and open force, we stand at a
distance and unite not against them, yea we are calling each other Heretic and
Deceivers, and teaching them how to revile us, and putting such words into
their mouth against us, as may help our people to despise us, and reject us,
and warrant them from our own mouths or pens to rail at us and forsake us: One
part of us being Heretics or Deceivers by the testimony of the other part, and
the other part by the testimony of too many of them.

Dear Brethren, if selfishness shall not now be left, when we are in the sight
of the havoc it has made, and stand in the field among those that it has
slain, and see the Church of God so horribly abused by it: when then shall it
be forsaken! I here entreat every man that loves his present or everlasting
Peace, and the Peace of the Church or Commonwealth, that he will resolve upon a
deadly enmity with this selfishness in himself and others! And that you will
suspect it, and watch against it in every work you have to do. Are you upon any
employment spiritual or secular? Presently enquire when you set upon it, [Is
there no self-interest and selfish disposition lurking here? How far is my own
worldly, fleshly ends or prosperity concerned in it?] And if you discover that
self is any way concerned in it; I beseech you suspect it, and follow self with
an exceeding watchful eye; and when you have done your best, it is ten to one
but it will overreach you. O look to it that you be not ensnared before you
are aware. Take heed of it, especially you that are great and honorable, and
have so much self-interest to tempt you in the world! How hardly will you
escape! When all other enemies are conquered, you have yet self the greatest
enemy to overcome. Take heed of it; you that have any rising thriving project,
little know you on what a precipice you stand: Take heed of it you that are in
deep and pinching wants, lest self make them seem more grievous than they are,
and provoke you to venture upon sin for your relief. Take heed all you that
have raging appetites or passions, or lustful inclinations, and remember your
enemy is now discovered, and you have him to deal with before your face: and
therefore see that you be resolute and vigilant. Take heed all you that have
Learning, Parts, or fame and honor, or any thing that self has to glory in
and to abuse, lest the noblest gifts should by this deadly principle be turned
into a plague to the Church, and to your souls. Suspect self in the choice of
your parties and opinions: Suspect it in your public labors; yea and in your
private duties, and greatest diligence in Religious Works; lest when your eyes
are opened at last it should appear, that you preached, or prayed, or
professed, or wrote, or lived for self, and not for God. I do but transcribe
the counsel to you, that God is daily giving in to my own soul: and as I feel
exceeding great use of it to my self, so I am sure there is to others: and woe
to me and you if we take it not, and be not found among the self-denying.
Doubtless God will put you to the trial, and find you frequent use for this
grace. Let me take the boldness to tell you from my own (though alas too small)
experience, that as it is mere selfishness, that is the perplexer and
disquieter of the mind, without which nothing that befalls us could discompose
it, so it is God only that quiets it, and gives it rest: And I bless the Lord I
can truly say, that I have found that content in loving and closing with the
will of God, and endeavoring to know no interest but his, to disquiet or quiet
me, which I never could find in any other way. When God is enough for us, and
his will is in our eyes, the will of a Father infinitely good, it may satisfy
the soul in the darkest condition; when we understand not the particular
meaning of his providence, nor what he is doing with us, yet still we may be
sure that he is doing us good: And therefore a child may not only submit to the
will of God, because it cannot be resisted, as enemies must be forced to do;
but he may Rest in that will as the Center of his desires, and the very
felicity and Heaven of his soul.

And now Sirs, I must let go this subject, as to you that have heard it
preached, for we must not be always on one thing: but I am exceedingly afraid
lest I have lost my labor with most of you, and shall leave you as selfish as
I found you; because sad experience tells me, that it is so natural and
obstinate an enemy that I have discovered, and that you have now to set your
selves against. I have done my work; but self has not done, but is still at
work in you. I cannot now go home with every one of you, but self will go home
with you. I cannot be at hand with every one of you, when the next temptation
comes, but self will be at hand to draw you to entertain it. When you are next
tempted to error, to pride, to lust, to contention with your brethren, by words
or real injuries, what will you do then, and how will you stand against this
enemy? If God be not your Interest, and the dearest to your souls, and you see
not with his light, and will not by his Will, and selfdenial be not become as
it were your nature; you will never stand after all this that I have said, but
self will be your undoing for ever! If you have not somewhat within you, as
selfishness is within you, to be always at hand as it is, and ready, and
constant, and powerful to overcome it, it will be your ruin after all the
warnings that have been given you. And this preserving Principle must be the
Spirit of God, by causing you to Deny your selves; Believe in Christ, and Love
God above all. I say again that you may think on it, and live upon it: The sum
of all your Religion or saving grace is in these three, Faith, Self-denial, and
the Love of God. Departing from Carnal-self, Returning home to God by Love, and
this by faith in the Redeemer, is the true Christianity, and the Life that
leads to everlasting life.

FINIS.
A DIALOGUE OF Self-denial. Flesh. Spirit.
Flesh. WHat! become Nothing! never persuade me to it.
God made me Something: and I Will not undo it.

Spirit. Thy Something is not thine, but his that gave it.
Resign it to him, if thou mean to save it.

Flesh. God gave me Life: and shall I choose to die
Before my time? or pine in misery?

Spirit. God is thy Life: If then thou fear death;
Let him be all thy soul, thy pulse, and breath.

Flesh. What! must I hate my self? when as my brother
Must love me? d I may not hate another?

Spirit. Loath what is loathsome: Love God in the rest:
He truly love's himself, that love's God best.

Flesh. Does God our ease and pleasure to us grudge?
Or does Religion make a man a drudge?

Spirit. That is thy Poison which thou call Pleasure:
And that thy drudgery which thou count'st thy treasure.

lFesh. Who can eudure to be thus mewed up?
And under Laws for every bit and cup?

Spirit. Gods Cage is better than the Wilderness.
When Winter comes, Liberty brings distress.

Flesh. Pleasure's man's Happiness: The Will's not free
To choose our misery: This cannot be.

Spirit. God is man's End: with him are highest joys:
Sensual pleasures are but dreams and toys.
Should sin seem sweet! Is Satan turned thy friend?
Will not thy sweet prove bitter in the end?
Have thou found sweeter pleasures than Gods Love?
Is a fools laughter like the joys above?
Beauty surpasses all deceitful paints:
What Is empty mirth to the delights of Saints?
God would not have thee have less joy, but more:
And therefore shows thee the eternal store.

Flesh. Who can love baseness, poverty and want?
And under pining sickness be content?

Spirit. He that has laid his treasure up above
And placed his portion only in Gods love;
That waits for Glory when his life is done:
This man will be content with God alone.

Flesh. What good will sorrow do us? Is not mirth
Fitter to warm a cold heart here on earth?
Troubles will come whether we will or no:
I Will never banish pleasure, and choose woe.

Spirit. Then choose not sin: touch not forbidden things:
Taste not the sweet that endless sorrow brings.
If thou love pleasure, take in God thy fill:
Look not for lasting joys in doing ill.

Flesh. Affliction's bitter: life will soon be done:
Pleasure shall be my part ere all be gone.

Spirit. Prosperity is barren: all men say.
The soil is best where there is the deepest way.
Life is for work, and not to spend in play.
Now sow thy seed: labor while it is day.
The Huntsman seeks his game in barren plains.
Dirty land answers best the Plowmans pains.
Passengers care not so the way be fair.
Husbandmen would have the best ground and air.
First think what is safe and fruitful: There Is no pleasure
Like the beholding of thy chiefest treasure.

Flesh. Nature made me a man, and gave me sonse:
Changing of Nature is a vain pretense:
It taught me to love women, honor, ease,
And every thing that does my senses please.

Spirit. Nature has made thee Rational; and Reason
Must rule the sense, in ends, degrees and season.
Reason's the Rider: sense is but the Horse:
Which then is fittest to direct thy course?
Give up the reins, and thou becom'st a beast;
Thy fall at death will sadly end thy feast.

Flesh. Religion is a dull and heavy thing,
Whereas a merry cup will make me sing.
Love's entertainments warm both heart and brain:
And wind my fancy to the highest strain.

Spirit. Cupid has stuck a feather in thy cap;
And lulled thee dead asleep on Venus's lap:
Thy brains are tipled with some wantons eyes:
Thy Reason is become Lust's sacrifice.
Playing a game at Folly, thou have lost
Thy wit, and soul, and winnest to thy cost.
Thy soul now in a filthy channel lies,
While fancy seems to sore above the skies.
Beauty will soon be stinking loathsome earth:
Sickness and death mar all the wantons mirth.
It is not all the pleasure thou can find
Will contervail the sting that is left behind.
Blind, brutish souls! that cannot love their God!
And yet can dote on a defiled clod!

Flesh. Why should I think of what will be to morrow?
An ounce of mirth is worth a pound of sorrow.

Spirit. But where is that mirth when sorrows overtake thee?
Will it then hold when life and God forsake thee?
Forgetting Death or Hell will not prevent it:
Now lose thy day, thou wilt then too late repent it.

Flesh. Must I be pained and wronged, and not feel?
As if my heart were made of flint or steel?

Spirit. Do thou delight to feel thy hurt and smart?
Would not an Antidote preserve thy heart?
Impatience is but Self-tormenting folly:
Patience is cordial, easy, sweet and holy.
Is not that better which turns grief to peace,
Than that which does thy misery increase?

Flesh. When sport, and wine, and beauty do invite,
Who is it whom such baits will not incite?

Spirit. He that perceives the look and sees the end,
Whither it is that fleshly Pleasures tend:
He that by faith has seen both Heaven and Hell,
And what sin costeth at the last can tell:
He that has tried and tasted Better things,
And felt that love from which all pleasure springs.
They that still watch, and for Christ's coming wait,
Can turn away from, or despise the bait.

Flesh. Must I be made the football of disdain?
And called a precise fool or Puritan?

Spirit. Remember him that did despise the shame,
And for thy sake bore undeserved blame.
Thy journey's of small moment if thou stay
Because dogs bark, or stones lie in the way.
If life lay on it would thou turn again,
For the winds blowing or a little rain?
Is this thy greatest love to thy dear Lord?
That can not for his sake bear a foul word?
Will thou not bear for him a scorners breath,
That underwent for thee a cursed death?
Is not Heaven worth the bearing of a flout?
Then blame not Justice when it shuts thee out.
Will these deriders stand to what they say,
And own their words at the great dreadful day?
Then they would be glad, when wrath shall overtake them,
To eat their wrrds, and say they never spoke them.

Flesh. How? Forsake all! Never mention it more to me,
I Will be of no Religion to undo me.

Spirit. Is it not thine more in thy Fathers hand,
Than when it is laid out at sins command?
And is that saved that is spent upon thy lust?
Or which must be a prey to thieves or rust?
And would thou have thy riches in thy way,
Where thou art passing on and can not stay?
And is that lost that is sent to Heaven before?
Had thou not rather have thy friends and store,
Where thou may dwell for ever, in the light
Of that long glorious day that fears no night?

Flesh. But who can willingly submit to Death,
Which will bereave us of our life and breath;
That lays our flesh to rot in loathsome graves,
Where brains and eyes were, leaves but ugly caves?

Spirit. So nature breaks and casts away the shell,
Where the now beauteous singing bird did dwell
The secundine that once the infant clothed,
After the birth, is cast away and loathed.
Thus Roses drop their sweet leaves under-foot;
But the Spring shows that life was in the root.
Souls are the Roots of Bodies: Christ the Head
Is Root of both, and will revive the dead.
Our Sun still shines when with us it is night:
When he returns, we shall shine in his light.
Souls that behold and praise God with the Just,
Mourn not because their bodies are but dust.
Graves are but beds where flesh till morning sleep's:
Or Chests where God a while our garments keep's.
Our folly thinks he spoils them in the keeping;
Which causes our excessive fears and Weeping:
But God that does our rising day foresee:
Pittie's not rotting flesh so much as we.
The birth of Nature was deformed by sin:
The birth of Grace did our repair begin:
The birth of Glory at the Resurrection
Finisheth all, and brings both to persection.
Why should not fruit when it is mellow fall?
Why would we linger here when God does call?

Flesh. The things and persons in this world I see;
But after death I know not what will be.

Spirit. Know thou not that which God himself has spoken?
Thou have his promise which was never broken.
Reason proclaims that noble heaven-born souls.
Are made for higher things than worms and moles.
God has not made such faculties in vain,
Nor made his service a deluding pain.
But faith resolves all doubts, and hears the Lord
Telling us plainly by his Holy Word,
That unclothed souls shall with their Savior dwell,
Triumphing over sin, and death, and hell.
And by the power of Almighty Love
Stars shall arise from graves to shine above.
There we shall see the Glorious face of God:
His blessed presence shall be our abode:
The face that banisheth all doubts and fears;
Shuts out all sins, and dries up all tears.
That face which darkeneth the Suns bright rays,
Shall shine us into everlasting joys.
Where Saints and Angels shall make up one Chore,
To praise the Great Jehovah evermore.

Flesh. Reason not with me against sight and sense:
I doubt all this is but a vain pretense.
Words against nature are not worth a rush:
One bird in hand is worth two in the bush.
If God will give me Heaven at last, I Will take it:
But for my Pleasure here I Will not forsake it.

Spirit. And will thou keep it? bruitsh flesh how long?
Will thou not shortly sing another song?
When Conscience is awakened, keep thy mirth!
When Sickness and Death comes, hold fast this earth:
Live if thou can when God says come away:
Try whether all thy friends can cause thy stay.
Will thou tell death and God, thou will not die?
And will thou the consuming fire defy?
Art thou not sure to let go what thou have?
And does not Reason bid thee then forecast,
And value the least hope of endless joys,
Before known vanities and dying toys?
And can the Lord that is most just and wise,
Found all man's duty in deceit and lies?

GET thee behind me Satan; thou do savor
The things of flesh, and not his dearest favor,
Who is my Life, and Light, and Love, and All,
And so shall be whatever shall befall.
It is not thou, but I that must discern,
And must Resolve: It Is I that hold the stern:
Be silent Flesh; speak not against my God;
Or else he will teach thee better by the rod.
I am resolved thou shall live and die,
A servant, or a conquered enemy.
LOrd, charge not on me what this rebel says,
That always was against me and thy ways!
Now stop its mouth by Grace, that shortly must
Through just but gainful death, be stopped with dust.
The thoughts and words of Flesh are none of mine,
Let Flesh say what it will, I will be thine.
Whatever this rebellious Flesh shall prate,
Let me but serve the Lord, at any rate.
Use me on earth as seems good to thee,
So I in Heaven thy Glorious face may see.
Take down my Pride; let me dwell at thy feet:
The humble are for earth and heaven most meet.
Renouncing Flesh, I Vow my self to thee,
With all the Talents thou have lent to me.
Let me not stick at honor, wealth, or blood:
Let all my days be spent in doing good.
Let me not trifle out more precious hours;
But serve thee now with all my strength and powers.
If Flesh would tempt me to deny my hand;
Lord these are the Resolves to which I stand.
Richard Baxter.
October 29. 1659.

