THE TRUE HISTORY OF COUNCILS Enlarged and Defended, Against the Deceits of a
pretended Vindicator of the Primitive-Church, but indeed of the Tympanite and
Tyranny of some Prelates many hundred years after Christ.

With a Detection of the false History of Edward Lord Bishop of Cork and Rosse
in Ireland.

And a Specimen of the way by which this Generation confuteth their Adversaries
in several Instances.

And a Preface abbreviating much of Ludolphus's History of Habassia.

Written to show their dangerous Error, who think that a general Council, or
College of Bishops, is a supreme Governor of all the Christian World, with
power of Universal Legislation, Judgment and Execution, and that Christ's Laws
without their Universal Laws, are not sufficient for the Churches Unity and
Concord.

By RICHARD BAXTER, a Lover of Truth, Love, and Peace, and a Hater of Lying,
Malignity, and Persecution.

To which is added by another Hand, a Defense of a Book, Entitled, No Evidence
for Diocesan Churches. Wherein what is further produced out of Scripture, and
ancient Authors, for Diocesan Churches, is discussed.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the
lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. 1682.

To the Pious and Peaceable Protestant-Conforming Ministers, who are against
our Subjection to a Foreign Jurisdiction. The notice of the Reason of this
Book, with a Breviate of Ludolphus's Habassian History.
Reverend Brethren,
WHen after the effects of our calamitous divisions, the rejoicing Nation
supposed they had been united, in our King newly restored (by a General and
Army which had been fighting against him, invited and strengthened by the City,
and many others) and an Act of Oblivion seemed to have prepared for future
amity; some little thought that men were about going further from each other
than they were before: But the Malady was evident to such of us as were called
to attempt a Cure, and neither the Causes nor the Prognostics hard to be
known. A certain and cheap Remedy was obvious; but no Pleas, no Petitions,
could get men to accept it. The Symptoms then threatened far worse than yet
has come to pass, God being more merciful to us than mistaken men. We were
then judged criminal for foreseeing and foretelling what Fruit the Seed then
sown would bring forth: And since then the Sowers say the Foretellers are the
cause of all. We quickly saw, that instead of hoping for any Concord, and
healing of the Bones which then were broken, it would become our Care and too
hard work, to endeavor to prevent a greater breach. Though we thought Two
Thousand such Ministers as were silenced would be mist, when others thought it
a blessing to be rid of them, we then feared, and some hoped, that no small
number more would follow them.

It was not you that cast such out; nor is it you that wish the continuance and
increase of the Causes. We agree with you in all points of the Christian
Reformed Religion: and concerning the evil of all the sins which we fear by
Conforming to commit, though we agree not of the meaning of those Oaths,
Promises, Professions, and Practices, which are the matter feared. We live in
unfeigned Love and Communion with those that love Truth, Holiness and Peace,
notwithstanding such differences as these. God has not laid our Salvation or
Communion upon our agreeing about the meaning of every word or Sentence in the
Bible, much less on our agreeing of the sense of every word in all the Laws and
Canons of men.

Two things we earnestly request of you, for the sake of the Christian
Religion, this trembling Nation, and your own and others Souls. 1. That you
will in your Parish Relations seriously use your best endeavors to promote
true Godliness and Brotherly Love, and to heal the sad Divisions of the
Churches: We believe that it must be much by the Parochial Ministers and
Assemblies, that Piety and Protestant Verity must be kept up: And what we may
not do, we pray that you may do it who are allowed. 2. That you will join with
us against all Foreign Jurisdiction, Ecclesiastical or Civil.

The Party which we dread I have given you some account of in my Reply to Mr.
Dodwell. By their Fruits you may know them. 1. They are such as labor to make
our Breaches wider, by rendering those that they dissent from odious, which
commonly is by false accusations* They call out for Execution by the Sword
against those that dare not do as they do, and cry, Go on, abate nothing; they
are factious Schismatics, rebellious: They might easily have learnt this
Language, without staying long in the Universities, and without all the
Brimstone Books that teach it them. An invisible Tutor can soon teach it them
without Book. He that hates his Brother is a murderer, and has not eternal
Life abiding in him. 2. They are for an universal humane Government, with power
of Legislation and Judgment over the whole Christian World. How to call it they
are not yet agreed, whether Aristocratical, or Monarchical, or mixed. Some of
them say that it is in the Collegium Episcoporum, governing per Literas
formatas, for fear lest if they say, It is in Councils, they should presently
be confuted by the copious Evidence which we produce against them. And yet they
may well think that men will ask them [When did all the Bishops on Earth make
Laws for all the Christian World, or pass Sentences on Offenders without ever
meeting together? And how came they to know each others minds? and which way
the major Vote went? And what, and where are those Laws which we must all be
governed by, which neither God nor Councils made? The Canons were all made by
Councils.

If you say that I describe men so mad, as that I must be thought to wrong
them, I now only ask you, whether our Case be not dismal when such men as you
call mad, have power to bring us and keep us in our `Divisions; or to do much
toward it without much contradiction?

But others who know that such palpable darkness will not serve their cause, do
openly say, that it is General Councils which are the Legislative and judging
Governors to the whole Church on Earth, as one Political Body. For they know
that we have no other Laws besides Gods and theirs, pretended to be made for
all the World. But when the Cases opened by me in the Second part of my Key for
Catholics, and else where, do silence them, this Fort also is deserted by
them. Even Albert. Pighius has rendered it ridiculous. 1. If this be the
specifying or unifying Head, or summa Potestas of the Universal Church, then it
is not monarchical but Aristocratical. 2. Then the Church is no Church, when
for hundreds of Years there are no General Councils, an essential part being
wanting. And they that own but the 4 or 6 first General Councils, make the
Church no Church, or to have been without its essentiating Government these
Thousand Years. And by what proof, besides their incredible Word, can they tell
the Church, that they are subject to the six first General Councils, and yet
not to the seventh, eighth, ninth, or any since? 3. I have often (against
Johnson, and elsewhere,) proved that there never was an universal Council of
all the Churches, but only of part of those in the Roman Empire; Were there no
proof but from the recorded Names of the Callers of Councils* and all the
Subscribers, it is unanswerable. 4. Who knows not that the Church is now
divided into about Twelve Sects, all condemning one another? And that they are
under the Power of various Princes, and many Enemies to Christianity, who will
never agree to give them leave to travel to General Councils? And who shall
call them, or how long time will you give the Bishops of Antioch, Alexandria,
the Jacobites, Abassines, Nestorians, Armenians, Muscovites, and all the rest,
to learn so much of each others Languages, as to debate intelligibly matters of
such moment, as Laws for all the World must be. Twenty more such absurdities,
make this Aristocracy over all the World, as mad a conceit as that
forementioned: And when we know already what the Christian Parties hold, and
that the said Jacobites, Nestorians, Armenians, Circassians, Mengrelians,
Greeks, Muscovites, etc. are far more than either Protestants or Papists, do we
not know that in Councils if they have free Votes they will judge accordingly
against both.

But this sort of men are well aware, that the Church is always, but Councils
are rare, and it is, at least, uncertain whether ever there will be more; and
the Articles of the Church of England say, They may not be called without the
Will of Princes; and the Church is now under so many contrary Princes as are
never like to agree hereto. And they know that some body must call them, and
some body must preside, etc. Therefore they are forced to speak out, and say,
that the Pope is St. Peter's Successor, the prime Patriarch, and principium
Unitatis, and must call Councils, and as President moderate and difference the
lawful from the unlawful: And that in the Intervals of Councils he as Patriarch
is to govern at least the West, and that every Diocesane being ex Officio, the
Representer of his Diocese, and every Metropolitan of his Province, and every
Patriarch of his Patriarchate, what these do all the Bishops on Earth do. And
so the Riddle of a Collegium Pastorum is opened, and all comes but to this,
that the Italians are Papists, who would have the Pope rule Arbitrarily, as
above Councils; but the French are no Papists, who would have the Pope rule
only by the Canons or Church Parliaments, and to be singulis Major, at
universis Minor. This is the true Reformation of Church Government, in which
the English should (by them) agree. And now you know what I am warning you to
beware of.

We are for a twist and conjunction of the civil Power and the Ecclesiastical,
and for Christian Kingdoms, and Churches, so far national as to be ruled and
protected by Christian Kings, in the greatest Love and Concord that can be well
obtained: And for Councils necessary to such ends: But we are not for setting
up a Foreign Jurisdiction over King and Kingdom, Church and Souls, upon the
false claim of incapable Usurpers. One of your selves in a small Book called,
The whole Duty of Nations, and another, Dr. Isaac Barrow against Papal and all
Foreign Jurisdiction, (published by Dr. Tillotson) have spoken our thoughts so
fully, as that we only entreat you to take those for our sense, and concur
with us therein for our common Peace and Safety.

We reverence all Councils so far as they have done good; we are even for the
Advice and Concord of Foreigners; but not their Jurisdiction.

If you know the difference between an Assembly of Princes consulting for Peace
and Concord, and a Senate to govern all those Princes as their Subjects, you
will know the difference between our Reverence to Foreign Councils, and the
Obedience to them now challenged as the only way to avoid Schism. I hope you
will join with us in being called Schismatics both to Italian and French
Papists.

The great Instrument of such men's Design being to over-extol Councils called
General, and to hide their Miscarriages, and so by false History to deceive
their credulous party who cannot have while to search after the truth, I took
it to be my Duty to tell such men the truth out of the most credible
Historians, especially out of the Councils themselves as written by our
greatest Adversaries; that they may truly know what such Bishops and Councils
have done. Among others this exasperated a Writer, (by same called Mr.
Morris,) who would make men believe that I have wronged Councils and Bishops,
and falsified History: and diverse other accusations he brings, to which I have
tendered you mine Answer. I have heard men reverence the English Synods, who
yet thought that the 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th Excommunicating Canons and the late
Engines to cast out 2000 Ministers, proved them such to England as I will not
denominate. I have heard men reverence the present Ministry and Universities,
who yet have said, that they fear more hurt from the worser part of them to
England, than they should do from an Army of Foreign Enemies whom we might
resist.

I write much, and in great weakness and haste, and have not time for due
perusal: And my judgment is rather to do it when I think it necessary, as I
can, than not at all. And Mr. M. would make his Readers believe, when he has
found a word of Theodorets hastily mistaken, and Calami translated Quils, and
such matter for a few trifling cavils, that he has vindicated the Councils and
Bishops, and proved me a false Historian.

And can we have a harder censure of General Councils than his own Reverend
Lords and Patrons pass upon them, who tell us that there is but six of all the
multitude to be owned. If all the rest are to be rejected, I think the faults
of those six may be made known, against their Designs who would bring us under
a Foreign Jurisdiction, by the art of over-magnifying General Conncils.

I confess these men have great advantage against all that such as I can say;
for they have got a sort of Followers who will take their words, and are far
from having will or wit impartially themselves to read the Hiflories and try
the case; but will swear that we are all Rogues and Schismatics, and unfit to
be suffered: And they have got young Reverend Priests, who can cry, away with
them, execute the Laws; being conscious how much less able they are to confute
us, than the Jailer is: But this is but a Dream: The morning is near, when we
shall all awake. Perhaps you remember the jeasting story with which Sag^tar^us
begins the Preface to his Metaphysics: Indeed the hysterical suffocating
Vapors do ordinarily so work, that in a place of Perfumes or sweetness the
Women faint and swoun away as dead; and Castory or Assa Foe^^da, called Stercus
Diaboli, or such like stink, reviveth them like a Cordial. And worse vapors
affect the men we speak of: Motions of Love they cannot bear; but reviling and
false accusing Books and Speeches are Food and Medicine to them.

One of my chief Controversies with Mr. M. is about the Acts and Effects of the
Councils of Ephesus and Calcedon, about the Nestorian and Eutychian and
Monothelite Controversies. That the issue was most doleful Divisions of the
Christian World, unhealed to this day, is past the denial of sober men. Whether
this was long of the Bishops and Councils is the question. I have fully proved
that Nestorius, Cyril, and Dioscorus were all of the same Faith and differed
but in wording the same sense: And if so, judge how much the World is beholden
to these Councils of Bishops: But this Mr. M. takes for a false Report.

Because it is our most important difference, I will here give the Reader an
account of the Effect of these Councils even to our times, in the great Empire
of Habassia, out of the much praised History of Job Ludolphus.

Lib. 3. c. 8. In order to declare the Religion of the Habassines he first
declares the Success of the Council of Calcedon, thus, -- [Damnatus Dioscorus
Patriarcha Alexandrinus tanquam Eutychis Defensor and Haeresiarcha, verberibus
quoque mulctatus and in exilium ejectus fuit, alio Patriarcha Catholico in
locum ejus suffecto -- Atrox exinde in Ecclesia Alexandrina Schisma, caede and
sanguine continuatum, in causa fuit, ut non solum multo maxima pars Ecclesiae
Alexand. a reliqua Ecclesia Catholica avelleretur, sed and Aegyptus ipsa,
attritis incolarum viribus, in Saracenorum potestatem veniret; qui discordia
Christianorum, utrosque oppresserunt; ut exiguum, proh dolor! vestigium
Christianae Religionis nunc in Aegypto supersit. Haec atque alia talia
Scriptores nostri.

And the loss of Egypt and the South, so strengthened the Enemies of
Christianity, that this breach let in Destruction to the whole Christian
Empire: But the loss of the whole Empire and Introduction of Mahometanism, in
the Eyes of our fiery Canoneers, is no dishonor to these Councils: It is but
saying, It was all long of Dioscorus, and the Heretics: And were not these
Heretics also Prelates and Prelatical?

But he proceeds, [ But the Aethiopians thus report it, that Dioscorus and his
Successors, and their followers did greatly complain of the Injury done them;
for he neither followed Eutyches, nor ever denied or confounded the Divinity or
Humanity really existing in Christ, but only was unwilling to acknowledge the
word [Nature] to be common to the Divinfty and Humanity of Christ; and only
avoided this, lest contrary to the mind of the Catholic Church, and the
Decrees of the General Council at Ephesus, two persons of Christ should be
asserted: For that would sollow, if we admit Two Natures, and two Wills in
Christ. And the word [(...)] [Nature] signifying somewhat born or created, no
way fitteth the Divinity: Nor can the mind conceive of two Wills, in two
Natures united in one person, without Division, Separation, or Distance: And
the Humane Nature exalted into the state of Glory, does not will, do, or suffer
the same which it willed, did and suffered in the state of Exinanition; and so
in the present state of Glory, the humanity does neither will nor judge any
thing but what the Divinity at once wills and judges. And this being our
known Judgment, the question seems idle, and a mere strife of Words, for
which Christians should not have hated one another. At Calcedon they proceeded
from Words to Blows, and fought more than they dispured: And Dioscorus was
condemned absent, neither heard nor well understood, as obstinate and guilty of
Heresy in Hatred and Envy srather than by right.]

This is the Habassines Opinion of the Council and Controversy, false no doubt
in our Canoneers Judgment, (for alas they are unlearned men;) but indeed much
truer and wiser than their Adversaries.

He proceeds, Primo reperi omni dubio carere, quod Habessini rejiciunt
consilium Chalcedonense -- 2. Observavi eos in hoc errore esse, quasi Patres
Concilii Calced. Hypostasin Christi dividere, and contra praecedens Concilium
Ephesinum ex una duas personas facere voluerint -- Hanc ob causam damnant
Leonem Papam, and in coelum extollunt suum Dioscorum tanquam Orthodoxae fidei
hyperaspisten qui justo zelo diploma Leonis ad se datum di^aceravit; eumque
Martyri assimilant, ob accepta verbera, excussos dentes and evulsam barbam.]
(But it eased the Spleen of the Bps. at present, and then all the following
loss seems tolerable.) He adds, [4. Constat ex multis locis, quod utrumque
abstractum, Divinitatem and Humanitatem, conjunctim in Christo aperte
confiteantur. Quid autem hoc aliud est, quam agnoscere duas simul naturas in
Christo. 5. Tellezius ex Relatione Patrum societatis testatur [utramque
naturam] reperiri in eorum libris. 6. He shows that the Habassines words have
various signification, and by two natures, they mean two Persons -- Which
(says Ludolphus) when I read and consider, I find all to be confused and
perplexed: There is no certain state of the question, and the words are out of
measure equivocal. Perhaps Eutyches himself could not tell what sort of Nature
was made of two, and what was its name, and what was its qualities: But that he
was such a fool as to think that the Natures in Christ were so confused as
Water is with Wine, and that in so absurd an Opinion he had most wise men
agreeing with him; this almost exceeds all belief: Certainly the Ethiopians
are not guilty of so gross a Heresy. Wherefore I confess I cannot understand
what those frequent Disputations were, which the Jesuits had with the
Habassiines, of two Natures in Christ, in which they say they had still the
worse, being convicted by their own Books, which I easily believe, seeing they
most willingly confess Christ's Divinity and Humanity. To me it seems likely
only that they could not agree in words. Do but explain to them that by Natures
in Christ we mean his Divinity and Humanity, and then ask them which Nature is
it that fails in Christ. Most certainly they will answer that neither the
Divivinity nor Humanity failed, but both continue eternally. And so it is plain,
that they take the word Nature in a far other sense than we, and that the true
state of the question with them is, whether and by what common Name the two
abstracts are to be denominated, which they undoubtedly confess.

Now good Mr. Morris, (with your Lords) you must pardon me, (or choose) for
thinking that it is not necessary to Salvation, or to keep the Church from
utter* confusion, to be such Critics in Grammar or Metaphysics, as to resolve
the questions about the sense of Nature, and Unity, or Duality, which you no
better resolve your selves; I say, it is not necessary by Gods Law, but by the
Councils: And if I be a Schismatic for holding that Christ's Universal Law is
so sufficient for his Church, as that a Legislative Power in Councils to make
such Laws as shall tear all to pieces the Churches for 1300 Years, and teach
our Holy Fathers to damn Millions of the Innocent, is not either necessary or
desirable; a Schismatic I will continue.

Ludolphus proceeding to open the ambiguity of the words, adds, [ A famous
Countryman of ours, who anno 1634 dwelling in Egypt, read the Books of the
Cophties (Pet. Heylin of Lubeck.) judged that [the Dissent of the Parties was
more in their fear of the Sequel, than in the matter itself: For the Greeks
would obviate the Heretics who confound Christ's Divinity and Humanity: And the
Cophties those who feign two Persons in Christ.] And if indeed this be the
case, that the Fight either of old was, or still is only about the sense of
words; verily no kind of Tears can be so sharp, as to suffice to weep for this
unhappy Word-War; No Breast can be so hard which would not mourn for the
unhappy Contentions of them, to whom Christ by his own example solicitously
commended the strictest Bond of Charity: No mind can be so cruel, which for the
name of [Nature] would loose the knot of Concord between those whose Nature the
eternal Word assumeth into his most sacred Hypostasis.]

Fie, Mr. Ludolphus, can you so well describe Ethiopia, and no better know your
Neighbors? Come into England and you may soon know the Reverend and Right
Reverend, who will not only defend this Councils Acts, and condemn those that
be not of their mind, but are ready to do the like themselves, and triumph over
the thousands silenced, as they judge, for lesser things; yea, and make that
Councils Canons such a Law to the Universal Church, as that all are
Schismatics that obey it not.

But Ludolphus yet considering, adds* [But such is the Infirmity of our most
corrupt Nature, that where once Ambition has begun, and from Ambition
Emulation, and from Emulation Envy, and from Envy Hatred, the mind possessed
with (such) affections, no more perceives Truth, but as with Ears and Eyes
shut up, neither hears nor sees, how or with what mind any thing is spoken
or written by the other side.

O Sir, now I perceive you understand more than you seemed to do.

But yet the History is behind. The Pope has long had a great desire to be the
Church Governor of Habassia, but could never come to know it, much less to
bear Rule over it. At last the Portugals getting possession of some Maritime
parts, whence with much difficulty it was possible to come to them, the Pope
got them to help the Habassines in a dangerous War which they had against their
Neighbor Mahometanes and Heathens, on condition that the Habassines would
receive a Patriarch and Jesuits from Rome: The Portugals Guns, (which that
Country had not) and their own necessity, made the Habassines consent: The
Roman Patriarch and Jesuits came over. The custom of Habassia had long been to
receive a Metropolitan called their Abuna, from the Patriarch of Alexandria,
who being a poor unlearned Subject, and almost Slave to the Turk, made Abunas
and Priests as unlearned as himself: when the Jesuits came furnished with Arts
and Sciences, the matter came to long Disputes; for the People, especially the
Monks and the Rulers, were loath to change their old accustomed Religion, called
the Alexandrian, for that called the Roman: The King would needs have it done
by hearing both parties speak: But the learned Jesuits were still too hard for
the unlearned Habassines: One King seemed to like the Romans, but his Son (
Claudius) stiffly resisted them: Others afterward again needed help, and
received them, and by their Disputes seemed really to be for them, seeing how
much the Jesuits excelled their Priests; specially K. Zadengelus, being taken
with the Jesuits Preaching, when all his own Clergy only read Liturgies and
Homilies, and never preached: He set up the Roman Patriarch and power, and K.
Susneus after him swear Obedience to the Pope, and resolutely established
Popery: Disputes brought him to it: And the Jesuits knowing that it must be
something which seemed to be of Weight, which must make the Empire submit to a
Change of their Religion, accuse the Abassines as erring with the Eutychians,
in rejecting the Council of Galcedon, and denying two Natures and Wills in
Christ. This was chosen as the main Subject of the great Disputes: The Emperor
was convinced of their Heresy, and became a resolute Proselite to Rome: And
Popery Eight Years had the upper ruling hand.

But all this while the Empire was in discontent: The Royal Family and the
Sub-Governours often broke out into Rebellion. To be short, many bloody battles
were fought. The Emperor usually had the Victory: But when one field of blood
was dried up, a new Rebellion still Sprung up. The Papists still told the K.
that God gave him the Victory for owning his Church and Cause. His Rulers,
Priests, and Monks told him he killed his Subjects, and in the end would lose
his Empire for nothing but bare words. After many fights in the last about
Eight Thousand of his Subjects called his Enemies, were killed: The Kings own
adherents being no friends to the Roman Change, desired the King to view the
dead, and made to him presently this Speech: These were not Heathens nor
Mahometanes* in whose death we might justly rejoice: They were Christians; they
were formerly your Subjects our Countrymen* and near in Body some of them to
you, and some to us: How much better might so many valiant Breasts have been
set against the deadly Enemies of your Kingdom. It Is no victory which is got
upon Citizens; with the Sword by which you kill them, you stab your self. Those
whom we persecute with so terrible a War do not hate us, but only are against
that Worship which we force them to: How many have we already killed for the
changing of Religion (Sacrorum?) How many more are there yet to be killed? What
end will there be of Fighting? Give over we beseech you* to drive them to your
new Religious things (nova sacra,) lest they give over to obey you, else there
will never be a safe peace.] Yea, the Kings eldest Son and his Brother got the
Gallans (Heathens,) that had been Soldiers for the King, to tell him they
would fight against his Dissenting Christians no more. The K. growing weary of
War* and seeing and hearing all this, changed his mind, and called a Council*
in which it was agreed, [That the Alexandrian Religion should be restored: And
to effect this they declared, that indeed the Roman Religion was the very same:
Both said that Christ is true God and true Man: And to say, There is one
Nature, or there are two, are words of small moment, and not worthy the ruining
of the Empire.] And thus the King was brought to give Liberty of Religion to
the Dissenters.

The Roman Patriarch understanding all this, goes with the Bishop and Jesuits
to the King, and made this Speech to him, [ I thought we had been lately
Conquetours but behold we are conquered: The Rebels that were conquered have
obtained that which they desired: Before the Fight was the time of Vowing and
Promising, but now is the time of Performing: The Catholic and Portugal
Soldiers got the Victory, God prospering the Catholic Religion: But now what
thanks is given him? When it is decreed the other day, that the Alexandrian
Religion shall be freely permitted. And here you consult not with the Bps. and
Religious men, but the dull Vulgar, and Gallanes and Mahometanes, yea and Women
pass Sentence of Religion: Bethink you how many Victories you have won against
the Rebels since you followed the Roman Religion. Remember that it was not as
constrained by Arms or Fear, but induced by free Will, that you embraced it as
the truer. Nor did we come to you of our own accord, but were sent by the Pope
of Rome, the highest Prelate, and the King of Portugal, and this at your
Request. Nor did they ever intend any thing (against you) but only to join your
Kingdom to the Church of Rome. Take heed therefore lest you provoke them to
just Indignation: They are far off you, but God is near you, and will demand
the satisfaction which is due to them, you will inure an indelible Blot on the
Lion of the tribe of Judah, with whom your Ensigns shine; and will imprint a
stain on your Glory and your Nation: In a word you will cause so many sins by
your Apostafie, as, that I may not see them, nor the Vengeance of God, which
hangs over you, I desire you to command that my Head may be presently cut
off.] Thus lay the Parriarch, Bp. and Jesuits at the Kings feet in tears.

Readers, Lest you think that I have mistranslated, to fit the matter to our
times, I entreat the learned to try it by the Original: You see that the things
that are, have been, and that sin so blinds and hardens sinners, that one
Age and Country will take no warning by many others.

You see here that the Name and Interest of God and Religion* and the Church
may be pleaded by a blind ambitious Clergy* for the murdering of Thousands for
a bare difference of Names and Words, and Gods Judgments threatened against
those that will not go on in killing and destroying, and making Kingdoms
desolate by Cruelty: And that the hurt Satan does by Witches and Highway
Robbers, is a Flea*biting in comparison of what he does by ambitious Prelates
and valiant Soldiers. The dismallest Story of the success of Witches is that of
the Swedes Witches, by Mr. Hornick translated; But what is the killing of now
and then one, to the Murder of so many Thousands, the Ruin of so many
Kingdoms, the Silencing of so many Thousand faithful Preachers, the Persecuting
of so many Thousand godly Christians* and the engaging the Christian World in
Hatred and War, as the Popish Prelates have been guilty of?

But you will expect the Answer of King Susneus to the Patriarch.

Ludolphus thus proceeds, (li. 3. c. 12.) [ The King unmoved briefly
answers, that he had done as much as he was able, but could do no more. And
that the business was not about the total change of Religion, but only about
the grant or (Liberty) of certain Rites (or Ceremonies.)

(O Sir, you had been happier if you had known that sooner!)

The Patriarch answered, that he himself had indulged some things* and was
about to indulge more, which concern not the substance of Faith, (you are for
Toleration till the Fires are kindled,) so be it another Edict might be
proclaimed, that there might be no other change. The King gave him no other
Answer, but that the next day he would send some to treat with the Fathers.

They that were for the Alexandrian Religion go to the Emperor, and by Abba
Athanasius request, that by a public Edict he would allow his Subjects to
embrace the Religion of their Ancestors, else the Kingdom would be ruined. The
King consented, and sent some to the Patriarch, to acquaint him with it. These
upbraid him with the many defections of the People. Aelius, Caabrael,
Tecla-George, Sertzax, with many Myriades slain: And that the Lastenses yet
fought for the old Religion, and all ran to them. But the King was deserted,
all the Habassines desiring their old Religion. But that they that would might
follow the Roman Religion, etc.

The Papists seeing that they could get no better but a Toleration, sent to the
King this Answer by Emanuel d'Almeyda, That [ the Patriarch understood, that
both Religions were tolerated in his Kingdom, and now he loved Ethiopia equally
with his own Country Portugal, and would presently grant as much as might stand
with the purity of Doctrine, (viz, of the two Natures) But there must be
difference made between those who had not yet received the Roman Religion, and
with them they might agree; but those that had given up themselves to it, and
had used the sacred Confession and Communion, might not be suffered to return
to the Alexandrian Religion without grievous Sin.] By this temperament the
Patriarch would have kept the King and all his Court; for these had professed
the Roman Religion. But the King weakened with Age and Sickness gave them no
other Answer but. [ But how can that be done, for I have not now the Power of
the Kingdom?] Home went the Prelates and Jesuits: And presently the Trumpets
and Drums sounded, and the Crier proclaimed, [ Oyes, Oyes, (Hear ye) We first
proposed to you the Roman Religion, taking it for good; but an innumerable
multitude of men perished, with Aelius, Cabrall, Tecla-George, Sertzaxo, and
with the Country Lastenses; Wherefore we now grant you the Religion of your
Ancestors: It shall be lawful hereafter for the Alexandrian Clergy to frequent
their Churches, and to have their Arculae for the Eucharist, and to read their
Liturgy in the old manner: So farewell, and Rejoice*]

It is incredible with what joy this Edict was received by the People, and how
the whole Camps applauded and rejoiced, as if they had been delivered from an
invading Enemy, specially the Monks and Clergy having felt the Fathers greatest
hatred, did lift up to Heaven their joyful voices: The Vulgar Men and Women
danced, the Soldiers prayed all Prosperity to the Emperor: They broke their
own Rosaries, and other men's as they met them, and burned some, saying, That it
was enough for them that they BELIEVE CHRIST TO BE TRUE GOD and TRUE MAN, and
THERE IS NO NEED OF DISPUTING ABOUT TWO NATURES, and so they returned to the
old way.

It Is worth the noting here, that the Papists way was cast out as Novelty, and
the other kept on the account of Antiquity: For Habassia never had received the
Pope till the Portugals came to help them. Tet are they not ashamed here to
call theirs the old Religion, because when they had banished the old, [which
was simple Christianity] we returned to it by Reformation.

Besides the Dectrine of Two Natures, about which they saw they agreed in
sense, while the Jesuits Hereticated them, three things much alienated the
Habassines: 1. Denying them the Sacrament of the Eucharist in both kinds. 2.
Rebaptising their Children. 3. Reordaining their Priests.

This much being done, the Papists were by degrees soon overcome. 1. The
Patriarch is accused for preaching Sedition. 2. Then the Temples are taken from
them, and they break their own Images lest the Habassines should do it in
seorn. 3. On Sept. 16. 1632. the King died, and his Son Basilides was against
them. 4. Ras-Seelaxus their most powerful friend is banished, and others after
him. 5. Upon more Accusations their Farms, Goods, and Guns are seized on. 6.
They are confined to Fremona: Thence they petition again for new Disputations:
The King Basilides answers them thus by writing:

[ What I did heretofore was done by my Fathers command, whom I must needs
obey, so that by his conduct I made War against my Kindred and Subjects. But
after the last Battle in Wainadega, both learned and unlearned, Clergy and
Laity, Civil and Military men, great and small, fearlesly said to my Father the
King, How long shall we be vexed and tired with unprofitable things? How long
shall we fight against our Brethren and near Friends, cutting off our Right
Hand with our Left? How long shall we turn our Swords against our own Bowels,
when yet by the Roman Belief we know nothing but what we knew before? For what
the Romans call two Natures in Christ, the Divinity and Humanity, we knew it
long ago, from the beginning even unto this day: For we all believe that the
same Christ our Lord is perfect God and perfect Man; perfect God in his
Divinity, and perfect Man in his Humanity: But whereas those Natures are not
separated, nor divided, (for each of them subsisteth, not by itself, but
conjunct with the other) therefore we say not that they are two things, for one
is made of two, yet so as that the Natures are not confounded or mixed in his
Being. This Controversy therefore is of small moment among us: Nor did we
fight much for this; but specially for this cause, that the Blood was denied
the Laity in the Lucharist, whenas Christ himself said in the Gospel, except ye
eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood ye shall not have eternal
Life. -- But they detested nothing more than the Reiteration of Baptisms, as if
before the Fathers rebaptized us we had been Heathens or Publicanes: And that
they Reordained our Priests and Deacons. -- You too late offer us now that
which might have been yielded at the first; for there is now no returning to
that which all look at with the greatest horror and detestation, and therefore
all further Conferences will be in vain.]

In short the Patriarch and all the rest were utterly banished out of the
Empire. Ludolph. l. 3. c. 13.

I add one but thing ( ex cap. 14.) to end the story. As the new Alexandrian
Abuna was coming out of Egypt, the foresaid Dr. Peter Heyling of Lubeck being
then in Egypt, took that opportunity to see Habassia, and went with him: On the
Borders at Suagena they met the departing Roman Patriarch; where Peter Heyling
enters the List with him, and so handled him as made it appear, that it was
only the poor Habassine Priests unlearnedness, which had given the Jesuits
their Success: And the Patriarch at the parting, sighing said to his Company,
If this Doctor come into Habassia, he will precipitate them into the extremest
Heresy. But what became of him is yet unknown.

And so much for this History of the Roman Conquest in Habassia, by the
Calcedon Council, and the Hereticating the Habassines, about the one or two
Natures, and the Eight years possession Popery got by it, and the many bloody
Battles fought for it, the Prelates powerful Oratory for it, and the Peoples
more powerful against it; the Kings mind changed by sad experience, and the
Papists finally Extirpated.

And it is exceeding observable, that their very Victories were their Ruin,
and the last and greatest which killed 8000, was it that overcame them, when
they thought they had done their work. And those that conquered for them drove
them out, when they considered what they had done: But had it not been better
known at a cheaper rate?

This Tragedy is but the fruit of the Council which Mr. Morris justifies: The
fruit of a Church determination above 1200 years ago. If you had seen the
Fields of blood in Habassia, would it not have inclined you to my Opinion
against Mr. M. Or if he had seen it, would it not have changed his mind? I
doubt it would not, because the Silencings and Calamities in England no more
move such men; and because they still call for Execution against those that
obey not all their Oaths and Ceremonies* and will abate nothing, what ever it
may ost the Land by the strengthening of them that are for our Division: And
because the 1200 years experience has not yet been enough to make them see the
faultiness of such Bishops and Councils, ^ay, because they yet take not all
Gods Laws in Nature and Scripture for sufficient to Rule the Catholic Church
in Religion, without the Laws of these same Councils, which have had such
effects: But some Bishops and Cle^^g^ Men yet stand to it* that All must be
taken as Schismatics who obey no^ these same Councils Decrees, as the Laws of
the Universal Church.

And if Lud^lp^^s and the Abassines can say so much against Here(...)g those
called Eutychians, much more may be said for the Nestorians, to prove that the
Contro v^^s^ was but verbal.

There is in Biblioth. Pat. To. 6. p. 131. the Missa qua utuntur antiqui
Christiani Episcopatus Angamallensis in Montanis Mallabarici Regni apud Indos
Orientales, emendata and ab erroribus blasphemiisque Nestorianorum expurgata
per Alexium Menesium Archiepiscopum Goanum an. 1599. I had rather have had it
with all its Errors, that we might have truly known how much is genuine. But
it being one of the most Scriptural, rational, and well composed Liturgies of
all there published; It would make one think, 1. That these Nestorians were not
so bad a people as their Anathematisers would have made the world believe them.
2. That the Banishment of the Nestorians and Eutychians accidentally proved a
great means of the Churches enlargement beyond the bounds of the Roman Empire,
whither they were banished: And this is plain in current History.

I have given you this account of my Design in both the Books, ( The History of
Councils, with its Vindication, and the following Treatise.) I add an Answer to
a Lord Bishop of Cork and Rosse, who has written many Historical Untruths by
his credulity, believing false Reporters. As to his and others Reprehension of
my sharp unpeaceable words, my Case is hard; My own Conscience at once forbids
me to justify my Style or Passion; and also tells me that if making odious
Gods servants, silencing and persecuting faithful Ministers, and Perjury,
should prove as great a guilt and danger of Destruction to the Land, as is
feared, I cannot justify my long Silence, nor that I use no more plainness and
fervency in calling the guilty to Repent.

The CONTENTS.
I. A Specimen of the Way by which this Generation confuteth their Adversaries
in several Instances. II. In the General Part: 1. Hard for young men to know
what Teachers or History to believe. 7. Tempting Reasons for Papacy. 8. Evident
against it. 9. The Steps by which Bishops ascended to Papacy. 15. The different
Opinions of Popery in the English. 18. The Case of Fact discerned, what
Judgment I settled in about Church Power. 20. For what Mr. M. has wrote with
so much displeasure against me. 22. Instances of above an Hundred Councils,
besides particular Bishops, all before An. 1050. of whom I appeal to the
Consciences of all sober Men, whether they have not been the Tearers of the
Church. General Instances of the greater Schisms since then by popish Bps. Some
Questions put to Mr. M. and some Reasons to abate his displeasure. 22. Of a
late Book of the History of my Life, to prove me the worst of men. 24. Whether
I be guilty of falsifying History.
III. The particular Answer to Mr. M's Vindication. Chapter 1. The Reason and
Design of my History of the Schisms of Bishops and Councils. Chapter 2. Whether we
ought to tell of the Bishops and Councils Church-corrupting Ways. Chapter 3. Of Mr.
M's Industry to show me to be unlearned. Chapter 4. Whether I vainly name
Historians which I never read. Chapter 5. Of my use of Translations, and following
Binnius. Chapter 6. His charge of my own mistranslations and mistakes. Chapter 7. His
false Supposition that I am only for a Church of one Congregation. Chapter 8. His
false Supposition that I am against Diocesanes, when it is only the ill species.
Chapter 9. And that I am a Independent, and yet plead for Presbyterians. Chapter 10.
His false Accusation that I make the Bishops the cause of all Heresies and
Schisms. Chapter 11. And that I mention all the Bishops Faults and none of their
Goodness. Chapter 12. His Accusation of Spite, Malice, and Railing examined, Dr.
Burnet satisfied. Chapter 13. His Supposition that I speak against all Bishops
Councils. Chapter 14. Some men's Credit about ancient History, tried by their
History of this Age. Twenty Instances of the History of our times. My own
experience of it. Whether I hate compliance with Superiors, or to preach by
License. Chapter 15. Mr. M. Magisterial authorizing or rejecting what Historians he
pleases. His Accusation of Socrates and Sozomene, and valuing Valesius, Simond,
etc. Chapter 16. His Observation on my Notes of credible and incredible History.
His Instances of my Railing particularly considered. Whether the word
[Hereticating] be railing or causeless. An Instance of Fifty five of Bp. St.
Philastrius's accused Heresses, by which I desire any sober man to judge. Other
Instances. Whether St. Theophilus, or Socrates and Sozomene were the Criminals.
Even Pope Honorius and Vigilius hereticated for being wiser than other Popes.
Chapter 17. Of his Censure of my Design and Church Principles: Whether I be guilty
of exposing Christianity more than Julian and Lucian. Chapter 18. Of his 2d Chap.
Who is most against Discipline. Of Anathematising. Whether Novatus was a Bishop
or an ordaining Presbyter. Councils for rebaptising. His Self-contradictions.
Some Questions to him. Whether the Diocesane Party (as Mr. Dodwel) who nullify
our Sacraments, are Heretics, if the Re-baptisers were such. The old qu. was
not of Rebaptising Heretics, but of such as Heretics had baptized. Of the
Donatists and many Councils. Of our Liturgy's Rule to find Easter Day. What the
Novatians held. Petavius and Albaspineus Testimony of them. His quarrels about
Epiphanius, the Arians, the Audians diverse Synods. Antioch. Of the
Circumcellians. Optatus of the Donatists as Brethren. His Excuse of the
Bishops. Chapter 19. Of the 1st General Council at C. P. Whether Bishops followed
Emperors. Their usage of Greg. Nazianz. Of the Priscillianists, the Bishops,
and Martin. Of my Letter to Dr. Hill. Of the Council at Capua* Jovinian,
Easter, African Bps. Donatists. Theophilus. Aliars. Chapter 20. His 5 Chap. Of the
1st Ephesians. Council. His reviling Socrates and Sozomene, as against Cyril.
Cyrils Story. Of the Presbyterians Cruelty. Nestorius; Case. His cavils against
my Translations. The effects of that Council at this day considered. Chapter 21. Of
the 2d Ephesians. Council. Of Cyril, the Eutychians, and Dioscorus. Chapter 22. Of the
Calcedon Council: Pulcheria and Eudocia. What one sound man can do in a
Council. Whether our late Conciliatory Endeavors about Arminianism, have been
as vain as these Councils. Of Theodos. 2. and the Eutychians. The whole story
of that Council. Luther as well as I, makes the Controversy verbal. Of the
Bishops Peccavimus: Many Accusations refelled: More of the Councils Successes,
and late Conciliators. The Westminster Synod. Mr. M's way of Concord. Of the
old Conformity and ours. Mr. Edwards Gangrena, and the late Sects and Heresies.
Chapter 24. Of his 7th Chapter. Of the old Heresies. Whether Projects for
Moderation have been the chief distracters of the Church. He ost falsely says,
that I charge the Bishops with all the heresies in the world. What it is that I
say of them. The true cause of Schism confessed. His misreports of the cause
and Bishops. His false saying of me that I compared Oliver and his son to David
and Solomon My professed Repentance which he seigneth me an Enemy to. What
Nonconformity is, and what his misreports of it. An explitatory profession of
the meaning of this Book against Misinterpreters.

THE Ready Way OF Confuting Mr. Baxter. A SPECIMEN OF THE PRESENT MODE OF
Controversy in England.
Joh. 8. 44. 1 King. 22. 22. Prove. 29. 12. and 19. 5, 9. Rev. 21. 8. and 22.
15.
IN 1662. Dr. Boreman of Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, Published a Book
against me, as having written to Dr. Hill against Physical-Predetermination to
Sin; and in it says, That it is reported, That I killed a Man with my own Hand
in cold Blood; and if it be not true, I am not the first that have been
wronged. The Man, though promoted to the Charge of this Parish, St. Giles in
the Fields, was accounted so weak, (forbearing his Ministry, and saying he was
suspended some Years before he died) that I thought it vain to take public
Notice of his Words* neither imagining whence he had them, nor ever hearing of
them before.

But a few Weeks before the late Plot was reported, one Mr. P. came to me, and
told me, That at the Coffee-House in Fullers-Rents, where Papists and
Protectants used familiarly to meet; he provoking the Papists to Answer my
Books, or to Dispute with me, was answered by a Gentleman of this Parish, said
to be of the Church of England, That [ Mr. Baxter had killed a Man in cold
Blood with his own Hand.] Mr. P. provoked him by a Wager to make it good. He
refusing the Wager, was told, He should hear of it publicly, unless he would
ask me Forgiveness. After some time, the Gentleman came to me with Mr.
Tasborough, (since imprisoned, as is known) and with great Civility, ask't me
Forgiveness. He was the Son of a Knight, and Judge, of my Acquaintance; and had
an Aunt, that had been my very dear Friend. I told him, That Slandering is so
common, and asking Forgiveness so rare, that I took it for a note of great
Ingenuity in him; and, as I must forgive all Men as a Christian, so I could
easily forgive any wrong to one related to such a Friend of mine. He told me,
He was resolved openly to confess his Fault, and to vindicate me on all
Occasions.

Accordingly, at the same Coffee House, he openly declared his Repentance. Upon
which, Mr. P. tells me, That Mr. G. an Aged Lawyer, Brother to the Lady Ab. was
displeased, and said, He would prove the thing true by many Witnesses: (And,
says Mr. P. the Story among some of them was, That a Tinker did beat his
Kettle at my Door, and being disturbed by him, I pistoll'd him, and was tried
for my Life at Worcester.) Mr. P. said, He provoked Mr. G. to lay a Wager on
it: And he refusing, was told, [ Then he should hear of it in
Westminster Hall.] Upon this, says Mr. P. his Fellow- Catholics ingenuously
resolved to disown him, unless he would ask Forgiveness; which he being
unwilling to come to me to do, Mr. P. says, He at last performed before Him,
and Capt. Edmund Hampden.

All this being done without my Knowledge (till after,) I was relating it to
Mr. John Humfrey: Why (says he) I did twelve Years ago hear Dr. Allestry, now
Regius-Professor in Oxford, say the like, That he could not think well of that
Man, that had killed a Man in cold Blood with his own Hand.

I little regarded all the rest: But Dr. Allestry had many Years been my old
School-Fellow; many a time I had taught ^^im; and he was the best at Learning,
and of the honestest Disposition* of any Boy that ever I knew; and I thought,
if Parties could draw such as he into such Guilt, there was little Account to
be made of the Reports or History of Men, if once they fell into different
Factions, Wherefore I wrote to him what Mr. Humfrey told me, and received from
him this honest ingenuous Letter, which I here annex.

And as to all this Story, I do here solemnly profess, That I never killed,
wounded, or hurt any Man in my Life, (save one Man, whose Leg I hurt with
playful Wrestling, when I was a Boy, and once or twice boxing with Schoolboys,
and correcting ^ads when I was one Year a Schoolmaster.) Nor in all the Wars,
or in my life did I ever see any other kill any Man, save one; and that was at
the same Bickering, (about Forty of a Side) when Jennings was wounded: While
they were Fighting with him in one great Field, I being in another near the
House, saw the Soldiers offering Quarter to a Foot-Souldier, and promising him
Safety, if he would lay down his Musket; which he did not, but struck at them;
and Captain Holdich shot him dead* And it proved after to be a Wolsh man, that
understood not English; which grieved them when they knew it.

I have gone the next day where Fights have been, and seen many dead, when I
had nothing to do with the Armies of either Part. But I never saw any, to my
Knowledge, kill or hurt any Man, but this one.

Dr. Allestry's Letter: (Which I should not Publish, but that even in Oxford,
and elsewhere among the Clergy, the Report yet goes on.)
SIR,
I Must profess sincerely, That I cannot recollect I ever said such Words of
you to Mr. Humfrey, as it seems he does affirm I did: But yet I cannot but
acknowledge; it is very possible, that I related, (and may be, to Him) That I
had heard, you kill^d a Man in cold Blood: Since I very well remember, that
above Thirty Years since, at the End of the War, I heard that publicly spoken
before Company; and with this farther Circumstance, that it was a Soldier, who
had been a Prisoner some Hours. Now this Report relating to the Wars, in which
(I fear) such Things were no great Rarities, and from my very tender Youth, I
having not had the least Converse with you, nor likelyof any for the future,
did not therefore apprehend, at present, any Concern or Occasion of inquiring,
whether it were true; of which, upon that confident Asseveration, I did make no
doubt. And I took so little thought of laying up the Relation, that I protest
to you, as in the Presence of Almighty God, it is impossible for me to recover,
who made up that Company in which I heard it, or from whom I heard it: And I
wonder, how it came into my Mind, to say that I had heard it, so long after.
But however, though it be some Ease to me, to believe the late Discourses of
it, do not come from my relating so long since that I heard it, neither are
likely to receive any Confirmation from it, unless it be made more Public than
I have made it; yet I do profess, it is a great Affliction to me, to have
spoken that, though but as a Report, which (it seems) was a Slander, (for so I
believe it, upon your Asseveration) and not having endeavored to know whether
it were true. And, as I have begged God's Forgiveness of it; so I heartily
desire, You will forgive me. And if I could direct my self to any other way of
Satisfaction, I would give it. This is the whole Account I can give of this
Matter; to which I shall only add, That I am,

Eaton-Coll. Dec. 13. 1679. SIR, Your very Affectionate Servant, Richard
Allestry.


II. In the Preface to the Life of Dr. Heylin are these Words.

Mr. Barter may be, pleased to call to mind, what was done to one Major
^ennings, the last War in that Fight that was between, Lyndsel and Longford, in
the County of Salop; where the Kings Party, having unfortunately the worst of
the Day, the poor Man was stripped almost naked and left for dead in the Field:
But Mr. Baxter, and ou^ Lieutenant Hurdinat, taking their Walk among the
wounded and dead Bodies, perceived some Lif^ left in the Major, and Hurdman run
him through the Body in cold Blood; Mr. Baxter all the while looking on, and
taking off with his own Hand, the Kings Picture from about his Neck; telling
him, as he was swiming in his Godr, That he was a Popish Rogue, and that was
his Crucifix: Which Picture was kept by Mr. Baxter for many Years, till it was
got from him (but not without much difficulty) by one Mr. Somerfield, who then
lived with Sir Thomas Rous, and generously restored it to the poor man, now
alive at Wick near Pershore in Worcestershire, although at the Fight supposed
to be dead: being, after the Wounds given him, dragged up and down the Field by
the merciless Soldiers; Mr. Baxter approving of the inhumanity, by feeding his
Eyes with so bloody, and so barbarous a Spectacle.

I Thomas Jennings, Subscribe to the truth of this Narrative abovementioned;
and have hereunto put my Hand and Seal this second Day of March 1682. Thomas
Jennings. Signed and Sealed, March 2. 1682. in the Presence of John Clark,
Minister of Wick, Thomas Dacke. Published by George Vernon, Minister.

The like was before Published by Roger L'Strange.

Answ. I do not think Major Jennings knowingly made this Lie, but was directed
by some bodies Report, and my sending him the Medal. I do solemnly protest, 1.
That, to my Knowledge, I never saw Major Jennings: 2. That I never saw Man
wound, hurt, strip, or touch him: 3. That I never spoke a word to him, much
loss any word here affirmed: 4. That I neither took the Picture from about his
Neck, nor saw who did it: 5. That I was not in the Field, when it was done: 6.
That I walked not among any wounded or dead; nor heard of any killed, but the one
Man before mentioned. 7. That the Picture was never got from me with
difficulty. But that this is the Truth: The Parliament had a few Men in
Longford. House, and the King a^ Lyndsel, about a Mile and a half a-sunder; who
used often to skirmish, and dare each other in the Fields between* My Innocent
Father being Prisoner at Lyndset, and I being at Longford, resolved not to go
thence till he was delivered. I saw the Soldiers go out, as they often did, and
in another Field discerned them to meet and Fight: I know not, that they had
seen Jennings; But, being in the House, a Soldier showed a small Medal of
Guilt Silver, bigger than a Shilling; and told us, That he wounded* Jennings,
and took his Coat, and took that Medal from about his Neck* I bought it of him
for ^^^^ no one offering him more. And some Years after (the first ^^^ that I
heard where he was, freely desired Mr. Somerfield to give it him from me, that
had never seen him; supposing it was a mark of Honor, which might be useful to
him. And now all these Lies, are all the Thanks that ever I had.

III. The Observator, N. 96. says, [Tor. Who says, they (the Presbyterians)
brought in the King, besides your self? Wh. Mr. Hunt, the Author of the
Conformists Plea, Mr. Baxter and who not?

Tor* Prithee ask Mr. Baxter, If he knows who it was, that went with five or
six more of his own Cloth and Character, to General Monk, upon his coming up to
London, in 1659; and finding a great deal of Company with him, told his
Excellency, That he found his time was precious, and so would not trouble him
with many Words: But as they were of great weight, so he hoped, they would make
an answerable Impression on him: I hear a Report, Sir, (says he) that you have
some thoughts of calling back the King; but it is my Sense, and the Sense of
these Gentlemen here with me, that it is a thing you ought not to do on any
terms: For Prophanness is so inseparable from the Royal Party, that if ever
you bring the King back the Power of Godliness will most certainly depart from
this Land.

Answ. Dr. Manton (and whether any other, I remember not) went once with me to
General Monk, and it was to congratulate him; but with this request, That he
would take care, that Debauchery and Contempt of Religion might not be let
loose, upon any men's pretense of being for the King, as it already began with
some to be. But there was not one word by me spoken, (or by any one, to my
remembrance) against his calling back the King, nor any of the rest here
adjoined; but as to me, it is a mere Fiction.

And the King was so sensible of the same that I said, that he sent over a
Proclamation against such Men, as while they called themselves the Kings Party,
did live in Debauchery and Prophanness; which Proclamation so rejoiced them
that were after Nonconformists, that they read it publicly in the Churches.
Such gross Falsehoods as these, are part of the Evil deprecated.

As to his Question, Whether the Presbyterians brought in the King? Who can
affirm or deny any thing of equivocal Words? A Presbyterian is, who these Men
will call such. They that in the Face of the World deny the Public Acts of
Three Kingdoms, in the Age they were done in, no wonder if they multiply the
grossest Lies of such as I. The Parties that restored the King, were these; 1.
The Excluded Members of the Long Parliament, the Ministers that were since
silenced; and the frustrated endeavors of the Scotch Ar^nies, and Sir George
Booth, Sir Thomas Middleton* joining with some of the Kings Soldiers, prepared
Men's minds to it. 2. General Monk, and his Army, who were Fighting against the
King a little before, ^^pre^t Cromwels Army. 3. The Long-Parliament Members
restored, agreed to dissolve themselves, and set up a Council to call home the
King. 4. Sir Thomas Allen, Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen; invited General Monk
into the City, who joining with him, turned the Scales. 5. The City Ministers
(called Presbyterians) persuaded the Lord Mayor to this, and wrote to Monks
Colonels (called Presbyterians) to be for the King* (specially Mr. Ash, by Mr.
Calamy's Counsel.) 6. The Lord Mazarine, Lord Broghil, and others of the same
Party in Ireland, contributed their help; and Colonel Bridges, with others,
surprised Dublin Castle. 7. Many of the Old Parliament Men openly provoked Gen'
Monk, and secretly persuaded and treated with him, to bring in the King (whom
the Earl of Anglesey, the Earl of Shaftsbury, and others yet living, can Name
to you.) 8. The Parliament called by General Monk, (by agreement with the
Long-Parliament,) accounted mostly of the same Party, Voted the Kings Return:
Which no doubt also, the Old Royalists most earnestly desired, and endeavored.

This is the Historical Truth; which if in this Age, Men will deny, I will bear
any lies that they shall say or swear of me.

Now, either the foresaid Armies, Parliament men, Ministers, etc. were
Presbyterians, or not. If they were not; then, 1. Say no more, that it was
Presbyterians that raised War against the King; but that it was the Episcopal
Men, if these were such. 2. Why then have you called them Presbyterians so
long, and do so still? But if they were Presbyterians, then it was such that
Restored the King. But alas, how contemptible, yea, how odious is Truth grown
to this Generation!

IV. There is yet a more Famous Historian, than any of these, though unnamed;
who pretending to militate after Dr. Stilling fleet, as in a 2d. Part against
Separation, takes on him to give you the History of my Life. Partly making it
my Reproach, that when I grew to Understanding, I remembered how many Drunken or
Ignorant Readers had been my Teachers: Partly raking up retracted and
obliterated Passages of Old Writings; while at once they persuade me to Reviews
and Retractions: Partly heaping up abundance of down right Falsehoods* Partly
clipping Sentences, and leaving out the part that should make them understood,
and turning true Words, by perversion, into Falsehoods: And partly by mixing
this known Truth, [That I was on the Parliaments side, and openly declared it.]

But when at the new Model, I saw that they changed their Cause, I changed my
Practice, and was from the Day that I went into the Army, a resolved Opposer of
all that they did, to the Changing of the Government, and their Usurpation; and
was sent among them to that end; which was immediately after Naseby Fight: And
continued openly disowning the Usurpation, and the Means that set it up. And
though I was Preaching and Writing against the said Usurpers, when an Army was
Fighting for them, against the King, and the King knew how to forgive and
Honor them, that did so much to his Restoration; yet are the Accusers so far
from forgiving those that never personally hurt a Man, that they forbear not
multiplying false Accusations; yea, and accusing those Ministers, and private
Men that never had to do with Wars: Yea, the same Men that then wrote against
me for the Changers and Usurpers, have since been the fierce Accusers of us,
that opposed them.

And if these Men be unsatisfyed of my present Judgment, I have no hope of
giving them Satisfaction, if all will not do it, which I have largely written
in my Second Plea for Peace, for Loyalty, and against Rebellion; and all my
Confutation of Hooker's Politics, in the Last Part of my Christian Directory;
with much more.

But this Book must have (if any) a Peculiar Answer.

V. Lately, when I taught my Hearers, That we must not make the World believe,
that we are under greater Sufferings, than we are, nor be unthankful for our
Peace, and that we must when any hurt us, love and forgive them, and see that
we fail not of our Duty to them; but not forsake the owning, and just defending
by Scripture-Evidence the Truth opposed. They Printed, that I Bid the People
Resist, and not stand still, and dye like Dogs. And I was put the next Day to
appeal to many Hundred Hearers, who all knew, that the Accusation was most
impudent Lies. This is our present Case.

VI. The Players, I hope, expect no Answer to their Part.

London, Printed for R. Janeway, in Queens-Head-Alley, in Paternoster Row,
1682.

The General Part containing the Design and Sum of this and the former Book,
that it may be understood what it is that Mr. Morris defends, and opposes;
and what it is that I maintain or blame, and by what Evidence.
1. I Have been these forty years much troubled with the temptation to wonder,
why God suffers most of the World to lie drowned in Ignorance, Infidelity and
Sensuality, and the Church of Professed Christians to live in so great Scandal,
Contention, Division, and for the greater number, in a Militant Enmity against
the Word, Will, Way, and Servants of Christ, while in Baptism they are Listed
under him. But of late since Experience tells me of the marvelous Diversity of
Humane Interests and Apprehensions, and the deep Enmity of the Fleshly Mind to
Spiritual things, I admire the Wisdom and Providence of God, that there is so
much Order, and Peace, and Love in the World of Mankind as there is: And that
all men live not as in a continual War. And I perceive that if God had not
preserved by Common Grace some remnants of Moral Honesty in the World, and had
not also sanctified a peculiar People, whose New Nature is LOVE, the Sons of
Men would have been far worse than Bears and Wolves to one another; and a man
would have fled with greater fear from the sight of another man, than from a
Snake or Tiger. But God has not left himself without witness, in his Works,
and daily Providence, and in the Consciences of those who have not sinned
themselves into Brutes or Devils. And hence it is that there is some Government
and Order in the World, and that sin is ashamed of its proper name, and even
they that live in Pride, Covetousness, Ambition, Lying, Persecution, etc.
cannot endure to hear the name of that which they can endure to keep and
practice, and cannot endure to forsake.

2. And indeed it is a great Credit to Honesty and Piety, to Truth, and Love,
and Peace, and Justice, that the deadliest Enemies of them are ambitious of
their Names; and though they, will damn their Souls rather than be such, they
will challenge and draw upon any man that denies them to be such.

And I must profess, that I fetch hence a great confirmation of the Immortality
of Souls, and a Future Life of Retribution. For if there were not a very great
difference between Moral Good and Evil, what should make all the world, even
the worst of men, be so desirous to be accounted Good, and so impatient of
being thought and called naught, and as they deserve. And if the difference be
so vast here, must there not needs be a Governor of the World that has made
such a difference by his Laws and Providence, and who will make a greater
difference hereafter, when the End and Judgment comes.

3. Among other Causes of Humane Pravity and Confusion, one is the exceeding
difficulty that young men meet with, in the communication of so much Knowledge
as they must necessarily receive from others. Knowledge is not born with them:
It is but the power and capacity of it, and not the act in which an Infant
excels a Dog. And how shall they have it but by Objects and Communication? And
Objects tell them not things past, the Knowledge of which is necessary to make
them understand things present, and to come; and without which it is not
possible to be wise. And God teaches not Men now by Angels sent from Heaven,
but by Men that were taught themselves before; and by his Spirit blessing men's
endeavors. And when I have said [ by Man] how bad, how sad a creature have I
named? Alas! David's haste Psalm. 116. was not erroneous passion; nor Paul's
words, Romans 3. a slander, when they called all men Liars, that is untrusty; and
so little do men know that must teach others, and so much does all corruption
incline them to love flattering Lies, and to take fleshly Interest, the World,
and the Devil for their Teachers, and to hate the Light, because it disgraceth
their hearts and deeds, and so much goes to make a man wise, that it must be a
wonder of merciful Providence that shall help young men to Teachers that shall
not be their Deceivers. There were ever comparatively few that were truly wise
and trusty, and these usually despised in the World.

4. And how should young men know who these are? This is the grand difficulty
that makes the Error of the World so uncurable. It requires much wisdom to
know who is wise, and to be trusted; who can well discern and value that
Knowledge in another, which he is a stranger to himself? Experience tells us,
that young unexperienced men do commonly receive that man's Opinions, 1. Who
has by nearness, or some accident the greatest advantage in their esteem and
love: 2. Or his that speaks most for their fleshly Interest, and for that which
they would have to be true: 3. Or his that has the last word. It cannot be
expected that they judge of any thing, beyond the advantage of their senses,
and the Notitiae communes, according to Evidence of Truth, which must be
received by long and serious study, and by willing honest minds, and by the
help of antecedent Verities.

5. In this therefore Divine free Election is very manifest; As in giving the
Gospel to some Nations in the World, when most others never have it, so in
giving some young persons the blessing of good Education, and Teachers, and
choosing for them that were unable to choose well for themselves; as also in
blessing the same helps to one, which are despised by another. And verily when
I have been long stalled with the difficulties about Election and Differencing
Grace, undeniable Experience has been my chief Conviction. If the Gospel be
true, the common worldly fleshly sort, that are for Christ but by Tradition,
Law and Custom, and are religious for worldly ends, and no farther than the
Interest of the Flesh and World will give them leave, have no true Saving Grace
at all. And the rest that seriously believe and seek a better Life, and live
above fleshly worldly Interests, are in most places few, and made the scorn and
hatred of the rest. And if de facto, God do sanctify only a peculiar People,
who can deny his differencing Will and Grace?

6. I was my self in my Childhood ignorant what Teachers among such diversity I
should prefer. And first God had such a witness in my Conscience, that Virtue
and Holiness were better than Vice and Sin, that it made me think that the sort
of Teachers who Traded merely for the World, and never spoke a serious, word of
Heaven, nor differed from sober Heathens, but in Opinion; yea, that endeavored
to make serious Godliness to seem but Hypocrisy, were not like to be the
wisest and most trusty men. And yet how to judge among the serious, which were
right, was long too hard for me.

7. When I came to consider of the Divisions of the Christian World, and ^eard
the Papists pretend to Catholicism, and call all others Schismaricks or
Heretics, it sometime seemed a plausible Opinion, that the greatest Power and
Dignity of the Clergy, was the Interest of Christianity: By Riches, Honor and
Power, they may protect the Godly, and keep Religion from Contempt among the
worldly sort of men, or from oppression at the least.

2. And I saw that in all Ages and Countries of the World, Historians tell us
how rare a thing, a wise and holy Prince has been, and how commonly by Wealth
and Greatness they have been bred up in that Sensuality and Pride, which has
made them the Capital Enemies to serious Piety; if not the Persecutors of it.

3. I thought with myself if such godly Christians, as much value the Interest
of Religion had lived in such times and places, where Rulers were Persecutors
of the Truth, how glad would they have been to have had the Power of
Church Matters put into the hands of their Chosen Pastors, what would they have
desired more?

4. And I read that till Riches and honors were annexed to the Office, the
People had still the Choice of their own Pastors, and therefore could not choose
but wish their Estates and Lives, and all, as well as their Religion, to be as
much as might be in their hands. And so no doubt when the Bishops were advanced
to great Diocesses, and Power, it was by the desire of the most Religious
Christians, who valued most the Interest of the Church.

5. And I could not but observe, that though Christ gave his Apostles no Power
of the Sword, he set them above other Ministers, not only in Miraculous Gifts,
and Infallible testifying and recording his Commands and works, but in some
sort of oversight, which seems a thing appointed for Continuance as well as
preaching.

6. And I thought that if Church-Grandure were the Interest of Religion and
Unity the strength of the Church, it looked very plausibly to reason, that as
Bishops were over Presbyters, so there should be some over Bishops; and that
National Churches should by such Government be hindered from Schism and Heresy
as well as Parochial. And that Diocesans and Metropolitans Power should be
derived from a Superior as well as Presbyters. And that when poor Subjects
dare not reprove a Prince, some that are above fearing his Power may.

7. And when I read the Popes Claim, I thought it seemed not improbable, that
Petrus primus, and pasce oves meas, and super hanc Petram were not spoken in
vain And these thoughts pleaded thus for Church-Grandeur in Prelates and Popes.

. 8. On the other side, I saw 1. That Christ said, His Kingdom was not of this
world, and comes not (...) with observable Pomp. And that when they strove who
should be greatest, he reproved them, and Concluded [ with you it shall not be
so] and that the most serviceable is to be accounted the greatest; that Peter
himself accordingly describes their office, 1 Pet. 5.

2. I find that Christ appointed them another sort of work to do, even to
Preach the Gospel to all Nations through all streights, difficulties and
sufferings, and to baptize, and teach Christians to observe the Laws of Christ.
And that as he never put the Sword into their hand, so an official declaring
and applying his Word to voluntary Disciples was all their Office, as ordinary
Pastors to be continued.

3. I find that Christ sent them out by two and two, as if it had been done on
foresight, that men would erect a Church-Monarchy: And that no Scripture tells
us of any division of the Church into Diocesses, where ore Apostle was a
Monarch, or had Power above the rest, or was his Peculiar Province: Nor that
the twelve settled twelve such, or any as the seats of their Successors.

4. I find not that ever any one Apostle exercised Government over the rest:
Nor that ever Christ gave the rest any Command or Direction to obey any one;
Nor that ever the Contending or Schismatical sort of Christians were directed
to end their strise, by taking any one for the Head who must determine all
their Controversies: And that they that said [ I am of Cephas] are reproved
with the rest. And that all are called Members of the Body, and only Christ the
Head. And if it had been his will that One Universal Head or Power should have
been set up as the Principium, or Center of Unity, it is a matter of so great
consequence, that it is not to be believed that Christ would not have plainly
commanded it.

5. I find that Christ has himself done the work, for which the necessity of
Universal Humane Government (by Pope or Councils) is pretended; viz. He has
made and caused his Apostles (peculiarly qualified for it) to record Universal
Church-Laws, even as many as are Universally necessary: And if so, I cannot but
think, 1. That he has done it better than Man can do; 2. And that to add more
unnecessarily must needs be a snare and burden to the Church; 3. And that it
must be an usurping the Power of Christ: For if there be no other Universal
Governor, there is no other that has Authority to make Universal Laws.
Therefore this is Treason against Christ, and a making Man a Vice-Christ.

6. I found that there is not so much as a Natural Capacity in any one, or
many, for an Universal Government: Church Government being of such a nature as
makes it far more impossible, than for one Monarch or Aristocracy to Govern
all the Earth: And to do it by a truly General Council, or by the Diffused
Bishops of all the World is further from possibility than to do it by a Pope.

7. I searched the Councils pretended to be General, to see whether they had
made any better Laws than Christ's, or made any desirable addition. And I found
1. That while they were not wholly Papists, they never pretended to make Canons
for any Christians, but only those in the Roman Empire. 2. And that it had been
much happier for the Churches if they had made no more Laws than Christ had
made them, for holy Doctrine, Worship, and Church Discipline, and had only as
Teachers expounded and applied the Laws of Christ.

8. I considered the Present State of the Church Universal, and I find it such
as no Party of Christians in the World does own. The Pope pleads for an
Universal Sovereignty, and all his Clergy do the same; some saying it is in
Councils, some in the Pope, and most in both together, or Councils approved by
the Pope: And Protestants, Greeks, Nestorians, Jacobites, and almost all other
Christians in the World, accuse this Roman Church and Claim.

The Papists condemn the rest: The Greeks, Arminians, and almost all the rest
accuse each other.

9. I considered what Popery is, that is, Clergy-Power in its height, and what
it has done in the World. And I found 1. A woeful description of the lives of
multitudes of Popes, recorded by their own most credited Historians. And 2. I
found multitudes of vicious Canons obtruded by them as Laws on the Universal
Church. 3. I found most doleful Histories of the Wars and Rebellions that they
have caused from Age to Age. 4. I found that they have corrupted the Doctrine
of Christ in abundance of particulars. 5. And that they have locked up the
Sacred Scriptures from the Vulgar, as they have not done their Canons. 6. And
that they have turned God's Spiritual Worship into a multitude of Superstitious
Rites, and scenical Ceremonies and Shows. 7. And that they have turned
Spiritual Church Discipline into a secular sort of Tyranny. 8. And that they
have most schismatically unchurched the rest of the Churches, because they are
not Subjects of the Pope. 9. And that they have branded the soundest Churches
with the name of Heretics, while they are the grand Heresy of the World. 10.
And that they have been and are the greatest Silencers of sound Preachers, and
hinderers of true Piety and Reformation in the Church. 11. And that they have
woefully vitiated the People that are their Subjects, so that odious wickedness
fed by Ignorance, abounds among them; and it is their Votaries that are called
Religious, and a few Canonized persons Saints; as if Religion and Sanctity were
rarities, or any could be saved without them. 12. Lastly, I find that they have
lived upon Blood, like Leeches, and have been the cruellest Persecutors of holy
men, on pretense of killing Heretics: And that it is this to which they trust.

10. I took not this notice of them upon mere prejudice, but have read, I
think, as many Papists Books, as Protestants, or any other against them. Nor
have I taken it upon dark Scripture Prophecies, suspecting my understanding of
them: But 1. The matter of fact from themselves: 2. Against their Papal
Supremacy from such Arguments as are fully collected by Dr. Barrow. 3. Against
their heinous Church-corruptions, from such Moral Evidence as Dr. H. Moore has
fully gathered in his Mystery of Iniquity. 4. Against their pretenses of
Tradition and Antiquity, I fetched my Arguments from the Histories and Authors
which they themselves allege, and especially their Councils, with the Fathers
Writings.

9. Seeing the Church in this sad Condition, and the Papal part so greatly
vitiated, I considered how long it had so been. And I found that the Pope and
his Bishops grew not up like a Mushroom in a day; but had been long in thriving
to maturity: And I met with no man that could just tell what Year or what Age
the disease or tumor did begin. Bishop Bromhall thinks if they will abate their
last 400 years Innovations, we may have hope of agreeing with them. Bishop
Gunning will own no General Councils, but the first six; some will receive
eight; some but four. Mr. Morris here goes no further in his defense of them,
whatever he think. Some begin Popery with Leo the great, some with Gregory's
Successor. But it is most certain, that it was first an Embrio, and next an
Infant and so grew up from Childhood to maturity by degrees. And the first
Church-corruption was not that which we now call Popery. And it is as certain
that the tumor did neither begin nor grow up in the Bishop of Rome alone, but
in other Bishops, who grew up with him, and were his strength and Councils, and
he their Head.

10. It is known when the Greeks and Romans began most notably to strive which
should be greatest, and how the division increased, and when and how it came to
an anathematizing or excommunicating each other.

11. It Is notorious that it was from the Councils of Calcedon, and Ephesus,
that the great separated bodies of Nestorians and Eutychians (now called
Jacobites) that possess the East and South, were broken off with Nestorius and
Dioscorus, and so continue to this day.

12. I considered who were the Chief Authors of all these lamentable Schisms,
and Church-corruptions in the several Ages when they rose, and who continue
them to this day: And I found that many Princes were much to be blamed, and the
People not Innocent, no not the Religious Monks. But the Bishops that had the
main Church Power, by abusing it, were with their Clergy the principal Causes,
and so are to this day: The breaches might yet be healed in East, West, and
South, were it not for them.

13. Finding this in History of undoubted Truth, I next considered what was the
Cause that the Bishops and their Clergy should become such Church-corrupters
and Dividers, and still continue the Churches miseries.

And I found as follows, 1. That none are able to do so much hurt as those
that have the greatest Parts, Power, Interest and Trust. None kill so many
(except Soldiers) as those Physicians who are entrusted to heal and save them.
If five hundred neighbors mistake a man's Disease, whom he never trusted, it
hurts him not: But an unskilful Nurse or Parent may kill a sick Child; and an
unskilful or unfaithful Physician may kill multitudes.

2. And there goes so much to make a man a skilful, faithful Pastor, as that
such are rare. As a Physician is like to kill his Patient, if he mistake but
some one thing in his Disease, or some Ingredient in his Medicine, though he
were right in all the rest: So if a Guide of Souls were excellent in all other
things, what work one Opinion, yea or unskilful word may make, not only the
case of the Nestorians, Eutychians, Monothelites, etc. tell us, but even the
strife that arose in the Church about Hypostasis and Persona, which had almost
hereticated Jerome himself, for all his skill in the Languages: And the case of
the Greeks and Latins about [ Filioque] and abundance such.

3. And Pride is the Heart of the Old Man; first living, and last dying. And
great Power, great Parts, and great Esteem do feed it, if true Grace do not
mortify it. Knowledge puffs up; and especially when men live among the
ignorant and unlearned, and are but half Learned themselves, and are thought by
the people and themselves, to be much wiser than they are: Inter coecos luscus
Rex.

4. And Selfishness is the very sum of all positive iniquity: And Pride and
Selfishness make men desirous to be the Idols of the World, and to seem as Gods
knowing good and evil, and to have their will of all that they have to do with.

5. And the strongest temptations use to cause the greatest sins,

14. These Generals presupposed, it is most clear, 1. That the remnant of these
sins, even in Christ's Apostles, set them on striving who should be greatest,
and made James and John desire pre-eminence, and also to have called for Fire
from Heaven; and made them after Christ's Resurrection, hope that he would have
restored the Earthly Kingdom unto Israel. And it put Paul to vindicate his
Apostleship against many that disparaged him; As it made Diotrephes, who loved
to have the pre-eminence, to cast out the Brethren, and speak evil of John: It
gave Peter occasion to warn the Bishops not to Lord it over God's Heritage, but
to be Examples to the Flock, overseeing them not by constraint, but willingly.

2. Even in good men this fault, though not in a reigning degree, did live more
in others afterward, that had not that measure of the Spirit as the Apostles
had to overcome it. And if even in Paul's days he had none like-minded to
Timothy, who naturally cared for the good of all; for all (too much) sought
their own, and not the things that are Jesus Christ's, as Demas forsook him for
some worldly Interest; what wonder is it if afterward Pride and Worldliness
grew greater, and Heresies and Strifes increased.

3. Yet while Christianity was a suffering and laborious State, the Pastors of
the Churches were commonly the best men, that had more Knowledge, Holiness and
Love than others, and the Churches prospered under the Cross: They that spared
not their labors, but imitated the pattern set by Paul, Acts 20. did not
strive who should have the largest Diocese, and undertake that which they could
not do, but they strove to do as much as they were able, and to increase and
edify the Flock.

4. But when extraordinary Gifts abated, and acquired Ones became more
necessary, and few Philosophers turned Christians, able Taking Preachers or
Orators grew fewer, and those few that were eminent in Knowledge and Speech
were justly preferred before the rest. And usually some one man had the chief
hand in converting men, and gathering a Church in each particular Town, and
then he rightfully was taken for their Pastor: And it being found that the
public and private care of Souls required in each Church, where were fit men,
more than one Pastor; It was not meet that more should be brought to ^im that
was there before, without his approbation and consent; but that he were to the
Juniors as a Father; And because the rest were usualiy below him in Gifts and
Worth, it was thought but meet that they should do what they did by his
consent: And also to avoid Divisions, to which they were over-prone, it was
judged fit that one should have the pre-eminence, and a negative, and partly
ruling Vote.

5. The Churches, which in the beginning had these Bishops and
Fellow-Presbyters, were single Congregations: And shortly they grew to be more
than could meet together in some few great Cities; Persecution hindering them
from very large Assemblies, besides their want of large capacious Temples. Dr.
Hammond thinks that there is no evidence, that in Scripturetime there were any
other Presbyters than Bishops, and consequently a Bishop had but one
Congregation, unless he went one hour to one, and another to another, which was
not their use. But doubtless in this he is mistaken, as the many Speakers as
Corinth show.

6. The Greatness of the Roman Empire was prepared by God to be then an
exceeding great fortherance of the Gospel: For under the same Civil Laws and
Powers, where one or two Languages were understood by most, Christians had the
far greater advantage for Communication. Want of foreign Languages is now our
great hinderance from Preaching the Gospel to other Nations of the World: And
the Confusion at Babel was an unspeakable Judgment. But as Ships, yea Navies,
can sail on the Ocean, when small Barks or Boats only can pass on Rivers; so
the vastness of the Roman Empire was a great help to the Church, by
Communication, Language and Accesses: But especially when the Emperor became
Christian, the advantage was exceeding great: Whereas now the Greatness of the
Turkish, Tartarian and Indostan Empire, are great Impediments to the Gospel;
because the Barbarians are more cruel Enemies than the Civil Romans
(notwithstanding the ten Persecutions) were; and their opposition is the more
extensive by the extent of their Dominions; and the Christian Churches having
now more scandalized the Infidels by their corruptions. While they were not
corrupted by worldly power and wealth, the great holiness of the Churches
convinced the sober part of the Empire. Albaspineus shows us clearly that their
strictness was so great, that they endured no notable scandalous sin among
them; yea and came very near to the Novatians in their Discipline: And that it
was not for greater strictness that the Novatians were condemned, but for
denying the Power of the Church to absolve men penitent that sinned after
Baptism. And their Canons show it. And it is certain, that Christians obeying
Paul, avoided the Heathen Judicatures as much as might be, and censured those
that did not, and ended their Differences by the way of Arbitration, and took
the Bishop with the Consent of his Clergy to be an Authorized Arbitrator; and
thus the affairs of all the Christians being cast upon him, and he having no
power to force any but only to govern Volunteers, the Bishops were constrained
to make their Rules of Discipline so much the stricter, that all that would not
renounce Christianity, and Church Communion, might be brought to Obedience to
escape Excommunication.

7. God having made the Great Power and Extent of the Roman Empire, so great a
means for the propagation of Christianity, the Christians thought that the
Greater they grew themselves, the more it would tend to the Churches
deliverance, from contempt and persecution: And their advancement lay in that
advancement of the Bishops, which private men could not expect, save only by
subsequent participation. Hereupon the Bishops, by the Peoples consent,
endeavored to form the Government of the Church within the Empire, into a
conformity to the Government of the Empire: And they contrived that those
Cities whose Governors had the chief Civil Power, their Bishops should have
answerable Church Power; the Glory of the Empire drawing them for seeming
Interest, into imitation.

8. From the like Principles they desired greatly the enlargement of the
Churches of which they were Overseers: And whereas Christ had made single
Churches like Schools, and every stated Worshipping Church, was also a Governed
Church, as every School has its Schoolmasters, one, or mo^^ by degrees these
Churches were by degeneration quite altered (...)o other things: First, They
were like a Parochial Church, (...) adds Chapels: They thought not so
contemptibly of the P^^^^ral work as we do, but found enough, as is said, for
many me(...) a Church of a few hundred or thousand souls: And when by
Persecution, or Numbers, or Distance, they could not all meet ordinarily in one
place, they appointed them to meet under several Presbyters, in several places,
but without appropriating a particular Presbyter to each Assembly.

2. After they appropriated them to their distinct charges, and distinguished a
stated Worshipping company from a Governed Church, the Bishop and his
Consistory ruling all in common; and the People tied to communicate only at the
Bishops Altar, and elsewhere to be but Hearers and Worshippers.

3. After that they set up Altars up and down for Monuments and Memorials of
Martyrs, and then in the Presbyters Chapels; yet so that the People were at
Easter, Whitsuntide, and the Nativity, to communicate with the Bishop in the
Mother Church or Cathedral.

4. Then when Country-Villages distant had a great increase of Christians, they
allowed Country-Bishops, Chorepiscopos, (proved by Petavius to be true Bishops;
if they were not, Presbyters ordained.) But they must be subject to the City
Bishop. 5. After this they decreed that very little Cities should have no
Bishops, ne vilescat nomen Episcopi; whenas before that every City had a Bishop
and Elders, that had Christians enough: And every Town, like our Corporations, or
Market Towns, were called Cities: (...) did not signify only such as we now
call Cities distinct from such Towns; were they no bigger than Cenchrea,
Majuma, and such others close to greater Cities, they had Bishops. Yea every
Church was to have their Elders, (and consequently Bishops, says Dr. Hammond)
where ever it was, by the Rule of the Holy Ghost, Acts 14. 23. And God never
said, Let there be no Churches but in Cities: Else when an Emperor would put
down all the Cities, or many, he should put down as many Churches.

6. After this they set up Patriarks as before they had done Metropolitans: And
it was three that they first set up (but no where out of the Empire:) And the
Papists find in the Institution the mystery of Trinity in Unity: For they could
not find any where Twelve Seats Successors to the Twelve Apostles; and so they
feigned, that Peter being the Center of Unity, The Trinity flowed from him. 1.
He as Bishop erected the Antiochian Patriarchate. 2. By St. Mark his Disciple,
the Alexandriau. And 3. By his final Episcopacy the Roman, says Joh. Dartis,
de statu Eccles. tempore Apostoli, page 23, 24. [ Imitatur Ecclesia Deum ut
trinum in Personis and unum in essentia, quatenus scilicet una and eadem
Ecclesia est multiplex ratione locorum; nam distributio prima and generalis
omnium Ecclesiarum fuit in tres Patriarchatus, Romanum, Alexandrinum, and
Antiochenum, ut unum esset per tres Antistites Sacerdotium ad Trinitatis instar
cui una est atque individua potestas ut recte interpretatur Symmachus Pap. ad
Eonium -- Dicendum est quod sicut in Trinitate una existente essentia, tamen
personae differentes existunt, it a Ecclesia una est essentia, licet plures
particulares existant: Et sicut omnes Trinitatis personae originem sumunt a
Patre, qui est origo Filii, and uterque Sp. Sancti, ita Ecclesia origo est
Romana aliarum.]

7. At the same time they began to describe Churches or Bishops Provinces by
the Measures of Land, which before were described by the Persons of Volunteers,
inhabiting near each other, says the aforesaid Dartis p. 128. Et sane diu
duravit ille mos tanquam Apostolicus in Ecclesiis, ut non essent alii termini
Episcopatus quam multitudo eorum quos ad fidem convertissent and baptizassent,
which he proves out of the Canons.

8. Rome being the imperial Seat, the Bishop of Rome was nearest the Emperor
and subordinate Rulers, and so most capable to make Friends for Christians
under any Accusations and Persecutions; by which advantage all Christians
through the Empire needing and being glad of such help, did willingly give the
Primacy to the Roman Patriark.

9. The Emperor Constantine turning Christian, and taking them for his surest
Soldiers, resolved to raise them as high as he well could, for the interest of
Christianity and his own, and thereby to work down the Heathens by degrees, and
accordingly gave them chief Countenance, and chief Power; and their Bishops
being their chief men, it must be done by exalting them. He made them the
authorized Judges of all Christians that desired it, even in criminal cases. He
yet gave not the Bishops the power of the Sword; but if any Christians had
committed Fornication, Adultery, Perjury, yea Murder, the Bishop was to punish
them by Penance and Suspension from the Sacrament: Besides which, Christians
had the chief Preferments as they were capable of in the Armies and Civil
Government: So that they triumphed over their late Persecutors, And now Honor,
Power and Wealth, were most on the Christians side, but especially the Bishops.

10. Worldly Interest being now on the Churches side, much of the World by such
Motives crowded into the Church, and no man can imagine that it could be
otherwise, who considers which way the Vulgar go, and how apt to be of the
Prince's mind, and how much nature inclines to fleshly Interest: Who had not
rather be kept from the Sacrament and Communion for a crime, till he profess
Repentance, than to be hanged or banished, or ruined for it?

But especially the Temptation was strongest to the Bishops, whose baits were
the most alluring: And ever since then they that most loved Wealth, Power and
Honor (that is, the worst, most worldly men) have been the most eager desirers
and seekers of Bishoprics: And while humble holy men must rather be sought to,
such earnest seekers are like to be the ordinary finders and possessors.

11. But yet three things kept up for some time a considerable number of godly
Bishops in the Churches, which with the humble Presbyters, kept up the Interest
of sound and practical Religion.

1. Those that had been tried worthy men before Constantines conversion, and
the Bishop's exaltation, kept their Integrity in the main; though in the Nicene
Council their contentious Libels showed that we are more beholden to
Constantine than to them, that they fell not into such strife as their
Successors did. Good men may be carried too far in Pride and Strife, but they
will not be mastered by them, and turn against the Power of Godliness.

2. The People and Inferior Clergy had the choice of their Bishops: And so
(though they often had tumults, as in popular Elections it will be) yet the worst
ambitious men were long kept out, and the best often chosen, till the People and
Presbyters themselves were corrupted.

3. And diverse good Emperors arose that took some care to promote the best:
But alas! this had sad and frequent interruptions.

12. For the Arians possessed Constantine himself with hard thoughts of
Athanasius and his Adherents: And it could not be expected that Julian should
countenance the best, when Constantius and Valeus had done so much against
them, and got most of all the Churches headed by Arian Bishops; to say nothing
yet of after times.

13. But now two things became matter of Contention among the Bishops and their
Clergy, and increased the strife from time to time. The first and chief was the
Old Cause greatly strengthened, viz. Who should be greatest? Who should have
the largest, fattest, and most Ruling Diocese and Seat? The other was, Who
should be taken for the most Orthodox, and whose Explications of the Faith
should be taken for the soundest; especially about the description of the
Person and immanent acts of Christ? Or briefly, 1. Jurisdiction and Greatness:
2. Wisdom and hard words.

14. Now also Constantinople contended with Rome, and being the Seat of the
Empire which they judged to be the true Reason of Church-preheminence, they at
first modestly took the second place: And now the Trinity of Patriarchs was
turned to five, Jerusalem being made the fifth. At all this Rome grudged.

15. All this while the old Discipline of the Church was tolerably kept up; 1.
Because though much of the world had got into the Church, yet a very great part
were tenacious of their Heathenish Customs, and prejudiced against Christians
by their Contentions, (odiously described by Am. Marcellinus, and many others,
and prejudiced against Constantine for his Son Crispus and Sopaters death, etc.
and against Constantius for the Murder of Julian's Relations; and being taken
with the plausible parts of Julian, and with the great Learning and highly
extolled Lives of Plotinus, Porphyrius, Jamblichus, Aedesius, Maximus,
Proeresius, Libanius, Chrysanthius, and such others, described by Eunapius,
etc. so that except Rome and Alexandria, for 200 years, and some few of the
very great Churches for 400, the Churches were no greater than one Bishop and
his Consessus, might tolerably govern by the Keys. 2. And all this while all
the Presbyters were Church Governors as well as the Bishop, though he was
their Chief, and all Excommunications were to be done by joint consent; And so
many Church Governors may do more than one.

16. Then Councils called General, having by the Emperors Grant, and the
Clergies Desire and Consent, the Supreme Church Power, it was in these Councils
that the Pride, Ambition and Domination of all the worldly Prelates that were
too soon got in, did exercise it self as the valor and wit of Soldiers in a
field of War: And as 1. The good men yet among them; 2. And the Articles of
Faith yet retained by them, did cause them to do much good against some
Heresies and Disorders, so the Pride and Turbulency, yea ignorance of the rest,
caused them to become the occasions of the doleful Schisms, and Heresies; and
Enmity of Christians against each other, which continue to this day unhealed.

17. These hurtful Contentions in Councils at first prevailed but little, and
that at Nice did much more good (I think) than harm: And after at Constant: a
little more hurt was done, and much good: And those that followed did worse and
worse, till the proud worldly Spirit contracted Malignity, and so much
prevailed, that for a thousand years at least the Bishops with their Prelatical
Clergy and their Councils have been the grand Corruption and Plague of the
Church; which many of the most Learned Expositors of the Revelation, take to be
the Image of the Beast; and Dr. H. Moore calls it a Heathenish Christianity,
which they have made their Religion.

18. In their progress to all this, as the Diocesses first grew up from our
Parochial Magnitude toward that of the present Diocesan, so the very Pastoral
Power of all the rest of the Presbyters, was by degrees taken away, so far as
that they had no consenting power in Ordinations or Excommunications, unless
the Bishop would choose a few for his Council: so that the proper power of the
King's was confined to one Bishop over many hundred Parishes; and so Discipline
became an impossible thing, save as it served the Bishops against some that
they disliked: And so the Church which was as the Garden of Christ, became like
the Commons, and good and bad were little differenced in Communion.

19. Yet because the Power must still be useful to the Bishops ends, as he sees
cause, some shadow of the old exercise must be kept up: But the Bishop having
not leisure for the tenth part of the labor which this very shadow required,
Laymen are made his Chancellours to decree Excommunications and Absolutions,
and to Govern by the Church Keys; like a secular Court: And Commissaries,
Officials, Surrogates, and other hard names and things, are set up instead of
the Presbyters and their Ancient Office.

20. By this time the Ancient Species of the Churches was altered; and whereas
it was long held, that a Church and Bishop were Correlates, and there were no
more Churches than Bishops, now many hundred or a thousand Parishes are become
no Churches, but parts of one Diocesan Church, which is the lowest, and many
score or hundred of the old sort of Bishops, all cast out and swallowed up by
one. Just as if a thousand, or some hundred Schools should have but one
Governing Schoolmaster, and be but one School, but each part have an Usher to
read to the Boys, and tell the one Schoolmaster as a Monitor what they did
amiss; but might correct none, nor put them out.

21. By this time they began to live on blood; and even as they swelled in the
beginning, cruelty grew up equally with Pride: For Reason and Scripture were
not on their side, nor would justify their Cause and them, and therefore
violence must do it: They desired not the bare title of Power, but the exercise
of it, to promote the Issues of their Wit and Will. They began with rash
silencing, ejecting and deposing Dissenters, and thence to anathematizing them,
and thence to banishing, till at last it grew up to tormenting in the
Inquisition, and burning them.

22. And whereas (notwithstanding the petty Heresies among Christians too
early) the glory of the Ancient persecuted Christians was their entire Love and
Concord, and the shame of the Philosophers was their discord; it came to that
pass, that whereas a Heresy of old did start up among a few for a small time,
like our Ranters and Quakers, who shame Religion no more than Bedlams shame
Reason: Now the great Continents of the Earth have been the Seats of the
millions of those called Heretics and Schismatics by each other, about 1400
or 1300 years. Eusebius in Praepar. and Demonstr. copiously shows that the
Philosophers were all confounded in dissension (and yet did not persecute each
other) but that the Christians were all of one Religion, cleaving to one Sacred
Word of God: Of which also see Raym. Breganium in Theol. Gent. de Cogn. Dei,
Enar. 5. cap. 8. To be Lovers of good men, was the character of the old
Bishops: To be dividers, and haters, and slanderers, and silencers, and
persecutors, and murderers of them, grew up with corrupters Pride.

23. And with these did gradually grow up corruptions of Doctrine, even while
they pretended a burning Zeal against Heresy; and corruption of God's public
Worship, till it grew up to all the Mass and Roman Impurities.

24. And to secure all this against Reformation, ridiculous Legends, and
falsification of Church History, made it hard for posterity what to believe, or
whom.

15. Being thus far sure of the matter of fact, by what degrees Prelacy grew up
to the height, that it has now attained in the World abroad, I considered what
men thought of it now at home (I am speaking yet but of matter of fact;) and I
found great diversity in men's thoughts of it.

1. As to the Roman height, I found that the Church of England since the
Reformation till A. B. Laud's time took the Pope to be the Antichrist; It was
in their Church-books: Many other Bishops, as well as Bishop Downam, have
written for it: What Bishop Morton, and Hall, and Abbot, and abundance such
have written against Popery I need not name.

2. I found that then the stream began to turn, and the name of Antichrist was
put out, and our Reconciliation with Rome was taken to be a hopeful work, and
actually endeavored (which by their conversion all good men desire.)

3. I found that many among us of greatest reverence and name had laid down
such terms as these, [That the Catholic Church is one Visible Society under
one humane Governing Sovereignty: That this Universal Sovereign has power of
Universal Legislation and Judgment: That the College of Bishops through all
the World, are this one Supreme Universal Sovereign: That they exercise it in
General Councils when they sit: That every Bishop is by Office the
Representative of his Diocesan Church; and these Bishops may, or must have
Metropolitans and Patriarchs; and by these Patriarchs and Metropolitans per
literas formatas, and their Nuntii the Universal Supreme College may exercise
their Power over all the World: And what they do thus, the Church or College
does, in the intervals of General Councils: That the Pope of Rome is to be
acknowledged the Principium Unitatis to this Universal Church and College of
Bishops, and the Ordinary President of General Councils ex Officio. That
Councils called without the President who has the sole power, are unlawful
Assemblies, and punishable Routs. That the approbation of the President, (if
not of the most of the Patriarchs) is the note by which an authorized obliging
Council is to be known from others. That the Pope is to be obeyed accordingly
as Prime Patriarch, Principium Unitatis, President of General Councils, and
Patriarch of the West. That all that will not unite with the Church of Rome on
these terms, are Schismatics, and so to be accounted and used. That those
that thus unite with the Church of Rome, are no Papists: But a Papist is only
one that holds all to be just and good that is done by Popes, or at least one
that is for the Pope's Absolute Power of Governing above Canon-Laws and
Church-Parliaments or Councils. And that if they will but abate their last 400
years Innovations, or at least not impose them on others, we may unite with the
Church of Rome, though they claim as Peter's Successors, the Universal
Supremacy at least to be exercised according to the Canons of Councils. And
that it is not the Church of Rome, but the Court of Rome, which at present we
may not unite with. That the Church of Rome is a true Church, and has had an
uninterrupted Succession, and its Sacraments true Sacraments: But none of those
Protestant Churches are true Churches, that have not Diocesan Bishops; nor any
of their Pastors true Ministers of Christ, who have not Diocesan Episcopal
Ordination; nor any that have such, unless it has as such been conveyed down
from the Apostles by uninterrupted Succession by such Diocesans. That such men
have no true Sacraments, God not owning what is done by any not so ordained:
That therefore they have no Covenant-promise of, or right to Pardon and
Salvation, because such right is given only by the Sacrament: That therefore
all such Protestants Sacraments are but nullities, and a profanation of holy
things: And that the Holy Ghost being the Instituter of these sacred things, it
is the sin against the Holy Ghost to undertake and exercise the Ministry, and
celebrate Sacraments without such uninterrupted successive Ordination. That an
Ordained Minister, has no more power than was intended him by his Ordainers:
That in such Presbyterians, or Episcopal Churches, which have their power from
the Ordainers, and so far for want of Succession, are nullities; it is safe for
men (as e. g. in France) to be rather of the Roman Church than theirs.

16. And as I found this Doctrine in the ascendent in England, so I met with
such as were for using Protestants accordingly, even for the silencing of them
by thousands, if they would not swear, profess, promise, and do all that -- And
for using the People accordingly. And abating neither big nor little, an Oath
or a Ceremony to unite or save them. And I lived in an Age where these things
were no idle speculations.

17. Being thus far sure of the Matter of Fact, I studied as well as I was able
to know which of these ways was right: And I saw that either Popery that is,
the Popes universal Headship or Government is of Divine Institution, or elss it
is a heinous Usurpation, and forms a sort of Church which is not on any
pretense of Concord to be owned. And as to the first I have said before and in
many Books what I have to say against it; which is all summed up in Doctor Iz.
Barrow, and Doctor H. Moore, and largely told the world by Chamier, Sadeel,
Whitaker, Jewel, Usher, Morton, White, Chillingworth, Crakenthorne, and
abundance more. And I thought it strange if either Papacy, or that Tympanite of
the Clergy which tended to it, were of God, that the Persons should be
ordinarily so bad, and it should introduce so great mischief in doctrine,
worship and practice over the Christian world, and bring the Church into such a
divided and polluted state, and that as the Clergy swelled the Body should pine
away, and the Spirit of holiness and Love be turned into the Skelleton of
Ceremony and Formality, and into hatred, cruelty, and tearing and tormenting
pains.

18. Upon all such thoughts I concluded in these resolutions; 1. That I must
not accuse any Office made by God, for men's abuse of it. 2. Nor must I accuse
the good for the faults of the bad. 3. Nor Confound the Office it self, with
its disease, and the accidental Tympanite. 4. Nor aggravate humane infirmities
in good men, as if they were the crimes of malignant Enemies. 5. Much less lay
any of the blame on Christianity or Piety, when nothing in the world is so much
against all these Evils, nor would they have been so far limited, restrained or
resisted, had it not been for that Christianity and Piety that was kept up
against it; nor is there any other cure of it. It is not by Religion, but for
want of more true and serious Religion, that all these mischiefs have so
lamentably prevailed.

19. I therefore resolving to avoid extremes, concluded thus; 1. That it is
most certain that Christ is the only Head of the Church.

2. And that as such he himself did make universal Laws, and will be the final
universal Judge, and there is no other that has universal Legislative and
Judicial Power but he.

3. As such he instituted necessary Church Officers; first, extraordinary ones
to be his Instruments in Legislation, as Moses was to the Jews, giving them his
Spirit extraordinarily for that use, to bring all that he taught them to their
remembrance, and guide them to deliver and record all his Commands: And
ordinary Ministers (as the Priests and Levites to the Jews) to teach and apply
these Commands, or universal Laws, to the end of the World, but not to add,
diminish or alter them.

4. That the formal Essence of this continued Sacred Ministry consists in a
derived Power and Obligation in subordination to Christ as Prophet, Priest and
King, to Teach, to Guide the Churches in holy Worship, and to Rule them by the
Pastoral Power, which makes them Ministerial Judges of men's capacity for
Church Communion; but they have as such no forcing power of the Sword.

5. That there are two sorts of these Ministers accidentally distinguished: 1.
Such as are only ordained to the Ministry in general, and not specially related
to any one particular Church more than other; whose work is to do their best to
Teach Infidels, and baptize them, and gather Churches, and occasionally to
Officiate orderly in such Churches where they come as need their help. 2. Those
that have moreover an additional call to be the stated Pastors, Overseers or
Guides of particular Churches as fixed Officers of Christ. All which have the
three foresaid Essentials of the Office, to Teach, Worship and Rule.

6. That the Office of these men is to be performed by themselves, and no
Layman may do any Essential part of them by their deligation, and therefore
(as in Physicians, Tutors, etc.) necessary Personal abilities are as essential
as the necessary dispositio materiae is ad receptionem alicujus formae. And ex
quovis ligno non fit mercurius.

7. That it is very much, and great, and most important work, which these
Ministers have to do. To Preach God's Word understandingly, faithfully,
constantly, fervently; to resolve the doubtful, to reprove the scandalous, to
persuade the obstinate, to confute gainsayers, to comfort the sad, and
strengthen the weak, particularly as there is occasion. To visit the sick,
Catechize, Baptize, besides all acts of public Government. Therefore one man
cannot possibly do all this for too great a number of souls, but great
Congregations must have many Ministers: And so they had in the Primitive
Church, where the most able Speakers preached usually in public, and the rest
did more of the personal and more private work.

8. And whereas it was very early that most single Churches had one that had a
pre-eminence amongst the rest (not as of another Office, but as a President in
a College of Philosophers, Physicians or Divine Students, to be a Governor
over those of his own profession, by moderate Guidance,) and it is not unmeet,
that when one worthy Teacher has gathered a Church, and brought up younger
Christians to Ministerial abilities, that they when they are ordained should
take him for their Father, I will never gainsay such an Episcopacy in single
Churches (that is, societies of Christians combined for personal Communion in
Doctrine, Worship and Holy living under such Pastors as aforesaid.)

9. And because I find that the Apostles and Evangelists had a Ministerial care
of many Churches to teach, reprove, exhort the Pastors and People; And though
the Apostles extraordinary power and work ceased, yet Church-Oversight as well
as Preaching being an ordinary continued work; and when I find Christ has
instituted some Teachers over many Churches, I dare not say that he has
repealed this till I can prove it. And the nature of the thing tells us, that
if some grave holy men have the care of counselling and warning and reproving
the Ministers of many Churches who are below them in parts and worth; It may do
much good and can do no harm to the Churches, while they have no power of force
or tyranny, Therefore I resolved never to speak or do any thing against such
Bishops of Bishops, though Diocesan.

20. Thus far I have often declared my self for Episcopacy: But finding in all
the aforesaid History, how the Church came to the woeful State that it has been
in these 1200 years, and what it suffers by the Bishops and their Clergy in
almost all parts of the Christian World; and that even the English Diocesans
can endure no more Parochial Pastoral Discipline than they do* (I mean such as
Bucer in Script. Anglic. pressed so vehemently on King Edw. and the Bishops) and
that they cannot contentedly hold their Lordships, Wealth and Honors, without
silencing and ruining Two thousand such as I, or better; and using many
thousands of godly Christians as they do; and finding that I and such others
are accused as being disobedient to them -- and for not swearing and
covenanting never to endeavor any alteration of their present
Church Government, and all excommunicate by the Canon that say there is any
thing in it (even from the Archdeacon downward to [ the rest in Office]
repugnant to the Word of God) I took it at last to be my duty to give the
Reasons of my dissent in a full Treatise of Episcopacy.

And because I perceived young men and strangers to former times, deceived by
the general noise, How Ancient and Universal Episcopacy has been; as if all
that is called Episcopacy were but one and the same thing; or as if we were
against the Primitive Episcopacy; therefore I suddenly (and too hastily for
want of time,) bestowed a few weeks in summing up the Heads of the History of
Bishops and Councils, out of a few Historians which were most common, next at
hand, and of most credit with those whose faults I opened: That it might be
truly known How much the tumified degenerate sort of Prelacy had caused the
Divisions and Calamities of the Church.

21. For this Mr. Morris (as fame says) and many more are so greatly offended
with me, and say of me herein what they do. And on pretense of Vindicating the
Primitive Church which untruly implies that I who vindicated it against
corrupters did oppose it) he defends the corruptions and sinful miscarriages
and diseases of the Prelates: And this he does, 1. By striving to make me
contemptible as unlearned, as if that would excuse the sins which I rehearse
and lament: He finds in one place through my haste and heedlesness, a word of
Theodoret misplaced, and the word [ Calami] translated Quills, which he thinks
should be Reeds; and one or two more such; as if he prevaricated, and had a
design to extol the Book, which he finds no more and greater fault in, than he
really has done. And he proves it likely that I never saw the Histories that
stood by me near twenty years, because the Printer put a Comma between [
Marquardus] and [ Freherus] (I think there are a dozen Comma's misplaced in my
whole Book;) when he himself says of his own Book [ The faults that have
escaped are almost infinite.] But of these things more anon.

2. He loudly and frequently charge me with malicious falsifying History; and
when he comes to the proof, I have showed you who the falsifier is.

3. The great thing I am accused of, is making the Bishops more the causes of
Heresy, Schism and Violence, than they were: And of that I have said nothing,
but what I think I have fully proved: And let the Reader judge by this
following Catalogue.

Dominee^ing Pride has been the chief cause of Heresies and Schisms,
especially working in the Clergy to tumid Prelacy and Tyranny.

I. I before noted how the Apostles began to strive who should be greatest,
till the effusion of the Spirit after Christ's rebukes had cured them. And what
tyranny Diotrephes used through love of Pre-eminence.

II. If the doubtful stories of Simon Magus be true, his tumor was more than
Papal; And Epiphanius makes Menander, Saturnilus, Basilides, to be but his
Offspring. The Original of the Nicolaitans and Gnostics (who Epiphanius
says, had ensnared himself once) is utterly uncertain; Carpocras, Cerinthus,
Ebion, Valentinus, Secundus, Ptolomaeus, were all but Birds of the same
Gnostics Nest, a crazed sort of men that mingled Christianity, Platonism, and
Magical Imaginations; and what they were themselves, is not known: Such was
Marcus, Colarbasus, Heracleon, the Ophitae, the Cainites, the Sethians, Cerdo;
Marcion was a Bishop's Son cast out for vice; and Lucian, Apelles and Severus
his Offspring, the Heads of their little Sects; whether Bishops or not, is
unknown. What kind of Heretics Tertullian, Tatianus, and Origin were, and how
many faults as soul Lactantius, and many not numbered with Heretics have, is
well known: And among all these in those early days, till there were Popes and
Diocesans (such as now) in the world, none such could be Heretics.

III. Many Councils contended about the time of Easter, and Victor with one
part of Bishops, excommunicated Polycrates and the Arian Bishops; while, as
Socrates and Sozomen tell us, the Churches that left it indifferent had peace.

IV. A Council of the best Bishops at Carthage decreed Rebaptizing.

V. A Council of the Bishops of Cappadocia, Cilicia, Galatia, etc, at Iconium,
for Rebaptizing those Baptized by Heretics: And Stephen Bishop of Rome
excommunicated them all.

VI. A Council at Synadis, and diverse others decreed the same Rebaptizing.

VII. Diverse more African Councils of good Bishops with Cyprian, decree the
same, whom Stephen Bishop of Rome condemns.

VIII. Diverse Bishops are said to be Sabellian Heretics.

IX. Paulus Samosatenus Bishop of Antioch was a Heretic.

X. The Council of Bishops at Cirta in Numidia under Secundus Mr. M. calls
worse than I do.

XI. A Carthage Council of 70 Bishops An. 306. set up the Donatists Schism,
striving for the pre-eminence, who should be Bishop of Carthage.

XII. An. 308. Another Donatists Council had 270 Bishops. Many more Councils
they had.

XIII. The first General Council at Nice we honor, and assent to its Creed:
But thank Constantine for burning all their Libels, and keeping peace by his
presence and speech.

XIV. The Schism made by Meletius and Peter, Bishops, is well known.

XV. The Heresy of Arius (a Presbyter that would have been a Prelate) quickly
infected Eusebius Nicomed. If not Eusebius Caesariensis, and diverse other
Bishops.

XVI. Epiphanius says, that Audius was driven to his Heresy by being long
abused, beaten, and at last excommunicated for reproving the Bishops and
Priests for their Covetousness, Luxury, and other sins: And so he became a
Bishop himself.

XVII. Eusebius Nicom. made Bishop of Constantinople (whom you tell us Valesius
thinks was no Heretic) hired a Whore at Antioch, to father her Child on
Eustathius the Bishop there, and got more Bishops to depose him, and the
Emperor to banish him.

XVIII. A Council of Bishops at Tire unjustly condemn and persecute Athanasius.

XIX. Three Bishops (says Mr. M. overcome with too much Wine and persuasion)
ordained Novatian falsely Bishop of Rome (before this aforementioned.)

XX. A Council at Jerusalem An. 335. tried and approved Arius Faith, and
restored him.

XXI. A Council at Constantinople condemned Marcellus Ancyranus, and
Athanasius, and justified Arius.

XXII. A Council of near 100 Bishops at Antioch, 36 being Arians, deposed
Athanasius.

XXIII. Another Council at Antioch make a new Creed without [(...)]

XXIV. A Council of 376 Bishops at Sardica, decree Appeals to Rome, which
Augustine and the African Bishops were against.

XXV. The Semi-Arian Bishops went to Philippopolis, and condemned such as the
other at Sardica had absolved, but cast out [(...)] as not scriptural, and cast
dreadful accusations on Athanasius, Paulus C. P. and Marcellus.

XXVI. An. 350. A Council at Milan received Ursacius and Valens, Arians.

XXVII. Stephen an Arian Bishop hired a Whore to go in to Bishop Euphratas; and
this Euphratas after turned Photinian.

XXVIII. An. 353. A Council at Arles condemn Athanasius.

XXIX. An. 355. A General Council at Milan of above 300 Western Bishops (though
the Eastern that were most Arian could not come) where Athanasius was
condemned, and communion with the Arians subscribed.

XXX. An. 356. A Council at Byterris condemned and banished Hilary, and
condemned them as Separatists or Schismatics that renounced the Arian
Communion.

XXXI. A General Council at Sirmium of 300 Western Bishops besides the Eastern,
made three different Creeds, condemned Athanasius, left out the word
[Substance] made P. Liberius, and old Osius subscribe against Athanasius.

XXXII. The Oriental Bishops at Ancyra were only for [(...)] and not [(...)]
and with Macedonius against the Godhead of the Holy Ghost.

XXXIII. A General Council 400 Bishops met at Ariminum; of whom most at first
were Orthodox; but after when the Emperor interposed, subscribed to the Arian
Party.

XXXIV. The rest sat at Seleucia, and were more Orthodox, but divided into
Acacians, who were for leaving out [ Substance] and Semi-Arians, who were for [
Like Substance.] Sulp. Severus tells us, that many Bishops quieted their
Consciences by [ subscribing in their own sense] and so deceived the Arians
that thought they had won them.

XXXV. A Council at C. P. made a Ninth Creed, leaving out [ Substance and
Hypostasit, The Semi-Arians for this banished the Authors.

XXXVI. A Council at Antioch cast out Miletius, and made a Tenth Creed, worse
than the rest.

XXXVII. Julian Reigning, Athanasius calls a Council at Alexandria, which had
almost divided East and West about the names [ Hypostasit and Persona;] but
that some wise men persuaded them that the words were both of the same
signification; which yet was hardly entertained afterward.

XXXVIII. A Council at Antioch of Semi-Arians Petitioned Jovianus to cast out
the Acacians; till they knew his mind, and then the Arian Bishops turned
Orthodox.

XXXIX. At a Synod in Tyana Eustath. Sebast. denied [(...)] and the Godhead of
the Holy Ghost.

XL. An Arian Council of Bishops in Caria under Valens: And another at
Singeduni in Misia.

XLI. Damasus in a Roman Council condemns Sisinnius for Conventicles: For at
the Election in the Church they fought for these two: And Damasus his Party one
day left 137 dead bodies behind them, and got the better.

XLII. Valens by cruelty set up Arian Bishops in a great part of the Eas^.

XLIII. The first General Council at C. P. is commonly called the Second
General, when yet that at Sardica, Ariminum, Sirmium, Milan, were General also:
They were many good men, and did good: But how they used Nazianzen to the great
grief of the Church of C. P. and how Nazianzen describes them, I desire the
Reader to take from his own words, and not from mine, or Mr. M.

XLIV. The Council at Caesar Augusta did that which made Martin separate from
them and all their Councils after to his death.

XLV. A Council at C. P. set up Flavian at Antioch, and a Council at Rome were
for Paulinus: The former advance C. P. and Jerusalem.

XLVI. Many Schismatical Councils of Donatist Bishops followed.

XLVII. For Theophilus case I refer you to Socrates and Sozemene.

XLVIII. Epiphanius his Schismatical usage of Chrysostom is unexcusable.

XLIX. And so is Theophilus prosecution of him, and a Synod of Bishops casting
him out, and Cyril's resisting the restoring of his name when dead, and
reviling the Joannites that kept separated Meetings for his sake.

L. The Diospolitan Council absolved Pelagius. Diverse Carthage Councils
condemned him. P. Innocent condemned him. Zosimus once absolved him, and
condemned his accusers.

The Bishops cast out for Simony, I will not number here.

LI. The Contentions between Bonisace and Eulalius, and others after them to
get the Bishopric of Rome, are so many as I will not number them. And the
striving of three Bishops successively against the African Fathers for the
Roman super-eminence and Appeals to Rome, are commonly known.

LII. One of Bishop Boniface's Decrees is, That [ No Bishop shall be brought
before any Judge, Civil or Military, either for any Civil or Criminal Cause.]

LIII. What the first General Council at Ephesus did in the Cause of Nestorius
I have fully opened: Derodons Evidence is undeniable, that Nestorius was
Orthodox as to the Matter, though he mistook as to words, in thinking that Mary
should not be called The Mother of God, but of Christ who is God. (which Luther
also shows.) Yet since that Councils anathematizing him, a great body of
Christians in many Eastern Kingdoms, to this day are a party hereticated by the
rest. Is not such an effect of 1200 years continuance, a witness of the failing
of that Council?

LIVE. The Bishops of C. P. and Alexandria striving which should be greatest, a
Council at C. P. decided it for C. P. where Theodoret was for Alexandria, and
fell under displeasure.

LV. Leo M. Bishop of Rome, claims the title of Head of the Catholic Church.

LVI. Two Councils at C. P. one against Eutyches the other for him.

LVII. The second Council at Ephesus is so heavily accused by Mr. M. and such
others, that I need not accuse it more. Flavianus of C. P. was there hurt to
death. Yet Bellarmin confesses it wanted nothing of a true General Council but
the Pope's approbation.

LVIII. A Council at Alexandria under Dioscorus excommucateth Leo.

LIX. What the Council of Calcedon has done I have showed: Instead of
reconciling the Nestorian and Eutychian Controversies by a skillful explication
of their ambiguous unfit words, they Anathematized both and banished Dioscorus,
And ever since to this day, the Eutychians and Nestorians are separated
Dissenters.

LX. At Alexand. the Bishops party that the Council was for ( Proterius) and
Timothy whom Dioscorus party were for, so reged, that they murdered Proterius,
and dragged his carcass in the streets, and bit his flesh: And each party still
accused the other.

LXI. Pulcheria ( Theodosius's Sister and Martian's Wife) being for the
Council, and Eudocia Theodosius's Widow for Dioscarus, they animated the
several Parties of Bishops and Monks: And in Palestine Juvenal Bishop of
Jerusalem was expelled, Severianus Bishop of Schythopolis killed, etc.

LXII. Leo the Emperor commanding obedience to the Calcedon Council, at
Alexandria and Antioch the Armies of contending Bishops were in continual war,
calling each other Nestorians and Eutychians; one Bishop banished by the
Emperor, the contrary Bishop murdered by the people, and cast into the River;
the next getting the better again, etc.

LXIII. In Martian's and Leo's days most Bishops subscribed to the Council.
When Basiliscus usurped, and was against the Council, says Niceph. three
Patriarchs, and five hundred Bishops renounced it, most before having damned
its adversaries. Basiliscus recanteth his Commands, and commands all to be
for the Council, and the Bishops obey him, save those of Asia. Zeno recovereth
the Empire, and is for the Council, and the Asian Bishops turn for it, and say
they subscribed to Basiliscus at first for fear. Zeno seeing it impossible
otherwise to make Peace, leaves all indifferent whether they will subscribe
the Council or not. Then the War grew hotter between the Bishops and their
Armies against each other, specially the Patriarchs; all being in Confusion, at
Alexand. Antioch and C. P. and no Emperor wise enough to quiet them.

LXIV. Anastasius a peaceable man, made Emperor, leaves all to think of the
Council as they will: Then the Bishops fall into three Parties; some for every
word in the Council; some anathematizing it, and some for the indifferency: The
East one way, the West another, and Lybia another; yea each Country divided
among themselves: Says Niceph. So great confusion and blindness of mind befell
the whole World. The Emperor falls upon the impeaceable of both sides: At his
own place C. P. the Sedition of the People overcame him, for their Council
Bishop, which turned the Emperor more against the Council, and that Bishop and
the rest.

LXV. At Antioch the Armies of two Bishops fought it out, and the Council Party
getting the better, killed so many Monks, as to save the labor of burying
them, they cast their bodies into the River: And after another Party of them
made as great a slaughter. For this blood the Emperor banished Flavianus the
Council Bishop: This was called Persecution. Pet. Alex. being dead, the Bishops
of Alex. Egypt and Lybia, fell all into pieces among themselves, and had
separate Meetings: The rest of the East separated from the West, because the
West refused Communion with them unless they would anathematize Nestorius,
Eutyches, Dioscorus, Moggus, and Acacius: And yet says Niceph. Qui germani
Dioscori and Eutychetis sectatores fuere, ad maximam paucitatem redacti sunt.
Note that Flavian the Council Bishop for fear with his Fellow Bishops
(threatened by Bishop Xenaias) subscribed an Anathema against Theodore,
Theodorite, Ibas, as Nestorians: The Isaurian Bishops yield to anathematize the
Council. Severus a fierce Enemy of the Nestorians made Patriarch at Antioch,
forced many Bishops to renounce the Council; and many to fly. The Isaurian
Bishops repent and condemn Severus: The Emperor commanded out two Bishops for
condemning their Patriarch: The People defend them, and force the Emperor to
desist, because he would shed no blood for Bishops. Helias Bishop of Jerusalem,
saw all the Bishops in such confusion, that he would communicate with none of
them, but the Bishop of C. P. The Monks at Jerusalem proclaim Anathema to all
that equal not the four Councils to the four Evangelists, and write to the
Emperor that they would make good the conflict to blood, and went about to
engage men to the Council: The Emperor commanded the Bishop to reform this: He
refuses. The Emperor sends Soldiers to compel them, and the Bishops and
Monks forcibly cast them out of the Church. He sent Olympius with a stronger
band, who cast out the Bishop: The next Bishops and more Soldiers had yet more
conflicts after this, and the Soldiers driven away by force.

LXVI. Faelix of Rome, with 77 Bishops, excommunicate Acacius of C. P. (with a
[ Nunquam Anathematis vinculis exuendus) and their own two Bishops that obeyed
the Emperor in communicating. The Schism between Laurentius and Symmachus,
came to bloodshed, when five or six Councils labored to heal it. Symmachus
excommunicateth the Emperor and Bishop of C. P. as communicating with
Heretics; but not an Arian King then at Rome.

LXVII. A Council of 80 Bishops at Sidon anathematize the Council of Calcedon.

The striving Parties keep up still in great Bodies, and the Melchites (as they
call those that obeyed Kings and the Council) have one Patriarch at Damascus,
the Eutychian Jacobites one at Mesopotamia, the Maronites one at M. Libanus,
all called Patriarchs of Antioch, (and the Romans make a fourth of the same
title) and the Nestorians have their Patriarch at Muzal.

Of the many Heresies or Sects that rose up from the intemperate opposition to
Nestorius, and the woeful ruins they made in the East after the Calcedon
Councils, and all caused by Pride and Prosperity, and wantonness of Wit, and
stopped only by the Conquest of the Sarazens and Arabians, and how orthodox now
in their Captivity and Poverty they all are, even the Jacobites, the
Nestorians, the Armenians, the Cophti, the Abassines, the Indians, and the
Maronites, see the notable words of Brierwrod Enquir. p. 180, 181, 182, 183. As
also how the Persian King was a great cause of the spreading of the Nestorians
through his Dominions.

LXVIII. The East and West were divided in Justin's Reign, on the Question,
whether the names of two Orthodox dead Bishops should be restored into the
Dypticks, even Euphemius and Macedonius, whom the Pope had damned as
communicating with Heretics; the Bishops of the East being for it, and the
West against it.

LXIX. Justin turning the stream for the Calced. Council, the Bishops in a
Council at Jerusalem, and another at Tire are for it, and condemn Severus. And
a Roman Council condemns the three dead Bishops of C. P. Acacius, Euphemius
and Macedonius.

LXX. So far were the Bishops yet from Peace, that Justinian being Emperor,
headed the Council Party, and his Wife the adverse Party.

About 30000 they say were then killed in C. P. at an Insurrection.

LXXI. A mischievous Schism for the Bishopric at Rome, between Boniface 2. and
Dioscorus and Agapetus after Boniface.

LXXII. In Justinian's time a Controversy arose, whether we may say [ One of
the Trinity was crucified?] Hormisda Bishop of Rome said No. The Nestorians
took hold of this and said, [ Then we may not say Mary was Mother to one of the
Trinity.] Justinian sent for a Council about it to Pope John: He and his
Bishops concluded contrary to Hormisda, that we may say [ One of the Trinity
was crucified.] And say Baronius and Binius [Ita mutatis hostibus arma mutari
necesse suit.] Faith changes as occasions change. Reader, if thou see not
here how Bishops have broken the Church in pieces, I must not tell thee, lest
Mr. M. be angry.

I entreat the Reader to see what I said, Hist. p. 132. of the Conference of
Hypatius and the Eutychians.

LXXIII. A Council at C. P. calls their Bishop Patriarcha Oecumenicus, and
condemn diverse Bishops, as does a Council at Jerusalem.

LXXIV. At Rome the Arian King made Silverius Bishop, and others chose Vigilius
that murdered him. Vigilius excommunicated Menna of C. P. which Justinian
revenged.

LXXV. A new Controversy is stated whether Christ's body was corruptible: The
denyers had Gainas A. Bishop; The affirmers had Theodosius; The first were
called Phantasiastae, the other Corrupticolae. Most were for Gainas, but the
Soldiers for Theodosius: They fought many days, and the Soldiers killed many,
and many of them were killed, and the Women with stones from the top of the
houses, and the Soldiers with fire, continued the war: And the division
continued in Liberatus's days: Justinian was so zealous for the Council of
Calcedon, that he murdered thousands (as they say) in Egypt, and yet dyed a
reputed Heretic himself, being for the Corrupticolae, and Evagrius says, when
he had set the whole world in tumult, he was damned himself. But God best
knows that.

LXXVI. A Council at Barcelona Decree that Priests must cut their beards, but
not shave them.

LXXVII. By the Cheat of an Eutychian Bishop Justinian was persuaded that the
condemning of some Writings of Theodore Mopsuest, Theodorite and Ibas, would
reconcile the Bishops: He calls a General Council at C. P. to that end (usually
called the 5th) His Letters are read opening the doleful divisions, that the
Churches had no Communion with one another, etc. The three Bishops writings are
read: Theodorite charged by this General Council with that salt Epistle against
dead Cyril, and a like Speech at Antioch, and none vindicated him: Binius and
Mr. Morice and others say the Letter is forged: I know not; But the Tria
Capitula are condemned. And now this General Council has made a new dividing
snare. Many that were for the Calcedon Council feared this was a condemning of
what they did in receiving Theodorite, etc. The Adversaries were never the more
satisfied; but says Binius himself [ The end was not obtained, but a most
grievous mischief added to the Church -- The whole Catholic Church was torn by
Schism, and worse, the Emperor stir'dup Persecution, deposed or banished P.
Vigilius: But lest the East should all forsake the West, he recanted and
consented to the Council. Does either the work or the effect commend this
General Council?

LXXVIII. A Council of Jerusalem save one Bishop, presently received this
Decree.

LXXIX. A Western Council at Aquileia condemn this 5th General Council at C. P.
and (says Binius) separated from the whole Catholic Church (even from Rome)
for an hundred years till Sergius reconciled them. Q. Were the Western Bishops
or the Pope then the Western Church? So many separated, that Vigilius being
dead, there could but two Bishops (and a Presbyter) be got to ordain Pelagius
his Successor. But the Emperor and his Pope persecute the Bishops, and the
Schism seemed desperate.

LXXX. Another Council at C. P. An. 587. decree that John Bishop of C. P. be
called The Universal Bishop; which greatly increased the Churches divisions.

LXXXI. King Gunthram called a Council at Mascon An. 589. finding all things
grow worse and worse, and all long of the Bishops only, says Binius.

LXXXII. Even Great Gregory called a Synod against the dissenting Bishops, and
they not obeying his summons, the Bishop of Aquileia was ruined (the Western
Head) Sabinian that succeeded Gregory would have had his Books burnt. Boniface
the third got Phocas the Murderer to declare Rome the Chief Bishops Seat (He to
whom Greg. had sung Laetentur coeli, and exult et terra, etc.)

LXXXIII. Next rose up the Monothelite Controversy, Cyrus Bishop of Alexand.
to end the Controversies aforementioned, was told that to use the word [ Dei
virilis operatio and voluntas] would unite them all, which past as satisfaction
in a Council at Alexand. P. Honorius persuaded them to silence [ One] and [
Two.]

But this Counsel was rejected, and now whether Christ had [ One or Two Wills
and Operations, became as de fide, the new War of the Bishops through the
world. Some were for [ One] and some for [ Two] as if [ Will and Operation, and
One or Two] were words that had but one signification; When every Novice in
Philosophy must grant that Christ's Will and Operation in some sense, was but
One, and in other senses Two, as I have proved. But Sergius Bishop of Constable.
set it on foot, Heraclius being for it, and Pyrrhus his Successor followed it
on. And Sergius by a Council of Bishops at C. P. decreed for [ One Will.]

The Opinion and the Emperor Constans his silencing both, are condemned at
Rome. The Pope, Emperors and Bishops, are all condemned, and persecuting each
other about it.

LXXXIV. Constable. Pogonat. called a General Council at C. P. called the 6th,
which condemned Macarius Bishop of Ant. and the pacificatory Epistles of P.
Honorius and Sergius as Heretical, and all that were for One Will, and One
Operation of Christ; 1. As denominated a naturis and earum principiis seu
facultatibus, the Divine and Humane Will and Operations were and are Two: 2. As
denominated ab unitate persona; they are the Will and Operations of One person,
and so far may be called One. 3. As denominated ab unitate objectiva they are
One: The Divine and Humane Nature will the same thing, so far as the Humane
wills, and do so far the same work: But if any will make a new Heresy by
disputing whether the Divine Nature alone do not will and act somewhat without
the volition and action of the Humane (since the Incarnation) they shall have
no company of mine in it. 4. In the sense as the Operation of the principal and
instrumental Cause are One, producing One Effect; so Christ's Divine and Humane
Operations are One. 5. As Consent denominateth Unity, and the Old Christians
are said to be of One heart and soul, One mind and mouth; and Christ prays
that we may be One in him, so his Will and Operation are One. 6. Yea if there
be a sort of Union between Christ and his Members, and between the Blessed in
Heaven, which is quite beyond our present comprehension, it is much much more
so between Christ's Divine and Humane Will and Operations.

And now Reader, whether it was well done to pass over these and many other
needful distinctions, and to put men barely to say that Christ's Will and
Operations were not One, but Two, when really they were both One and Two; and
to make the Pope himself a Heretic, for one of the wisest Epistles that ever
Pope wrote (I am no such enemy to a Pope as to be partial;) and to divide the
very Western Church from Rome, and make Aquileia its Head for an hundred years,
and to set all the Roman Empire in a flame, anathematizing and separating from
one another, because they had not skill or sobriety enough to ask each other by
such distinctions what they meant, I say, if this be wisely and well done, and
be a praise to Prelacy, and I be to blame for blaming it, then good and evil is
but what every diseased soul will make it. Mr. Morris and his Masters, that
honor their Leviathan for such works as these, do tell us, that they would do
it themselves were it to be done again. And let it be their work, and the
reward be theirs: For my part I abhor and renounce it.

LXXXV. Faith and Salvation now depended so much on Arithmetic, that the
Bishops of Spain raised another Arithmetical Controversy, asserting Three
Substances in Christ, his Divinity, his Soul, and his Body, and say, [ A Will
begat a Will, that is, the Divine, the Humane.] These things are true. But the
wise Pope was so affrighted with Arithmetical Controversies by experience of
the mischievous Effects, that he cautioned them much about it, and for that
some judged him erroneous.

LXXXVI. The Council at Trull was one of the best that ever they had, yet
showed the Core of the Churches Plague, by decreeing, That whatever alteration
the Imperial Power makes on any City, the Ecclesiastical Order shall follow
it. This Clergy ambition nursed up Antichrist.

LXXXVII. A Council at Aquileia condemned the 5th General Council for
condemning the Tria capitula.

LXXXVIII. Pope Sergius condemning the Trullane Council, the Emperor commanded
him to be a Prisoner, and the Soldiers bribed rescued him.

LXXXIX. Bardanes Philippicus being made Emperor, he calls a General Council
at C. P. where, says Binius, out of the East there were innumerable Bishops,
(which is not said of any other Council) who all condemned the 6th General
Council, and their Decrees of Two Wills and Operations.

Here (not I, but) Baronius and Binius say [ Thus at the Beck of an Emperor,
and the Will of a Monothelite Patriarch, the holy 6th Synod is condemned, and
what they said of Two Wills with Christ, and two Operations, and all retracted
by the Decree and Subscription of very many Oriental Bishops, that were in one
moment turned from being Catholic to be Monothelites.] But do they forget the
100 Year, that even the West made a head against the 5th Council and the Pope.

XC. Next all the World is set together by the Ears about Images, for which the
Pope rebelled against and rejected the Emperor for Charles Martel of France.

And Pope Zachary bid Bonisace call a Council to eject the Astors of Antipodes

CXI. In a General Council at C. P. 338 Bishops condemned the worshipping of
Images, and swear men not to adore them, and destroyed relics, etc. and
decreed, that Christ's Body is not flesh in Heaven: But the Pope and Western
Bishops of his Party, condemn this Council.

XCII. The Greek Bishops condemn the Roman Bishops for adding [ Filioque] to
the Creed, and so another occasion of Schism is raised.

XCIII. The Schisms in Italy and Rome itself now grew so great and the Effects
in Blood and Confusions so dismal, that I must not number them one by one.

XCIV. Constantine and Leo Isaur. Emperors, being dead, a Woman Irene, and her
Infant Son are for Images, and call a General Council for them at Nice, where
Tharasius Bishop of C. P. got the Bishops to carry it for Images and Relics,
and the Chief Bishops that had condemned them before, now cried peccavimus, and
condemned those that were against adoration of Images, etc. If Mr. Morris call
me an Enemy to Repentance for reciting this, I cannot help it.

XCV. Yet more Schism: Two Bishops, Foelix and Elipandus, say, That Christ as
the eternal Word was Gods natural Son, but as Man he was but his adopted Son:
(thinking that duo fundamenta, viz. Generatio aeterna, and temporalis,
duas-faciunt Relationes, filiationis in una persona.] But Councils condemned
them as making two Sons. And the great Council at Frankford condemning the
second Council of Nice, and Image Worship, condemn also these two Bishops, 1.
For saying Christ was God's Adopted Son; 2. And that by Grace; 3. And that he
was a Servant. Is any of this false, not excluding a higher title?

The Council concludes that Christ was not a Servant subjected to God by penal
servitude: Sure it was part of his suffering for our sins, to be in the form of
a Servant, Phil. 2. 7.

XCVI. Binius says the Filioque was added to the Creed by the Spanish and
French Bishops without the Pope.

XCVII. One Council at C. P. restored him that married the Emperor
adulterously to another wife: And another condemned Theod. Studita and Plato,
for being against it.

XCVIII. The most excellent Emperor Ludov. Pius was so zealous to reform the
Bishops, that they hated him, and in a Council at Compendium (Compeigne) most
perfidiously deposed him, and after basely abused him, even without the Pope.

XCIX. As to please his Son Lotharius, they deposed the Father; so when he was
beaten by his Brethren, they after in a Council at Aquisgrane (Aken) deposed
Lotharius, accusing him as they did his Father.

C. At C. P. a Council was called by the power of another Woman Theodora and
the Bishops that had under diverse Emperors condemned Image Worship, now turn
to it again, and anathematize on a sudden the opposers.

CI. The Bishops own Lotharius Adulterous marriage with Waldrada.

CII. The Councils that set up and pulled down Ignatius and Photius at C. P.
and the woeful stir that they made as Emperors changed, were lamentable.

CIII. Many contrary Councils were between the French Bishops that were for
Lotharius divorce and the Pope.

CIV. Basil the Emperor writes to the Pope to pardon all his Bishops, or else
they should be without, because all had miscarried, and turned with the times.

CV. A General Council at Constable. called by the Papists, The Eighth General
Council, condemned Photius again, and set up Ignatius, and the Changers cried,
peccavimus, and make extreme Decrees for Images (But they well condemn
subscribing to be true to their Patriarchs and Bishops;) but decree that all
Princes and Subjects worship the Bishops, who must not fall down to them. Other
horrid Elevations of Prelates above Princes they decreed -- saying, A Bishop,
though it be manifest that he is destitute of all Virtue of Religion, yet is a
Pastor; and the Sheep must not resist the Shepherd.

CVI. A dangerous Rent between Rome and C. P. what Bishop should have the
Bulgarians.

CVII. A Council at Metz called Praedaetorium, gave the Kingdom to Car. Calv.
unjustly.

CVIII. A Council at Pavia falsely make Charles Emperor.

CIX. Another ( Pontigonense) confirmed it; (the Pope claiming the Power.)

CX. A Roman Council unjustly made Ludov. 3. Emperor.

CXI. A General Council at C. P. again set up Photius, and cast out [ Filioque.]

CXII. The Roman actions for and against P. Formosus, are odious to all sober
Christians Ears.

CXIII. A Council at Soysons confirm the A. Bishopric of Rhemes to a Child of
five years old, Son to the E. of Aquitane. Diverse other Councils do and undo
about the same Cause.

CXIV. The History of the Bishops of Rome and their Councils from hence forward
is so lamentable that even the most flattering Papist Historians mention them
with detestation. So that I must not stay to name many particulars.

CXV. An. 1049. A Roman Council was fain to pardon Simoniacal Bishops and
Priests, because the Cry was, that else none would be left to officiate.

CXVI. Being come into the Roman sink, I will pass above an hundred more of the
Councils of this woeful sort of Bishops, lest Mr. Morris think that I suppose
him to vindicate them, or not to abhor them. Only remembering my Reader of a
few General or notable things: viz.

I. The multitude of Schisms, and long vacancies at Rome; and the horrid
incapacity of very many Popes, which prove an interrupted succession.

II. The horrid wars that long infested Italy by the Popes means.

III. The dismal wars with many Emperors, and the Bishops and Councils half on
one side and half on the other.

IV. The Council that called the Emperors and others Princes power of
investing Bishops, the Henrician Heresy, and judged the Bishops that had been
for it to be dig'd out of their graves and burnt.

V. The Subjecting and debasing of all Christian Princes, making them but as
the Body, and the Moon, and the Bishops, to be as the soul and the sun.
Especially the General Lateran Council which decreed Transubstantiation, and
all to be Heretics that denied it; And oblige all temporal Lords to
exterminate all such Heretics on pain of Excommunication, deposition and
damnation.

VI. The Councils of Constance and Basils that were for Reformation how falsely
and cruelly they dealt with Hus and Jerome and rejected the four great requests
of the Bohemians, and fixed their pollutions.

VII. The Councils of Florence, and that of Trent, which had more Learned men,
who yet more obstinately managed the Enmity to Reformation.

VIII. The present State of the Universal Church throughout the World as it is
divided into Papists, Protestants, Greeks, Moscovites, Georgians, with the
Circassians and Mengrelians, Armenians, Nestorians, Jacobites, Cophtis,
Abasines, Maronites, Melchites: And what thoughts these have of one another.

And I would desire Mr. Morris to tell us,

1. Whether he believes not verily that all these Instances prove that the
Bishops have been the chief cause, and that by Ambition, Pride and Worldliness?

2. Whether it be not the Bishops that in the Roman and other Parties now, are
the greatest hinderers of Reformation, and of Concord? and it would not be soon
done were it not through them?

3. Where it is that he will stop in his Vindication of the Bishops and their
Councils, and go no further? and by what cogent reason?

4. Whether he thought he had well defended the Church-Tyranny which I accused?
1. By vindicating the first Ages, and others whom I praised, and accused not;
2. And by letting fall his Vindication (save a few consequent quibbles) at the
fourth General Council; which was in 451. And so seems to vindicate the Bishops
and Councils but for the space of 150 years of the time that I mentioned their
degeneration?

5. Whether if the Bishops had been willing when they had the King's Commission
to make necessary alteration, or were but to this day willing to prefer things
necessary before things hurtful or indifferent, we might not live in happy and
holy Love and Peace in England?

6. Whether he can blame a man that believes in Christ, for lamenting the
doleful corruption and division of the Christian world, and for enquiring of,
and lamenting the sinful causes.

7. If that Church Prelacy which they justly call the best in all the world can
endure no more Parish Discipline than we have, nor can endure such a Ministry
as are silenced by hundreds or thousands (than whom no Nation on Earth abroad
that I can hear of has better) can you blame us for suspecting that somewhat
is amiss with them, and more with others?

8. I hope you will yet remember that I did not appear as an accuser of Prelacy
or Conformity, but as importuned by your selves to give the reasons why I dare
not take your Covenant and Oath never to endeavor any alteration of your
Church Government: and that after seventeen years silence. My prayers to God
shall be my endeavor for these following Alterations.

1. That the Primitive Discipline may be exercised in the Parish Churches, as
Bucer importuned the King and Bishops de Regno Dei, etc.

2. That to that end we may either have so many Bishops under the Diocesan as
be capable to do it, or the Presbyters enabled, allowed and obliged to do it.

3. And that we may not instead of it have only a distant Court of men that
know not the Parishioners, where a Lay Chancellor decrees Excommunication,
and Absolution, which the Parish Priest must publish, though his conscience be
against it.

4. And that Diocesans may not silence faithful Ministers without such cause as
Christ will allow, nor set up ignorant bad ones and bind the Parishioners to
hear and communicate with no other. I am so far from precise expectations from
Diocesans, or from reviling them, that I do constantly praise them as very good
Bishops who do no harm, or but a little, and if they should never preach
themselves, so they will not hinder others.

9. And as for my calling Things and Persons as they are, I hope you will not
say that it was out of Malice that Anastasius Platina, Massonius, Stella,
Sigibert, Baronius, Genebrard, Binnius, etc. have recorded such horrid crimes
of Popes, and others also of Prelates. And is it malice in me to transcribe
their History?

I am of Dr. Henry Moore's mind, who says, [ Mystery of Iniq. p. 388. Hence it
is plain that they are the truest friends to Christendom, even to Rome it self,
that do not sooth them up in their sins, by mitigating and hiding their soul
miscarriages, but deal apertly and plainly with them for their own safety; that
neither admit, nor invent subterfuges to countenance or palliate their
Idolatrous and superstitious practices, but tell them plainly how much they are
apostatized from the true Worship of God and Christ into Paganism and Idolatry.
Better are the rebukes of a faithful friend, than the hired flatteries of a
glozing mercenary.] I pray mark this well.

10. I take two things to be the degenerating and corruption of Episcopacy.

1. When they became so bad that they were not willing to do good according to
their undertaken Office. Bad men will do ill in any place.

2. When they had put themselves into a state of incapacity, that they could
not do the Good undertaken, were they never so willing.

1. Since great Baits of Wealth and Domination have tempted the worst men to be
the Seekers, Bishops have rarely been good, except under a Saint-like Prince or
People that had the Choice; nor are ever like to be. And what work the Enemies
of Holiness will make by abusing Christ's Name against himself, is easy to
know; such will take the best men for the worst, and call them all that is
naught, that they may quiet their Consciences in destroying them.

2. And since a Diocese of many hundred or score Parishes has had but one
Bishop for Discipline, the work is become impossible to the best. But when a
few Bad men will mercinarily undertake Impossibilities, and so Badness and
Impossibility go together, alas, what hope, but of a better world above?

Says Luther de Council. and Eccles. p. 300. Sed quam sunt intenti hanc crassam
and asininam ^atuitatem? Unus Episcopus nonnunquam habet tres Episcopatus vel
Dioceses, and tamen vocatur Unius Uxoris maritus, and cum habet tantum unum
Episcopatum, tamen interdum habet centum, ducentas, quingentas Parochias, aut
etiam plures, and vocatur tamen Sponsus unius Ecclesiae -- Hi non sunt digami
-- Tam insulsas and ineptissimas naenias recipit men's humana; it a permittente
Deo cum a verbo discedimus, and omnia limatius and subtilius scrutamur quam
ipse vult nos scrutari.] Whether you reverence Luther any more than Calvin I
know not.

11. To conclude this matter, two things I desire you, or at least the Reader
to consider,

1. Whether it be not a dreadful thing for a man to make the Church corrupting,
dividing and confounding sin^, to be all his own by defending or excusing them,
on a false pretense of Vindicating the Primitive Church Government, which was
contrary to them?

2. Whether you trust to Truth and Evidence, or to Interest and depraved
Judgments, if you think men shall believe that you have confuted all this
undoubted History, and the present experience of all the woeful Christian World,
by a general Cry that I write falsely and maliciously, or by saying that I am
unlearned, or that I trusted to a Translation, or Binnius, or that Binnius
mistook the year, (things that I will not turn over my Books to try,) or that I
misplaced or misunderstood a word of Theodorite, or mistranslated Calami, or
such like. Such Believers of you are guilty of their own deceit.

22. There is lately published by a nameless Prelatist, to show the World what
Spirit he is of, a Book pretending by the description of my Life from 1640.
till 1681. to prove me one of the worst men alive. To that I will now say but
these few words.

1. That let them take me to be as bad as they will, so they would have some
mercy on their own and others Souls, and the Church of God.

2. That it is no wonder that we differ about Ancient Times and History, and
present Impositions, when the main difference in our Times is, who are godly,
yea tolerable Christians, and who are intolerable Rogues; and those that (as
before God) by long and intimate acquaintance, I judge to be the most serious,
conscionable, humble, holy Ministers and People that were ever known to me, are
the Persons that the Prelatists prosecute, silence, and cry out against as the
most intolerable wicked Enemies of Piety, Truth and Peace. What is it that is
the root of this?

3. That this foresaid Book is one continued Calumny, unworthy of an Answer,
partly making my duty my sin (as that I disliked the many drunken Readers that
were the Teachers of my Youth, etc.) and partly perverting scraps of sentences;
and partly reciting one revoked Book, and a few retracted sentences of another,
when Augustine is commended for retracting far more, and filling it with a
multitude of most gross untruths, of his own fiction.

4. That as to his and Mr. Morris and others talk of the Wars I say.

1. That I never thought the Parliament blameles^.

2. That yet on Bilson's grounds I was in my Judgment, and Speech, and Action,
comparatively for them while they made their Commissions to Essex for King and
Parliament.

3. That from Naseby Fight I wholly labored to have drawn off their Soldiers
from Error, and Rebellion, and Usurpation; in which I did and suffered more
than multitudes of my Accusers.

4. That I never went so far against the Power of the King as R. Hooker whom I
have long ago confuted.

5. That I never struck or hurt man in the wars.

6. That I will consent to be silenced and imprisoned if they will but give
those Ministers leave to preach Christ's Gospel that never had to do with wars
(unless for the King.)

7. That when our beginning Concord had restored the King, the Scots, though
unsuccessfully fought for him, Monk and his Army, that had bloodily (at Dundee,
etc.) fought against him, had with the Concurrence of Sir Tho. Allen, the
Londoners and Presbyterians restored him, when the King by them came in
Triumph, Honored Monk and others of them, confessed them the Cause of his
Restoration, past an Act of Oblivion that we might all live in future Peace, I
say, If after all this it be Prelacy and Clergy Interest and Spirit, that will
rub over all the healed wounds, and strive again what ever it cost us to
ulcerate the peoples minds, and resolve that the Land and Church shall have no
Peace, but by the destruction of such as restored the King; I shall think never
the better of Prelacy for this. But ask them, why did you not Speak it out in
1660 to Monk and his Army, or till now.

23. And whereas that Advocate (described Job. 8.) and you are still deceiving
the ignorant by facing men down with Confidence that I lie in saying that [ Two
Episcopal Parties began the War in England and the Papists and Presbyterians
came in but as Auxiliaries.] I again say,

1. Allow me but reasonable leave, and I will prove it to the shame of you if
you deny it.

2. At present I will but recite one clause in Whitlocks Memorials, page 45.
even after they thought themselves under a necessity to please the Scots as far
as they could. [ Anno 1640. The Commons had debate about a new Form of
Ecclesiastical Government, and July 17. agreed, That every Shire shall be a
several Diocese; a Presbytery of Twelve Divines in each Shire, and a President
as a Bishop over them; and he with the assistance of some of the Presbytery to
ordain, suspend, deprive, degrade and excommunicate. To have a Diocesan Synod
once a year, and every third year a National Synod, and they to make Canons,
but none to be binding till confirmed by Parliament.

The Primate of Armagh offered an expedient for conjunction in point of
Discipline, that Episcopal and Presbyterian Government might not be at a far
distance, but reducing Episcopacy to the Form of Synodical Government in the
Primitive Church

Were not these men Episcopal? It Is much like Mr. Thorndike's own motions
saving his Opinion for Foreign Jurisdiction.

24. As to your first and last Chapters, and about the Ancient Extent of
Churches, while my Treatise of Episcopacy, which fully confuteth you, is
unanswered; if I repeat it again, it will not be read by weary men. And another
has answered those parts of your Book, which is ready for the Press.

I after tell you where Chrysostom even in his time numbers the Christians in
that great Imperial City to be an hundred thousand, that is as many as in
Martins and Stepney Parishes, and perhaps in Giles Cripplegate too.

25. To conclude, whereas Mr. M. in general charge me as falsifying History,
I still call my self a HATER of FALSE HISTORY, and loath Mr. Morrice's History,
because it is false: But if he will instead of falsifying and trifling, show me
any false History that I have owned, I will thank him unfeignedly, and retract
it. But factious reproaching of good men, and painting the deformed face of
Vice, go not with me for convincing proof. If I am not near of kin to Erasmus,
I am a stranger to my self, even as Merula, and M. Adamus describe him, [
Ingenio erat simplex; adeo abhorrens a mendacio, ut puellus etiam odisset
pueros mentientes; and senex ad illorum adspectum etiam corpore commoveretur.
Dignitatum and magnarum divitiarum contumax contemptor; neque quicquam prius
otio habuit ac liberate.] And I think, as it is said of Cuspinian; [ Ratus se
satisfacturum ingenuo Lectori, siquae verissima esse comperisset simplicissima
oratione mandaret posteritati: satis enim est historico ( ut praeclare dixit
apud Ciceronem Catullus) non esse Mendacem.]

And as to my ends and expectations, I am not so vain as to write with any
great hope of persuading many, if any who are possessed of large Diocese, Wealth
and Power, to forsake them, much less to cure the common Thirst that corrupted
Nature is possessed with, and to be the means of a Public Reformation: If I may
satisfy my Conscience, and save some from being deceived by false History
about the Causes of the Ancient Schisms, it is all that I can hope for: Had I
lived in Alb. Crantzius days, I might perhaps have said as he of Luther [
Frater, Frater, abi in cellam tuam, and dic Miserere mei Deus:] Et de Canonicis
(...) dictis, Nunquam posse eos reduci ad meliorem srugem nisi prius a viris
doctis expugnata arce ( i. e. Papatu.)

And for my self, none of the Interested men's reproaches are unexpected to me:
Anger will speak. I know what the Papists say of the Reformers, and all the
Protestants: And yet I expect that all at last will turn to the disgrace of
falsehood, by putting men to search Church History for the Truth.

The case of Capnio is worth a brief recital. A covetous Jew pretending
Conversion, contrived with the Friars and Inquisitors, to get a great deal of
money from the Jews, by procuring an Edict from the Emperor to burn all the
Jews Books, that so they might purchase them of the Friars. The Emperor will
first hear what Capnio a great Hebrician says: Capnio advises to spare all
that only promoted the Hebrew Literature, and burn only those that were written
against Christ. Hockstrate and the Friars were vexed thus to lose the prey, and
accused Capnio of Heresy: The cause is often tried, especially at Rome: All the
Learned Hebricians were for Capnio: The Friars raged the more: This awakened
many Learned men to search into the Cause, and armed them against the Friars.
Galatinus, Hutten, Erasmus, etc. are for Capnio. The Friars accuse them also of
Heresy: But by this they stirred up such a Party of the most Learned men
against them, that when Tezelius came to vend his Indulgencies, Luther had so
many ready to join against the Inquisitors and Mercenary cheating Friars, as
greatly furthered the Reformation. And two or three ingenuous Conformists who
have lately written against the violent battering Canoneers, do tell us that
some are like to be excited by the Overdoing of the Accusing silencing Party,
to search better into the matter of Fact and Right, till they can distinguish
between an Eucrasie and a Tympanite.

Or if this world be incurable, they cannot keep us out of the heavenly
Jerusalem, where there is no Error, Schism, nor Persecution, because no
Ignorance, Malignity or Pride, but the General Assembly of perfect Spirits, are
united in one perfect Head, in perfect Life, and Light, and Love.

The particular Defense of the History of Councils and Schisms.
An Account to Mr. Morris why my mentioning the Churchdistracting sins of the
Clergy, when worldly grandeur corrupted them, is not a Dishonouring, but a
Honoring of the Primitive Church. And to vindicate those sins is no Vindicat
ion of the Primitive Church.

CHAP. I. The Reason and Design of my History of Bishops and Councils.
1. THEY that know the men with whom I have to do, and the Cause which I have
in Controversy with them, will easily understand my purpose. The Persons with
whom I am to deal, are such as hold,

1. That a General Council of Bishops or the College of Bishops Governing per
Literas formatas out of Council, are the Supreme Governing Power over the
Universal Church on Earth, having the Power of Universal Legislation and
Judgment.

2. That among these the Pope is justly the Patriarch of the West, and the
Principium unitatis to the whole, and the ordinary President in such Councils.
And say some, It belongs only to the President to call them, and they are but
rebellious Routs that assemble without a just call.

3. That there is no concord to be had but in the Obedience to this Universal
Governing Church. But all Persons and all National Churches are Schismatics
who live not in such Subjection and obedience.

4. That such as the Diocesan Episcopacy which is over one lowest Church
containing hundreds or multitudes of Parishes and Altars without any other
Bishop but the said Diocesan is that Episcopacy which all must be subject to,
while it is subject to the Universal supreme.

5. That every Christian must hold subjective Communion with the Bishop of the
place where he lives: And say some must not practice contrary to his Commands,
nor appeal for such practice to Scripture or to God.

6. That if this supreme Power silence the Diocesans, or these Diocesans
silence all the Ministers in City or Country, they must Cease their Ministry
and forsake the Flocks.

7. And say diverse of them, They are no true Churches, or Ministers, that have
not ordination from such Diocesans, yea by an uninterrupted succession from the
Apostles: And for want of this the Foreign reformed Churches are no true
Churches, but the Church of Rome is.

Much more of this Nature I have already transcribed (and confuted) out of A.
Bishop Bromhall, Dr. Heylins Life of A. Bishop Laud, Mr Thorndike, Mr Dodwell
and diverse others.

2. The first thing then in my intention is to show that the Roman Grandeur
which is thought to be the Glory of the Church on Earth, and the necessary
means of its Unity, safety and true prosperity, has proved clean contrary,
even the means of Church corruption in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Conversation, the Soil of the most odious crimes, the means of tyranny,
suppression of true piety, and persecution of Gods faithful Servants, and of
rebellious, War and cruel bloodshed.

3. To this end I described the steps by which the Clergy ascended to the Papal
height: For as all Protestants justly maintain that their Corruption of
Doctrine and Worship came not in at once but by slow degrees, so do they also
of the Papal Government and discipline. And they commonly show the vanity of
the Papists demand, who ask us who was the man, and which was the year, as if
the world had gone to bed in simple Christianity, and awaked Papists the next
morning. Whereas it is most evident in all Church history that the Clergy
leaving the Christian Purity, Simplicity and Love, did climb the ladder step by
step till they ascended to the Papal height. And it is a mere dream of them that
think it was the Bp. of Rome alone that thus ascended, and not the Army that
made him their General: As the boat rises with the waters, so did the Pope
with the ascending Clergy: Others strove for superiority as he strove for
Supremacy: The strife began among Christ's Apostles who should be greatest, and
who should, sit next him in his Kingdom; And though Christ then suppressed it by
his Word and Spirit, and the sufferings of the Church took down those aspiring
thoughts, as soon as Constantine had set them the Ladder, what scrambling was
there who should climb highest. Yea Constantinople strove for the Supremacy it
self.

3. And I the rather mentioned this because I found some late learned
Expositors of the Revelations, taking this inordinate ascent, for the promised
glory and felicity of the Church on Earth; and taking it for the fulfilling of
many of those prophecies and promises which some applied to the Millennium, and
some to the heavenly state. And doubtless Hildebrand and his adherents had such
thoughts, and did believe that their rule over Emperors, Kings and Kingdoms,
by the Power of the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, was the true Glory of the
Church, and the Reign of Christ, and that all the honor was indeed given to
Christ as King of the Church, which was thus given to the Pope and the
Church-Parliaments of Bishops. Campanella de Regno Dei does but speak the
thoughts of greater Clergy men when he applies the foresaid Texts to prove
that the Popes Universal Monarchy is the true Kingdom of Christ on Earth, to
which all Monarchs and Men must stoop.

And Nature is so apt to entertain such thoughts, especially in the Clergy, who
think of it as their own prosperity and glory, that it is no wonder, if as
Venner, and his Fifth Monarchy men, did itch to be getting up under the name of
the Reign of Christ, and so did John of Leyden and his Company at Munster; so
the Fifth Monarchy Clergy men, who can aspire more plausibly, do long to be
climbing, and are very reconcilable to Papal Greatness; and where Popery is
become a distasted name, they nevertheless desire their share in the Power,
Honor and Wealth, and under pretense of Peace and Concord among all
Christians, and restoring the Church to its Unity and Strength, they strive for
much of the same thing, and think it enough to avoid the name: And the Pope
shall be but Principium Unitatis, and the President of the Clergy or Councils.
Get but the poor trick of calling nothing Popery but the Pope's Arbitrary
absolute Power, and do but tie him to Rule by the Consent and Laws of
Church-Parliaments, that is, set up the French Church Government, and then they
are no Papi^ts. Do not the French Protestants deserve all their sufferings then
for calling the Church o^ Bishops there Papists, and separating from so
Excellent a Government?

5. And it was not the least of my Motives to try, were it possible to cure
their Love-killing Error, who think that all are Enemies to Unity and Peace,
who are not for Obedience to this Universal or Superlative Prelacy, and to save
us all from that confusion and calamity, which this Opinion is carrying on,
while the Patrons of it think that all are to be prosecuted, silenced, ruined
as Rebellious Enemies to the Ruling Church, who do not subject themselves to
such a Prelacy; and that we must or can have no Christian Church-Concord, but
by Obedience to the Universal Church, as Bishop Gunning has over and over told
me, that is, to the Universal College of their sort of Bishops: Yea not only
the Papists, but these Bishops among us, to this purpose repeat and apply Psalm.
72. 11. Yea all Kings shall fall down before him: All Nations shall serve him.
Or Isa. 60. 12. For the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve the^ shall
perish: Yea those Nations shall be utterly wasted,] which Bishop Gunning
applies to the Episcopal Universal-Governing College.

These are terrible threatenings, as they show the principles and purposes of
men, however they mistake the mind of God. Few parts of Europe have had more
long and cruel Wars, than Italy it self, where these Principles have obtained:
But the blood of thousands of sincere Christians has been a Sacrifice to these
Principles in the Clergy. When we read in Jesuits, Friars and Prelates, sound
Christians called Heretics, and all such Heretics called, mortal, odious,
wicked, pernicious, intolerable Enemies to the Church, whom all good men are
bound to endeavor to root out and destroy; when we hear our neighbor Papists
say, It is no more sin to kill an Heretic than a Dog: And when we hear and
read our Clergy calling out to Magistrates for yet more Execution upon us, for
not obeying them against that which we undoubtedly take for the Law of God; and
the nearer any man is to the Papists, usually the more he is for our
destruction, and for their way of cruelty, I thought it time to try if it were
possible, if not to save the Land from this consuming fire, yet at least to
save some Souls who else were like to be tempted to malignant Enmity to the
best and truest Christians, and to perish for ever by this deceit.

How many honest passages are in Mr. Thorndike which show that it was n^^ ^^y
worldly interest of his own that moved him; but yet the Power of this Error [
Of a Church that was Universally One by One Ruling College or Council of
Prelates, of which the Pope was the rightful President, etc.] which must be
acknowledged by all Nations and Persons, that will have Christian Communion and
not be condemned Schismatics, prevailed with him to the exclusion of all
Dissenters, and confining his Communion to those only who owned and obeyed This
Universal Governing Church.

6. And as long as this Opinion prevails, especially in men of Power and
Reverence who take other men's belief and obedience for their unquestionable
right, where can we think hatred and Persecution will stop. Will not they still
think that they that kill or silence or imprison or banish us, do God service,
and that the Magistrate that does not punish us deserves punishment from God,
if not also from the Church. And they that are most for Seldom preaching, and
can dispense with our Ministerial labor therein, will not be indifferent as to
the silencing, imprisoning or destroying us.

7. Whether we have any reason to refuse swearing or subscribing to them, and
never to endeavor any alteration of their Government as it is in England, I
have sincerely endeavored to show in my Treatise of Episcopacy. And if
Christian Concord and Communion be so hard and narrow a thing, as that no men
are Capable of it who are not of a higher form than I, as to understanding,
impartiality and willingness to know the Truth, the Church and Christianity are
things beyond my capacity and reach: But I doubt not but it is humane error
that would dwindle it into so small a Sect.

8. Alas what Persons for Knowledge and Life can they bear with in their
Communion, who cannot bear with such as they silence and ruin in this Land!
And the Papists can receive even those that know not Christ if they do but
profess obedience to the Clergy-Church. Luthers words are harsh, but I will
recite them de Concil^^s P^^t 3. Page 291. Si monstrav^rint mihi unum aliquem ex
tota illa multitudine qui possit aequare unum alphabetarium in aliqua erudita
Schola, aut in summa doctrinae Christianae, vel in Scriptura Sacra tantum
profecerint, quantum u^a aliqua puella septem a^norum; tunc illis concedam
palam -- nisi quod plus callent traditionum humanarum, and Sycophantiarum: Quod
valde credo, and firmius quam in Deum cred^, cum me convinc^nt facto ipso ut
credam. To this pass did the Clergies aspiring then bring the Church, when
worthy men were silenced and persecuted. And we are unwilling of any thing that
looks toward a differencing men so contrary to that which Christ will make
at last.

CHAP. II. Whether we have any reason to report the Faults of some Bishops and
Councils, from the beginning of their Depravation till the last?
1. THat I had great reason for it, I think what is before said will evince;
when we see men destroying Christian Love, themselves, and us, and the Land,
could they prevail, by their erroneous endeavor to grant no Concord, Communion
nor Peace, to no Christians how conscionable otherwise soever, who cannot unite
in a species of Prelacy which they believe (by such evidence as I have given)
to be contrary to the Law of Christ. To the saving men from Heresy and Schism
now, our opposers (and we) do judge it useful, to know how Heretics and
Dividers miscarried heretofore, that others may beware. And is it not as true
if Bishops be the Dividers? And also when the Clergies Ambition and Usurpation
have brought that upon the Christian World which it languisheth and groaneth
under in East and West, is it not needful to open the beginning and progress of
the disease, by such as had rather it were cured, than the Church destroyed by
it?

2. Among the multitude of Protestant Church Historians and Chronologers, how
few are there that do not do the same, though in various degrees? He that will
read the Magdeburgense^, or Lucas Osiander, Illyrici Test. Verit. Melancthon
himself, and Carrion Func^ius, yea peaceable holy Bucholtzer, Micrelius,
Meander, Phil. Pareus, Hen. Gut^erleth, etc. yea or Julius or Jos. Scaliger,
Salmasius, H^ttoman, Hottinger, Morney, shall see the faults of Bishops opened
before this day.

3. The pious and moderate Papists themselves report and lament them: Such as
Clemangis, Pelagius Alvarus, Mirandula, Fer^^, Jos. Acosta, Lud. Vives, Gerson,
Erasmus, and many other such.

4. The ancient Godly Bishops are they who for the most part have been freest
in reprehending the vices of the rest; especially Greg. Nazianzen, and
Chrysostom, and many ancient godly Presbyters have been as free, as Gildas,
Isidore Pelusiota, Salvian, Sulp. Severus, Bernard.

5. And if I have wronged the Bishops or Popes in this Abridgment, their own
Historians, yea their chief flatterers have wronged them. One Pope angered
Platina by imprisoning him: Yet if he be partial, it is for the Clergy, and not
against them. But who will believe that Binnius, Baronius, Crab, Genebrard,
Bellarmine, Petavius, and such others have spoken too hardly of them. There is
no one man that I took so much from as Binnius: And what should move him to
name so many of the miscarriages of the Councils, but the necessity of reciting
the Acts of the Councils historically as he found them?

6. The Sacred Scriptures record the Crimes of the best men in all the Ages of
which they write, even Adams, Noes, Lots, Aarons, David's, Solomon's, Hezekiahs,
Josiahs, Peter's, all the Apostles, etc. And it was not done out of spite or
malice; but as a necessary warning to us all.

7. The falsehood of History is an intolerable abuse of mankind: To know
nothing done before our times, is to shut up mankind in a dungeon; and false
History is worse than none. And it may be false and deceitful in defect as well
as excess. He that should record all that was good in the Popes, and omit all
the rest, would be a dangerous deceiver of the world, and do more than has
been done to make all Christians Papists. You tell us your selves, that he that
should write the History of Cromwell, c. g. or of any Sect that you are
against, and should leave out all their faults, would be taken for a false
Historian.

8. They that write the History of men's Lives, do use to record their
Parentage, Birth and Education: And so must he that will truly write the
History of Church-Tyranny, Persecution and Schism. The end is not well
understood without the beginning. Who is it that hears how many Ages the
Christian world has been divided into Papists, Greeks, Jacobites, Nestorians,
Melchites, etc. and that sees what work the Papacy has made, but will ask how
all this came to pass? Did the man that died of Gluttony, swallow all at one
morsel? or rather one bit after another? And when the Clergy have ventured on
one merry Cup, or one pleasant morsel in excesa, it is easy to make them
believe that one, and one, and one Cup more; one, and one, and one bit more, is
no more unlawful than the first. Princip^is obsta, is the Rule of Safety.

If Papists intending the recovery of England to the Pope should say [ Let us
but first get them under the Oaths, Covenants and Practices which we will call
Conformity, and so cast out most that dare not sin, and by this engage them as
two Armies in contrary Interest to fight against each other, and it will be an
easy matter to bring the swallowing Party to go further by degrees, and to
believe that as a Parish Church must not be independent as to the Diocesan, nor
the Diocesan to the Metropolitical or National, so neither must a National be
independent as to the Universal: And that the Universal therefore must have its
known stated Government as well as the National,] Were it not necessary here
for him that would save the Land from Popery to show the danger of the first
degrees.

The usual Method is not to use Boccalines Roman Engine, which will help a man
to swallow a Pompion that he may get down a Pill, but to swallow a lesser Pill
first and a bigger next, till the Pompion will go down. Infancy is before
manhood.

9. But the great necessity was as aforesaid, from the revived or rather
Continued attempts, of imitating the fatal ambitious and Contentious malady. If
Priscillians, or Gnostics should rise now among us, were it not our duty to
set before them the history of the miscarriage of their predecessors. And when
men are so much set on restoring an Universal Supremacy, is it not meet to show
them where, and when, and with what success the aspiring humor did begin. If
we have small visible probability of escaping, we must yet before we come to
Smithfield, satisfy our Consciences that we betrayed not the Church.

CHAP. III. Of Mr. M's notice that I am Unlearned.
1. MR. M's Preface Contracteth the Chief things which he has to say against
me in his book, that the Reader may find them there all together. And of these
[ that I am unlearned] is not the least. And if that be any of his question I
assure him it shall be none of mine. I am not yet so vain as to plead for my
Learning: Yea, I will gratify him (though he accuse me of being against
repentance) with an unfeigned confession that my ignorance is far greater than
his accusation of unlearnedness does import. Alas I want the knowledge of far
more excellent things than languages. I do but imperfectly know my self, my own
soul, my own thoughts and understanding: I scarce well know what knowing is.
Verily if no knowledge be properly true that is not adequate to the object I
know nothing: And subscribe to Zanchez, quod nihil Scitur, (by such as I.) Alas
Sir I groan in darkness from day to day, and I know not how to be delivered!
How little do I know of that God whom the whole Creation preaches, and of that
Society which I hope to be joined with for ever, and that world which must be
my hope and portion, or I am undone. Many whom I am Constrained to dissent from
upbraid me with my ignorance, and I suppose it is that for which they silence
me, reproach, hate and prosecute me; even because I have not knowledge enough
to discern that all their impositions are lawful (or else I know not what it is
for) But none of them all can (and will) tell me, how I should be delivered
from this ignorance: If they say, [ It must be by hard study] I can study no
harder than I have done. If they say [ I must be willing to know the truth] I
take my self for sure that I am so: If in that also I am ignorant, in thinking
that I know my own mind when I do not, what else then can I hope to know? If
they say [ You must be impartial] I think I am so, saving that I must not deny
or cast away the truths already received. If they say [ You should read the
same books which have convinced us] I read far more of the Papists and
Prelatists and other sects that write against me, than of those that are for
me. And the more I read the more I am confirmed. And when these men preach and
write against the Calvinists, they render them odious as holding that men are
necessitated to sin and to be damned, and that it is long of Gods Decree which
cannot be resisted: Therefore I suppose they will not lay the Cause on God. I
do then confess my Ignorance, of matters a thousandfold greater and more
needful than those which they mention in their accusations. I confess my self
unlearned: But I entreat them that tell me of my disease (which I know to my
daily grief much better than they) to tell me also how I may be cured. If they
say that it must be by Fines and Imprisonment it has been tried and I am yet
uncured: I hope they will not pronounce me remediless and not tell me why, who
use themselves to speak against those that preach men into desperation; would
they but tell me the secret how so many thousands of them came to be so much
wiser than I, in far shorter time, and with far less study, it would be (if
true) an acceptable deed of Charity; rather than to tell me of the Ignorance
which I cannot help. Could I but know needful truth in English, I would
joyfully allow them to glory of being more skilful in all the Oriental Tongues,
and also in French, Irish, Spanish and Italian, than I am.

CHAP. IV. Of his Accusation, that I vainly name Historians which I never saw
or read.
1. I Must profess that it never was my purpose to tell the world how many
Historians I have read; nor to abridge all that I have read: And those that I
have most read I have there made no mention of, as not being for my intended
end: And multitudes that stood by me, I never opened to the writing of this
history, my design being chiefly against the Papists and those Protestants who
most esteem their writings, and had rather unite with the French Papist Church,
than with us Nonconformists: Therefore when I was past the first 400 or 500
years, it was the greatest and most flattering Popish historians that I
abriged, as ad hominem being likest not to be denied.

I told the reader that I made not use of Luther the Magdeburgenses, nor the
Collections of Goldastus, Marquardus Freherus, Reuberus, Pistorius, etc.] And
the Printer having put a Comma between Marquardus and Freherus, he Conjectures
that I took him for two men, because I added not the Christian names of the
rest: And he concludes that [ whoever this mistake belongs to, it is plain that
M. B. had but little acquaintance with those Collections.] For I name some of
the Authors therein.

Ans. Seeing these things are thought just matter for our accusers turn, I will
crave the Readers patience with such little things while I tell him the truth.
It is about 25 years since I read the Germa: History in the Collections of
Freherus, Reuberus and Pist^rius, and about 30 years since I read the
Collections of Goldastus: The Magdeburgenses, Osiander, Sleidan, or any such
Protestants I thought vain to allege to Papists. About seven or eight years
ago as I remember, I was accused for Preaching, and Fined by Sir Thomas Davis;
and the Warrant was sent by him to Sir Edm. Bury Godfrey to levy it on me by
Distress: I had no way to avoid it but bona fide, to make away all that I had:
Among the rest I made away my Library, only borrowing part of it for my use. I
purposed to have given it almost all to Cambridge in New England: But Mr.
Knowles (yet living) who knew their Library, told me that Sir Kenelme Digby had
already given them the Fathers, Councils and Schoolmen, but it was History and
Commentators which they wanted. Whereupon I sent them some of my Commentators,
and some Historians among which were Freherus, Reuberus and Pistorius
Collections, and Nauclerus, Sabellicus, Thuanus, Jos. Scaliger de Emendat.
Temp. etc; But Goldastus I kept by me (as borrowed) and many more which I could
not spare; and the Fathers and Councils and Schoolmen I was stopped from sending.
Now whether I was unacquainted with those that partly stand yet at my Elbow,
and which I had read so long ago, must depend on the Credit of my Memory; and I
confess my Memory is of late grown weak, but not so weak as to think that
Marquardus Freherus was not one man, and a Palatinate Councillor, though it be
names that I most forget; why I gave not the Christen names of Reuberus and
Pistorius, whether because I forgot them, or because I minded not so small a
thing, not dreaming what would be inferred from it, I remember not. But when I
wrote that abridgment, I made use of none that I thought the Papists would
except against: For the first ages I gathered what I remembered out of the
Fathers, and out of Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen, Evagrius, Theodoret, the
Tripartite, Nicephorus, Liberatus, Brev. Victor Utic. Beda, and such others as
are by them received: Besides which I principally followed and Epi^omized
Binnius, and Crab, and partly Baronius, with Platina, Onuphrius Panunius,
Stella, Petavius, and others of their own. And I resolved I would not so much
as open Goldastus, or any Protestant Collector, that they might not except
against their Credit, and reject them as malicious cursed Heretics, as Labbe
does Melchior Goldastus and almost all such others as he mentions; and as
Gretser, Sanders, and other Papists commonly do. Therefore even those Histories
which be in Goldastus, I would not take as out of him, but some of them from
the books published by others, and some as cited by Binnius, Petavius, or other
such. And this is now the proof of my Vanity.

2. It is a mistake if he think that I intended (as he speaks) to be a Compiler
of General Church History; When I professed but to acquaint the English Reader
with the true matter of fact out of the Papists themselves, what the ambitious
part of Bishops and Councils have done, and by what degrees the Papacy sprang
up, and whether subjection to the ascendent exort Prelacy be absolutely
necessary to Concord and Salvation.

3. As to his saying [ I am the first that ever reckoned Nazianzen among
Historians,] I take the writings of the Fathers, especially Justin, Clemens
Alex. Tertullian, Cyprian, Eusebius, Basil, Nazianzen, Hierom, Chrysostom,
Augustine, to be the best part of Church History, especially their Epistles. And
of this opinion I am not the first.

CHAP. V. Of his Accusation of my citing Hanmer and other Translators, and
being deceived by Binnius and such others.
1. 1. HE accuses me for not using Valesius his Edition of Eusebius and those
Editions of the Councils which he accounts the best: To which I say,

1. I am not Rich Enough to buy them, nor can keep them if I had them. Must
none write but Rich men? The French Councils would cost more than many of us
are worth: We have had no Ecclesiastical maintenance these 19 years; and we
cannot keep the books we have. Luther wrote his book de Conciliis when it seems
he had never read many of the Councils Acts, but as related by Eusebius
Socrates, Sozomen, and the Tripartite History.

2. Dr. James has long ago warned all Scholars to make much of Crab and other
old ones, (and the Fathers as Printed at Basil by Erasmus, Amerbachius, etc.)
and not to trust much to new Editions, as coming through untrusty hands.

3. Is Valesius a man of so much credit with you? Do you believe what he says
of Grotius as being in judgment for the Papal Church, and only in prudence
delaying his visible Communion with them, that he might draw in many with him?
( Vales. in Orat. de Petavio:) If he lie in this, and the success of Petavius
on Grotius, why should he be more trusted than others? If not, I need not tell
you what to think of those Bishops and Drs. who profess to be of the same mind
and Church as Grotius; nor again to tell you who they be.

4. My design led me not to make use of Critics, but only to tell the world,
what the Papists themselves confess, such as I have throughout cited.

2. As for my using Hanmers Translation of Eusebius and Socrates, my case was
^s before described: Valesius I had not: Grineus I made use of heretofore. But
since I was by constraint deprived both of my books and money to buy more, when
I wrote that Abridgment, I had only Hanmers Translation left me. And if that
sort of men that forced me to give away my books, to keep them from being
distreined on, will make use of this to prove me ignorant of them, the matter
is very small to me.

If you say, I should not then have written, I answer, could they so have
silenced us in the Pulpit, they had more answered their own judgment than mine.
I had no use for Critics, nor for any thing in Eusebius and Socrates that
depends on the credit of the Translator.

3. As to his often noting that in Translations, and sometime in Chronology I err
by following Binnius, I answer, had I written a full Church History, I should
better have examined him and others. But I lay no stress of my cause of any of
Binnius his Translations, nor will I undertake for any Historian that I cite:
My business was but to tell those that believe Binnius and Baronius, and such
other, what they say. Nor do I yet intend to bestow any time, in examining
whether he wrong Binnius or not, it being nothing to my cause nor me, whether
he mistook a year, or the meaning of a word of the Authors whom he cites.

4. He says I use an old uncorrect Edition of Binnius 1606. Ans. It is that
which is in most common use, entitled, Recognita, Aucta, notis Illustrata,
dedicated to the Pope, and to C. Baronius, ejus monitu scripta, qui veterem
illam, mendosam, mutilam and confusam compilationem mill locis illustravit,
etc. commonly Preferred before Crab, Surius, Nicolinus, etc. But any quarrel
serves some men.

CHAP. VI. Of his Accusations of my own Mistranslations and Mistakes.
1. OF these are two real Oversights which he names, committed by too much
have and heedlesness: The one is, that I misplaced [ Vere] in the Translation
of a Speech of Theodorets; a gross oversight I confess: The other, that I put [
Episcopi] as if it had been the (...)tive case, when it was the Nominative
plural; which also was a heedless oversight. And about the death of Stephanus,
he notes my mistranslating Calami; and I imagine yet he is scarce certain what
it signified himself. As for his note of my use of [ Scripture] about the
Ephesine Council, I purposely kept to the literal Translation, that none might
say I did mistranslate it; but I never said that by the Scriptures was meant
the Bible.

2. This Accuser puts too great an honor on such a History as mine, which
goes through so many Ages and Acts, in noting so few, and such little things.
I never pretended to be as good an Historian as he is; yet I do not think that
it was any thing but a slip of memory that made him put Eustathius instead of
Flavian, as kicked to death at Ephesus. And me thinks he that thus begins his
Errata of his own Book [ The faults that have escaped are almost infinite:]
should not for one false Comma of the Printers, have passed the foresaid
censure of me.

But does not this Learned Historian know, how ordinarily the greatest of them
do charge one another with manifold Errors, and of far greater moment than
these forementioned. How few Historians do not this? Yea what bitter censures
does he pass himself on no lower Historians than Socrates and Sozomen? It would
be tedious to give you the Instances that every such Book affords. I see he
valueth Labbe the Jesuit. How often does he accuse Historians of Error,
Ignorance, Malice, etc. e. g. de Anastasio Biblioth. so eminent a Writer of the
Popes Lives, yet [ Errat Vossius and siqui alii cum Anastasio Presbytero, etc.]
And even of that famous History of the Popes, [ Onuphria^ Panuinius, Gerb.
Vossius, and plerique alii (...) consent esse ab Anastasio scriptam, Nicolai 1.
Papae Vitam, and a Gulielm^ S. R. E. Bibliothecario additas fuisse Ha^r. 2. and
Steph. 6. P. Vitas: Verum Cardinalis Baronius iis refragatur eidemque auctori
omnes illas ascribit; sunt quoque qui a Damaso Papa, etc.] Here the greatest
Historians differ about one of the most noted Histories.

Of Augustin's Works ( To. 1. p. 129.) he tells you that Bellarmine tells us
not what Edition he used: But it is certain he used not the Antwerp, or
Plantinian Edition, which was the best, and the Original of all the rest.]

P. 132. Rivet and Perkins are derided for disowning some Epistles.

P. 135. Erasmi, Riveti similiumque ridetur a doctis censura (viz. de lib.
Continent.) And I profess my self less skilful in such matters than Erasmus.

Et ibid. Erasmus and H^sius Juliano opus illud tribuere videntur, Pamelius
tanquam incerti Authoris allegat: Nos cum Lovaniensibus Bellarmino, aliisque
Catholicis Augustini esse censemus, nec tricae Riveti deterrent.

P. 136. Quaest. Vet. and Novi Test. non sunt Augustini ut facile omnes
consentiunt: Quamvis sub ejus nomine citatae reperiantur ab Episcopis Lutetiae
Paris. An. 824. Congregatis and quibusdam aliis.

Of Ausonius the Poet, p. 171. he says, [ Quam falsa sint quae de eo scripsit
Jo. Trithemius quivis vel ex ipsa lectione intelliget.

Of Mantuan, p. 173. [ Ex Trithemii encomio haec dubio pro^ul omni obliteranda:
[ Q^ metro Virgilium, Ciceronem prosa aequat, ne dicam superat:] Sunt enim
falsissima iis qui gustum aliquem latinitatis habent.

Of Beda, p. 184. See what he says of Will. Malmsbury, Mat. Westminst. Vessius
and Baronius.

Of B^ethius, p. 204. Henorius Augustod. -- ubi falso narrat Mediolani
interfectum fuisse --

P. 217. Plura adversus Leunclavium, primum eorum editorem declamavit Jac.
Billius (de Caesario.)

De Claudio Scoto, p. 228. Tho. Dempsterus multa pro more suo indigesta effudit
--

De Gersone, p. 565. Errat post Possevinum Maraccius qui Joan. hunc Monachum
ordinis coelesti -- asserit -- Idem quoque ex Patrologo eradendum.

See what he says de Julio Asricano, that the Annotationes eruditiss. in
Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. -- Opinioni nostrae in plerisque adversantur.] I suppose
he means that Valesius which I wanted.

And de Justino Mart. Scaligerum errasse, etc.] Et p. 833. ( insigne mendum ex
Trithemio, Gesnero, Simlero, Sexto, Possevino, Bellarmino, Miraeo, aliisque
propagatum --)

To. 2. p. 361. Smaragdos duos in unum confuderunt, Trithemius, Sixtus
Senensis, Possevinus, Bellarminus, Miraeus aliique passim -- ] Abundance such
charges tell us how much greater Errors are charged on the greatest
Historians, than Mr. Morris charge on me, with the least show of probability.

How many score of Historians does Blondell cite, who he thinks have falsely
told us of a Pope Joan?

What abundance of faults would Causabon have found in Baronius, if he had
lived to go through him as he began? And I profess my self much more ignorant
in History than Baronius.

It would be tedious to number all the gross Errors that Vossius cites de
scriptor. Graecis and Latinis; e. g. in the Later. p. 230. Hos duos confudit
Trithemius -- vid. quae habet de Fla^. Alcuino, p. 290, 291, 292. De Usuardo,
p. 295. cont. Gualterium and Baronium, Wicelium, p. 296. and cap. 32. de
Turpino contra Trithemium and alios. Et cap. 33. de Walafr. Strab. Tritthenius
vehementer errat -- Et Laur. Surium Bellarmin. in Catal. and alios nonnullos in
errorem induxit.

Vid. and quae de Aimoino, p. 308, 309. habet, and contra Possevinum, p. 310.
and contra alios, 311. Et contra Baronium, Breulium, etc. 312. Et de Haimone
cap. 35. contra Tritthenium, and de Rabano Mauro, p. 315. Et de Landulph.
Sagace contra Caes. Orlandium. De Anastas. c. 35. p. 319. De Hin^maro contra
Tritthenium, c. 36. p. 320. But I must not tire the Reader: Multitudes of such
Instances this one Author gives us: And how few Historians charge not others
with Errors so much greater, and more than Mr. M. with any Truth accuses me
of.

3. As to his notes on my Titles of some Councils, it is past my memory, whether
it was my carelessness, or (as I think) the Printer's Error, to put [a Council
at Aransican, Toletan, Regiense, for Concilium Aransicanum, Toletanum,
Rhegiense.] If it was my act, I forgot that I had first put the Substantive in
English. But he may often find the same names used to his mind: And sure it is no
falsification of the History.

4. But he has a far greater charge against me, that I did not apprehend the
mind of the Council at Tours; why so? The words are [ Nos vero siquos Lex
perimi jubet, si cupiunt audire praeconem, volumus ut convertantur ad vitam:
Nam perimendi sunt oris gladio and communione privandi si relicta sibi seniorum
decreta observare noluerint, etc. Here he says the meaning is, [The
Ecclesiastical Laws do punish such with perpetual Excommunications, yet this
Council thought fit to mitigate it, etc.] The Question is, Whether [ Quos Lex
perimi jubet, signify Death, or Excommunication?] I take it to be Death, and
that the Council says [Though by the Law such are to Die, if they will hear
the Preacher, we will have them converted to Life: But so that if they will not
be separated, the Church Sword of Excommunication shall cut them off instead of
Death.] My Reasons why [ Lex perimi jubet] signifies Death, are from the
express foregoing words, [ Quia etiam Lex Romana constituit, ut quicunque
sacratam Deo Virginem vel Viduam fortasse rapuerit, si postea eis de
conjunctione convenerit, capitis sententia feriantur. Item siquis, non dicam
rapere, sed attent are matrimonii conjungendi causa, sacram Virginem ausus
fuerit, capitis sententia feriatur. Cum etiam in Chronicis habeatur de
Virginibus Gentilium tempore, quae se deae Vestae sacraverant, postmisso
proposito and corrupta virginali gratia, Legali sententia vivas in terra fuisse
desossas. If none of this signify Death, I confess I understand not Latin. I
thought the Council meant Death by [ Lex perimi jubet,] but they would be more
merciful; which I blamed them not for, but noted here what many other Canons
instance, where they also punish murder but with keeping men from Communion,
that this agrees with some Sectaries Opinion. I leave Mr. M's. great skill in
expounding Councils here to any equal Judge. But if I ignorantly mistake in all
this, and neither [ Capitis sententia feriantur] nor [ Vivas in terra desossas]
signify Death, but Excommunication, yet many other Canons after cited fully
tell us of the Bishops Clemency.

CHAP. VII. Mr M's. Exposition of Church History tried by his Exposition of my
own words: And 1. Of his false supposition that I am only for a Church of one
Congregation meeting in one place.
1. IF so many repetitions of my Opinion cannot save Mr M. from so untrue a
supposition of my self, I must not too far trust him, of the sense of those
that he is as distant from as I. Yet this supposition running through all his
book, shows that he wrote it against he knew not whom nor what. His foundation
is because I define a single Church by Personal present Communion.

2. I do so: And 1. Does he think there is no such thing as Christians
conjoined for assembling in Gods ordinary worship, under the Conduct of their
Proper Pastors. I will not censure him so hardly as to think he will deny it.
2. Are these Churches or not. I suppose he will say, Yea. 3. But is there no
Personal Present Communion but in public worship. Yes sure Neighbors who
worship God in diverse places, may yet live in the Knowledge and conversation of
each other; and may meet for Election of Officers, and other Church businesses,
and may frequently exhort, reprove and admonish each other, and relieve each
other in daily wants; and many meet sometimes by turns in the same place, where
they all cannot meet at once: We have great Towns, (like Ipswich, Plymouth
Shrewsbury, etc.) which have many Parishes, and yet Neighborhood makes them
capable of [ Personal Communion in Presence] as distinct from [ Communion by
Letters or Delegats with those that we neither see nor know.] And we have many
great Parishes which have several Chapels, where the People ordinarily meet
yet per vices some one time and some another come to the Parish Churches. Have
these no Parochial Personal Communion?

To the well-being of a Church, I confess I would not have a single Church of
the lowest species have too many, nor too few: No more than whose Personal
Communion should be frequent in Gods public worship. Nor so few as should not
fully employ more Ministers of Christ than one. But to the Being of a Church, I
only require that the End of their Association be Personal Communion as
distinct from distant Communion by Letters and delegates. And by [ Communion] I
mean not only the Sacrament.

2. It is in vain therefore to answer a book that goes on such false
suppositions, and a man that will face down the world that I plead for that
which I never owned, and so frequently disclaim.

CHAP. VIII. Of his false supposition that I am against Diocesan Bishops,
because I am against that species of them which puts down all the Bishops of
single Churches, and those Churches themselves.
1. THis supposition goes through almost all the book: In his preface he says
[ The superiority of Bishops over Presbyters is acknowledged by Catholics, and
Schismatics and Heretics, etc. and yet this Church history would have us
believe the Contrary.] And so throughout.

2. And yet to show that he knew the Contrary in one place he confesses it,
and described part of my judgment, and says that none will be of my mind in
it, but it is singular to my self: Yea I had in my Disput. of Church
Government, which he takes on him in part to answer, and in my Treat. of
Episcopacy which he also pretends to answer in part, told them of more sorts of
Bishops than one that I oppose not, no not A. Bishops themselves: And one of
them hereupon notes it as if I differed but about the name, submitting to
Diocesans so they may but be called A. Bishops. To whom* I answered that A.
Bishops have Bishops under them, so that though I over and over even to
tediousness tell them it is the d^posing of all the first or lowest Species of
Bishops and Churches, and Consequently all Possibility of true Dis^ipline that
I oppos^, and submit to any that oversee many such Churches without destroying
them and their privileges instituted by Christ] I speak ^ill in vain to them:
These true Historians face down the world that I write whole books to the clean
contrary.

CHAP. IX. Of his supposition that I am an Independent, and yet that I plead
for the cause of the Presbyterians.
1. THis is also a supposition that is part of the Stamina of his Book; and how
far he is to be believed herein judge by the evidence following.

1. He knew what I said before for three sorts of Bishops, 1. Episcopi Gregis,
Overseers of single lowest Churches, as of Divine Institution: 2. For Episcopi
Episcoporum, or Presidents-Bishops ejusdem Ordinis, non ejusdem Gradus, in the
same Churches, as of early Humane Institution, which I resist not. 3. Episcopi
Episcoporum, Overseers of many Churches, which I suspect to be Successors of
the Apostles, and of such as Timothy, Titus, etc. in the continued ordinary
part of their work, (exercising no other Power than they did:) Insomuch that
Dr. Sherlock would be thought so much less Episcopal than I, as that he says,
It is Antichristian to assert Episcopos Episcoporum.

2. And Dr. Parker has newly written a Book for Episcopacy, which I hear many
despise; but for my part I take to be the strongest that I have seen written
for it these twenty years; but to no purpose against me; for it is but for
Episcopacy in general, which I oppose not. It excellent well improveth the
Arguments of the K. and Bishops at the Isle of Wight; even that one Argument
that a Superiority of some over others being settled by Christ and his
Apostles, that Form must be supposed to continue, unless we have clear proof of
the Repeal or Cessation. I have ost said the same; I could never answer that
Argument: But this will not justify the deposing of thousands of Bishops and
Churches, and of their Discipline, to turn them all into two or three Diocesans.

3. Also he knows that I have written these 35 years against Lay. Elders;
believing that the College of Elders which of old assisted the Bishops, were
none of them Laymen, nor unordained, but of the same Order, though not Degree,
with the Bishop himself.

4. And I have also written that Synods of Bishops or Presbyters are but for
Concord, and have not as such by a major Vote a proper Government of the minor
part or absent: Much less that Classes, and other Assemblies, are the stated
Church Government which all must obey: And are the Presbyterians of any of the
three forementioned Opinions?

5. I ever held a necessity of manifold dependence of all Christians and
Churches. As all depend on Christ as their Head, so do all the People on the
Pastors, as their authorized Guides, whom they must not Rule, but be Ruled by,
1 These. 5. 12, 13. Heb. 13. 17, 24. And all these Churches depend on each other
for Communion and Mutual Help, as many Corporations in one Kingdom. And
frequent Synods well used, are greatly helpful to these ends: And the Command
of doing as much as we can in Love and Concord, does bind all the particular
persons to concur with the Synods in all things that tend to the Peace and
Edification of the Church, or are not against it. And more than so, if the
general Visitors or Bishops that take care of many Churches, do by God's Word
direct, instruct, reprove, admonish the particular Bishops and Churches, they
ought with reverence to hear them and obey them. And if Independents really are
for all this, why do these Accusers represent them odiously, as if it were no
such matter, but they were merely for Church-Democracy? Either you are not to
believed in what you say of them, or of me.

6. I know we have men that say, that on pretense of acknowledging all this
Episcopacy, I put down all, because I take from them the power of the Sword,
and leave all to despise them if they please. Ans. This indeed is the power
that under the name of Episcopacy now too many mean. Bishop Bilson knew no
Power but Magistrates by the Sword, and Ministers by the Word. But why name I
one man? It is the common Opinion of Protestants, and most sober Papists, that
Bishops as such have no power of force on Body or Purse. But we deny not the
forcing Power of the Magistrate. 3. But we heartily wish that they would keep
it in their own hands, and never use it to force unwilling men into the Church,
or to Church Communion; high Privileges which no unwilling person has any
right to. This is my Independency.

CHAP. X. Of his Accusation, That I make the Bishops the Authors of all
Heresies and Schisms, as distinct from Presbyters, Monks and People.
1. THis also runs throughout his Book; and must such Books be answered or
believed? I never denied the guilt and concurrence of others with them. I only
say, That as Bishops were the Chief, so they had the chief hand, as far as I
can yet learn, in Heresies and Schisms, since they came to their height of
Power, and specially in those grand Heresies and Schisms, which have broken,
and keep the Churches in those great Sects and Parties, which in East and West
it consists of to this day. I never doubted or denied but that 1. The
Heresies that were raised before the Church had any Patriarchs, or the turgent
sort of Bishops, were certainly raised without them. 2. And afterward sometime
a Presbyter began a Heresy. 3. And the Bishops were but as the Generals of the
Army in all the Church Civil Wars. But I never denied but the Prelatical
Priests, Monks, and multitude were their obsequi^us Army.

2. Mr. M. says, That those Bishops that were Heretics, were mostly such, or
inclined to it before. Answ. 1. Was there then a good Succession of Ordination,
when the World groaned to find it self Arian? Were all these Arians before
their Consecration?

Answ. 2. Were they not all Prelatical Presbyters that aspired to be Bishops,
and so as they say had a Pope or Bishop in their bellies. I never thought that
Prelatical Priests that studied Preserment, and longed to be Bishops, had no
hand in Heresies nor Schisms, no more than that the Roman Clergy are innocent
herein, and the fault is in the Pope alone. What a deal then of this man's Book
is lost and worse, on such suppositions?

CHAP. XI. Of his confident Accusation, that I mention all the faults of the
Bishops, and none of their Goodness, or Good Deeds.
1. THis also is a chief part of the Warp or Stamen of his Book. In his Preface
he says, [ This History of Bishops is nothing else but an Account of all the
faults that Bishops have committed in the several Ages of the Church, without
Any Mention of their Good Actions, of their Piety and Severity of their Lives;
of their Zeal for the Faith, etc.]

Answ. 1. Whether this Fundamental Accusation be true or false, let the Reader
who loves Truth see 1. In the very first Chapt. from 41. to the end. 2.
Through all the Book where I often praise good Bishops, good Councels, and good
Canons, and good Books and Deeds. 3. In the two last Chapters of the Book,
written purposely to hinder an ill use of the Bishops faults.

In the first Chapter [ Very many of the Bishops themselves were humble, hol^,
faithful men, that grieved for the miscarriages of the rest: Though such
excellent persons as Gregory of Neocaesarea, Greg. Nazianz. Greg. Nyssen,
Basil, Chrysostom, Augustine, Hillary, Prosper, Fulgentius, etc. were not very
common, no doubt but there were many that wrote not Books, nor came so much
into the notice of the World, but avoided contentions and factious stirs, that
quietly and honestly conducted the Flocks in the ways of Piety, Love, and
Justice. And some of them (as St. Martin) separated from the Councils and
Communion of the prevailing turbulent sort of the Prelates; to signify the
disowning of their sins.]

Of the Ancients before the world crowded into the Church, I never made
question: Such as Clemens, Polycarp, Ignatius, Irenaeus, and the rest.

How often I have praised holy Cyprian, and the African Bishops and Councils, he
sometime confesses.

What I say of Atticus, Proclus, and other peaceable Bishops, you may see p.
17. and very often. Yea of the Bishops of many Sects, much of the Albigenses,
etc. p. 17, 18.

Yea of the good that was done by the very worldly sort p. 18, 19, 20. Yea of
the Papists Bishops that were pious p. 20. 46.

And 47. I vindicate the excellency of the Sacred Office. And 53, 58, 59, 60. I
plead for Episcopacy it self in the justifiable species of it.

2. But perhaps he will say, that at least I say more of their faults than
their (...): I answer, of such good Bishops as Cyprian, Basil, Greg. Nazianzen,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Hillary, Martin, etc. I speak of their virtues and
nothing at all (that I remember) of their faults. Of such as Theophilus, and
Cyril Alexandri. and Epiphanius, etc. I speak of their virtues and some of
their faults (as the scripture does of many good men's.) Of the more ambitious,
turbulent sort, I speak only or mostly of their faults: For I profess not to
write a History of their lives, but to inform the ignorant what Spirit it is
that brought in Church tyranny and divisions. I denied none of their virtues,
though it was not my work to record them.

While I am confuting the Errors of your book, do I wrong you unless I write a
Catalogue of your good works. Morney, Illyricus, and many others have gathered
a Catalogue of old witnesses for Protestant Verities. And Bishop Morton has
cited multitudes of Papists against their party: Have they wronged them because
they have not also cited all that the same said for the Roman cause? I have
mentioned the virtues of some of the Popes, even of Greg. 7. but of many others
I have only mentioned their vices: This is not to deny any good that is in
them: Nor do you accuse your selves of any injustice when you tell the world
how bad men the Parliaments have bin, and how bad Cromwell and the Armies, and
how bad the Nonconformists are, and I in particular, without naming any of
their good deeds or virtues: Because it is not your business.

CHAP. XII. Of his Accusation that I do all in spite and malice against
Bishops, and as using ill language of them.
1. ANsw. 1. Spite and Malice are heart sins: If the same effect may come from
other Causes, how know you that these are the Cause?

Ans. 2. Is it from Spite and Malice that Protestants commonly describe the
vices of the Popes, such as Greg. 7. Sergius, Alexandr. 3. Boniface 8. Joh. 12.
and 13. and 22, and 23. and Eugen. 4. etc. And also that they so hardly speak
of the Jesuits, Yea and Papists commonly? Sure it may come from some other
cause.

Ans. 3. Is it from Spite and Malice that you recite the tumults of the German
Anabaptists, the faults of those at Munster, the Errors of David George, the
many Enthusiastic Sects described by Beckman Exercit. (of whom many as
Thaulerus, Kempis, Behmen had much very commendable; and Grotius praised Job.
Ar^dt.) Is it from Malice that the Familists, Seekers, Quakers, Anabaptists,
etc. are usually by your party described by their faults, without any mention
of their goodness?

Ans. 4. Is it from Spite and Malice that your Party have written what they
have done of the great faultiness of the Nonconformists, both former and
latter; and that Calvinists are so odiously represented, that the Reformation
by them is described by Heylin and others as Rebellious? That such books are
written as Heylins Aerius Redivivus, H. Fowlis, the Evangel. Armatum, The
Eccles. Polit. the Friendly Debate, the Counterminer, the Vindica^. of Dr.
Stillingfleet, the pretended second part, (which is a continued Calumny against
my self, so full of particular falsehoods as are not to be without a tedious
Volume answered: And a multitude such written to render the Nonconformists
odious and unsufferable. If all these be not written in Malice, how know you
that mine were?

Ans. 5. And whereas some pretending moderation accuse me of too bad provoking
language, 1. Is there any Comparison between the language of any of these
books, or yours and Dr. Sherlock's and mine? Read but Learned Godly moderate
Bishop Downam his Defense of his Visit. sermon, his frequent charges [of
shameless, impudent Lying, and much more] against a Nonconformist that gave him
no such language. Read but the ordinary Writings of such as Bishop Bancroft,
Dr. Sutcliff, and most others against the Old Nonconformists; and of the
Lutherans against the Calvinists, even men that I am persuaded meant honestly,
but by Faction were exasperated, as Hunnius, Brentius, Morlinus, M^rbackius,
Snepfius, Wigandus, Heshusius, Andreas, Se^necerus, Heerbrand, Calovi^s, and
many such. Read but our Grammarians, such as you may find in the many Volumes
of the Collections of Janus Gruter^s, even those of Cramer, and Phil. Paraeus,
and others against himself; where Fools, Knaves, Liars, Sots, and worse, make
up much of the style.

Read but our Old Grammarian Reformers against the Popish Priests, and
Schoolmen, I mean Erasmus, Hutten, Faber, and the rest, what Scorns their
Writings do abound with.

I will not refer you to the Queen of Navarr^, and Stephanus his World of
Wonders, against the Priests, lest you think I approve of the excess.

Yea read but the Writings of our famous Learned Critics, Jul. and Joseph
Scaliger, Heinsius, Salmasius, etc. from whom the railing Jesuit Labbe took
advantage to say, Tom. 1. p. 820. [ Riv^^o prae^v^^at Josephus Scaliger, homo
utique modestissimus, qui Editores S. Irae^ae^ vocat, clamosos,
maledicentissimos. C^rcop^s, Tartareos, Pyriphleget^o^tas, vir^lentiae and
probrorum co^c^^n^tores, and editionem coloniensem, cloacam Sycophantiarum,
l^^^in^m conv^ti^^^m, and sta^^l^m inscitiae.] Through God's great mercy, while
Malignity is the Complexion of the Serpent's Seed, and Lying is their Breath,
and Murder is their Work, the names of all these sins are odious in the world,
and guilt is impatient, and cannot endure its own name.

Should I but mention the Language of Papists, how they represent the holiest
Protestants as Liars, Deceivers, Devils, intolerable, whom it is as lawful to
kill as Dogs, Foxes or Toads, it would concern none but those of you that use
to say, I had rather be a Papist than a Puritan, or Presbyterian; o^ those
that renounce Communion with us, and own it with the Church of Rome; who are,
alas, too many. Such Language as ^a^^^'s, Vol. 1 p. 819. is of the sweeter
sort, viz. Quisquis es s^lutis t^^ amans, Omnes illic^ Calvinistas, Lutheranos,
Socinianos Anabaptistas, similesque generis humani pestes, Cacodamon^m instar
execrabere. This is but what we daily hear: But while we hear it in a Language
so very like from the Papists, and the Pulpits and Press, and Roger Le Strange
is become the Church's Advocate and Mouth, it will harden them that did ill
join together Popery and Prelacy in their rejections.

Honest Thuanus is amiable and honorable for Speaking well of all that
deserved it, without partiality: But Gerb. Vossius is put to defend his
Father-in-law Junius against his unjust censure. Indeed Junius was a man of
Eminent peaceableness and moderation, (I would Arminius and he had been the
utmost prosecutors of that Controversy, notwithstanding Dr. Twisses
undervaluing his skill in School Divinity) And few men were more unlike Thuanus
his ill Character than Junius: But Dr Manton has told me that he has been
fully informed that it was not Junius that Thuanus meant but another that dyed
that year (which Junius did not) and that by some ill chance a wrong name was
put in Contrary to Thuanus intent.

2. Dr. Burnet is a man whom I much value and honor, and pleads much for
peace and moderation, and therefore much the more amiable to me: I thank him
for his reproof of me to my face; but because he goes on to vend it as just
behind my back, where I cannot answer him, I must do it here. He says that [ I
began and that with unchristian, provoking language against the Conformists in
my first Plea for peace, which caused all the succeeding heats.]

Ans. 1. I have to him and often in print appealed to humanity and common sense
whether one that was seventeen years silent, and communicated in the Parish
Churches, and under scorns, and ejection, imprisonment and mulcts did peaceably
continue Communion with them without reply or self defense, and never wrote
against them, till they had long called out to him to give them an account of
the reasons of his Nonconformity, and then durst not provoke them by a dispute,
but barely named the matters which we judge unlawful, professing not to be the
Accuser of Conformists, but only to answer the Call of Parliament Men, Bishops,
and others that urged us, and threatened us if we would not tell them what we
stuck at; and made this the Justification of their prosecution of many hundred
men: I say, whether such a man had a Call to speak? When the King Licensed us,
I had before briefly defended our Preaching as Licensed: But being thus
summoned by our Prosecutors and Superiors, I told them what we judged
unlawful; and was this a beginning of the Flame? Was Seventeen years Poverty,
Prohibition and Prosecution, and all this Importunity, no provocation or call
to speak? Did this begin? If he were in the House of Correction, and were
beaten but Seventeen years, or Seven years, to confess the Cause for which he
suffered, and at last con^essed it, and one should say, This was the beginning
of the strife, Would he take this for a good Historian? And if he had written
History, would this report advance the credit of it?

3. But the second thing accused, is the unchristian Language of that Book.
Answ. Does a general Accusation signify more ill of the accuser, or of the
accused, if it be not proved by particular Instances? I urged him to name the
unchristian words, and I remember but two Instances he gave me.

The first is, that I use the word [ untruths] against my Accusers. And 1. I
think the Reader will very rarely find that word in that Book. 2. Is this so
harsh as the common charge of Lying, used even by the most Learned sober
Conformists? 3. I thought it had been a modest word: What shall a man say when
such Volumes of Slander are published against him and others, as tends to
preach all their Neighbors into hatred and persecution of them? Alas! Does it
increase our crime to say, It is untrue? How shall we then answer for our
selves at any Bar? Is it tolerable voluminously to tell the World downright
falsehoods of us? and is it railing for us to say, [ They are untrue?] What Is
this but like him that run a man through in wrath with his Sword, and indicted
him for crying, oh? This is the Church Justice even of our moderate Historians.

4. But he says, I should not call it [a falsehood, or untruth] but a mistake.
Answ. This is a sharper word; for it signifies the fault of the mistaker
usually; whereas by speaking de objecto, that it is false, I leave it to others
how far the reporter is to be blamed. But sure most Logical Disputations are
Railings, if the words [ ^alsum] and [ fallacia] be such.

5. About a month or six weeks ago the Observator, the Churches Advocate
published, That [ a Captain of Horse of the King's, had the fortune to be
dismounted, wounded and stripped, and a Chaplain (naming me before) cut from
about his neck a Medal, which the King had given him, and the Soldiers spared
in the heat of blood] I sent him word how false this was: I never saw the man
in my life that I know of; much less ever meddled with him: But was in a House
where a Soldier brought a small silver-guilt Medal, about the bigness of a big
Shilling, and said, he took it from about the neck of one Captain Jennings,
whose Life he spared: He offered it to sale, and no one offering him more, I
gave him eighteen pence for it in 1643. as I remember: And about 1648. hearing
where Captain Jennings was, supposing it might be of great use to him, I sent
it him as a gift by one Mr. Sommerfield.] And this slander is all the thanks I
had. The Church-Advocate wrote me back, that he had it formally attested. I
craved as a favor of him to tell me if Captain Jennings be living, how I might
write to him. He answers me, that one was out of the way that he must first
speak with, and I should shortly hear from him. The next I heard was as a
second part of Dr. Stillingfleet, the foresaid Book full of cruel falsehood,
taken from my having been for the Parliament, and from many distorted words of
mine: Now when this Book renders me worse than a Jew, or Heathen, and unfit to
live, some I fear will tell abroad that I am a Traitor, for saying, that [ It
is slanderous or untrue.]

6. His second Instance was these words of mine [ Pardon me for saying, I think
that Mr. Tombs has said more like truth for Anabaptistry, the late Hungarian
for Polygamy, many for Drunkenness, Stealing, and Lying, in cases of Necessity,
than ever I yet read for the Lawfulness of all that I have here described.]

Answ. 1. Is there any Railing or unchristian Language in these words? which be
they?

Answ. 2. Do I here speak of any but my self and the Nonconformists? Do I not
protest against accusing others, and only say, what it would be to me, should I
conform? And must I not, when importuned by Bishops, Priests and Rulers, say
what I fear, le^t others should think it intimates their guiltiness? Can I
help that?

Answ. 3. Did that man ever understandingly consider the matter, who can doubt
of the truth of what I say?

I. On the one side how heinous and many the sins that we fear are, if we
should conform, I must not again name, for that is it that provokes.

11. Now as to the Comparison;

1. I Will appeal to Learned Bishop Barlow whether Mr. Tombs has not made the
Case of Anabaptistry more difficult? Let them that deny it confute him better
than I have done.

2. And why does none answer the Hungarians book for Polygamy if it be easier
done than the task in question. I have known the man that maintained, that if a
King had a barren wife, and his Kingdom like to be undone by a destructive
successor, he might as lawfully take another wife, as Adams Children might
marry incestuously. And indeed the many unreproved instances of Polygamy in
Abraham, Jacob, Moses, David, Solomon, etc. will allow men more pretense for
it, than ever I saw brought for all (I say, but For all) that I have named in
that book.

3. And many Physicians have said so much (though amiss) for the lawfulness of
a Drunken Cup instead of a Vomit and a Cordial in some diseases, as have made
it a harder case than ours seems to me: And I say not what it seems to others.

4. And de necessario concubitu legantur quae a medicis dicuntur de furore ut
erino.

5. And for stealing nothing but present food to save life, he that Considers
what God allowed a man to take that went through an Orchard, Vineyard or
Corn-field, and what the Law of nature is, and whether the Kings Army on whose
strength the Safety of King and Kingdom depends, may not violently take food
without the owners consent rather than perish, will find it harder to justify
the denying Christendom and Communion to godly Persons that scruple our sort of
God Fathers, Crossing and Kneeling, etc. than to confute the aforesaid
stealing, or that which is merely to save life.

6. And as for Lying in cases of necessity, No less men of their own party than
Grotius de Jure Belli and Bishop Jer. Tailor in Duct. Dubit. have written for
it. And though I be against it, and many Conformists for it, yet I will not
deny but if the Life of the King might be saved among Enemies by a Lie; or the
Life of a Patient by his Physicians deceiving him by a Lie, much more may be
pretended for it, than for all the heinous sin which I fear.

7. And if these words be uncharitable Railing, what means have we lest to give
them that demand it, the Reasons of our Nonconformity?

What if we had gone further, and taken it for a crying Church Crime, and
called all the Clergy to Repentance? If that which we judge sinful be not so,
let them confute us: If it be so, and as great as we fear, is it not our duty
to bewail it, and mourn for it? Ezekiel. 9. 4. Zeph. 3. 17, etc. And is not
mincing and extenuating great sin, an implicit hardening men against
Repentance? Should one Preach against Adultery, Fornication, Perjury, Murder,
as about a doubtful Controversy, or a small thing, and say but [ Good men are
on both sides; I dare not say it is a sin, though I dare not do it my self: Or
if it be one, it is but such as good men are ordinarily guilty of: We must not
judge one another.] What were this but (worse than Eli to his Sons) to cherish
Sin, and Preach Impenitence, and serve Satan against the Evangelical Preaching
of Repentance?

8. For my Judgment, I profess it to be the duty of me, and all men, to use no
Language of Good men's faults, no, though they turn Persecutors upon some
particular Error, but what is consistent with true Love to the men, and to
cover their faults that are private, and merely personal, as far as lawfully we
may; but not to make light of public, aggravated Crimes, such as those of
Hophni and Phinehas; nor to show indifferency toward Buyers and Sellers in the
Temple; nor to strengthen the Sin which threatens a Land. If I thought that
hundreds or thousands of Christ's faithful Ministers in any Country were
unjustly hunted and forbidden to Preach the Gospel to a People that truly need
it, and this to the unavoidable dividing of the People, and the plain making
way for a Foreign Jurisdiction, I should take my self as a guilty hinderer of
Repentance, and Enemy to the Public Safety, if I should say only [ This is a
doubtful Controversy between Good, Wise, and Learned men.]

Labbe ends his To. 1. as justifying his bitterest Reproaches, with the
Authority of Christ, Peter, Paul, John, Jude, Ignatius. And if he had only
given great and public sins, the true names necessary to men's knowledge of
them, for Repentance or Preservation, those Texts, and many more would have
justified him.

CHAP. XIII. Of his Supposition that I speak against all Bishops Councils.
1. THis is not so. 1. I write often for the great usefulness of Councils. 2. I
justly praise no small number of them, especially before the great Rising of
the Bishops, for the first 300 or 400 years: He once acknowledges it of the
African Councils: And he might have seen the like of many Spanish, and some
French and Germane Councils: The English I little meddled with. 3. The First
General Council at Nice I justly honor; yea and the Three following, and many
more than three, for the soundness of their Faith, and as having many very
laudable persons in them; though I show the ill effects of their contention and
ambition.

I have heard some Conformists confess the great Learning and piety of the
Westminister Synod in 1642. and of the Synod of Dort, where we had Delegates:
and yet sharplier speak against the Acts of both by far, than I have done by
any such pious Persons. Even they that have honored Bishop Carlton, Bishop
Hall, Bishop Davenant, Dr. Ward, etc. that were there, have yet bitterly
reproached the Decrees which they subscribed. And how many as well as Dr Heylin
have written and spoken ill of A. Bishop Usher, of A. Bishop Abbot, A. Bishop
Grindai, A. Bishop Parker ( yea of A. Bishop Whitguif^ for the Lambeth-Articles
which I justify not) who yet have a great honor both for Bishops and their
Councils.

2. But I confess I am much of Nazianzen's mind, and I think I am no more
against them in the general than he was. And I am against our subjection to the
Jurisdiction of Foreign Councils, and the use that the Pope and ambitious
Clergy have made of them, to become Masters of Princes and of the world: I am
not for Ebbo's French Council which deposed Ludov. Pius, nor for making them
either the Popes Army, or the Army of Patriacks against each other or of such
Princes as Constantius, Valens, Theodosius junior, Anastasius Philippicus,
Justinian, Irene, etc. to fulfill their own mistaken wills, how honest soever
the men might be. Much less am I for such work as the Council at Later an sub
Innoc. 3 made, no nor that at Florence.

3 And I take it for an Act of great Prudence in this my accuser, while he is
vindicating Bishops Councils, to go no further than the four first General,
when it is many hundred that I have mentioned. And is it not really an
intimated accusation of them to vindicate so few of above 400. And those such
as for their faith we all own.

And yet a man would think by the strein of his style and language that it were
at least the greater part of Conncils that he were pleading for. I say still as
Bishop Bilson and other Protestants: Well ordered sound Councils we owe great
respect and honor to, for Counsel; strength and Concord, but subjection and
Obedience, says he, We owe Them none, (save as we are bid, be all subject one
to another, and serve one another in Love.)

4. And now I leave any impartial man to judge what answer such a book
deserved, which goes upon all these forementioned untrue suppositions.

CHAP. XIV. Some men's Credit about ancient Church History, may be conjectured
at by their Reports of the History of the time and place that we live in.
1. BY their History of late and present things we may conjecture at the Credit
of not Mr. M's. but others of the Clergy-accusers and Prosecutors of their
Brethren. Almost all that I remember that write against me, agree in such
misreporting matters of fact, yea the most public, of the persons, place and
time, which our senses have given us notice of, that we must believe them with
as great difficulty as we must believe Transubstantiation, even in opposition
to all our senses and experience. And whether those men be fit Vindicaters of
the Bishops and Councils above a Thousand years ago (which are blamed by the
Historians of their own Age, and by their own Confessions, and by their most
servent Defenders) who notoriously misreport the persons, and actions of their
own Place and Age, I think it is not hard to judge.

I will instance in Twenty particulars of public notice; for those against
particular persons, even my self, are not to be numbered.

I. It is now commonly taken for true, that the present Nonconformists, who
gave in their Desires for Concord 1660. are of the same Judgment as those
called Nonconformists heretofore, and whatever can be raked up out of Christ.
Goodman, Knox, Kilby, or is reported by Bancroft, is partly chargeable on them,
when as their proposed Desires yet show the world that they never made any
motion against many things by those aforesaid scrupled, in Doctrine, Worship,
and Ceremony.

And it is commonly supposed by them, that the present Conformity is but the
same as the Old, and the Case no harder to us: And this notwithstanding all the
still visible Acts and Alterations, and Additions, which attest the contrary to
all the world.

II. In most of their Invectives the present Nonconformists are argued against,
as if they had been in the Civil War against the King; or had been guilty of it
more than the Conformists. And that War is made a Reason of their Silencing;
whereas so few of them had any hand in it, that I have many times told them,
that if they will Silence none but those that they can prove guilty of any War,
or Rebellion, or Sedition, the rest of us will give them a thousand Thanks,
though we suffer our selves. Few of the present Nonconformists were then in the
Ministry, and of those few that were, few now living meddled with War.

III. They are so confident that the Parliament and Army that began the War in
England, were Nonconformists, yea Presbyterians, and not of the Church of
England, that Mr. Hinkley, and here Mr. Morris, make a renouncing of their
Senses or Understandings necessary to the believing of it. And yet they might
as well tell us, that they were all Turks or Papists. Are not a Parliament and
an Army things public enough to be known in the same Age? When we name to them
the Chief Lords and Commons, and Chief Commanders, yet (and lately) living, who
are known still to live in their own Communion; and when we challenge them to
name Three Presbyterians that were then in the House of Lords, or the House of
Commons; or many that were at first Commanders in the Army; and we name them
the Men that then Commanded, who were commonly known to be Conformists of the
Church of England. And if they will not believe their present practice and
profession they may yet go to them and be satisfied from their own mouths what
were their former Principles. I have told them of a most credible Member of
that Parliament yet living, who has ost professed to me that he knew but one
Presbyterian in the House of Commons when the war began, and I have named that
one man to them, to try if they can name another. I expect not that they should
believe me, or such other concerning those whom we knew: But they may believe
the men themselves yet living, and their most familiar Friends.

Yea the Records of many foregoing Parliaments, with Laua's Life written by Dr.
Heylin fully shows them that the difference arose 1. About the fear of
Popery, (and Arminianism as they thought tending toward it) 2. About Property,
Loanmony, Knight-mony and after Ship-mony, etc. 3. About Imprisonment of
members and other Gentlemen. And these were still the quarrel.

But says Mr. M. How then shall we believe our senses. Ans. See Reader,
whether his most confident Errors about past things be any wonder. He is not
so sure of what he says of the old Prelates, or the Nestorians, Eutychians,
etc. as he is that he must believe his Senses: And his very senses tell him
that a Parliament, even Lords, Commons, and an Army, many of whom are yet
living, were of another opinion in Religion than ever they were then acquainted
with, and which was known to very few in England till afterward. And this
contrary to their Profession and practice and the senses of their acquaintance.
Lords are Persons of so public notice that they may easily yet be informed of
the living and the dead: In the Army the Chief Commanders were the E. of Essex,
the E. of Bedford (yet living) Sir John Merrick, the E. of Peterborough,
Dolbiere, the E. of Stamford, the Lord Hastings (E. of Huntington) the Lord
Rochford (E. of Dover) the Lord Fielding (E. of Denbigh) the Lord Mandevile (E.
of Manchester) the Lord Roberts (now Earl of Radnor and President of his
Majesty's Council) the Lord St. John's, (killed at Keim^n Fight.) Only the Lord
Say, and Lord Brook were known Independents; and whether the Lord Wharton (yet
living) was then for Bishops or against them I know not; but all the rest were
of the Church of England. And so were the other Colonels, Sir Henry Cholmley,
the late Lord Hollis, Col. Will. Bampfield, Col. Tho. Grantham, Col. Tho.
Ballard, C. Sir William Fair fax, Col. Charles Essex, Col. Lord Willoughby of
Parham, Col. Sir Will. Waller, Col. Edwin Sandys, Cap. Lord Gray of Grooby; and
I think then Sir Will. Constable and Col. Hampden. What mind Sir Will. Balfoore
was of I know not: But I know his Country man Col. Brown was too far from a
Puritan.

But says Mr. M. [1. It Is well the Bishops had no share in it] Ans. Let Heylin
tell you what hand the difference between A. Bishop Abbats Church of England
and Laud's then little Party had in the preparations. 2. And was the A. Bishop
of York no Bishop, who afterward was a Commander for the Parliament.

But says he, [ I pray where were the Presbyterians when the Parliament took
up Arms: Were they not then in being?] Ans. An excellent Historian! that
maintains Parliament and Army were such, as he knows not whether they were
then in being. Yes Sir, they were in Holland, and France and Geneva, and
Scotland* and in England there was one John Ball, and one Mr. Langley, and a
few more such old Nonconformists that never were in Arms, and old John Dod, and
one Mr. Geree that was against the war and dyed for grief of the Kings death:
But among those called Puritans, few knew what Presbytery was, till the Scots
afterward brought it in. Much less did Lords, Commons, and Army know it. In
your sense Sir they were not then in being, and therefore could not fight.

It appears by Bancroft and others that there had been once Presbyterians in
England: But they were dead, and few even of the few Nonconforming Ministers
succeeded them in the Study of that point.

But says he, [ Were they none of them in the house] Ans. Yes, one [ or did
they protest against the proceedings of the Episcopal and Erastians? Ans. That
one went with them. And Non entis non sunt accidentia.]

But says he [ Can Mr. B. believe (or think any one else so weak as to be
imposed on in a matter so notorious) that it was a Parliament of Episcopals,
and Erastians and not Presbyterians that began the war?]

Ans. Thus youngmen that know not whom they talk of can control the most
public matter of fact by their conjectures. Go ask the worthy Master of the
Rolls Sir Harbottle Grimston, whose Speeches were then printed: Ask Sir Joh.
Maynard His Majesty's Sergeant at Law who was one of them; or any other of them
yet living. Ask them whether they knew themselves and their companions better
than you, who it seems knew them not.

But says he [ Were they Episcopals that voted down Episcopacy Root and Branch
before the war begun] Ans. 1. Have you proved that they did so? 2. Do you think
that acontradiction? 1. They had got a belief that Bishop Laud had got such men
into the Seats as were for a Syncretism with the Papists (described by Heylin)
and against the Subjects Property and Liberty. And it was the Men and not the
Office that offended them. 2. But because they were willing of the favor of
the Scots, and those Londoners who were against the Bishops, they pleased them
by voting down the present frame, intending to set up a moderate Episcopacy in
its stead; Yea long after this when many Learned Divines in the Assembly
declared themselves for Episcopacy, but not for Deans, Chancellors, etc. They
altered the Covenant so as to describe the present frame only: And when the
House of Lords took the Covenant, Mr. Coleman (an Erastian) gave it them
openly, declaring, that it was not mere Episcopacy that this Covenant
renounced, but only the English described Complicate form. And could they have
had such Bishops as Abbot and the old Church of England, they had never gone
thus far. 3. And they thought not Episcopacy itself so necessary, (though if
moderate the best sort of Governments) as to hazard all for it, which they
thought had been in danger. Even in 1640 July 17. They Voted a Diocesan in
every County, with Twelve Divines to Govern.

But, says he, [ Were they Episcopals that Petitioned the King at York for
Reformation in Discipline and Worship then? i. e. for abolishing Episcopacy and
Common Prayer?] Answ. 1. Reforming is not Abolishing. 2. I answered that as to
the last. When they feared that the Old House would fall on their heads, they
were for pulling of it down, and building a New one, after such a Model as
Bishop Usher after gave, and the Germane, Swedish, and Danish Churches have;
which they called the Primitive Episcopacy: But before they could do it, they
needed the Scots help, who brought in the Covenant, which they chose rather
than to fall into the hands of those of whom they had such thoughts and fears,
as I need not now describe, Prin's History of Laud's Trial describes them.

I would ask this confident Historian ( whose senses tell him what Religion men
were of contrary to their daily practice of communicating in the
Parish-Churches conformably) whether the Longest Parliament of all, which made
the Acts of Uniformity, the Corporation and Vestry Acts, the Two Act^ against
Conventicles, the Militia Act, etc. were Presbyterian or Episcopal? Verily, if
these were Presbyterians, I am none, nor ever will be: We shall then have a
strange definition of a Presbyterian, such as will take in Bishop Sheldon,
Bishop Morley, Bishop Gunning, and such others. If not, did not the fear of
Popery make that very Parliament begin to look so sowrely on the Clergy, as
produced that which I need not tell you of? And did not most of the same men
meet in the next Parliament after, and look yet more suspiciously on the
Clergy? And the next yet more? And does it follow that they were not Episcopal
but Presbyterian? But some men are confident against the Sun-light, and the
most notorious Public Evidence. But I must confess that such have shaken my
belief of the mere Moral Evidence of most History, and left me only certain of
that which has Evidence, which is truly Natural, in the Natural Impossibility
of Conspiracy in a Lie.

There were men heretofore that would swear that man was a Puritan, who would
not swear and drink with them, and would pray in their Families, and read the
Scriptures on the Lord's Day, while others were dancing. And the word [
Puritane] is now vulgarly changed into [ Presbyterian] (by the Clergies
Conduct.) And there are some Clergymen that will say, a man is a Presbyterian,
who reproves them for Drunkenness and Swearing, and other Crimes, specially if
he would not have Nonconformists ruined and laid in Gaol with Rogues. In this
sense I deny not but Lords, Commons and Army, had many Puritanes or
Presbyterians among them, who yet never knew what Presbytery was.

But, says Mr. M. [ Were they Episcopal who pray the King at Oxford to abolish
A. Bishops and Bishops, etc. that entered into a Solemn League and Covenant
against Episcopacy, and for Reforming the Church after the Presbyterian
Platform, and set up Presbytery by so many Ordinances?]

Answ. Distingue tempora is none of this Historians Principles. How long after
the War begun was this Petition at Oxford, this Covenant, and these Ordinances?
He proves them Presbyterians at first when they knew not what it was, because
they were for Presbytery a year or two after: Negatur Sequela. The Scots taught
afterward the Assembly, and them that which they never knew before, 2. And all
these Petitions and Ordinances showed not what they preferred as best, but what
they preferred before expected ruin. The Issue proved this, and Heylin
confesses it, and says, They never set up Presbytery in any one place (which
yet is not true, though they did not force it.)

3. Do you not know now living, those Episcopal Conformists, who refuse no part
of your Conformity, and are much against Presbytery, who since the Discovery of
the Papists Plot, are so much afraid of Popery, and so confident that too many
of the Clergy are prepared for it, that a little more would turn them from you,
though they love Presbytery as little as they love your selves.

In a word, The Old Clergy and the Parliament Men agreed. The New Clergy in
Bishop Laud's time distasted them; and the Scots Presbyterians helping them in
their straits, partly turned some of them, and partly imposed on them
unpleasing conditions.

But says he, [ The Erastians and Independents were at first inconsiderable,
and acted jointly with the Presbyterians, etc.]

Answ. Thus is History delivered to the deluded World! Neither Independency nor
Presbytery were understood by many till the War was begun. The Scots
Commissioners by degrees acquainted them with Presbytery, and Mr. Burton's
Protestation Protested, and the five Dissenters with Independency: Two or three
Independents were in the House of Lords, and some few in the House of Commons:
It was Episcopal-men that made up the main Body: These were of two sorts: The
one sort thought Episcopacy of Divine Institution, but not Chancellors, Deans
and Chapters, Archdeacons, Officials, etc. The other sort thought that
Episcopacy, not rampant, was the best Government Jure humano; But that the
Magistrate being Chief, might set it up, or take it down, as he see most for
the common good. These were called by some Erastians: And that these at first
were inconsiderable, is History written in despite of Evidence. Let any man 1.
Read what Parliaments formerly said; 2. And what many English Divines wrote for
the Jus humanum against the Jus Divinum; and what Testimony Prin has given of
it; 3. And what Dr. Stillingfleet has produced for it in his Irenicon; 4. And
how commonly it was owned by Conformists then in Conserence; 5. And how
commonly the Lawyers were for the Humane Right; 6. Yea and the Civilians
themselves; and then let him take this Historian's word, if he tell Posterity
that the Parliament and Army were not English men.

IV. These Historians heartily tell the world, that the Nonconformists, who
offered their Desires for Concord 1660. were Presbyterians, and so are most of
the Nonconformists now. Whereas they never made one motion for Presbytery, for
Lay Elders, for Ruling Classes or Assemblies, nor against Episcopacy; but only
offered the Paper called A. Bishop Usher's Reduction of Episcopacy to the
Primitive Form; wherein neither A. Bishops, nor Bishops, nor Deans and
Chapters, Archdeacons, were taken down, or any of their Revenues, Lordships, or
Parliament-Power. This is Presbytery with these Historians.

V. They make the world believe that the main Body of the Conformists, are such
as suffered for the King, or complied not with the Directory and Times of
Usurpation: Whereas it is publicly notorious, that there are about 9000
Parish-Churches in England, besides many hundred Chapels, and many Churches
that had more than one Minister. And almost all these complied with the Times
or Directory, as the Nonconformists did: And of all these, it was but about
2000 that Conformed not; so that 7000 or 8000 of them that had kept in, did on
a sudden turn Conformists. And diverse that had been in Arms for the Parliament:
Yea, some that had written for the Engagement when I wrote against it; yea some
that had spoken or written tantum non a Justification of the Killing of the
King. And of those that joined with us in our Proposals for Concord, Dr. Worth,
and Dr. Reignolds were made Bishops, and diverse others did Conform.

VI. These Historians would make the world believe that the Present Church, and
such as they, did more than the Parliamentarians, and Presbyterians, and
Nonconformists, to restore the King; when it is notoriously known, how often
their Attempts were defeated, and what the Scots Army under Hamilton underwent,
to say nothing of the next; and of the Lord Delamore's Attempt, and what the
Restored Parliament did: But sure I am, that the Old Parliament Soldiers, and
Presbyterian Commanders and Soldiers in General Monk's Army, with those in
England and Ireland that joined with him, and Sir Thomas Allen Lord Mayor, with
the Londoners, at the persuasion of the Presbyterian Ministers, drawing General
Monk to join with them, did the main work, which the Council and Parliament
after finished. When most of these men that will not endure the oblivion of
Discords, nor the Reconciling and Union of the King's Subjects, do but start up
to revile others, and blow the Coals again, and reap the fruit of other men's
labors, that desire but to live in Peace.

VII. That there are able worthy men that Conform, we are far from denying; and
we earnestly desire their Concord, and the success of their Labor, and I hope
love them as our selves. But whereas the History of this Party does proclaim
how much better and abler Ministers than the Nonconformists are generally put
into their Places, that are no Novices or Ignorant Youths, no Drunkards, nor
scandalous, but more laborious, skilful Laborers, I will say nothing, but let
the Countries judge.

VIII. And whether it be true that there is no need of the Nonconformists
Ministry, but the Churches are sufficiently supplied without them, both as to
the number and quality of their Teachers, I have in my Apology enquired; and
with godly men it is easily judged.

IX. And whether it be true, that it was only for the Kings or Bishops cause
that the Parliament put out all, or most of them that were heretofore removed,
I leave to the Witnesses and Articles against them. I am sure I and my
neighbor Ministers petitioned that none that were tolerable pious Ministers,
might be put out for being for the King or Bishops.

X. It is commonly now recorded and reported that the Presbyterians and those
that now conform not put down Catechizing, and turned the Creed, Lords prayer
and Decalogue out of the Church Service. Whereas (if some few Independents did
any of this, it is more than I know, but) in all our Country, and where I
came, I remember no Churches that did not use the Creed openly at their
baptizing any, and the Decalogue frequently read out of Exodus 20. or Deuteronomy. 5.
and the Lords prayer frequently; as we did constantly. But some thought that we
were not bound to use it every time they prayed. And the Directory commends
all these to them. And all our Country agreed not only to Catechize publicly,
but to take larger time on the week days to Catechize every family.

XI. These Historians say that I and such others take the things which we
conform not to, to be but inconveniences and not sins; And that we keep the
Nation in Schism while we confess the things to be but Indifferent And our
writings are visible in which we professed the contrary, and labored by many
arguments to prove it and protested that we would conform if we took them not
to be sins. And we gave in a Catalogue of what we judged to be sins: And this
before the New Conformity was imposed: And since the fiercest displeasure is
against us for telling them what we account Sin, and how great: When many years
together our Rulers and the People were told that we confessed them indifferent
and refused them but to avoid offending our followers.

XII. We frequently hear from them that we oppose Episcopacy because we cannot
be Bishops our selves: When its known that nothing could more put men out of
all such hopes than the Presbyterians Endeavors that both their power and
wealth should be taken down: And he that has any desires of a Bishopric
should sure be for the keeping of them up. And the same men reprove us for
refusing Bishoprics and Deanries, and say we did it to please the People.

XIV. The new Historians would make us believe that the Reformed Church of
England before Bishop Lauds time were of their mind that now call themselves
Bishops and Doctors of the Church of England, in holding as they do, that there
is an Universal humane Sovereignty with Legislative and Judicial power over all
the Churches on earth: and that this is in Councils, or an Universal College
of Bishops; of which the Pope may be allowed to be president, and Principium
Unitatis etc. and that he must be obeyed as Patriarch of the West; and so we
must be under a foreign Jurisdiction. Whereas it is notoriousy known that
before Bishop Lauds time the doctrine of this Church was quite Contrary, as may
be seen at large in the Apology, the Articles of Religion, the writings of the
Bishops and Doctors; Yea they writ copiously to prove that the Pope is
Antichrist, and put it into their Liturgy. And Dr. Heylin tells us that the
Reason why Bishop Laud got it out was, that it might not offend the Papists and
hinder our reconciliation with them; And the Oath of Supremacy swears us
against all foreign Jurisdiction.

XV. The same Historians would make us believe that these men's doctrine is now
the doctrine of the Church of England or agreeable to it. Whereas the Oath of
Allegiance is still in force, and so are the Homilies, and the Articles of
Religion and the Laws and Canons for the Kings Supremacy against all foreign
Jurisdiction. And there is no change made which allows of their doctrine: And
the Church doctrine must be known by its public writings, and not by the
opinions of new risen men.

XVI. The new Historians make the Nonconforming Ministers to be men grossly
ignorant, preachingfalse doctrine, of wicked principles and lives, and not fit
to be suffered out of Gaols. And yet these 19. or 20. years how few of them
have been convict of any false doctrine? And I have not heard of four in
England that have ever been convict since they were cast out, of being once
drunk, or fornicating, cheating, swearing, or any immorality, unless preaching
and not swearing, Subscribing, etc. be such, nor for false doctrine.

XVII. The new Historians have made thousands believe that the doctrine or
opinions of the Nonconformists is for sedition and rebellion; And that it is
for this that they refuse to renounce the obligation of the Covenant as to all
men besides themselves and that they refuse to subscribe that it is not lawful
on any pretense whatsoever to take Arms against any Commissioned by the King.
Whereas we have at large in a second Plea for peace opened our judgments about
Loyalty and obedience, and none of them will tell us what they would have more,
nor where our profession is too short or faulty. Nor have they convict any of
my acquaintance of preaching any disloyal doctrine.

XVIII. Yea they have by writing, preaching and talking made multitudes believe
that the Nonconformists or Presbyterians have been long hatching a rebellion
against the King, and have a Plot to take down Monarchy under pretense of
opposing Poperty. And how far these Historians are to be believed, true
Protestants by this time partly understand.

XIX. Yea these Historians have made multitudes believe that the Parliaments
that have been disolved here of late years have been designing to change the
Government of Church and state, under pretense of opposing Popery. As if that
Parliament that did that for them and against us which is done, and made all
the Acts which are for the Renunciation of the Covenant, and for all the
Declarations, Subscriptions and Practices Imposed, and for Fining us 20 l. and
40 l. a Sermon, and laying us in Gaols, had been for Nonconformists, and
against Episcopacy; and they that made the Militia Act, and such other had been
against the King or his Prerogative: Or the other following had not been of the
same Religion.

XX. But the boldest part of their History, is their description of the two
sorts of the People in England, those that are for the present Nonconformists,
and those that are against them. Those that are against them, they account the
most Religious, Temperate, Chaste, Loyal, Credible, and in a word, the best
people through the Land (for of our Rulers I am not speaking.) And those that
are for the Nonconforming Ministers, they defame as the most proud,
hypocritical, treacherous, disloyal, covetous, false, and in a word, the worst
people in the Land; or as Fowlis says, the worst of all mankind, and unfit to
live in humane Society. How long will it be ere the sober people of this Land
believe this Character? One would think that the quality of the common
Inhabitants of the Land should not be a Controversy, or unknown thing. All
that I will say to this History, is, to tell the Reader the utmost of my
observation and experience from my Youth up, concerning these two sorts of men.

Where I was bred before 1640. (which was in diverse places) I knew not one
Presbyterian Clergy man, nor Lay, and but three or four Nonconforming
Ministers. Nay till Mr. Ball wrote for the Liturgy and against Can, and Allen,
etc. and till Mr. Burton Published his Protestation protested, I never thought
what Presbytery or Independency were, nor ever spoke with a man that seemed to
know it: And that was in 1641. when the War was brewing. In the place where I
first lived, and the Country about, the People were of two sorts: The
generality seemed to mind nothing seriously but the body and the world: They
went to Church and would answer the Parson in Responds and thence go to dinner,
and then to play: They never prayed in their families, but some of them going
to bed, would say over the Creed, and the Lord's Prayer, and some of them the
Hail Mary: All the year long, not a serious word of holy things, or the Life to
come, that I could hear of, proceeded from them. They read not the Scripture,
nor any good Book or Catechism. Few of them could read, or had a Bible: They
were of two ranks; the greater part were good Husbands as they called them, and
savoured of nothing but their business or Interest in the World; the rest were
Drunkards: Most were Swearers, but not equally: Both sorts seemed utter
strangers to any more of Religion than I have named; and loved not to hear any
serious talk of God, or Duty, or Sin, or the Gospel, or Judgment, or the Life
to come: But some more hated it than others: The other sort were such as had
their Consciences awakened to some regard of God and their Everlasting State;
and according to the various measures of their understanding, did speak and
live as serious in the Christian Faith, and would much enquire what was Duty,
and what was Sin, and how to please God, and to make sure of Salvation; and
made this their Business and Interest, as the rest did the world. They read the
Scripture, and such Books as The Practice of Piety; and Deut' s Plain Man's
Path Way; and Dod on the Commandments, etc. They used to pray in their
Families, and alone; some on the Book, and some without: They would not Swear,
nor Curse, nor take God's Name lightly: They feared all known sin: They would
go to the next Parish Church to hear a Sermon when they had none at their own;
would read the Scripture on the Lord's Day, when others were playing:* These
were, where I lived, about the number of two or three Families in twenty; and
these by the rest were called Puritanes, and derided as Hypocrites and
Precisians, that would take on them to be Holy: And especially if they told any
one of his Swearing, Drunkenness, or Ungodliness, they were made the common
scorn. Yet not one of many of them ever scrupled Conformity to Bishops Liturgy
or Ceremonies, and it was godly Conformable Ministers that they went from home
to hear: And these Ministers being the ablest Preachers, and of more serious
Piety, were also the Objects of the Vulgar Obloquy as Puritanes and Precisians
themselves; and accordingly spoke against by many of their Tribe, and envyed
for being preferred by godly men.

This being the Condition of the Vulgar where I was, when I came into the
acquaintance of many Persons of Honor and Power, and reputed Learning, I found
the same seriousness in Religion in some few before described, and the same
daily scorn of that sort of men in others, but differently clothed: For these
would talk more bitterly, but yet with a greater show of reason against the
other, than the ignorant Country People did: And they would sometime talk of
some Opinions in Religion, and some of them would use some of the Common Prayer
in their Houses, and some of them would swear, but seldom, and small Oaths, and
lived soberly and civilly; but serious talk of God or Godliness, or that which
tended to search and reform the Heart and Life, and seriously prepare for the
Life to come, or to awaken Souls to a care of their State and Salvation, they
would at least be very weary to hear, if not deride as Puritanical. Mr. Robert
Bolton a Conformist, has fully opened all this of both sorts in his Discourse
of True Happiness, and Directions for walking with God: And how the name
Puritan was then used.

This being the Fundamental Division where I came, some of these that were
called Puritanes and Hypocrites, for not being Hypocrites, but serious in the
Religion they professed, would sometimes get together, and as Drunkards and
Sporters would meet to drink and play, they would (in some very few places,
where there were many of them) meet after Sermon on the Lord's Days to Repeat
the Conforming Ministers Sermon, and sing a Psalm, and Pray. For this, and for
going from their own Parish-Churches, they were first envied by the Readers,
and dry Teachers, whom they sometime went from, and next prosecuted by
Apparitors, Officials, Archdeacons, Commissaries, Chancellors, and other
Episcopal Instruments: For in former times there had been diverse Presbyterian
Nonconformists, who earnestly pleaded for Parish-Discipline (as Bucer also did
in Oper. Anglic.) And to subdue these, diverse Canons were made; which served
the turn against these Meetings of the Conformable Puritanes, and going from
their own Parish-Churches; though the Old Presbyterians were dead, and very few
succeeded them. About as many Nonconformists as Counties were left; and those
few most stuck at Subscription and Ceremonies, which were the hinderance of
their Ministry; and but few of them studied or understood the Presbyterian or
Independent Disciplinary Causes.

But when these Conformable Puritanes were thus prosecuted, it bred in them
hard thoughts of the Bishops and their Courts, as Enemies to serious Piety, and
Persecutors of that which they should promote: Suffering bred this Opinion and
Aversation. And the ungodly Rabble rejoiced at their troubles, and applauded
the Bishops for it, and were every where ready to set the Apparitors on them,
or to ask them, Are you holier or wiser th^^ (...) Bishops? And their
Accusations were readily entertained: This much inclined them to hearken to
them that were averse to Conformity, when such rose up, and to such as were
more against the Bishops, than there was cause; so that by this time, the
Puritanes took the Bishops to be Captains and the Chancellors, Archdeacons,
Commissaries, Officials and Paritors, their Officers, and the Enemies of
serious Godliness, and the vicious Rabble to be as their Army, to suppress true
conscientious Obedience to God, and care of men's Salvation. And the censured
Clergy and Officers took the Censurers to be Schismatics, and Enemies to the
Church, unfit to be endured, and fit to be prosecuted with reproach and
punishment; so that the said Puritanes took it to be but the common Enmity that
since Cain's days has been in the world, between the Serpent's and the
Woman's Seed: And when the persons of Bishops, Chancellors, Officials,
Apparitors, etc. were come under such a repute, it was easy to believe what
should be sail against their Office. And the more the Bishops thought to cure
this by punishment, the more they increased the Opinion, that they were
persecuting Enemies of Godliness, and the Captains of the Profane.

And when such sinful Beginnings had prepared men, the Civil Contentions
arising, those called Puritanes, mostly were against that side which they saw
the Bishops and their Neighbor Enemies for: And they were for the Parliament
the rather, because they seemed desirous to Reform the Bishops, and Restore the
Liberty of those whom they prosecuted for the manner of their serving God. Yet
they desired, wherever I was, to have lived peaceably at home: But the
Drunkards and Rabble that formerly hated them, when they saw the War beginning,
grew enraged; and if a man did but Pray, and Sing a Psalm in his house, they
would cry [ Down with the Roundheads] (a word then new made for them,) and put
them in fear of sudden violence, and afterward brought the King's Soldiers to
plunder them of their goods, and they were fain to run into holes to hide their
persons ( Martin Crusius in his Turco-Gracia describes much the like Case of
his Father.) And when their Goods were gone, and their Lives in continual
danger, they were forced to fly for Food and Shelter: To go among those that
hated them, they durst not, when they could not dwell among such at home. And
thus thousands run into the Parliaments Garrisons, and having nothing there to
live upon, became Soldiers.

We had an honest very Old Arminian (Mr. Nayler) in Coventry, that was against
the Parliaments Cause; and he would say, [ The King has the best Cause, and
the Parliament the best Men.] And that he wondered how it came to pass, that the
generality of sober Religious men, should be all in the wrong, and the most
Irreligious and Profane, and Debauched be in the right.] But he knew but the
Vulgar, and not the Grandees, who no doubt were many of them men of very
laudable accomplishments.

And as the feud of the Bishops and their Officers and Curates against the
aforesaid exercises of Religion occasioned this sad Division, so did the sense
of this in the minds of those called Puritanes continue too long. Many a time
have I seen abundance in great Perplexity, saying [We believed them that
professed that they took not Arms against the King, but to execute the Law on
Delinquents and defend themselves and the Kingdom from them: We abhor the
Regicides and Usurpers: We would restore the King, if we were stronger than the
Army. And yet we are in doubt how far we should actively contribute to our own
calamity: For though the King deserve more than we can do, we doubt not but the
Bishops will increase our Burdens and make greater havoc in the Church than
heretofore] And many sat still on this account, and as far as ever I could
discern, next the Power of the Army, the fear of the Bishops was the chief
delay of the Kings return.

I knew not all England; but according to the Extent of my acquaintance, I have
truly told you the quality of those then called Puritans and of their Common
adversaries.

And on which side now proportionably are most of the most understanding,
sober, charitable, conscionable, and seriously religious Persons, and on which
most of the contrary (not speaking of any Magistrates) I think it neither my
work, nor our New Historians to tell: For people that live among their
neighbors, will believe their senses and experience, what ever either he or I
shall say. And I am well assured that this argument (which I think was not
found) [ We cannot believe that God will suffer the Generality of the Religious
to be deceived in so great a case, and the most of the debauched ignorant
haters of serious Godliness to be in the right,] did prevail with very many
that could not try the Cause by the Laws and constitution of the Kingdom.

2. If I should recite the particular unjust reports of multitudes of these
Writers it would be tiresome and loathsome: Yea all the mistakes of this
Eminent Historian are too many to be named: But I will here name one which
seems at once to smite and smile.

Page 2^7. [ There is a temper which Mr. B. is acquainted with that, is not to
be prevailed on, either by threats or promises from the Magistrate; and seems
to hate nothing so much as compliance with Superiors: There are some that scorn
to preach by the License of the Government, and place the Kingdom of Christ
purely in opposition to Law and Magistrates.]

Answ. Note the credibility of this Historian. 1. Does their accusation of my
flattering the Usurpers (whom I more openly disowned than most of his
Fraternity) agree with this?

2. Did my long and earnest Petitioning to be accepted but in a poor Curates
place, though I Preached for nothing, yea if it were but in some ignorant
obscure Village, and only to preach over the Catechism, agree with this?

3. Does my large profession of Subjection in my Second Plea for Peace not yet
blamed by them herein agree with this?

4. I willingly took the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and an Oath to be
true to the King as his Chaplain in ordinary, and had this any such
signification?

5. Did my begging in vain a License from Bishop Morley, and craving and
obtaining one of Bishop Sheldon, signify this?

6. But the smile is that one would think by these words, I might have preached
by the Governors License and would not. And is that true? Did I not preach by
the Kings License, and the Clergy blame me for it? And as for the Bishops
License I do profess that it is yet in force, and I do preach by it. If I
mistake it is not my refusing it. If he intimate as he seems, that by the
Bishops License I might have had leave to preach in the Parish Churches, it is
now too late: But I would I had known how to get it. I confess one Summer in
the Country about 25 miles off, I did venture upon the Credit of my License
(at Amersham, Chesham, Rickmersworth, etc.) But it was too pleasing work to me
to be continued: One Church in Southwark I was once let into, but no more in or
near London. I once craved leave of the moderate Bishop that now is, that
without putting down the meeting where I was in that great Parish of St.
Martin's, I might preach sometime there and once a day at the Chapel which I
built, which the Parish Incumbent uses, and that he would quiet the Justices
to that end, and thought I had had his consent: But the Constables and other
Officers stood from that day about a quarter of a year together every Lord's
Day at the door of the former place of Assembly, to have apprehended me by the
Justices warrant if I had gone. And never could I hear of a man in London that
was willing I should come into his Pulpit; but the best have refused it. Nor
did I much desire it here: For it is not to preach to them that have no need
that is my request; but to such as cannot come into the Parish Church or
otherwise truly need our help. Once I did try to have got leave two miles out
of the City to have preached a Kinswomans Funeral Sermon on the right of my
License: But the Minister said, He must first ask the Bishop, and then denied
me.

Reader, these are the Historians that Charge me with misreport of ancient
History, visible in the most partial Authors on the other side: Judge of them
by their Report of the History of our Place and Age.

CHAP. XV. Mr. M's. way of getting belief, by a Magisterial condemning the most
credible Historians, and authorizing whom he please.
1. IF we had not Eusebius, Socrates and Sozomen, how naked should we be left,
and much unacquainted with the case of the Church from the Apostles; (Besides
Theodorets History) till 440. And what a shake is given to the Credit of all
these by Mr. M. and others of greater name?

Though Eusebius himself be by Petavius and many other Papists accounted an
Arian, yea and seemingly proved such, and by Bellarmine de Script. Eccles. its
said that Athanasius so calls him, and Jerome calls him the Arian Signifer and
Prince, and the 7th General Council so judges him, yet Socrates vindicateth
him, and thinks he is wronged: And indeed though his own Epistle written to his
Flock be not justifyable, incautelous and unjustifyable words were too Common
before his days (as Petavius has too fully proved) with those that we must
not yet call Arians. But while Bellarmine and Mr. M. charge Socrates and
Sozomen as Novatians that is Heretics themselves, they deprive Eusebius of
much of their defense; and render his History the more suspicious.

2. And though I know Mr. M. has more partners herein, I never saw yet any
credible proof that either of them were Novatians: Good Christians are not
ashamed nor afraid to make profession of their Religion. And they are so far
from professing it, that they often speak of the Novatians in disowning words.
But they praised them for the good that is in them! And would not any impartial
Historian do the like? Must a man rail at any party, or hide their Virtues or
else be taken to be one of them? I confess that such as Mr. M. do fully acquit
themselves from the suspicion of being Presbyterians or Nonconformists. But so
did not A. Bishop Grindall, Bishop Jewel, A. Bishop Abbot A. Bishop Usher, and
many more such. Sure Candor and Impartiality is Laudable in Historians; And
Thuanus is most honored for that. And notwithstanding Mr. M's assertions of
the contrary, I profess my self a lover and honourer of the worth of many of
the aspiring Bishops that corrupted the Church, and of many Popes, and of many
that continue Church corruptions in the height; even many of the Papists
Cardinals, Schoolmen and Jesuits. Who will not love and praise the excellent
Learning of such as Suarez, Vasquez, Victoria, Petavius and abundance such? Who
will not praise the piety of such as Gerson, Borromaeus, Sales, and many
others, though we nevertheless disown their Popery? For my part I highly value
the Cleareness, of multitudes of the Schoolmen, and that they have not in whole
loads of their volumes so much malicious railing as the Jesuits and many of our
late Conformists have in a few sheets. Does it follow that I am a Papist
because I praise them, or that Socrates or Sozomen were Novatians because they
speak well of their faith and piety.

There are abundance of Malignants, that acknowledge the Good Lives of those
they call Puritanes (and if he had not had the late Wars between King and
Parliament to fill all Mouths and Books against them, the Devil by this time
might have been at a loss with what Accusations to reproach them. For he was
put to use the Voices (no names) of [ Roundheads, Whigs, etc. when their
Revilers were called Drunkards. Swearers, Dam-me's, etc.] But they that confess
the Good, reproach them as Hypocrites that do but counterfeit it. Does this
acknowledgment prove them Puritanes. I suppose Mr. M. knows that no small
number of Historians and Fathers confess the strictness of the Novatians Lives,
and yet were no Novatians. And Constantine's words to Acesius imply that he
thought him singularly strict. And Mr. M. says Pref. [ The Novatians, says
the Author, did not suffer much by this Edict, being besriended by the
Emperor, who had an esteem for their Bishop of C. P. upon the account of his
Holiness.] And may not an Orthodox man confess the Piety of others?

3. But Mr. M. is so Magisterial as to say, Page 322. The story of Theophilus,
and the Monks of Nitria, no reasonable man can believe, as it is related by
Socrates and Sozomen, without loving a malicious Lie.] So that Socrates and
Sozomen either believed not themselves, or else Love^ a malicious Lie.

And Page 319. he says, [ The story of Theophilus his charging Isidore with
double Letters, that whoever was Conqueror, he might apply himself to him in
his name, is of the same piece with the rest of Socrates his story concerning
that Bishop; and in all probability an invention of one of the Monk^ of Nitria.]

It seems this Historian believes Old Historians, as the matters seem probable
or improbable to himself. And so we may take him for the Universal Expositor of
History: It is not the Old Historians that we must believe, but his
Conjectures. And thus he deals with diverse others.

4. For my part I profess, that before I had any Engagement in these
Controversies, since I first read them, I took Socrates and Sozomen to be two
of the most credible Historians that the Church had till their Times, and of
many an Age after them. I said of them, as I use to do of Thuanus, A man may
trace the footsteps of Knowledge, and impartial honesty, and so of Veracity in
their very style. And there are few of the judicious Censurers of Historians,
but do tell us of far more uncertainties in Eusebius, and after in Nicephorus,
and most that followed, (as far as I am acquainted with such Censurers) than in
these two. And if their History be shaken, our loss will not be small. And I
doubt not but the Anathematizing and Condemning Spirit has done hurt, which
has made Eusebius an undoubted Arian, and Theodoret, first a Nestorian, and
after at the fifth General Council condemned some of his Writings, and imposed
it on the whole Christian World to condemn them, though many never heard of
them, and that made Ruffinus (and Chrysostom) Originists, and Origin a
Heretic, condemned also by a General Council, and Socrates, and Sozomen,
Novatians, Epiphanius an ignorant credulous Fabler, Sulpitius Severus, and
Beda, two pious credulous Reporters of many feigned Miracles, and one a
Millenary, Nicephorus a Fabler, Anastasius Bibl. full of Falsehoods, Philastrius
an ignorant Erroneous Hereticator, Cassianus a Semi-Pelagian, Cassiodori
Chronic. est farrago temulentiae inquit Onuphrius Pan. Pene nunquam cum Eusebio
convenit inquit Vossius, etc. I say, Though it be no wrong to the Church to
take them for fallible, and such as have mistakes (which the English Articles
say even of General Councils) yet it wrongfully shakes all our belief of
Church History to call their Credit in matters of fact into question for their
Errors or opinions sake, without good Evidence that either they were ignorant,
misinformed or wilfully lied. But if the Novatians were more strict and
precise than others, it is rather like that they were more and not less credible
than others, and made more or not less conscience of a lie. Certainly that
which the rest named are charged with is somewhat more as to Historical Credit
than to be Novatians: So that if these men had been Novatians, I should yet say
by the Complexion of their History that They are two of our most useful and
credible Church Historians.

5. But when it serves his turn he can gather out of Sozomen that even in
Constantine's time, Constantinople was [ Altogether a Christian City] Because
he mentions the great Enlargement of it; and great increase of Christianity:
When as no man that lived could be a sitter judge of the number of Christians
in his time than Chrysostom: And he that considered that there and every where
Constantine left all the Jews and Heathens uncompelled to be Christians, yea
and used them commonly in places of dignity and Government in City, Provinces
and Armies, and that they continued in such power under many Emperors after
him, will hardly believe that in Constantine's time C. P. had half or a quarter
so many Christians as were in the time of Arcadius and Chrysostom; And yet then
Chrysostom conjectureth the Christians to be an hundred thousand, and all the
City poor half as many, but the Jews and Heathens not to be numbered. See him
one Act 4. Hom. 11. When he is making the most of their estate and numbers,
says he [ I pray you tell me: How great a number of all sorts of men has our
City? How many Christians will you that there be (That is will you grant, or do
you think there be?) Will you that there be (...) an hundred thousand? But how
great is the Number of Jews and Ethnicks? How many pounds of Gold have been
gathered? (or Myriads?) And how great is the Number of the Poor? (that is, of
the whole City?) I do not think they are above fifty thousand (Commelin. has
put an hundred thousand, as Erasmus Translation, I suppose by the Error of the
Press.) Now if there was in Chrysostom's days but an hundred thousand (which
many say is not near so many as there be in two Parishes here, Martins and
Stepney) it is not like that in Constantine's Time they were half so many at
most. And yet I am far from thinking that there was then no more than usually
met in an Assembly, or could so meet.

6. The Jesuits, Valesius and Sirmondus, I am no fit person to censure. But I
am not satisfied why their Credit should go as far with me as it does with him:
I have before spoke of Valesius's Recording Grotius as one that designed to
bring many with him into the Roman Church. And Grotius himself says, That many
of the English Bishops were of his mind, as Bishop Bromhall, and many Doctors
by defending him seem to be: And yet when I wrote my Christian Concord, and The
Grotian Religion, how many censured me as a Slanderer, for saying less than
Valesius does. Yet I am false with this Historian, and Valesius is a credible
Jesuit.

And he vouchsafes to tell us the Judgment of Valesius, that Eusebius Nicomed.
was no Arian, page 332. where he says [Eusebius of Nicomedia was no Heretic
in the Judgment of Valesius: But if he were, he was not an Heretic, because he
did not begin the Arch-Heresie, but followed Arius.]

What the meaning is of the latter words I know not [ If he were (an Heretic)
he was not an Heretick] I conjecture it is one of the almost Infinite Errata's
of the Printer: (But he supposes my Printer's to be mine own:) But that
Eusebius Nicomed. should be no Heretic, whom all the stream of credible
Historians make to be that Arch-Heretick (I say not the first) who corrupted
Constantine his Court and Son, which introduced the prevalency of Arianism to
the almost Ruin of the Orthodox Church, is a thing which he that believes
Valesius in, must prefer the Credit of one Jesuit that lived above a thousand
years after, before the whole current of the best Historians of the same, and
many following Ages. And did I ever so discredit the whole stream of
Church-Historians, as on the word of one Jesuit, to bring them under the
suspicion of such a Lie? But I confess I am more inclined to believe a Jesuit,
and a Prelatist, when they excuse any man of Heresy, than when they accuse him.

7. In the Preface he tells us that [ Had I consulted Sirmond's, Edition of the
French Councils I must have wanted several Allegations for the Congregational
way, which are nothing else but corrupt readings of the ancient Canons of the
Gallican Church. Nor can we suspect Sirmond as too great a favourer of Diocesan
Bishops, since it is well known how he is charged by the Abbot of S. Cyran
under the name of Petrus Aurelius, for having falsified a Canon in the Council
of Orange to the prejudice of the Episcopal Order] Jesuits care as little for
Bishops as our Protestant Dissenters can do.] Answ. I doubt not but Sirmond was
a very Learned man, and had not the Conformists divested me of all
Church-maintenance, I had been like to have bought his French Councils. In the
mean time, that notice which others before him gave of the Acts and Canons of
Councils, sufficed to my furniture, fully to prove the Cause I maintained: But
I confess his pretended reason no whit induces me to give more credit to a
Jesuit than to another man. Though Albaspineus was a Bishop, there is so much
Judgment and Honesty appears in his Observations, that I would sooner believe
him about Episcopacy, than a Jesuit that you say is against it.

But it is as incredible to me, as the rest of his spurious History, that the
Jesuits care as little for Bishops as our Protestant Dissenters can do. Sure
many of those called Presbyterians and Independents, would have none at all. If
this be true, then 1. The Jesuits would have no Bishops of Rome, though they
be his sworn Servants. 2. Then they would have no Bishops to be subject to the
Pope. 3. Then they would have all particular Churches to be without Bishops, or
to be unchurcht. 4. Then they would have Ordination without Bishops. 5. Then
they think not that an uninterrupted Succession of Episcopal Ordination is
necessary to Church or Ministry. 6. Then they think that Bishops should not
confirm. 7. Then they are against the Councils of Bishops, General or
Provincial. 8. And against Diocesans Government of the Parish Priests. And yet
is a Jesuit a Papist? Wonderful! that they will venture their Lives in
endeavors for the Church of Rome, and that they write so much of and for
Bishops Councils, and yet are quite against them.

But if really this be so, you that take me for incredible, who am against but
the Corruption of Episcopacy, do allow me to take Sirmondus and Valesius, and
the rest of the Jesuits for incredible, who are as much against the very
Office as our Dissenters can be? But what will not some Historians confidently
say?

CHAP. XVI. Mr. M's. Observations on my Notes of credible and incredible
History, Examined.
1. I. BEcause I suppose that common sound Senses are to be trusted: He 1.
Infers that I was asleep, and thought that I saw all that I relate; that is, He
that says he must believe sense, implies that he sees all that he reports:
I am one of the unlearned, and this Logic is too hard for me: Let it be his
own.

2. He concludes, That we must not believe our senses, if they were not
Presbyterians but Episcopal that begun the late War (in England:) As if he had
seen not only the Parliament (Lords and Commons) then, and the Army then (forty
years ago almost) but had seen their Religion, or heard or read them then so
profess it: Whereas I cannot learn yet whether he was then born, or of capable
understanding, and has neither sense nor reason for what he says. The Case
that we are in is very sad, when both sides say they have the Evidence of Sense
it self against each other; what hope then of Reconciliation? They that are yet
living, that were Lords, Commons, and Commanders, say their internal Sense and
Self-knowledge told them that they were no Presbyterians, but Episcopal; and
their daily converse told them, that their Companions were mostly of the same
Religion and Mind. But Young Men that never conversed with them, know them all
better, and that infallibly by sense it self.

2. II. Because I say, the History of the Gospel is certainly credible; it is
ground enough to say, That All is not Gospel that I write; as if I had said it
is.

3. III. Because I say, Prophets were sure of their Revelation, he says. It
may be Mr. B. heard a Been scripsisti: As if I had pretended to be a Prophet.

4. IV. I said that History is certain even by Natural Evidence, when it is the
common Agreement of all men of most contrary Interests, etc. in a matter of
fact and sense to all that knew it. To which he says [ The Superiority of
Bishops over Presbyters is acknowledged by Catholics, and Schismatics and
Heretics, men of very contrary minds, dispositions and interests; and yet this
Church History would have us believe the contrary.

Answ. This is our credible Historian.

1. He does not tell us in what Ages it was so acknowledged; when those who
doubt of the matter of fact, doubt but some of 100, some of 150, or 200 years:
Does any doubt whether it be so now?

2. He tells us not either what Species of Bishops the question is of, nor what
Species of Presbyters, nor what the Superiority was.

3. He speaks without distinction or Exception, and so must be understood to
say that this Church history would have us to believe that even President
Bishops Ejusdem Ordinis had de facto no Superiority at all over Presbyters in
the same Churches and of the same order with them, which is an untruth so gross
as is no Credit to our Historian. I have named both more than one rank of
Bishops whose Superiority de Jure I deny not: and Popes, Patriarchs, Primates,
Diocesans who deposed the Bishops of single Churches, whose Superiority de
facto I fully enough affirm, in the ages and degrees in which they did ascend.

If he say that he meant it [ Even from the Apostles time, and that of such
Diocesans as have scores or hundreds of true Churches and Altars without their
particular Bishops, or any Presbyters that were Ejusdem Ordinis with the
Bishops, and were Episcopi Gregis, and that had such Power of the Keys over
their flocks, as ours have not: or that had so many such Assemblies that were
no true Churches;] if he will be proved a Historian worthy Credit, Let him give
us any proof that all men described by him agreed de facto that there was so
long, such a superiority of such Bishops. But these men deride distinguishing,
and banish Logic, that is Reason, from their History.

5. V. The next Evidence of certainty which I mentioned, was from [ continued
Existent visible Effects which prove their Causes.] And here this
undistinguishing Historian is at it again. The Superiority of Bishops over
Presbyters is proved by the Laws and Customs of all Churches. This has the
same answer, which I will not repeat. Either it falsely reports my denial, or
it falsely affirms that all Churches in all ages have left us visible Effects
of the foresaid species. And I would he would help us that are ignorant therein
with such History and Evidence from the beginning of the Churches in Scotland,
and in the Southern and Eastern Countries that were without the Empire.

6. VI. I said, that History is credible which speaks consentingly against
the known interest of the authors: and therefore I named few testimonies of the
sins of Popes and Councils but of those that are their most Zealous Friends. To
this he says that my Characters of ancient Bishops are taken from their
professed Enemies, [as my account of Athanasius; Theophylus, Cyril, and diverse
others.]

Ans. 1. My account of Athanasius is almost all, if not all, in his praise, and
is not an enemies testimony there valid. If I mention the displeasure of
Constantine against him it is not any Character of him, but of Constantine the
Agent: Nor do I think Constantine, or Eusebius Caesar: meet to be numbered with
his Enemies; why did he not instance in some words of mine?

As to Theophylus and Cyril, I do not believe that he can prove that Socrates
and Sozomen, and the Historians that Concur with them, were their Enemies. And
if in reciting the Acts of the Councils I recite their Enemies words, so does
Surius, Nicholinus, Binnius, Baronius and all just writers of those acts. And I
do not find that Chrysostom himself, or Isidore Pelusiota had any Enmity to
them, nor Pope Innocent neither. Of the rest before.

7. VII. The next degree of credibility that I mentioned is that which
depends on the Veracity and fitness of the reporter. Of which I named nine
things requisite.

Here he supposes me one that is unfit; and particularly says [ Whether any
has ^ailed with greater intemperance, and less provocation] Ans. 1. I am not
the Author of the History of the mentioned Councils or Popes or Bishops, but
the Transcriber. Let me be as bad as you, or any of your tribe have made me,
that proves not that Socrates, Sozomen, Theodorite, Nitephorus, etc. or
Binnius, Baronius, etc. have misreported what they write. If I have misreported
these authors in any material point, prove it and I will soon retract it.

As for my railing, I expect that title from all such whose faults I name, and
call them to repentance: He that calls men to Repent, calls them sinners, and
that is Railing he it never so great.

His first instanced railing is Page 19. [ A few turbulent Prelates Persecute
good men] He says thus I call the present Bishops of the Church of England;
Does he mean All or some? If All he is an untrue Historian: He may see many
named before my Apology whom I except: And if I have named two I have annexed
the proof.

The next is Page 46. [ silencing destroying Prelates] Ans. Are there none
such? Were not about 2000 here silenced? Do we not continue so and impoverished
almost 20 years? Have none perished in prisons or with want? Do men call out
for the execution of the Law, and plead for our Silencing as a good work, and
take it for railing to have it named? Does not Conscience recoil in these men
when in Pulpits, press and Conference they maintain it to be a good work, and
tell the world how sinful a thing it is for rulers to suffer us out of Gaols?
What, are you now ashamed of your meritorious works? Sure they are s^ant good
if it be railing to name them. You will not say I rail, if I call you
Preachers. And why do you say so, if I call you Silencers, if that be as good?

The next railing is Page 73 [ If all the proud, Contentious, ambitious,
Hereticating part of the Bishops, had been of this Christian mind (to endure
each other in small tolerable Differences) What sins, Scandal and shame, what
Crimes, confusion and miseries had the Christian world escaped?] And is this
railing? Has the Christian world had no such Bishops these 1000 years? Have
not whole Kingdoms been forbidden all Gods Public worship by such, even France
and England among the rest? Is it railing to tell for what little things they
not only Silenced men, but burned and murdered many thousands? Were they not
proud ambitious Prelates that deposed and abused Lud. Pius, and those that in
Council decreed the digging all the dead Bishops out of their graves to be
bur^t as Heretics, who were for the Emperors power of Investitures? Do I rail
if I say that Greg. 7. was Proud and ambitious when he threatened the Prince of
Calaris with the loss of his dominions, unless he made his Bishop shave his
beard? Do not Jewel, and all Protestant writers say worse than this of Papist
Bishops? Is there any such thing as pride silencing, burning, etc. If yea, must
it never be known, reproved, repented of and so forgiven to the penitent? And
if yea, than how shall it be known without proper names? By what name should I
have called Silencing but its own and so of the rest? Gods power over
Conscience is mavelous that sin cannot endure its own name.

The next railing is the word [ Hereticating.] And how could I have known if he
had not told me that this word is railing? Did not the Bishops take it for a
great service of God, and is it railing to name it? It Is true I used one word
instead of a Sentence for brevity, to signify the Bishops culpable over doing
in proclaiming men Heretics. He that does not believe that they did not well,
nor do not to this day in Cutting off from the Church of Christ all those whole
Countries of Christians called Nestorians, Jacobites, Melchites and the
Monothelites and many such I cannot save him from himself who will own all such
sin and contract the guilt of it. Has not Bishop Epiphanius made us more
Heretics than he needed? Has not Bishop Philastrius made many more than the
Devil himself made? Lest this pass for railing once more I will name some of
them.

1. His 11th sort of Heretics are those that kept Easter Day at a wrong time (
as our Britains and Scots did.

2. The Millenaries are the 12th ( such as many of the ancient fathers, and our
Mr. Mede, Dr. Twiss, etc.)

3. The 27th Offered Bread and Cheese at the oblation.

4. The 28th put New Wine in New Vessels in the Church.

5. The 29th Put their fingers on their mouths for Silence.

6. The 30th thought that all Prophets ended not with Christ.

7. The 33d went without shoes.

8. The Novatians are the 34th.

9. The 41th thought the Epistle to the Hebrews was not written by Paul, but by
Barnabas or Clemens? and the Epistle to Laodicea by Luke.

10. The 42th are the Orthodox Miletians that Communicated with the Orthodox
and some Arians too.

11. The 46th doubted of the diversity of Heavens.

12. The 47th being ignorant that there is another Common Earth invisible,
which is the Matrix of all things, do think that there is no Earth but this one.

13. The 48th thought that water was the common matter, and was always, and
not made with the Earth.

14. The 49th Heresy denied that the soul was made before the body, and the
body after joined to it: and believed that Gods making them Male and Female
first was to be understood of the bodily Sexes: Whereas (says he) it was the
Soul that was made Male and Female, And the Soul was made the Sixth day and the
body the 7th.

15. The 50th Heresy thought that not only Grace, but also the Soul itself,
was by God breathed into man.

6. The 51st is Origens ( that thought our Souls were first celestical
Intellects, before incorporate ( as Mr. Glanvile and many now.)

17. The 52d thought that brutes had some reason ( as Mr. Chamber.)

18. The 54th thought that Earthquakes have a natural Cause.

19. The 55th Heresy learned of Trismegistus to call the Stars by the names of
Living Creatures (as all Astronomers do.)

20. The 56th thought that there were not many languages before the confusion
of Babel.

21. The 57th Heresy thought that the name of a [Tongue] proceeded first of
the Jews or of the Pagans.

22. The 58th Heresy doubted of the years and time of Christ.

23. The 59th thought (as many Fathers) that Angels begat Giants of women
before the flood.

24. The 61st was that Christians were after Jews and Pagans.

25. The 62d Heresy says that Pagans are born naturally, but not Christians,
that is, that the Soul and body of men are not daily, Created by Christ, but by
Nature.

26. The 63d says that the number of years from the Creation was uncertain and
unknown.

27. The 64 thought that the names of the days of the week (Sunday, Monday,
etc.) were made by God first and not by Pagans, and were named from the Planets.

28. The 66th was that Adam and Eve were blind till God opened their Eyes to
see their nakedness.

29. The 67th Heresy imputes the Sins of Parents to their Children.

30. The 68 Heresy was of some troubled about the Book called Deuteronomy.

31. The 69 thought that those sanctified in the Womb wore yet conceived in sin.

32. The 70th Heresy thought that the World had been first divided by the
Greeks, Egyptians, and Persians.

33. The 71 thought there was a former Flood under Deucalion and Pyrrha.

34. The 72 says that men are according to (or under) the 12 signs of the
Zodiac, not knowing that those 12 signs are diverse Climates, and habitable
Regions of the Earth.

35 The 74 Heresy is that Christ descended into Hell to offer Repentance there
to sinners.

36. The 75 doubted of the nature of the Soul, thinking it was made of Fire,
etc. ( as many Greek Fathers did.)

37. The 77 is of Gods hardening Pharaoh, ( etc. where he describes the
Dominicans.)

38. The 79 is that the Psalms were not (all) made by David: and it denies the
equality of the Psalms, as if they were not all written and placed in the order
that the things were done.

39. The 80 Heresy thought that Gods words to Cain [Thou shall rule over him]
were properly to be understood, whereas the meaning was [Thou shall rule over
thy own evil Thoughts that are in thy own free Will.]

40. The 81 Heresy did not well understand the reason of Gods Words to Cain,
giving him Life.

41. The 82 Heresy thought that the Stars had their fixed place in Heaven, and
their course, not understanding that the Stars are every night brought out of
some secret place, and set up for use, and at morning return to their secret
place again, Angels being Presidents and Disposers of them,) (that is, as
servants bring Candles into the room at night and take them out again.)

42. The 83 doubted (as some Episcopal Commentators) of the Book of Ca^ticles,
lest it had a carnal Sense.

43. The 85 Heresy thought, that the Soul of man was naturally G^ds Image
before Grace.

44. The 87 Heresy thought, that really four living Creatures mentioned in the
P^^phe^s praised God.

45. The 88 Heresy thought that the Levitical Feasts were literally to be
understood, not knowing that it was the 8 Feasts of the Church that were meant.

46. The 90 Heresy preferred Aquila's Translation before the Septuagint.

47. The 91 preferred a Translation of thirty men before the Septuagint.

48. The 92 preferred another Translation of six men before it.

49. Another Heresy preferred the Translation of Theodotion and Symmachus
before it.

50. The 94 Heresy preferred the Scriptures found in a Vessel after the
Captiv^^y before it.

51. The 96th ought that Melchizedeck had no Father or Mother, not knowing that
it is spoken of him as learning that which his Father and Mother never taught
him.

52. The 97 hold that the Prophet Zachariah of Fasts, is to be properly
understood; when as it is but for the four Fasts of the Church, viz. for
Christmas, Easter, Epiphany, and Pentecost.

53. The 98 H^r^sie holds, that Solomon' s great number of Wives and
Concubines, is literally to be understood; whereas it is meant but of diversity
of Gifts in the Church.

54. The 100 Heresy thought that the Measuring Cord in Zachary, was to be
understood of measuring Jerusalem literally whereas it meant the choice of
Believers.

55. The 101 Heresy not understanding the Mystical Sense of the Cherubim and
Seraphim, in Isaiah, are troubled about it, and in doubt (And here he
Mystically tells you the Mystical Sense.)

56. The last Heresy thought that one of the Cherubims came to Isaiah, and
with a Coal touched his Lips, and that it was an Angel or Animal with Fire;
whereas it is the Two Testaments, and the Fire of God's Grace.

To these you may add if you please the Heresy of holding Antipodes,
determined by Pope Zachary, by the Mediation of the holy Bishop Boniface, I
think an English man. And of what peril it is for Christians to eat Jayes, and
Rooks, and Badgers, and Hares, and Wood horses: And Lard must not be eaten
before it is dried in the Smoke, or boiled on the Fire: Or if it be eaten
unboiled, it must not be till after Easter: And there must be three great Lamps
set in a secret place of the Church, after the similitude of the Tabernacle,
which must be kept burning; and at Baptism others lighted by them.

Reader, remember 1. That Philastrius as well as Epiphanius, was a Bishop; 2.
Yea and a Saint; whereas very few Bishops of all the Councils had the honor to
be Sainted.

Therefore if you say that all these were not Anathematized by Councils; I
answer, 1. All these are Registered as Heretics. 2. And they held (as Mr.
Dodwell and his Company here do) that he that communicates with Heretics, is
to be judged a Heretic. 3. And that Heretics are no parts of the Church.

And forget not above all the Hen^ician Heresy, which determines not only our
King, but many Papist Princes to be Heretics, for claiming Invest^tures.

And now Reader, I un^eignedly hate uncharitableness, and therefore deny no
good that was in such Bishops: But I must no more be indifferent between Good
and Evil, than between Heaven and Hell; not may I judge Christ a Railer, for
saying to his prime Apostle, [ Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense
unto me, etc.] If the name of [ Hereticators] that is, too rash pronouncing men
Heretics be railing, I will give thee no Character, censure or name of the
aforesaid practice, for I can devise no name which may not be called Railing.
But judge of it and call it what you see cause.

And again, if you say, These are not the Decrees of Councils, I answer, These
are but Flea-bitings to the wounds that the Church has received from Councils,
by Anathematizing.

The next Instance of Railing in these words, which he half repeateth [ Either
credible Socrates and others were gross Liars, or this Patriarch and St was a
dow^right Knave.] Ans. He himself is so far from denying this, that he makes
Socrates and Sozomen not only Liars, but Lovers of a Lie; for what they say of
St. Theophilus: And who is it then that is the Railer? Read the Story.

The next Instance is, p. 95. that I call Bishops the [ Firebrands of the
World*] Ans. The words are these [ I take them to be the Firebrands of the
World, and unworthy the regard of sober men, who pretend to know men's Judgments
better than themselves, and allow not men's own a^liberate professions to be the
notice of their Faith.] If they will say, that you are Heretics in heart,
though your Tongue and Life pr^fess sound Doctrine, what means has any man to
clear himself against such, and keep from their Inquisition Racks or Flames? Is
this Railing?

The next Instance is the Word [ Self-conceited Bishops] P. 98. Having
mentioned the many Logical Niceties necessary to decide the Question between
the Nostorians, Eutychians, and the Orthodox, I said [ Is it not p^ty that such
Questions should be raised about the Person of Christ, by self conceited
Bishops, and made necessary to Salvation, and the World set on fi^e and divided
by them?] Reader, remember the Division made by it con^inueth to this day, to
the Separation and Condemnation of a great part of the Christian World! And is
the name [ self-conceited] in describing the cause of this a railing? How much
worse r^^ers are they that will call a Drunkard a Drunkard, or a For^^cator a
Fornicator? Read the sadder words of Ludolphus.

The next railing is [ merciless, fur^^us Bishop^, page 196] Ans. There is no
such word: When I find where it is I shall see the occasion of it. Italy,
Piedmont, Ireland, etc. have tried that there have been such.

The last is page 183. [ The Confounders of Churches.] Ans. I thought I had
merited of them by my impartiality and lenity: As after I commend the Wisdom
and peaceableness of Pope H^norius, (though a General Council even for that
made him an H^retick,) so I here justly commend the Wisdom and Peaceableness of
Pope Vigilius, who advised the Council to leave dead men to God ( Theod. M^ps.
Theodorite and Ibis] and not dam^ them when God has judged them already, and
yet not to admit any of their wrong opinions] I ^^y T^is was the right way: If
they had all dealt as visely and Christianlike, Councils ^ad not been the
Consounders of the C^u^ch^^] Is this railing? At last they forced Pope Vig^lius
to subscribe to them, and it so consounded the Churches, that a great part of
Italy itself forsook the Church of Rome for it, and set up another head against
the Pope a^ 100 Years. Was not this confusion? And must it not be known?

Reader, as far as I understand them, the Paraphrase of these men's words, is
[If we kindle a fire in the Church, name it nor, much less call any to quench
it: or else we'll say it is you that kindle it: say not you are excommunicate or
silenced when you are, though it be by Thousands: else we will prove that you
are railer^: If we lay you in Gaols and take all you have, do not say, you h^rt
us, much less you wrong us: take not on you to know or feel when you are hurt:
else we will have an Action of railing against you.

8. That w^i^h follows I answered before: But after he finds a notable piece
of my ignorance. The Pope inviting the King of Denmark to conquer a Province of
Heretics, I know not who they were unless they were the Waldenses: Well guest,
says Mr. M. Waldo was in 1160, 80 Years after. Ans. This will serve for men
willing to be deceived. It was the Persons and Religion, and not the name that
I spoke of. Does not he know that Rainerius himself says, that those Persons
(called Albigenses, Waldenses, and other such names) professed that their way
of Religion was Apostolical, and they derived it down from Silvesters, that is
Constantines time? If I did not guess well I wrong no Bishops by i^: and I
confessed my Ignorance that I knew not whom the Pope meant: And why did not
this callent Historian tell us who they were?

9. Next he has met with my Ignorance for saying Vienna near France] which is
in the Borders of France. A^s 1. Is that any slander of Bishops or Councils? 2
Truly I had many a time read in Councils, that Vienna was in France, and had
not forgot it, if Ferrarius and Chenu had not also told it me; And whether it
was the fault of the Printer, or of my Hand, or my Memory, that put near for
in, I leave it freely to his Judgment, for I remember it not.

And if the manner of Binnius naming it made me call Ordo Prophetarum in
Gelasius a Book, it is no wrong to Episcopacy.

CHAP. XVII. His Censure of my Design, and Church-Principles, considered.
1. AS to this his first Chapter I have before showed how falsely he reports
my design. He says he never saw any thing which more reflecteth on Religion:
Lucian and Julian have left nothing ha^f so scandalous in all their Libels
against Christians, as this Church History has raked up: Here is nothing to be
seen in his Book but the Avarice, Ignorance, Mistakes and furious Contentions
of the Governors of the Church.

Ans. How false that is the Reader may see in all the beginning, the two
Chapters in the end, and much in the midst, which are written contrarily to
obviate such false thoughts 2. Is the ascendent sort of Prelates that were
growing up to maturity till Gregory the Seventh's days, the whole Church of
God? Are there no other Christians? Is all that is written against the Pope and
such Ascendents, written against Christianity? Did Christ speak against
Christianity, when he reproved them for striving who should be greatest? or
Peter, when he counseled them, as 1 Pet. 5. And Paul when he said, I have no
man like minded; for they all seek their own things, and not the things that
are Jesus Christ's? Or when he said, Demas has forsaken me, etc? Or John, when
he said, Diotrephes loved to have the pre-eminence? Or all those Councils of
Bishops which condemned each other, far deeplier than I judge any of them?

What have I said of Fact or Canons, which Binnius and their other Flatterers
say not? Was it not there extant to the sight of all?

And that I Recorded not all their Virtues, 1. The History of Councils says
little of them. 2. Must no man show the hurt of Drunkenness, Gluttony, etc. and
so of Ambition and Churchcorruption, unless he will write so Voluminous a
History, as to contain also all the good done by all the persons whom he
blames? I have often said, that I wondered that instead of so greedy gathering
up all the scraps of Councils, the Papists did not burn them all, as they have
done many better Books which made against them.

2. I was about to answer all his first Chapter, but I find it so useless a
work, that I shall ease my self and the Reader of that labor. 1. He takes on
him to answer a Piece of a Disputation written about 23 years ago, whereas I
have lately written a Treatise of Episcopacy, with fuller proof of the same
things, which he names, and takes on him to answer some part of it, and
answers not: Till he, or some other, show me the mistakes of that, let them
talk on for me in their little Velitations.

2. Most that is considerable which he says, is answered already in that Book:
As his fiction that Unum Alt are in Ignatius, signifies not an ordinary
Communion Table, etc. And much more out of Ignatius, and many more is added,
which he says nothing to.

3. I have before showed that he goes on false Suppositions, that I am only
for a Bishop of a single Congregation, or against all, and many such; when yet
he himself confesses the contrary, yea derideth me for making Twelve sorts of
Bishops, and being for such as no Party is like to be pleased with.

4 The contradictions and mistakes are so many as would tire the Reader to
peruse an answer to them.

And when he has all done with the numbering of Churches, (over-passing the
full proof of the Primitive Form of them which I gave as before) he confesses
that even his great esteemed Jesuit Valesius, [ believes that the City Church
was but One even in Alexandria, and in Dionysius' s time, p. 64.

And while p. 65. he makes Petavius and Valesius so much to differ, as to
gather their contrary Opinions from the same words, and consequently one of
them at least understood them not, I that profess my self not comparable to
either of them, specially Petavius, in such things, am taken for a falsifier,
if I misunderstand a word that concerns not the matter of the History.

This therefore being not about Church History so much as against my Opinion of
the Ancient Government, when he has answered the foresaid Treatise of
Episcopacy, if I live not, some one may reply, if he deal no better than in
this.

CHAP. XVIII. Of his Second Chapter.
1. Page 78. He would have men believe that it is Discipline against real
Heresy, that I find so much fault with, and ascribe all mischief to --

Answ. Utterly contrary to my most open Profession: It is only making those
things to seem Heresy that are none (either Truth, or mere difference of
words, or small mistakes,) or curing Heresies by rash Anathema's, without
necessary precedent means of Conviction, or by Banishment or Blood.

2. Is this it that you defend the Church for, and we oppose it for? When we
would have none in our Churches whom we know not, and that have not personally,
if at Age, professed understandingly their Faith. And what is the Discipline that
you exercise on Heretics? It Is enough that you know them not, and so never
trouble them. Your Talk and Pamphlets truly complain what swarms of Hobbists,
Sadduces, Infidels, Atheists, are among us: Do they not all live in the
Parishes and Diocesses? Does the Bishop know them? Are any of them
Excommunicated? I could never learn yet how to know who are Members of your
Churches: Is it all that dwell in the Parishes? Then all these aforesaid, with
Jews and Papists, are in it: And then why are ten parts of some Parishes
suffered without Discipline to shun the Parish Church Communion? Is it all that
hear you? Then 1. Ten parts in some Parishes, and two or three, or half in
others are not of your Church, and hear you not, and many Nonconformists hear
you. 2. And any Infidel may hear. Bare hearing was never made a sufficient note
of a Churchmember. 3. And how can you tell who all be that hear you in an
uncertain crowd? 4. And why does not your Discipline meddle with constant
Non-Communicants?

3. Is it only all that Communicate with you? 1. These are yet fewer, and so
the far greatest part of many or most Parishes here are let alone to be no
Church members at all, when they have been long Baptized, and no censure by
discipline past on them. 2. How know you your stated Communicants, when any
stranger may come unquestioned? The truth is, it is Parish discipline which you
will not endure. No wonder if you named it Issachars burden. Bucer in scrip.
Anglic. and all the Nonconformists after him long strove for it in vain. It is
the hated thing. Were it possible to prevail with you for this, we should have
little disagreement about Church Government. But the Popes that have been the
greatest enemies of it, have yet gloried in a Discipline to set up their power
over Princes and Peoples, and to have their own wills, and tread down all that
are against them.

2. To extenuate Anathematizing (so very Common with Councils) he tells us P.
81. that [ Let him be Anathema imports no more than that we declare our
abhorrence of such doctrines, and will have nothing Common with those that
profess them.]

Ans. 1. We may declare our abhorrence of every known sin and Error, in such
as must not be anathematized. 2. By (nothing) I suppose you mean not [ not the
same King, Country, Earth, Air, etc.] but [ not the same Church, the same
Christian Communion, familiarity, love, etc] Whether you mean [not the same
God, Christ, etc.] I know not But do you think the Anathematizing Bishops so
unreasonable, as to renounce all Christian Communion with men and not tell why?
Or to give no better Reason than [ We abhor their doctrine:] How few Churches
or men have nothing worthy to be abhorred, that is, No Error or sin? And must
we renounce Communion with all the Christian world? No, they were not so bad:
You use them hardlier than I. They took them to be no true Christians, as
wanting somewhat of that faith which is necessary to Salvation, and Essential
to a Christian, and so to have made themselves no Church Members, and therefore
are to be sentenced and avoided accordingly.

And how ordinarily do they expound [ Let him be Anathema] that is [ Cut off
from Christ?] Not only Hildebrand so expounds it often, but many before him:
Whereupon they commonly agree that an Anathematized Heretic is none of the
Church, nor can be saved without repentance.

And indeed to renounce all Communion with Christ's true members not Cut off
from the Church, is a greater sin than I charge on them. Though familiarity and
specially Communion may be suspended, while delay of repentance makes the Case
of a sinner doubtful.

3. Page 82 He begins himself with blaming Bishop Victor, for Endangering the
Peace of the whole Church upon so light occasion. Valesius is of opinion, that
it was but by letters of accusation.

Answ. I think it could be but by Letters of Accusation, Renunciation, and
persuading others to renounce them. For Bishops were not then come up to their
Commanding Power over one another. But does not Mr. M's. here rail upon a
Bishop, in saying the same of him that I did, if my words were Railing? Thus
you shall have him all along confessing much of that faultiness by them, which
he takes the mention of by me to be so bad.

4. He names many Councils, which he says I pass lightly over; then sure I
say no harm of them. He thinks it is because I could not, as if he knew it were
my will. And so I am never blameless.

5. But he has a notable Controversy against Baronius, who thought Novatus
had been a Bishop (such Errors as Baronius was guilty of by Ignorance, are
excusable in one so far below him in History as I am.) But I congratulate Mr.
M's, discovery, that he was but a Presbyter: But all confess that he Ordained
Felicissimus Deacon: And here is a Presbyter Ordaining: But it was irregularly!
Let it be so: He says, that he ought not to have Ordained, but with Cyprian,
or by his permission. I grant it. But 1. If Cyprian's permission would serve,
then it was not a work alien to a Presbyter: If a permitted Presbyter may
Ordain, a Bishop's Ordination is not necessary ad esse Officii; and so that
which is a disorder is no Nullity. 2. And it seems by Novatus's Act, that the
Necessity of Episcopal Ordination was not universally received. And I have not
yet met with any that make it more necessary ad esse Presbyteratus quam
Diaconatus.

6. Next he mentions another Carthage Council, where one Victor dead, is
condemned for making a Priest Guardian of his Child, and so entangling him in
worldly Affairs. And he tells you, that all that I can say against this, is the
rigor of the Sentence; but he dissembleth, and takes no notice that I mention
it in praise of the Bishops of those Times, who were so much against
Clergy-mens meddling with Secular Affairs: What odious Puritanism would this
have been with us? What I cite in praise, our Historian cannot understand.

7. And that you may need no Confuter of much of his Accusation of me but
himself, who so often says, I say nothing of Bishops and Councils, but of their
faults, etc. he here says as follows.

[ After this he gives a short Account of Councils called on the Subject of
Rebaptization of Heretics: And here, to do him right, he is just enough in his
Remarks: The generality of the World was for Rebaptizing Heretics: And
considering what manner of men the first Heretics were, it is probable they
had Tradition as well as Reason on their side. However, Mr. Baxter endeavors
fairly to excuse these Differences, and speaks of the Bishops with honor and
respect, allowing them to be men of eminent Piety and Worth. Had he used the
same Candor toward others, etc.

Answ. 1. If this be true, a great deal contradictory is untrue.

2. He greatly misreporteth the Controversy: It was not whether Heretics
should be Rebaptized, but those that were Baptized by Heretics, and taken into
their Churches. If a Heretic had been Baptized when found by a sound Minister,
and after turned to Heresy, he was to be restored by Repentance without
Rebaptizing; and I think they all agreed in this. But I imagine this was but a
lapse of his memory in Writing.

3. But the Question is, Whether the Bishops, whose faults I mention, were of
equal Worth and Innocence with those whom I honor and praise? Let the proof
show.

I would he would freely tell us, Q. 1. Whether he think at this day the
generality of Bishops (in Italy, Spain, France, Germany, Poland, the Greek
Church, Moscovy, Armenia, Syria, etc.) are so commendable, as not to be notably
blamed? Q. 2. If not, When was it that he thinks they ceased to be generally so
commendable? Was it in Hildebrand's Time, or any time before? Q. 3. Can you
believe that the generality turn from good to bad just in one Age? Or rather
that they degenerated by degrees? If they were mostly bad in a thousand, or
nine hundred, or eight hundred, can you think that they were not drawing
toward it and near as bad a little before; Q. 4. What was it think you in
which the Corruption of the Clergy did consist? Was it not most in a proud,
domineering worldly Spirit? Is it not that that you blame the Popes for? Was
not their Ascent their Corruption? Sure you all agree of that. Q. 5. And did
the Papacy Spring up in a year? Did not Leo begin to arrogate, and others after
him (to say nothing now of those before him) rise higher and higher by degrees
as Children grow up to manhood, till in Greg. 7. it came to Maturity? I know no
Protestant that denies this? Q. 6. And can you or any sober man think that in
so many hundred years it was only the Bishop of Rome that was sick of this
disease, and that all or most of the other Bishops were Free? Were they not
commonly for ascending with them: Did not they in the East strive to be
greatest? And the Bishops of the West strive to rise with, and by the Pope?
Were they not, and are they not as his Army? And did he prevail against the
Primitive Purity and Simplicity without them? Did not his Councils, and
Prelates, as his Armies, do his greatest works? Yea, have they not often outdone
him, and over-topt him in Mischief (as in the deposing of Ludov. Pius against
his will? say good Historians.)

Tell us then at what Age just we may begin to dispraise the Bishops. And from
that time forward, will you not be as great a Railer as I, and scandalize
Christianity more than Lucian or Julian?

8. But I somewhat marvel that he is again at it (reciting Dionysius's words
which he thinks I mistook for Eusebius's) That he does not condemn the
rebaptizing of Heretics which was a Tradition of so great antiquity: I judge
more Heartily of him than he does of me: Though he so often repeat it, I will not
believe that he knew not, that it was not the baptizing of Heretics as such,
that was the question: but only of those that were baptized by Heretics. Yet I
confess Eusebius phrasing it, might tempt one to think so that had not read
Cyprian and others upon the questions. But when Eusebius and Dionysius mention
[ rebaptizing Hereticks] they mean only those that were by Heretics baptism
entered into the Societies and Profession of Heretics. If the worst Heretic,
yea or Apostate, had been baptized, by the orthodox, Cyprian and all the rest
were agreed against Rebaptizing such when they repented. This Dionysius telling
Xystus Romans of an ancient Minister that was greatly troubled in Conscience that
he had been falsely Baptized by an Heretic (being himself no Heretic) and
doubted whether he should not be Rebaptized, yet says, He told him he durst
not Rebaptize him that had so long been in the Church and Communicated, but bid
him go on Comfortably in Communion (Much like a forementioned case put to me,
by some that never were Baptized, but in our undisciplined Parish Churches had
been without knowledge or question admitted long to Communion, whether yet they
should be Baptized at all: And Dionysius's Reasons against it I cannot answer.

9. And here I may take notice how our new Churchmen, (such as Thorndike, Mr.
Dodwell and all their partners) who nullify sacraments delivered by one that
has not Canonical Ordination by a Bishop of uninterrupted Succession from the
Apostles, do make themselves Heretics in the sense of the Roman Church which
they allow: For 1. Baptism is the first and most necessary Sacrament in their
own opinion. Yea Austin and too many of old, but specially too many now, take
it to be necessary to Salvation; 2. If therefore Baptism be a nullity all that
are Baptized in England, Scotland and all the Protestant Churches by such as
had no such Ordainers, must be Baptized again or be damned. 3. If they say,
They may be saved without it, then 1. they confess Mr. Dodwells Doctrine to be
false, that says none have a Covenant right to Salvation, who have it not by a
Sacrament from such hands. 2. And they renounce the Doctrine of the Necessity
of Baptism to Salvation. But if they are for Rebaptizing all such Protestant
Countries, as necessary to Salvation, they are uncharitable that do not speak
it out.

10. He passes by Bishop Stephens Excommunicating all the Oriental Bishops of
Cappadocia, Cilicia, Galatia, and Reprobating their Synods, for Rebaptization:
Does he think that even then some Bishops did not rise too fast?

11. The man that is so angry with me for telling of the faults of Bishops and
Councils, is page 87. angry with me for not saying worse against Secundus his
Council of Bishops at Cirta; and says, I have not done right to the Catholic
Church: I perceive the question is not, whether I may Rail at Bishops, but what
Bishops they be that I must Rail at.

As for the Council at Sinuessa, I believed the being of it no more than he
does: And when I am but naming the common Catalogue, he might pardon my modesty
for saying that the being of it is a Controversy.

12. Of the Council of Illiberis he says but contractedly the same that I do,
that It has many good Canons, and some that need a favorable Interpretation,
and is very severe in some cases. This measure of just praise and dispraise, is
practiced by him that is condemning it in me.

13. As to his Controversy, whether Bishops, or such as strove to be Bishops,
were the very first movers of the Donatists Controversy, who should be Bishop,
it is not worth the turning over one Book to search, as to my business.

14. Next he that accuses me of Railing at Bishops, accuses me for saying
(from some good Authors) that a Bishop of Carthage, Donatus, was a good man,
who he says was bad. It Is little to me whether he were good or bad.

15. Next he notes that I Err with Binnius and Baronius as to the year of a
Carthage Council. I undertook not to justify all the Chronology or History
that I transcribe: Whether Optatus, or Binnius and Baronius hit on the just
year, little care I.

16. I praised a Donatist's Council of 270 Bishops at Carthage for Moderation,
agreeing to communicate with penitent Traditors, without Rebaptizing them, and
so doing for 40 years.

Q. What was these men's Heresy?

He says, This looks liker a piece of Policy than Moderation, for it had no
tendency to peace, but to strengthen the Schism.]

Ans. Who knows how to please men? When they exclaim against Separation if men
Communicate with them, they judge it but Policy, that has no tendency to
peace. 2. And who is it now that most raileth at Bishops? I am confuted for
praising the moderation of 270 of them, and he is their censurer even when they
do well, and their moderation with him is but Policy. Even as they say, of me,
that I constantly Communicate with their Parish Churches to undermine them:
Near or far off, all is one with this sort of men, if you stick at any thing
that they bid you say or do.

But he will not believe that this Council of Orthodox moderate Donatists were
so many as 270. Because 1. we have only the Authority for it of Tychonius a
Donatist. 2. It Is improbable after Constantine's suppression of them that
Schism should so suddenly spread. 3. Lest it should prove the Churches to be
too Small: Yet he says, These Schismatics set up Churches in every City and
Village.]

Ans. 1. It Is said Tychonius confesses this Council, because the later
Donatists would fain have buried the memory of it: But that it depends only on
the Credit of Tychonius, I think depends only on your Credit: 2. Augustine that
reports it, honors this Tychonius, and recites an Exposition of his of the
Angels of the Churches, Rev. 2. and 3. which I suppose displeases you more
than his Donatism. 3. It seems you would have believed some stranger that knew
it not, rather than a Donatist that speaks against the will and interest of
his party. 4. It rather seems that the Donatists were the greater number of
Christians there before Constantine's time, and like the Papists therefore
counted themselves the Catholics and the others the Schismatics. Constantines
Prohibition did not suppress them. 5. Therefore the numerousness of their
Bishops and smallness of Churches, rather shows what was the state of the
Churches before worldly greatness swelled them to that disease, which was the
Embrio or infancy of Popery.

17. Whether the Donatists be like the Papists or the Separatists (much less to
the Nonconformists) if the Reader will but peruse what I have said and what Mr.
M. has said, I am content that he judge without more words.

18. He passes by diverse Councils because he could not say that I blame them:
And he passes by Constantine's Epistle to Alexander and Arius, which raileth
at them more than I do (in his sense.)

As to the Council of Laodicea, it is not two or three such words as his that
will make an impartial man believe that the Churches were like our Diocesses,
when every Convert before baptism was to say his Catechism to the Bishops or
his Presbyters: Or that the Command that Presbyters go still with the Bishop
into the Church, and not before him, do not both imply that they were both
together in every Church.

But he will have it confined to the Cathedral; And when I say, There were long
no Churches but Cathedrals, he says he will not differ with me whether they
shall be called Churches or Chapels. But the difference is de re: They say
themselves that A Bishop and a Church were then Relatives: And when they have
put down many hundred Churches under the Diocesan, forsooth they will gratify
us by giving us leave to call them Churches. As if they put down an hundred to
one of the Cities and Corporations, and then give us leave, to call them
Corporations when they are none. Yet blush they not to make the world believe
that they are that Episcopal party (who put down a thousand Churches and
Bishops in some one Diocese) and I am against Bishops.

Yea when they have not the front to deny but that every City then had a Bishop
(that had Christians,) and that our Corporations are such as they called
Cities, Yet when we plead but at least, if they will have no Chorepiscopi, they
will restore a Church and Bishop with his Presbyters to every such City with
its adjacent Villages, hatred, scorn and derision goes for a Confutation of
us; Though we do it but to make true discipline a possible thing; Which they
call Issachar's burden, and abhor it, and then say, It is possible and
practiced.

19. As to the Roman Council which he believes not, he might perceive that I
believed at least their antiquity as little as he: But the Canons are so like
those of following Councils that such it is like were sometime made.

And whereas I noted that their condemning them that wrong timed Easter, would
fall on the Subscribers to our English Liturgy, where 2000 are Silenced for not
Subscribing, the man had no better answers to give, than these 1. That I should
have said the Almanack-Makers. As if he would have had men believe that
Falsehood, that it was the Almanac Makers and not our Liturgy changers that
were deceived.

2. [ Alas! one year they mistook.] As if he would Persuade men that their rule
fails but one year, which fails often.

3. The Silenced Ministers have little Reason to thank him or any body else,
that gives this Reason of their Separation. It Is strange this should trouble
their Consciences that Care no more for Easter than for Christmas, but only
that it Falls upon a Sunday.

Here see his Historical Credibility. 1. Would he persuade men that we give
this Reason alone? Or why may it not be one with twenty more?

2. He intimates that I give them as reasons of Separation: As if to be
Silenced, were to separate, and to be passive were to be active.

3. He intimates that as Nonsubscribers I and such other are Separatists,
which is false; While we live in their Communion.

4. He takes on him to know our judgment as against Easter (but for Sunday)
when we never told him any such thing.

5. He intimates that it is no credit to us that we make Conscience of
deliberate professing Assent to a known untruth in open matter of fact: And if
the Contrary be their Credit, I wish they may never be Witnesses against us.

6. He intimates that a man that is not for keeping Easter, is the less
excusable, if he will not Profess a known Falsehood about the time of Easter. If
Conscience stood a man in no stead for greater Ends than worldly wealth and
ease and honor, who would not be a Latitudinarian Conformist?

20. Next when I deny belief to these Councils, he blames me for making
advantage of the History of them. As if he saw not that I do it, but ad hominem
to the Papists who record them as if they were really true. For it is
principally the Papists (from Infancy to Hildebrands Maturity) against whom I
write.

21. He next comes to the Novatians as my Favorite sect, And [ Favourite] may
signify to the Reader a truth or a Falsehood. 1. Does not every Christian
Favor them that have lesser Errors more than them that have greater?

2. Do I not as often as he profess my great dislike of every sect, as a sect?

3. Do I not disclaim this Novatian sect and their opinion, and own the
Contrary?

4. It seems he takes me to be too Favorable to some Bishops and their
followers: The question is but who they be that must be favored? I may come to
be taken for a Novatian by such men as well as Socrates and Sozomen.

22. Here (without railing) he bedawbs Novatus and Novatian to the purpose with
horrid Crimes, a Pharisaical Saint, Perjured, and what not? But what! Were they
not Episcopal? Yes, he doubts it not: It was for to be a Bishop that Novatian
wrought his Villainies; (what if I had thus bedawbed the Episcopal?) But yet the
very word [ Puritan] is of use to him. This, says he of Novatus, was the
tender Conscience of the author of the Ancient sect of the Puritanes? Can you
tell who the man aims at? Is it Nonconformists? Novatus and Novatian were
Prelatists, and never scrupled more Ceremonies than our Prelates impose. Who
then can it be but men that in general, though Episcopal, do profess Tenderness
of Conscience? And there I leave them, without the application.

23. But this Defender of Surgent Prelacy, sticks not to disgrace those whom he
seems to defend. It was three of the Catholic Bishops that Consecrated
Novatian, and (without railing) he calls them Three plain ignorant Bishops.
These good men suspecting no trick, and overcome with his good entertainment,
with too much Wine and persuasions, were forced at last to lay their hands on
him and Consecrate him Bishop.] 1. Ignorant Bishops; 2. Overcome with too much
Wine, and entertainment: 3. And with persuasion: 4. To do such an Act as to
Consecrate so bad a Bishop, and that in such a city as Rome, and that without
the Churches choice or Consent. How much worse have I said of Bishops? But, yet
[ they were good men.] But if they had been Nonconformists, what names had been
bad enough for them? No doubt if they had been sequestered and cast out (for
their too much wine and such ordination) how odiously might the agents have
been described as enemies to the Church and Persecutors of good men.

24. Yet further this New Bishop engages men to him by Oaths, enough to strike
a horror in the minds of the Reader, says he.

See what a man may do for a Bishopric? It reminds me of many good Canons that
forbid Bishops swearing their Clergy to them; And of our Et Caetera Oath in
1640 never to Consent to any alteration, (to say nothing of our times) and the
old Oath of Canonical obedience. It strikes horror into men's minds now that we
scruple these.

25. He makes the Novatian doctrine blasphemous (without railing) and me too
Favorable in representing it. As to that I suppose he is not ignorant how
great a Controversy it is what they held, even among the greatest Antiquaries,
and Enemies of Schism and Heresy. And I use in accusations to meet with most
truth in the most Favorable interpretations.

And here I will tell our Historian, that while I take leave to dissent from
his accusation, it shall be but by the authority of those whom I judge as well
acquainted with Church Writers and Customs as any that ever Mr. M. or any of
his Masters read, not excepting more knowing men than Valesius.

The first is D. Petavius in Epiphan. de Cath. Where first he tells us, that no
less nor later men than most of the ancient Fathers, and Specially the Greeks,
mistook Novatus and Novatian for one, or thought the sect had a single Author;
naming Eusebius. Theodoret, Epiphan. Nazian. Ambrose, Austin, Philastrius, yea and
Socrates. Yet half as great a mistake in me would have been scorned.

2. Against Epiph. and Theodoret he says [ Non ea Novatiani Opinio fuit, eos
qui gravioris peccati noxam contraherent, ab omni spe consequendae salutis
excludi: Nam and illos ad capessendam poenitentiam hortari solebant: Et ut
Divinam clementiam lach^ymis ac sordibus elicerent identidem admonebant: Sed
hoc unum negabant; ad Ecclesiae fidelium Communionem recipi amplius oportere:
Neque penes Ecclesiam reconciliandi jus ullum ac potestatem esse: Quippe unicam
illam peccatorum indulgentiam in illius arbitrio versari, quae per Baptismum
obtinetur; which he proves out of Socrates, Ambrose. And he says, that they
were not counted Heretics for wronging the lapsed, by denying them Communion,
but for wronging the Church Power, by denying the Power of the Keys for their
Restitution. (Like enough.)

The other shall be that excellent Bishop Albaspineus Observe. lib. 2. Observe.
20, 21. p. (mihi) 130, 131. [Advertant Novatianorum errorem non in eo positum,
quod dicerent neque lapsum, neque excommunicatum in morte a peccatis
liberandum; sed haereticos ideo habitos, quod opinarentur Deum ipsum Ecclesiae
neque remittendorum neque retinendorum peccatorum capitalium potestatem
copiamque fecisse: Atque haec in eo fuit viguitque eorum haeresis, qui quanquam
illud consequeretur ex-eorum falsa Opinione, ut absolutionem non largirentur,
tamen hoc eorum factum non haeresis nomine afficiendum erat, neque ad haeresin
accedebat ob aliam causam quam quod a font illo and quasi capite haresin
olente dimanarat, eo maxim quod Novatiani crederent id Ecclesiae a Deo non
fuisse praestitum and concessum; quae causa sola fuit cur praxis illa ce^
disciplinae Novatianorum ratio haeresis nomen notionemque non effugeret.]

The Clergy felt their own Interest, and the Novatians denied their Power to
retain, as well as forgive capital Crimes, and thought their Keys extended not
so far.

And that the Case of the lapsed was it that they began with, Epiphanius
himself and others agree.

And Observe. 19. he shows that Novatianus did this against his former Judgment,
in Envy and Faction against the Bishop, because he mist of being Bishop
himself. A Bishopric was it that provoked him to deny this Pardoning Power in
Bishops.

And Albaspineus has in many antecedent Observations showed, how little, if
any thing at all, the Novatians differed else from the Ancient Church in the
strictness of their Communion, and avoiding sinners: So that he thus begins his
fifth Observation [ Incredibilia prope sunt, quae his capitibus dicturi sumus:
sed tamen ita vera and certa, and quae cujusque animam summam in admirationem
rapiant, Ecclesiam primis temporibus nulla vel levissima labe inquinatam
fuisse; quin ita illibatam intactamque ut omni ratione, cura and solicitudine
prospexerit, filii ut sui quam a Baptismo hauserant puritatem eam nulla
aspersam vitii alicujus macula and soeditate conservarent. Imo ca se veritate
adhibita ut fugiendum sibi detestandumque peccatum, quovis terrore proposito
putarent. Non solum autem multa crimina peccataque numerabantur, quorum
Authors artificesque absolutionem omnem desperabant, sed and ea quoque quibus
ignoscet poenitentiam concedi opertere censuerat, peccata ita ulciscebatur, ^ut
non nisi semel eis qui ea commisissent, unius poenitentiae copiam faceret
Ecclesia, hoc est si post Baptismum lethaliter peccassent. Quod si cum Ecclesia
reconciliatus in idem aut aliud mortale peccatum iterum prolaberetur, ita in
perpetuum tribus primis saeculis ab Ecclesia repulsam ferebat, ut non nisi
poenitentiae and in morte precum quae reliqua erant subsidia expectanda sibi
duceret, nulla absolutione data quae in spem veniae illum erigeret.] And he
adds, that many that cannot deny his proofs, yet will not believe that ever
such a Discipline was used.

But this was in the three First Ages: After, when Prosperity and Wealth ticed
the ungodly into Bishops Seats, and into the Church, the Case was altered, and
as he shows, Observe. 6. the Case was so altered to the loose extreme, that
Criminals were admitted toties quoties. And in his Notes on Tertullian he
shows, that this was a difference between the Orthodox and the Heretics,
that the Orthodox did di^ multumque deliberare quos in societatem ejusdem
Ecclesiae, and corporis recipere debeant; but the Heretics were ready to take
all that came. Yet I suppose not near so loose as those Diocesan and Parochial
Churches that know not who comes, but without question take all that will but
come to the Rails and kneel: And when by the magnitude of Diocese and other
means, they have secured themselves against the trouble and possibility of
Pastoral Discipline, the Priest wipes off all guilt with a word, and faith, If
they were Atheists, Hobbists, Sadduces, Whoremongers, common Blasphemers,
Drunkards, it is no fault of mine, I know it not; and no wonder, when he knows
not who in the Parish are his Flock.

That Eusebius himself and others named by Petavius mistook the Novatians is no
wonder to those who read the volumes of palpable Falsehood written against the
Nonconformists in this present age, and hear witnesses at the bar swear those
Plots and Conspiracies and Treasons against men, from which grave and
conscionable Juries quit them.

But me thinks when Mr. M. had said that Socrates is an Historian of good
Credit and acquainted with them] he much forgot his own ends when he recited
these words as his [ Some took part with Novatian, and others with Cornelius;
according to their several inclinations and Course of life: The looser and more
licentious sort Favoring the most indulgent discipline, the other of more
austere lives inclining most to the Novatian severity.] Good still, I now see
that the Novatians indeed were Puritanes, though Episcopal, and I accuse not
our accusers of any such Heresy. But I confess that I shall believe a Novatian
Historian, who being so strict against sin must be strict against a Lie, rather
than those that Scorn such Puritanism, and deride the Person that cannot
swallow a bigger Pill.

And when Mr. M. labors to show out of Socrates that it was not only Idolatry
that they censured, he labors in vain: It was the beginning of their Schism
that I mentioned, and not Socrates his Age.

As to the judgment of the Council of Eliberis and all the three First Ages, I
have told you what Albaspine says before. If you can consute him, do; I am not
engaged to defend him; but I believe him.

26. I conclude this and the former Chapter with this Counsel to the Scorners
of Puritanes: Never trust to your Titles and Order, how good soever, without a
careful holy obedience to the Supreme Lawgiver, either for Concord on Earth,
or Salvation in Heaven. True Parish-Reformation is the way to satisfy godly
persons better than either Violence or Separation. But if you still obstinately
resist Parish. Discipline and Reformation, you must have Toleration of such as
will not consent to your Corruption, or else persecute the best to your own
ruin. Theophilus Parochialis has said more for Parish Order against the
Regulars, and Privileged, than you have done against the Separatists. And yet
the Confraternity of the Oratorians set up in every Parish, was the best way he
could devise to recover the state of lapsed Parishes: As the priviledging of
Friars was the Pope's last Remedy instead of Reforming his corrupted Church.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Council of Nice and some following.
1. THis Historian having put himself into a military posture seems to
conceit that every word proceeds from an Enemy. And first he feigneth me to
make Constantine judge that [ the Bishops and Councils were of little use] when
I had no such word or thought, but the contrary.

2. Next he himself confesses that which I blame those Bishops for; Even those
Libels which they Contentiously offered against one another; to have raised
Quarrels instead of Peace, and which Constantine cast altogether into the fire
without reading them. And when he confesses what I say, is he not a Railer at
the Bishops as much as I in that?

As to his excuse that [ It is no wonder considering their great dissentions in
Religion, etc.] I easily grant it: But in this excuse he says yet more against
them.

3. Because I said that Athanasius differing from Constantine about the
reception of Arius his repentance [ Caused much Calamity] he feigneth me
heinously to accuse Athanasius which I intended not: Even a just action may [
Cause Calamity] as Christ says his Gospel would bring division. All his labor
in justifying Athanasius fights but with a spectre of his own imagination.
And yet I am inclined to think that if an Hypocrite Arius had been connived at
to please such an Emperor, the death of Arius would have left the Church
quieter than it did; though he here thinks greater rigor had been safer: And I
think multitudes of Sadduces, Infidels and debaucht Persons in one of our
Diocesses, yea or Parishes, is worse than one Arius while Hypocrisy restrained
him from Venting his opinion.

4. And here he that dreamed I accused Athanasius, really accuses Constantine
as imposed on by a Counterfeit Repentance and restoring the incendiary to
opportunities of doing mischief, and being against the means that might have
ended that fatal mischief. But I confess Constantine was no Bishop, and
therefore this is not an accusation of Bishops or a railing at them.

5. Next when I had fully opened the Case of the Mel^tians out of Epiphanius on
pretense of abbreviating, he leaves out that which he likes not, and tells us
how the Nonconformists have advantaged the Papists: If I thought the man
believed himself I would try to undeceive him* In the mean time I desire him to
think again which party most befriends the Papists; They that are for a
reconciliation with them on these terms, that there may be acknowledged an
Universal supreme human Power over all the Church on Earth, and the Pope to be
Principium Unitatis and Patriarch of the West, and he shall abate us the last
400 years Impositions, and all be accounted Schismatics that unite not into
this Church; and that all the Preachers in England shall be silenced that will
not swear, promise, profess, and practice all that which is here imposed on
them, though they think it heinons sin, and others think it but matter
indifferent, and all the people shall be prosecuted that hear them; and that
this Division shall rather weaken the Kingdom, and advantage the Papists, than
the Consciences of men, as wise and faithful as themselves shall be eased of
such Impositions, or they suffered to Preach the Gospel of Christ: Or those
that being condemned to such Silence, Prisons and Ruin, had rather be
delivered, though a Papist be delivered with them, than be destroyed.] Methinks
we are used by these Church-Fathers, as if they should determine that a great
part of the Protestants who are most against Popery, shall be hanged, unless
the Papists will beg their pardon, or cut the Rope; which if these Protestants
accept, they shall be said to be the Promoters of the Papists.

6. As for all his Exceptions against Epiphanius, they are nothing to me, who
did not undertake to justify his words, but transcribe them; nor think it
worth my labor now to examine the Case of so small concernment.

7. When some have blamed me for condemning the Arians too much, he says, that
I say some what very much to the disadvantage of the Doctrine of the Trinity,
but he was so gentle as not to tell what it was, unless it be telling what
Petavius the Jesuit says: About that I am wholly of his own mind. But the
express words which Petavius de Trinit. cites out of all those Old Fathers,
cannot be denied: And verily they are so many, and so gross, that unless his
Argument satisfied me, viz. [ The Votes of the Council of Nice showed what was
the Common sense of the Church, better than the words of all those Fathers] I
should think as Philostorgius in point of History, that there were no
sufficient confuting of the Arians from those Fathers, though sometimes they
have better words. Visible words cannot be denied, even where they must be
lamented. That Is the difference between Mr. M's. Opinion of History and mine.

8. As to the Audians, I recite but Epiphanius's words, who in other cases is
greatly valued by these Accusers: They will believe what he says of Aerius.
And as to what he says to the contrary out of Theodoret, he may see that he
says all by hearsay, and says, that They hid that which he accuses them of,
and were Hypocrites, professing too much strictness, l. 4. c. 9. which is still
the common way of accusing the best, against whom instead of proveable faults,
they turn their strictness into a crime. Epiphanius is much more particular
than Theodoret in the story.

9. The rest which he notes of my words of the Council of Nice, have nothing
needing a reply. Petavius has fully proved that the Chorepiscopi were true
Bishops. But now we are odious Presbyterians if we would but have a Bishop in
every City, that is, Corporation, Desiring only that Discipline might become
possible. And for this we are proclaimed to be against Bishops; that is, says
this sort of men; They that would have but One Bishop over a thousand, or many
hundred, or score Churches, are for Episcopacy; and they that would have every
Church have a Bishop, as of old, or at least every great Town, and so would
have twenty, or forty, or a hundred for one, are against Episcopacy: And that
which is strange is, These men are believed.

10. I praised the Council of Gangra for condemning some Superstitions, and he
says, I have nothing against it: Whether it be a Common Mistake that Arius was
here received to Communion, I Will not stay to examine.

11. When he has weighed all he can for the Synod at Antioch, he is forced to
confess that they were a packt company of Bishops, that complied with
Constantius and Eusebius's Contrivance. And what do I say worse of them than
he? As to the Canon against Priests or Deacons not gathering Assemblies against
the Bishops will, I am for it as much as he, if the Bishops and Churches be
such as they were then; but not in France nor Italy.

He says, I leave my sting behind me, and end very angrily; for these only
words [ This is their strength] mentioning the Councils (that was against
Athanasius) suppressing Dissenters as seditious by force. I see angry men think
others angry when they are, and are stung if we do but name their stinging us:
As if Prisons and Ruin were not so sharp a sting as these four words. If it be
not their strength, why do they so trust to it, as to confess that their
Arguments and Keys would do little to uphold their Prelacy without it. In the
days of the Usurpers I moved for a Petition, that when they granted Liberty of
Conscience for so many others, they would grant Liberty for the full exercise
of the Episcopal Government to all that desired it. But the Episcopal Party
that I spoke to, would not endure it, as knowing what bare Liberty would be to
their Cause, unless they could have the Sword to suppress those that yield not
to their Reasons.

12. Next he says, I spare my Gall for about a dozentimes, not regarding how
it contradicts his former Accusations.

But whereas I recite the horrid Accusations of the Council at Philippopolis
against Athanasius, Paulus and Marcellus, of open Matters of Fact, as Murder,
Persecutions, Burning of Churches, Wars, Flames, Dragging Priests to the
Marketplace with Christ's Body tied about their necks, stripping Consecrated
Virgins naked before a concourse of People [and offering to send messengers on
both sides to Try the Fact, and to be themselves condemned if it prove not
true] he is offended that I seem staggered at this, Athanasius having detected
before so many Subornations, etc.

Answ. I did not say that I was staggered, much less doubted which of them did
the wrong: But that a Reader may by such a Temptation be astonished, and
confounded whom to believe. But d d I ever rail more at Bishops than he here
does? What 1. So great a number of Bishops, 2. Deliberately in Council, 3. To
affirm so vehemently, 4 Such matters of open Fact, 5. And offer it to the Trial
of Witnesses of both sides; and all this to be false, 6. And to be but the
consequent of former Subornations and Perjury; can you name greater wickedness?

Obj. But they were Arians. Answ. But they were Bishops. The worse for being
Arians. 2. Yet called but Semi-Arians, and renounced Arius, and pretended
Reconciliation. 3. And they were the Oriental part of the Council at Sardica,
called General by the Papists. 4. And they were believed against Marcellus by
Basil and Chrysostom: But all that I cite it for, is to tell the Reader what a
doleful case the Church was fallen into, by the depravation of the Bishops. Did
none of these profess before to be Orthodox? I do not say that it was quatenus
Bishops that they did all this, but that multitudes of Bishops were then become
the shame and calamity of the Church.

13. Next he scorningly accuses me for giving too soft a Character of the
Circumcellians; and says, My Moderation and Charity may extend to John of
Leyden. And he calls them The Most barbarous and desperate Villains that ever
defamed Christianity by assuming the Title.]

Ans. 1. This is the man that says I rail. I named so many and great sins of
theirs, that I little thought any Reader would have thought that I spared them
too much. 2. Yet they were Donatists, and of them Optatus himself says, lib.
5. [ Apud vos and apud nos Una est Ecclesiastica conversatio; Communes
Lectiones: Eadem Fides; ipsa Fidei Sacramenta, eadem mysteria] that is, says
Albaspine [Una Ecclesiastica disciplina: Eodem modo Scripturas Explicamus: Ipsa
Regula Fidei: Idem Mysterium quod confertur and significatur, and eadem res
visibilis per quam res spiritualis datur] in lib. 5. p. 153.

And says Optatus, lib. 1. [ Nequis dicat me inconsiderate eos fratres
appellare, qui tales sunt. Quamvis and illi non negent and omnibus notum sit,
quod nos odio habeant, and execrentur, and nolunt se dioi fratres nostros;
tamen nos recedere a timore Dei non possumus -- sunt igitur sine dubio fratres
quamvis non boni: Quare nemo miretur eos me appellare fratres, qui non possant
non esse fratres.

Obj. But the Circumcellians were worse than the rest.

Answ. They were of the same Religion, but the unruly furious part in their
practice: And Optatus says, Though they would rail in words [ sed unum quidem
vix inveuimus cum quo p^r literas, vel hoc modo loquatur:] And so goes on to
call Parmenian his Brother. And it is worth the consideration how much Albaspine
includes in Fraternity; note first, and in Observat.

3. And they were Orthodox fierce Prelatists, doing all this for the
pre-eminence of their Bishops. And what if some Prelatists now should hurt
their Brethren more than the Circumcellians did, must I call them therefore the
most barbarous Villains that ever defamed Christianity. Angustine says, They
made a Water of some Salt or sharp thing, and cast in men's Eyes in the night in
the streets: No man can think that this barbarous action was done by the most,
or any but some furious fools: They say that they would wound themselves to
bring hatred on the Catholics, as if they had done it, or drove them to it: He
that knows what Self-love is, will believe that this was the case but of a
few; and an easier wrong than some that abhor them do to their Brethren. And
must we needs Rail indeed against such numbers of hurtful Prelatists? What if
any rude persons of your Church should be Whoremongers, Drunkards, Blasphemers,
and seek the Imprisonment of their Brethren, yea their Defamation and Blood by
Perjury, should the Church be for their sakes so called, as you call them? I
speak them no fairer than Optatus did.

14. When p. 57. I commend the many good Canons of the African Councils, and
the faithfulness of the Bishops, he notes none of this, because it proves the
untruth of his former Accusations.

And when I name twenty five or twenty six more Councils of Bishops, some
General, and some less, which were for Arianism, or a compliance with them, he
defends none of them, but excuses them, and says, that [ they were not much
to the honor of the Church: Yet the evil Edicts and Consequences of them are
rather to be charged on the Arian Emperor, than the Bishops.]

Answ. 1. This is the same man that elsewhere so overdoes me in accusing the
Arians.

2. The Emperor was Erroneous, but said to be otherwise very commendable. And
is it not more culpable for Bishops to Err in the Mysteries of Divinity, than a
Layman? And for many hundred to Err, than for One Man? And do you think that
the Bishops Erring did not more to seduce the Flocks, than the Emperor's?

But he says, that [ If many fell in the Day of Trial, they are rather to be
pitied, than insulted over, for we have all the same infirmities, etc.

Answ. I wrote in pity of them and the Church, without any insulting purpose.
If any now to avoid lying in Prison, and starving their Families, by Famine,
should surrender their Consciences to sinful Subscriptions after a Siege of
Nineteen years, I shall pity them, and not insult over them. Nay, if I speak of
those that lay the Siege, and call out for more Execution, I do it not
insultingly, but with a grieved heart for the Church and them.

But when I largely recited Hillary's words of them, he says, [ The Account is
very sad] (and what said I more?) But, says he, yet such as shows rather the
Calamity, than the Fault of the Bishops.]

Answ. Nay then, no doubt, it is no fault to Conform. Hillary then, and all that
kept their ground, were in a great fault for so heavily accusing them. And so
the World turned Arians in show (as Hierom and Hillary speak) is much acquit,
and the Nonconformists are the faulty Railers for accusing them. It had been
enough to say, It was no Crime; but to say, no Fault, is too gentle for the
same man that so talked of Perjured Arians before.

15. Yet because he is forced to confess that it was most by far of all the
Bishops, even in Councils (he of Rome not excepted) that thus fell, he must
show how it offended him to be forced to it, by telling the world how
contentious I have been against all sorts and Sects (the first is false, and he
knows it I think, and the latter is true formally of a Sect as such; even his
own Sect.) And some judge me such a stranger to Peace, as to need a Moderator
to stand between me and the Contradictions of my own Books.]

Answ. Yes, the Bishops Advocate Roger L'Estrange, where nothing but gross
ignorance, or malice, or negligence, could have found Contradictions, were the
whole places perused. And where I am sure my self, that there is none; I have
somewhat else to do than to write more, to show the Calumnies of such Readers.
Who most seeks Peace, you, or those that you prosecute? One would think it
should not be hard to know if men be willing.

CHAP. XX. Of the first General Council at Constantinople. His Cap. 4.
1. HE begins with accusing me of imitating the Devil; Does Job serve God for
naught? because I say that [ the reason why the West was freer from the Arian
Heresy, than the East, was not as the Papists say, that Christ prayed for
Peter, that his Faith might not fail, but because the Emperors in the West
were Orthodox, and those in the East Arians: And the Bishops much followed the
Emperor's will.]

What, says he, can be more unchristian?

Answ. 1. I never said that this was the Only Cause.

2. I proved that this Privilege of Rome was not the meaning of Christ's
Prayer.

3. Is not this the same man that even now ^^id the fall of far more Bishops,
even most in the World, on the Emperor, as overcoming them by force and fraud?

4. Does not God himself keep men usually from strong temptations, when he will
deliver them from sin?

5. Were not the Eastern Bishops, and the Western, of the same mold and temper?
And if the Eastern followed the Emperors, had not the Western been in danger
if they had the like temptation?

6. Does not Basil that sent to them for help, complain of them as proud, and
no better than their Brethren?

7. Did not Marcellinus fall to Idolatry, and Liberius to subscribe against
Athanasius with the Arians?

8. Did not the West actually fall to Arianism when tempted for the most part?
Judge by the great Council at Milane, and by Hillary's complaints.

9. Has Rome and the West stood faster to the Truth since then? What! all the
Popes who are by Councils charged with Heresy or Infidelity, and all
wickedness, and those many whose Lives even by Baronius and Genebrard, are so
odiously described? Is the West at this day free from Popery and its fruits?

10. Do you think in your conscience that if we had not here a Protestant King,
but a Papist, many of the Clergy would not be Papists? Why then are they so in
France, Spain, Italy, Poland, etc? And why did the most of them turn in Qu.
Mary's days? I do not insult, but lament the Churches Case, which ever since
Wealth and Honor, and too much Power corrupted it, have had Bishops far more
worldly, and less faithful than they were the first three hundred years. Though
I still say that ever since, God has in all times raised some serious
Believers that have kept up serious Piety in the Church: And as I doubt not but
there are so many such among the Conformists, as is our great Joy, so I hope
that, though foully blotted with Superstition and Error, there are many such
among the Papists themselves.

2. Yet he says, I do the Bishops Right again, without thinking of doing them
Justice, while I tell how many were murdered.

Answ. 1. Does he know my thoughts? 2. It Is true I intended not to do any other
Justice, than to praise Christ's Martyrs and Confessors, while I lament the
Case of Persecutors and Revolters? Is the praise of Confessors any honor to
the Heretics?

But perhaps he means, I right the Order of Bishops. Answ. Did I ever say or
think that there were no Bishops that kept the Faith? Do I say All fell, when I
say Most fell? The Man speaks as his imagined Interest leads him, and so
interprets my words to his own sense, not as written. And if that be the
right way, I think he will grant that there were more Martyrs and Sufferers
under Valens, Constantius, Hunnericus, and Gensericus, in the East, and in
Africa, by far, than were when their Trial came in all the West that is now
subject to the Pope. And what moved the man to dream that when I so describe
and praise their constancy in Suffering, I did it as at unawares?

That the greater part of the Bishops of the Empire were Arians, I will not
offer by Testimony to prove, when it is so commonly by Fathers, Historians, by
Papists and Protestants agreed on. How many of them were Bishops before, and
how many but Presbyters or Deacons, I Will not pretend to number. The turning of
multitudes all agree on. The Constancy of many he falsely intimates that I
deny, and says, I injuriously represent them, and cannot tell a word wherein
that Crime is found.

3. Naming the things that were done by the Council at Constantinople, I
mention both the setting up, and after the putting down of Gregory; and lest
any Caviller should carp at the word [ putting down] I presently open
particularly what it was that they did toward it; that resolving on his
deposition, they caused him, though unwilling, rather to give it up, than stay
till they cast him out. This great Historian had no more manlike an Exception
here, than to say, that against all History, and against my own Explication, I
say that [ They Deposed him.] I said [ They put him down] in the manner, and as
far as I explained.

4. While he here himself accuses the Times then of General Corruption, and
the Church of Divisions, adding, [ What Age has been so happy as not to labor
under those Evils?] he accuses me of making misuse of Gregory's words, to
represent the Council in an odious manner.

Answ. It is to represent the worser part in a lamentable manner, as far as
Gregory did, and no further. And as to his quarrel at my citation, I shall say
no more; but if the Reader will but read Gregory's own words, I willingly leave
all that Cause to his Judgment: If he will not, my words cannot inform him.

Yet he himself says [ He does indeed in several places find fault with this
Council] And can you forgive him? I think I find no more than he did. But for
this you find fault with him [ He did resent the Injury (And was it an Injury?)
and did not bear the deprivation of his Bishopric with the same generosity he
proposed, which made him a little more sharp than was decent in his
representation of the Bishops -- What wonder if sharpened with discontent, he
exclaim with somewhat too great a passion against the administration of the
Church which he had been forced to quit] Ans. All will be confessed anon, when I
have been accused for saying it before him: That Is his way. But it was not for
leaving a high and fat Bishopric that he was grieved, but for being separated
from the People that he had partly served in their lower state, and partly won
from Heresy, and who came about him with tears entreating him not to forsake
them. And though it were morethan generosity to set light by the Honor and
Wealth, it is treachery to set light by Souls: And they changed to their great
loss. He resigned much to quiet the People lest they should do as they did for
Chrysostom after him. It is no new thing for the Major vote of the Clergy to
Envy those few that are better and more esteemed than themselves, nor yet for
the Godly People to be loath to leave such pastors.

5. He says [ His censure of Councils that he knew none of them that have any
happy End, was not the fault of the expedient, but of the men] Ans. And what
did I ever say more. It is his custom when he has stormed at me, to say in
Effect the same that he stormed at. Some Papists would persuade men, that it
was only Arian Councils that he meant, but most Protestants that Write about
Councils against them, do cite and vindicate these words of Gregory: And the
impartial Papists confess that it was the Councils also of the Catholics that
there and else where he spoke of.

6. In the Case of Meletius, and Paulinus, two Bishops in a City, and the Case
of Lucifer Calaritanus made a Heretic for separating from lapsed Arians, he
says over the same that I do; that good men cannot rightly understand one
another, and so it ever has been, and it is the Effect of humane frailty and
not Episcopacy. In all this I agree. But 1. If humane frailty make Bishops
swell in pride and ambition, and domineering, it has far worse Effects than in
other men: 2. And Bishops are bound to excel their flocks in Piety, humility,
Selfdenyal, peaceableness, as well as in knowledge. If the Physicians of this
city should prove unskilful, and yet confident where they err, it is not
quatenus Physicians that they are such: But if it be qui Physicians that are
such, they may kill thousands, while the same faults in all their neighbors
may kill few or none. If your Interest made you not smart and angry without
cause, you would not cavil against such plain truth.

7. About the Priscillianists he says [ I all along observe this Rule, to be
very favorable to all Heretics and Schismatics be they never so much in the
wrong, and to fall on the Orthodox party and improve every miscarriage of
theirs into a mighty crime.]

Ans. If all along this accusation be false, then all a long your History
serves such a use. But in France, Spain, Italy, he is favorable to Heretics
that takes not the orthodox for such, or that is not for racking and burning
them. And in England he is favorable to Schismatics that takes not the
greatest lovers of Piety and peace for such, and the Church Tearers for
Church-Healers: As Mr. Dodwell phraseth it, they are Schismatics that suffer
themselves to be excommunicate (for unsinful things in the Bishops account, and
heinous sin in theirs; and so that are not so ripe in Knowledge, as to know all
the unsinful things to be such which may be imposed.

8. What would this enemy of railing have had me said more than I did of the
Priscillianists? viz. that they were Gnostics and Manichees? Was not that bad
Enough. No, I favor them still? And what say I more of the Bishops and the
whole cause, than Sulpitius Severus the fullest and most knowing Describer
says? Why does he not accuse him for the same description? Yea and their Mr.
Ri. Hooker who in the Preface to his Eccl. Pol. says of Ithacius the like? Yea
Baronius himself consents? Where I say that to the death Martin separated
from the synods of these Bishops (I said not from all Bishops in the world) he
says, he renounced only the Communion of Ithacius his Party, and that others
did as well as he. Reader, it will be thy folly to take either his word or
mine, what an Author says, when we differ, without looking into the Book it
self. Read Sulpitius Severus; I will transcribe some words, lest he say, I
mistranslate them.

Priscillianus, familia nobilis, praedives opibus, acer, inquies, facundus,
multa lectione eruditus, disserendi and disputandi promptissimus -- vigilare
multum, famem and sitim far poterat, habendi minime cupidus, utendi
parcissimus (Was it a crime to say so much good of him?) But proud of his
Learning, set up a Heresy, and two Bishops Instantius and Salvianus joined
with him, and made him a Bishop -- At Caesar Augusta one Synod was gathered
against him. The Story I before recited. Next a Synod at Bordeaux tries them.
Says Sulpitius [ Ac mea quidem sententia est, mihi tam reos quam accusatores
displicere. Certe Ithacium nihil pensi, nihil sancti habuisse definio: suit
enim audax, loquax, impudens, sumptuosus, ventri and gulae plurimum impertiens.
Hic stultitiae eo usque processerat ut omnes etiam sanctos viros, quibus aut
studium erat lectionis, aut propositum erat certare jejuniis, tanquam
Priscilliani socios aut discipulos in crimen arcesseret. Ausus etiam miser est
ea tempestate Martino Episcopo -- palam objectare haeresis infamiam. Imperator
per Magnum and Ru^um Episcopos depravatus a mitioribus consiliis deflexus* --
So he tells how many were put to death -- Caeterum Priscilliano occiso, non
solum non repressa est haeresis -- sed confirmata, latius propagata est: Namque
sectatores ejus qui eum prius ut sanctum honoraverant, postea ut Martyrem
colere c^p^runt. Ac inter nostros perpetuum discordiarum bellum exarserat, quod
jam per quind^^im annos ^oedis dissensionibus agitatum, nullo modo sopiri
poterat. Et nunc cum maxim discordiis Episcoporum turbari aut misceri omnia
ce^nerentur, cunctaque per eos odio aut gratia, metu, inconstantia, invidia,
factione, libidine, avaritia, arrogantia, somno, desidia, essent depravata:
Postremo plures adversus paucos been consulentes, insan^s consiliis and
pertinacibus studiis certarent: Inter haec Plebs Dei, and Optimus quisque
probro atque ludibrio habebatur.] So ends Sulpitius History.

Do you not see, Mr. Morris, that there have been Prelates and Puritanes, even
Episcopal Puritanes before our Times? Does not your stomach rise against
Sulpitius as too Puritanical and severe? Is not my Language of most of the
Bishops soft in comparison of his? Yet he was so early as to live in that which
you now call the most flourishing Time of the Church. Sir, I hate Discord, and
love Peace; but I never look that the Enmity between the Woman's and the
Serpent's Seed, or Cain and Abel, should be ended* or that the holy Title of
Bishops and Priests should reconcile ungodly men to Saints. Sir, England
knows, that though some factious persons have done otherwise, the main Body
of those that your Law does Silence, Ruin and Revile, have a high esteem of
such Bishops as have been seriously godly; such as were many in Ancient and
late Times: And deride it as long as you will, the seriously religious People
in England are they that are most against Church-Tyranny, and which Party most
of the debauched and profane are of, has long been known.

9. But the Reader shall further hear how little you are to be trusted. Says
Sul. in Vita Mart. [ Apud Nemausium Episcoporum Synodus habebatur ad quam
quidem ire noluerat -- (There Is another Synod.)

Et page 584. In Mon. Pat. [ Maximus Imperator alias vir bonus, depravatus
consiliis Sacerdotum, post Priscilliani necem Ithacium Episcopum Priscilliani
accusatorem caeterosque illius socios, quos nominare non est necesse vi regia
tuebatur. -- Congregati apud Treveros Episcopi ( there is another Synod)
tenebantur, qui quotidie communicantes Ithacio communem sibi causam secerant:
His ubi nunciatum est ^^opinantibus, adesse Martinum, totis animis labesacti,
mussitare and trepidare coeperunt. -- Nec dubium erat quin Sanctorum etiam
maximam turbam tempestas ista depopulatura esset. Et enim tunc solis oculis
discernunt inter hominum genera, cum quis Pallore potius aut Vest, quam fide,
haereticus aestimaretur. Haec nequaquam placitura Martino Episcopi faciebant.
-- Ineunt cum Imperatore Consilium ut m^ssis obviam Magistri officialibus,
urbem istam (Martinus) vetaretur propius accedere. (But it was not five Miles
from all Cities and Corporations.) -- Interea Episcopi quorum communionem
Martinus non in ibat trepidi ad Regem concurrunt, per damnatos se conquerentes
actum esse de suo omnium statu, si Theognisti pertinaciam, qui eos SOLUS palam
lata sententia condemnaverat, Martini armaret authoritas: Non oportuisse
hominem capimoenibus illis: Non jam desensorem haereticorum esse, sed vindicem
( Methinks I read Mr. Morris) Nihil actum morte Priscilliani si Martinus
exerceat illius ultionem. ( These men have done nothing till they have
destroyed all that are against their Tyranny.) Postremo prostrati cum fletu (
they could weep too) and lamentatione Potestatem Regiam implorant, ut ut atur
adversus UNUM hominem vi sua: Nec multum aberat quin cogeretur Imperator
Martinum cum haereticorum sort miscere.] But the Emperor knowing his eminent
Holiness and Reputation, tries persuasion; [and blande appellat, haereticos
jure damnatos, more judiciorum publicorum, potius quam in sectationibus
Sacerdotum: Non esse causam qua Ithacii caet erorumque partis ejus communionem,
putaret esse damnandam, Theognistum odio potius quam causa, fecisse dissidium;
Eundemque tamen SOLUM esse qui se a communione interim separavit; a reliquis
nihil novatum.] You see here that M. M. says truly, that Martin separated but
from the Bishops of Ithacius's Party: That is, All save one Theognistus ( and
Iginus is elsewhere named.) Is not here a great accord of the Bishops?) [
Quinetiam paucos ante dies habita Synodus ( Synods still) Ithacium
pronunciaverat culpa non teneri] no wonder: Synods have justified the
forbidding of two thousand to Preach the Gospel.) At last when no other Remedy
could save the Lives of men from the Leeches, Martin yielded once to
communicate with the Bishops on condition the men's Lives should be saved: The
Bishops would have had him Subscribe this Communion: But that he would never
do. [Posterodie inde se proripiens, cum revertens in viam moestus ingemisceret,
se vel ad horam noxiae communioni esse permixtum -- subsedit, causam doloris
and facti accusante and defendente cogitatione pervolvens, astitit ei repent
Angelus; Merito inquit Martine compungeris, sed aliter exire nequisti: Repara
virtutem: resume Constantiam; ne jam non periculum gloriae, sed salutis
incurreris. Itaque ab illo tempore satis cavit, cum illa Ithacianae partis
communione misceri. Caeterum cum quosdam ex inergumenis, tardius quam solebat,
and gratia minore curabat, subinde nobis cum lachrymis fatebatur, se propter
communionis illius malum cui se vel puncto temporis necessitate, nonspiritu
miscuisset, detrimentum sentire virtutis. Sedecim postea vixit annos: Nullam
Synodum adiit; ab omnibus Conventibus se removit.] Now Reader, judge how great
Ithacius's Party was, that boasted but one or two men were against them: And
whether Martin separated not from their common Synods.

Methinks I see Mr. M. here in the strait of the Pharisees, when put to answer
whether John's Baptism was from Heaven, or of men. Fain he would make Martin
and Sulpitius Puritanes and Fanatics; but the Church has made a Holy day for
Martin, and dedicated multitudes of Temples to his Honor; and all men
reverence Sulpitius and him. Yet he ventures to go as far as he durst p. 142.
against them.

10. But here Mr. M. smarteth, and says [ This Instance could become none
worse than Mr. B. who in a Letter to Dr. Hill confesses himself to have been a
Man of Blood -- ]

Answ. A Man of Blood is your Libertine Phrase. If you would have published
that secret Letter, you should 1. Have told the whole, and worded it truly; 2.
And have professed your self a derider of Repentance, while you call for it. I
lived in an Age of War, and I was on the Parliaments side, and that was enough
to prove that I had a hand in blood while I was on one side, though I never
drew blood of any man my self (save once a Boy at School with boxing.)

But he thinks I should have imitated Martin in renouncing Communion with men
of blood.

Answ. Martin renounced Communion with those that were for destroying even
downright Heretics. Alas Sir, I dare not renounce Communion with these that
Silence thousands of faithful Ministers, and continue still to Plead, Preach,
and Write for their Prosecution by Imprisonment and Ruin. I hope many do it in
Ignorance, and if I do it, it may increase the distance that I would heal.
Nonconformists are no Priscillianists.

And if I renounce Communion with all that were in Wars, it must be with some
present Bishops, and a great part of the Land.

But I understand you; it must be with all that were in Arms for the
Parliament, etc. Answ. The King then will condemn me by his Act of Oblivion,
and by his own practice: Has he not one of them for the Lord President of his
Council? and many more in Trust and Honor? Did he renounce Communion with
General Monk and his whole Army, who were long in Arms for the Parliament? Or
with the Citizens, and multitudes of Commanders through the Land, who drew in*
and encouraged General Monk? Or the Ministers that persuaded Sir Tho. Allen,
Lord Mayor, to draw him in?

To be plain with you Sir (though you call it Railing) Men of your Faculty
kindled the Fire, and set the Nation together by the Ears, and when sad
experience brought them to repentance and to desire unity and peace, and those
that had fought for the Parliament had restored the King, this evil Spirit
envyeth the Kingdom the benefit of this concord, and would fain break us again
into contending Parties, and will not let King and Kingdom have peace, while
God gives us peace from all foreign enemies. Do we need any other notice what
a Contentious Clergy have still been, than the woeful experience of what they
are. If you would have had G. Monk and his Army, and all such that joined with
him destroyed or excommunicate for what they had done, why did you not speak
out at first, but when we would all fain have peace and concord thus twenty
years after cast your Wildfire you warn the Present Duke of Albemarle to expect
to be at last called to account for his original sin.

11. But his passion makes him say he knows not what, P. 142 [ I need not call
Mr. B. to rememberance who compared Cromwell to David and his Son to Solomon;
But this has transported me a little too far.]

Ans. He says this plainly of me afterward, to show the credibility of his
History? Did he know it to be false? If so, there is no disputing with him. If
not, why did he not cite my words. Yea he after transcribes the Epistle meant,
where he saw there were no such words: But others had told that tale before
him, and that was Enough: Even as one of his tribe has written that I have
written in my Holy Commonwealth, that any one Peer may judge the King. If
these Episcopal Historians tell foreigners that we have all Cloven Feet and
Horns, and go on four legs, yea and if some swear it, we have no remedy: They
can prove our noses horns, and our hands Feet.

I again tell them, If Martins Angel and Miracles be credible, woe to those
Prelatists that are for ruining violence, and silences against men better than
the Gnostics. If they be not true, let them not trust too much to the best
Historians.

12. Of the Council at Capua I said that they decreed that the two Bishops and
their People should live in loving Communion, Mr. M. finds me mistaken here.
The words in Binnius are [ Ut tam Flaviani quam Evagrii fautores in Communionem
Catholicam admittantur, modo Catholicae fidei assertores inveniantur] I thought
Catholic Communion had been Loving Communion: And I thought if their fautors
were to be received, so were they: And I thought Antioch had been a part of the
Catholic Church, and Catholic Communion had extended to Antioch: But if Mr.
M. deny these, I will not contend with him.

13. He tells us, that [ No man with his Eyes open ever saw the Condemnation of
Bonosus by the Council of Capua] (for denying the Virgin Mary's perpetual
Virginity.

Answ. It is Criticism and not History that the man is best at. They did it
mediately, while they referred it to them that did it. Says Binnius [ Causa
Bonosi cujusdam in Macedonia Episcopi haeretici, negantis delibatam Dei
genitricis Mariae Virginitatem, post partum in judicium deducta est. Synodus
cognitionem causae Anysio Thessaloniensi cum Episcopis ipsi subjectis
aelegavit. Ab Anysio Bonosum damnatum, eorumque quos ordinasset communione
privatum esse testatur Innoc. P. And he knows it is a Heresy now. Yet this
Council condemned Reordinations.

14. That Jovinian a Monk was called a Heretic, for Doctrines judged sound by
Protestants, is no strange thing. That one not a Bishop was the Head of a
Heresy, was somewhat strange then, but not before they got too high.

As to the Question, Whether Bishops were the Chief Heads and Fomenters of
Heresy, I crave his impartial Answer to these Questions. 1. Do not your selves
maintain that all Churches in the world had Bishops; and that the Bishops were
the Rulers, and of Chief Power? If so, can you imagine that after they had such
Power, Churches could be usually made Heretics without them?

Q. 2. Do not Councils, and all Church History tell us how many Councils of
Heretics there have been that were Bishops?

Q. 3. If any Presbyter broke from his Bishop to set up a Heresy, was it not
one that sought to be a Bishop? Or did they not make presently him or some
other their Bishop and Head? Heresy or Popery had made but small progress, had
it not been for Bishops.

15. When I commend the Novatians Canon, which allowed all men Liberty for the
Time of Easter, as better than burning men as Heretics, he takes it for an
Immoderate Transport that I say* [ as loud as I can speak, If all the Proud,
Ambitious, Hereticating part of the Bishops had been of this mind, O what sin,
what scandal, and what shame, what cruelties, confusions and miseries had the
Christian world escaped?] That is, had they left such Indifferent things as
Indifferent.

And is this against Moderation? I would such Zeal of God's House had more
eaten me up: Dare you deny but that this course would have saved the Lives of
all those thousands of Albigenses, Waldenses, and Bohemians that the Papists
killed: And the death and torment of multitudes by the Inquisition? And the
burning of our Smithfield Martyrs: And it is like most of the Wars between the
Old Popes and Emperors about Investitures? And the blood of many thousand
more. And it would have saved more Nations than ours from the Tearing and
Division of Churches by the Ejecting and Silencing of hundreds or thousands of
their Pastors, as the case of the Germane Interim, and other such actions
prove. And is it Immoderate Transport to wish all this Blood, Schism, Hatred
and Confusion, and weakening and shaming of the Church had been prevented at the
rate of Tolerating Indifferent things: No wonder if you had rather England
still suffered what it does, and is in danger of by Schism, than such things
Indifferent shall be tolerated: It is not for nothing that Christ and Paul
repeat, that some have Eyes and see not, Ears and hear not, etc.

16. And here he again would make his Reader think it is true, that the
Nonconformists pretend that their Silencing is for not keeping Easter Day at
the due Time; as if this man that lives among us did not know, that it is the
avoiding of deliberate Lying by subscribing to a known untruth, which is the
thing that they refuse; and they mention it only as an appurtenance of the
Imposition ad homines, that it would bind them to two different times.

Whether, as he says, our disease be a wantonness sed by concession, and we
are most violent when we know not what we would have, those men are no credible
Judges that for seventeen years would not endure us to speak out our Case; and
when before we debated part of it, would not vouchsafe to answer us; and at
last when we tell it them, do but accuse us with a sharper storm, instead of
giving any thing that a man can call an Answer that ever knew the Case, e. g.
to our Pleas for Peace, and my Treatise of Episcopacy.

17. He confesses that I praise the African Bishops as the best in the world,
though it contradict his former charge. As to the Magnitude of Diocesses, when
he has answered my Treat. of Episcopacy, some body may be edified by him.

I agree with him that Good men will do much Good in a great Diocese. But 1.
Worldly Bishops are so far bad: And worldly Wealth and Honor will ever be most
sought by the most worldly men: And usually he that seeks shall find -- Ergo --
And 2. A good man cannot do Impossibilities: The best cannot do the work of
many hundred.

Forty two years ago some wished for the Restoring of Confession.

Theophilus Parochialis brings copious Reasons and Orders of Princes, Popes and
Prelates, that all should confess to the Parish Priest. If you had set this up
here, how many men must have gone to it in the Parishes of St. Martin, Giles
Cripplegate, Stepney, etc* But how much greater work has Dr. Hammond, and Old
Councils, cut out for him that will be the sole Bishop of many hundred
Parishes? I have named it elsewhere.

And, if any man of consideration think I have not proved against Mr. Dodwell,
that Bishops Government is not like a King's, who may make what Officers under
him he please, but depends more as a Physician's or School-master's on Personal
Ability, I will now add but this Question to him [ Why is it that Monarchy may
be hereditary, and a Child or Infant may be King] but an Infant may not be
Bishop, nor any one not qualified with Essential Ability? I have at large told
you how sharply Baronius and Binnius condemn that odious Nullity of making a
Child (by his Father's Power) A. Bishop of Rhemes.

If I heard twenty men say and swear that one man is sufficient to be the only
Master of many hundred Schools, or Physician to many hundred Hospitals, or that
one Carpenter or Mason may alone build and rear all the Houses in the City
after the Fire, or one man be the sole Master of an hundred thousand Families;
what can I say to him, but that he never tried or knows the work?

18. When I note that the Donatists took themselves for the Catholics, and the
Adversaries for Schismatics, because they were the greater number, he very
honestly says, that Multitude may render a Sect formidable, but it is no
Argument of Right.

Very true; nor Secular Power neither. But what better Argument have the
Papists, and many others that talk against Schism?

19. He thinks the Donatists Bishops Churches were not so small as our
Parishes. Answ. Not as some: But if, as I said before, Constantinople in the
height of all it is Glory in Chrysostom's days, had but 100000 Christians, as
many as three London* Parishes have, judge then what the Donatists had.

20. His double quarrel with Binnius and Baronius, let who will mind. What I
gathered out of those and other Canons of the smalness of Churches then, I have
elsewhere made good. His Reviling Accusations of Envy to their Wealth,
deserves no Answer.

21. He comes to St. Theophilus's Case, of which we spoke before. The Monks
that reported evil of him, were, it may be, says he, downright Knaves, The
Reviling is blameless when applied to such. Doubtless they were ignorant rash
Zealots: But one that reads what the Egyptian Monks were in Anthony's days,
and after, and what Miracles and Holiness, Sulpitius Severus reports of them,
and why Basil retired into his Monastery, etc. may conjecture that they had
much less worldliness than the Bishops, and not greater faults.

22. I think it not desirable or pleasant work to vindicate the credit of
Socrates and Sozomen accusing Theophilus: But if his Conjectures in this case
may serve against express History of such men, and so near, let him leave other
Histories as loose to our Conjectures. Post^umianus Narrative in Sulpitius, is
but of one piece of the Tragedy. He thinks it improbable that Origin should be
accused for making God Incorporeal; and such Conjectures are his Consutation of
History: But Origin had two sort of Accusers; the Bishops, such as Theophilus
and Epiphanius had worse charges against him: But the Anthropomorphite Monks
were they that brought that Charge against him (that God had no face, hands,
eyes.) And Theophilus before them cried down Origin in general, to save his
life, by deceiving them, that they might think he did it on the same account as
they did. This is Socrates his Report of the Case.

He says, that the Impudent Mutinous Monks were not ashamed to tell all the
world, that all that were against them were Anthropophites.

Answ. It was other Monks that I here talk not of, that he means: It was these
Monks that were Anthropomorphites themselves, and would have killed Theophilus
for not being so, till he said to them, Methinks I see your faces as the Face
of God: And the name of the Face of God did quiet them. Hierom was a Party
against Chrysostom; it was for not passing that Sentence on Origin, that
Epiphanius would by masterly Usurpation have imposed on him, that Chrysostom
was by him accused.

23. Could any Sobriety excuse that man Epiphanius, that would come to the
Imperial City, and there purposely intrude into the Cathedral of one of the
best Bishops in the world, for Parts and Piety, and there play the Bishop over
an A. Bishop in his own Church, and seek to set all the Auditory in a flame at
the time of Public Worship, and require him to say that of Origin, which he
there without any Authority imposed on him? I know not what is Pride,
Usurpation, Turbulency, if not Malignity, if this be not.

But at last he says, [ I do not intend to excuso Theophilus in this
particular: (Thank Pope Innocent) He did certainly prosecute his Resentment too
far: But he was not the only man: Epiphanius, a person of great Holiness;
Hierom, and several other persons renowned for their Piety, were concerned in
the persecution of this Great man, as well as he: And to say the truth, this is
their weakness; for that Severity which gives men generally a Reputation of
Holiness, though it mortify some irregular heats, yet is apt to dispose men to
p^evishness.]

But true Holiness ever sincerely loves holy men, and specially such as are
public Blessings to the Church: And though I censure not their main State,
your Holy Persecutors of the best of Christ's Servants, will never by Christ be
judged small Offenders.

Alas! it is too true that Theophilus was not alone: A Council of Bishops were
the Persecutors. And it is hard to think that they loved Chrysostom as
themselves. When the forementioned Council at Constantinople had turned out
Nazianzen, even the great magnifiers of General Councils, Baronius and Binnius,
thus reproach them, that they drove away a holy excellent man, that a man was
set up in his stead that was no Christian; that it was the Episcopi Nundinarii
that did it, the Oriental Bishops first leaving them, and going away with
Gregory. And if the Major Vote of that General Council were Episcopi
Nundinarii, what Ch^ysostom's Persecutors were may be conjectured. Do not these
Papists here say worse of them than I do?

24. Yet though he confess as much as is aforesaid, and bring but his
Conjectures mixed with palpable omissions against the express words of Socrates
and Sozomen, he has the face to make up his failing with this Calumny [ I have
dwelt so long on this, not only to vindicate Theophilus, but to show once for
all the manner of our Author's dealing with his Reader in his Church History.
Any scandalous Story, though it be as false and improbable as any in the Anni
Mirabiles, or Whites Centuries of Scandalous Ministers, any Fiction that
reflects with disgrace on Bishops and Councils is set down for aut^^ntick, no
matter who delivers it, friend or foe.]

Answ. Are not Baronius and Binnius friends to the highest Prelacy? Does not he
himself say that Socrates is a credible Historian? Is his Authority weighty
enough to discredit them whom he contradicts? Has he proved one word false
that I have said of Theophilus? Is not Chrysostom as credible as he? Does he
not know how ill he is spoken of by a great number of Chrysostom's Defenders?
And how smartly Isidore Pelusiota reflects on him?

But who could have disgraced him more, than he that will imply that the things
mentioned of him are as true as what is said in White's Centuries of Scandalous
Ministers, or the Anni Mirabiles. I know not all or most things in either of
them. But he was a stranger in England that had not credible Testimony of
diverse of the things in the Anni Mirabiles. And Mr. White, the Chairman of that
Parliament-Committee, was commonly reputed a grave and godly credible man; and
if he lied, the whole Committee must concur in the Lie; and the Witnesses must
all be false. I will not further meddle in so unpleasant a business, than to
tell you, that all that I knew accused of Scandal, had Witnesses of it, that in
the places where they lived were thought to make as much conscience of a Lie,
as the best of their Neighbors: And whether such a man's scorn that was then in
the shell, is in History a sufficient proof that Committees of Parliament, and
Witnesses, were all Liars, I leave to consideration, I well know what
Schoolmasters and Curates I was bred under, and what the two Ministers were
that were sequestered in the place where I after came: And all the Country can
tell you. They constrained me to name them, and the Case in my Apology for our
Preaching, and my Answer to Mr. Hinkley: It Is yet the same Age: Any may enquire
of them.

25. As to his Note of Altars, I doubt not but there were at the Memorials of
Martyrs Commemoratory Altars erected in the third or fourth Centuries: But
what is that to Communicatory Altars? and those in the first and second Century?

26. I suppose he wrote against my Book upon some others Reading. I did in a
Parenthesis say ( Innocent Excommunicated Theophilus, Arcadius and the
Empress.) And of another matter added; yet did this pass without contradiction:
And he confounds them, and says, [ Any thing passes with him for History:
This Epistle of Innocent is all forged.] Answ. I see not his proof: But I had
rather it were proved false than true: But when I speak against Papal
Usurpation (be the men never so good) I think to such Binnius and Baronius are
meet Witnesses.

27. Boniface's Decree of exempting Bishops from Civil Judicatures, he thinks
not so Ancient, and says, We have only the Authority of Gratian for it: But
his Conjecture and a flirt at me is all the Confutation: And he cannot doubt
but that Exemption has sufficiently privileged Bishops since then: As is
after proved.

CHAP. XXI. Of the first Council of Ephesus, etc. His Cap. 5.
1. OUR Accuser in his Fifth Chapter passes by the just Praises which I give
to Peaceable Bishops, as crossing his Slander that I dispraise all, or such as
well as the unpeaceable, whose Justification it is that he undertaketh.

2. He begins with an Accusation, that [ to prejudice the Reader against Cyril'
s Council, I give the worst account of him that I could patch up out of all the
Libels and Accusations of his Enemies.]

Answ. If by Prejudice be meant Informing him of H^story; and by Worst is meant
Impartial Recitation of what History says; and by Patching up be meant such
Reciting; and by Enemies be meant the best and most credible Historians that
have written of it, then this is true: Else it is the work of that Undertaker
that is engaged to call Evil Good, and Darkness Light, and preserreth speaking
good of bad actions, before speaking truly.

3. And that you may know by what Spirit men that will not reproach the best
that differ from the Prelates, are themselves reproached by this Sect, and also
what sort of History this man gives the Lie to, on pretense of giving it me,
and how far he is from Railing, he thus proceeds.

[ The first thing he is charged with is the Oppression of the Novatians. This
was enough with Socrates or Sozomen to paint him as ugly as men do the Devil or
Antichrist; and therefore there is no great credit to be given them in these
Relations, as manifestly espousing the Cause and Quarrel of the Novatians.]

Answ. 1. Just as Thuanus or Erasmus espoused the Cause of the Protestants by
Truth and Peace, when others hated and belied them. 2. Methinks the man
revileth me very gently in comparison of Socrates and Sozomen, the two most
impartial and credible of all our Ancient Church-Historians (with Theodorot.)
But who can wonder that he imitateth that which he defends.

4. But he says, [ It may be the Novatians deserved it -- and it is not
unlikely that they were very troublesome and seditious.]

Answ. It Is not unlikely now that others will say it was so. But mark Reader
which of these Historians is most credible [ Socrates and Sozomen lived with
those that knew the things and persons: They have told us Truth in the rest of
their Histories: If they had been Novatians, Mr. M. says, They believed
sinning after Baptism had no pardon or absolution: And were they not like then
to fear such Lying and false Accusing as paints a Saint like the Devil or
Antichrist.] On the other side [Mr. M. lives above a thousand years after
them: He is one of the Party that take it to be not only lawful, but a duty to
say and swear all that is imposed now, which I will not here describe: How
truly he writes the History of his own Age, even of Parliament and Wars, and
living persons, I have told you. He says no more against the Historians credit
here, but [ it may be] and [ it is not unlikely] and [ they were Novatians,
Schismatics, Alexandrians.] Even so their Counterminer, and many Conformists,
that have many years reported us to be Raising a War against the King, had
their [ May-be'^] and [ It Is not unlikely] and [ they are Schismaticks] to
prove it: And others soon rose up and swore it. And when some lament their
Perjury, it stops not the rest. But some have such Free Will, that they can
believe whom they list.

5. Socrates, says he, makes it part of his charge that he took on him the
Government of temporal Affairs. This was not the Usurpation of the Bishop, but
the Indulgence of the Emperor: And he shows the Churches need of it.

Answ. That which he is charged with is, that he was the first Bishop that
himself used the Sword. And 1. Do you think that so great a Patriarchate and
Diocese would not find a conscionable Pastor work enough, without joining with
it the Magistrates Office? 2. Was not the Church greatly changed even so early
from what it was a little before in the days of Martin and Sulpitius, when
even Ithacius durst not own being so much as a seeker to the Magistrate to draw
the Sword against gross Heretics; and the best Bishops denied Communion with
them that sought it: And now a Bishop himself becomes the striker not of gross
Heretics, but such as peaceable Bishops bore with.

I remember not to have read that Cyril had any Commission for the Sword from
the Emperor: Others then had not: But I deny it not.

6. He says, that elsewhere I say [ I shall not dishonor such, nor disobey
them.] Answ. I say and do so: If a Bishop will take another Calling from the
King's Grant, when he has undertaken already 40 times more work as a Diocesan
than he can do, I Will honor and obey him as a Magistrate: But I would be loath to
stand before God under the guilt of his undertaking and omissions.

7. As to all the rest of the History about Cyril's Executions, and the
wounding of Orestes the Governor, I leave it between the Credit of Mr. M. and
Socrates.: And he very much suspects the Story of Cyril' s making a Martyr of
him that was executed for it: I leave all to the Reader's Judgment. I think I
may transcribe Socrates without slandering Cyril.

Here his spleen rising, says [ There are men in the world that honor such as
Martyrs for murdering a King.]

Answ. You may smell what he insinuates: I think he will not say, that he ever
did more against them than those that they call Presbyterians have done. We
Wrote and Preached against them when he did not. I know not the Presbyterian
living to my remembrance, that was not against the Murder of the King, and
Prin. whom the Bishops had cropped and stigmatized for being against them, as an
Erastian, was the hottest in the Parliament, for the Execution of the King's
Judges: But I knew diverse Conformists that have written or spoken to justify
or excuse that Fact.

8. As for the Murder of Hypatia, I leave him to his scuffle with Socrates and
Damascius, in which I interess not my self.

9. I thank Pope Innocent Mr. M. durst not deny Cyril's faults, in his Enmity
to the memory of Chrysostom; and yet he calls my reciting the matter of Fact a
reproach. He is constrained to confess [ That the Quarrel was it seems
hereditary to him ( so is Original Sin) and he did prosecute it beyond all
equity or decency against the memory of a dead man: This was a fault, and and
he that is without any, or without any particular animosity, specially if he be
in any eminent place, let him ^ast the first stone.]

Answ. Thanks to Conscience: We feel your Animosities: But is not this man a
Railing Accuser of Cyril, if I am such? What says he less in the main? Yea he
now renews his Accusation of his Predecessor, saying, It was hereditary. To
prosecute malice against the very name of a holy extraordinary Bishop, beyond
all equity and decency -- what will Christianity or Humanity call it? But
Faction says, it was a fault, and he that is without any, etc. Thus talked Eli
to his Sons: So one may say, To Silence 2000 Ministers, or to hate the best
men, and seek their ruin, is a fault, a Prelatical peccadillo; and so was
Bonner's usage of the Martyrs; and let him that is without any cast the first
stone. And St. John says, He that hates his Brother is a murderer, and none
such has Eternal Life abiding in him; and that as Cain, he is of the Evil One,
the Devil. And I believe him.

10. But he says, I injuriously charge him with calling Alexander a bold faced
man, when Atticus was the first Author of that word.

Answ. Atticus mentioned Alexander's confident, true and necessary Counsel;
Cyril contradicting it, calls the man, A man of a confident face or mouth. If
another Bishop said the first words before him, do I wrong him in saying he
said the second? O tender men! His urging the keeping up the names of such as
Nectarius and Arsacius, and casting out Chrysostomus, is so like our Canons
about Readers and Nonconformists, and our Canoneers descriptions of their
Country Parsons, and the Puritanes* that I wonder not that you defend him.

11. But he says, that It Is a little unchristian to blast his memory with the
faults which he corrected in his lifetime.]

Answ. 1. It Is necessary to tell that truth which blasteth the Reputation of
such sin as was growing up toward Papacy* Ans. 2. Then Christ was unchristian
to tell the Jews of their very Fathers murders of the Prophets, while they
disclaimed it, and built their Sepulchers, Mat. 23. And then it was unchristian
in the Holy Ghost, to blast the memory of Adam, Noe, Lot, David Solomon, Peter,
yea or Manasseh, with sins repented of. 3. History must speak truth about
things repented of; or else it will but deceive the world. 4. The Honor of
God, and Goodness, and Truth, must be preferred before our own Honor.
Repentance, if true, will most freely confess a man's own sin, and most fully
shame it.

12. Whether all his far-fetcht Conjectures that Cyril repented, be true or no,
is nothing to me. I will hope he did, though I never saw it proved: The very
last Sentence of Death might do it. His retortion is, [ I know no man deeper
engaged in the Contentions of the Church (than I) The writing of his Eighty
Books being but like so many pitched Battles he has fought, and most commonly in
the dark, when he was hardly able to discover friend from foe.]

Answ. It Is too true, that being all written for Peace, the Enemies of Peace
have fought against them. Nimis diu habitavit, anima mea inter osores pacis.
But pro captu Lectoris, etc. All men take not the words of such as he for
Oracles. How much I have written and done for Peace, let others read and judge.
I long labored and begged for Peace in vain with such as he defends. And
it is admirable if this pittiless Enemy of Sects and Errors can be for all the
Sects and Errors that I have written against. Have I in the dark taken for
foes by Error the Atheists, the Infidels, the Sadduces, the Hobbists, the
Quakers, the Ranters, the Papists, the Socinians, the Libertines called
Antinomians, the Anabaptists, the Separatists, and Sects as Sects? Be of good
comfort all: These Prelatists that accuse us for too dark and sharp Writings
against you, seem to tell you that they will more hate persecuting or
distressing you; Yes when they agree with themselves.

His Prayer that I may have a more honorable opinion of Repentance he calls me
to speak to in the End.

13. Whether good Isidore Pelusiota were a man [ very easy to take any
impressions, and upon false information charge Cyril with prosecuting his
private quarrels with Nestorius under pretense of zeal for the faith] I leave
all men to believe our Accuser as they see cause. And the same I say of that
which is so great a Controversy among the Critical Historians, whether
Theodorets Epistle to Job. Aut. against Cyril be Counterfeit, or were written
on a false rumor of Cyrils death. Their 5th General Council has it. Baronius
and Binnius say, some Eutychian knave has corrupted the Acts of that Council.
Must Councils be the Laws of all the world, and has the Church and Tradition
kept them no better, that we know not when we have them truly? Leave us then to
the universal Laws of God.

14. He says truly that [ the Council of Ephesus was chiefly directed by the
authority of Cyril] Ans. And so was that at Trent by the authority of the Pope
And when he has confuted the credible History which tells us of the women's and
Courtiers hatred of Nestorius, and proved that the Emperor and Pulcheria the
Empress were but one, I will grant that the authority of the Court directed not
Cyril; and that then and now Bishops neither were nor are directed by the Civil
powers.

15. When I spoke against Nestorius his cruelty to Sectaries he asks [ What
Hereticaters were hotter than the Presbyterians in 1646. The inquisition is not
more severe than their ordinance against Heresies, which they desired should be
made felony and punished by death etc.]

Ans. Reader Judge of the man's Credit as to ancient History still by his truth
about the Present age. 1. The Inquisition he says, is not more severe. Do I
need to answer this to any man of 50 years of age? It Is Capable of no answer
but what he will call by some name deserved by his own.

2. I can find no such ordinance: He says It was offered? Is that all? And by
whom? Was it the body of the Presbterians, or who?

3. What were the Heresies named by them? Were they not down right Blasphemy?

4. Who and how many were ever either tormented or put to death for Heresy,
from 1641 till 1660: I remember not one, save that James Nayler was imprisoned
and whipped, and had his Tongue bored for blasphemous Personating Christ, and
that not by the Presbyterians.

5. Why are they so ordinarily reproached by the Prelatists for tolerating all
Sects here in England?

6. What if all this had been true? What is it to me or any of my mind? I never
had a hand in persecuting one man, to my remembrance. How few can you name of
all the Nonconformists now in England, that had any hand in the Severities you
mention? I know not four in England, that I remember. And what is this to us any
more than to you?

7. And was it well done, or ill? If well* why do you liken them to the
Inquisition? Are you for it? If ill, why do you plead for it in others? Imitate
it not if you dislike it.

For my part, as I am against all Sects as such, I am much more against the
cruelty of any. I stick no more at the disgracing the Presbyterians sins, than
yours: And I am readier to disgrace my own than either, if I can know them. I
would cherish Errors no more than you; but I would not ruin or imprison even
such of your selves as have too many. Heresy must have its proper cure. I
thank God I had once an Orthodox agreeing Flock. But again I say, the
Presbyterians were too impatient with Dissenters; and it is better have variety
of Fish in the Pond, than by the Pikes to reduce them to special unity.

16. He says that Nestorius consequentially denied the Godhead of Christ. p.
192. Next he has found a contradiction in my words, that the Emperor was weary
of this stir: And yet that [ Cyril did it to please the Court] These critical
men can make their two hands enemies to each other. How came he waking to dream
that this was a contradiction, when Historians tell us that the Women and
Courtiers hated both Chrysostom and Nestorius? He implies that the Emperor
and the Court were all one, or of one mind. But I am not bound to believe him,
no more than of many other Emperors whose Wives kept up one party and they
another. And I pray you why should we be confident that Theodosius 2. himself
called an Eutychian by the hereticating Bishops, was not against Nestorius when
he called that Council, and at first Condemned both him and Cyril, and after
him alone? I did but recite the Historians words, and was that forgetfulness?

17. His many words about this controversy with Nestorius are the most
unworthy of any answer of all his Books: sometime he says as I, as p. 193. [
It had been happy for the Church if the mysteries of our Religion had never
been curiously disputed: sometime he confesses that Nestorius spoke the same
thing with Cyril, that Christ had two natures in one Person: ibid. And that he
expresses himself one would think very orthodoxly. p. 202. But the Heretic
dissembled and hid his sense. And so this man after above 1000 years knew the
man's mind to be contrary to his words: whereas it is palpable to him that
reads the Histories, that the man was so far from hiding and dissembling,
that he was sowrly and morosely addicted to stick to the words and Notions he
had espoused, and too little to regard a peaceable compliance to mollify his
accusers* His fault lay on the clean contrary side, But he proves him a
Heretic that meant Christ was two Persons, though he said the contrary, 1.
Because he says that the Humane Nature was united in dignity and honor to the
Divine.

Ans. As if either the hypostatical union were denied by those words, or he
knew that Nestorius meant not to include it in those terms:

But he says he uses the word (...) and not (...) Ans. As if (...) never
signified more than a Relative or official Person, when besides the many places
cited by Derodon, Nestorius often explaineth himself in the common orthodox sense.

But the foulest charge is, that he seems once or twice to distinguish Christ
from the Divine Nature. Ans. By [Christ] he expresses himself to mean the
humane nature anointed to his Office: And the man thought that the Divine
Nature was not so anointed: and distinguishing is not dividing.

It is not his Nay and my Yea that can inform any Reader what Nestorius said
and meant without reading his own words (rather than Cyrils of him.) And if
such as Mr. M. will pretend Charity, and contrary to plain evidence face down
the world that a Man denies consequentially Christ's Godhead, and the Unity of
his Person, while he professed the contrary, no man's innocence is sufficient to
escape the fangs of such hereticaters: And let him call me what his list
inclines him to call me, I again profess that on the reading of Cyril,
Nestorius, and the Council, and Derodon's Citations, I am quite past doubt that
the controversy was Verbal, which of them spoke orthodoxly while they both
meant the same thing; and when one said Mary was the Mother of God, and the
other said, no; She was but the Mother of that Person who is God; the fitness
of the phrase was the matter of their quarrel.

And consider 1. Many think that when a high point is in controversy to the
danger of the Church, we must use the exactest phrases, and not say all that
may be justified.

2. And as forma dat nomen, so locutio formalis, or denominating forma is more
exact and proper than a materia: And therefore though idioms may be
Communicated, he that in controversy denominateth the Divine Nature from its
own properties, speaks more exactly.

3. If one should in our Pulpits say ordinarily* [ The World was Created by
Man:] The eternal proceeding of the Holy Ghost was from a Man: Flesh and Blood
was from Eternity;] many sound Christians would not like it. And yet it is true
in the Communicative sense, viz. [He that is now man made the world as God: The
Holy Ghost eternally proceeded from the 2d Person in the Trinity who is now God
and Man: Christ who was flesh and blood on Earth, was Eternal as God.] So if
one now say [God was confined to the Virgins Womb, and to the Manger: God could
not speak in the Infancy of Christ: God was but about 30 year old when Christ
was Baptized: God knew not the day nor the hour of Christ's second coming: God
was asleep, hungry, sorrowful, in an agony, crucified, dead, buried, etc.] All
this is thus far true, viz. Of Christ who was God, not as God but as man: And
yet if I should deny but the fitness of this speaking, I were just such an
Heretic as Nestorius was: And many that are no Heretics for all that would
not relish it.

Either* my Eyes could not find that in Nestorius which he affirms of him or
else he is a mere slanderer of him, when he ^aith Page 193 that he denied Yea
obstinately] that Mary was the Mother of that Person who was God.] He has
produced no such word. That which he stood to was, that instead^ of saying Mary
was the Mother of God, we should say she was the Mother of Christ who is God
and Man. And of the unity of Person I have cited already his own words so
fully, as moved Derodon to say [ I dare boldly say, no Christian has hitherto
spoken trulyer and plainer of the unity of Christ's Person in two natures than
Nestorius*] And that it is false that he confessed but an union of dignity the
same cited words show: Nexu adeo sublimi (says he) Divinoque and admirabili
(mentioning the conjunction of the Divinity and humanity) ut Divina natura ea
sibi vendicet quae Corporis alioquin sint propria] Epist. ad Cyril.

And as to all his justifications of Cyril, he knows that I justify his
Doctrine as well as he, but not the work that he made, which is not undone
among Nations of Nestorians to this day. But if the man were able to be
impartial, and so happy as not to draw on himself the guilt of such sins by
justifying them, he might easily see in his own confession that Cyril the
Hereticator spoke as bad at least as Nestorius. He often confesses (for he
cannot deny it) [ that he does frequently own but one nature] p. 197. and 198.
[ that there is but one nature of the word incarnate] so p. 201. etc. But Cyril
meant well, that is, by Nature he meant Person. And was not this Eutychian
Speech as improper as Nestoriu's is? Is the nature and Person to be confounded?
Did the Fathers speak thus? If Nature put for Person be pardonable, why is it
not pardonable to prefer a denomination a proprietate vel forma, to another?
And thus you make Cyril to differ from the Eutychians, in their different
meanings while they used the same words. If I had said that Christ had but one
Nature I should have had a censure otherwise measured.

And though this man seem to deny it, I have cited many of his words in which
he says [ Duas naturas unitas asserimus: past unionem vero tanquam adempta jam
in duas distinctione, unam esse credimus filii naturam, tanquam unius sed
inhumati and incarnati and ad succes. Nihil injusti facimus dicentes, ex duabus
naturis factum esse concursum in unit atem: Past unionem vero non distinguimus
naturas ab invicem. But I have cited enough before.

The sum and truth is, to judge no one but my self, I must be blind by
ignorance or partiality if I be not past doubt, 1. That unskilful explication
was their difference. 2. That Cyrils words were Eutychian. 3. That Nestorius
words were orthodox in the main, but not sufficiently yielding to a tolerable
phrase. 4. That they both meant the same thing. 5. That all their war was
managed, 1. For want of distinguishing fully the Abstract [ Deitatem] and the
Concrete [ Deum] 2. For want of distinguishing [ Qui Deus] from [ Qua Deus] and
a strict formal expression from a more laxe that is tolerable. And 3. For want
of distinguishing [ division] from [ distinction] of natures. 4. For want of
explaining the various sorts and senses of [ Unity] and [ Plurality.] I cannot
but know this to be true, though Mr. M. scorn me for it.

What [ I that understand not the language they wrote in to pretend to know
better than the Council?] Ans. 1. So say the Papists: what? will you pretend to
know more than the Church and Councils? If it be implicit faith that they are
bringing us to, let them tell us which Councils we must so believe when they
condemn each other? 2. I thought I could make shift to understand their
language, though I be no critic in it: But if he know me better, I strive not
for the reputation of Learning; not only Baronius and Binnius, and all the rest
that he names that had no skill in Greek, but most of the Schoolmen, seem to
me without it, far more Learned than he. I can tell him of Lads whose Learning
I admire not, that shall vie with him in Languages Oriental and Occidental, and
give him odds; And when he scorns Derodons distinctions, telling us it is making
two bad Groats by slitting a Sixpence, etc. I leave him to glory in his
Confusion: But I suspect the Fox that speaks against Tails is like enough to
want one himself.

But when he has showed in all this History of Nestorius, Cyril, and the
Council, little but that partiality which can talk confidently to the ignorant
for any cause, without any show of confuting Derodons justification of
Nestorius, or my Conciliation, his crast or passion attempts to divert the
Reader by the art of the times, and as if it must stop our Mouths from
lamenting the sin of Hereticators, and misery of the Church thereby, he tells
us how men in these times call them Papists that are none.

Ans. If it be ill done, why condemn you your self by defending those that did
the like? If it was well done in Bishops Councils, why not in them? 2. But
what is this to me, if it be not me that he means? If it be, 1. If you will read
but the last part of my Cathol. Theolog. judge of the man's front. 2. It is none
but those that are for a humane Sovereignty over all the Church on Earth that
we judge Papists: And if you judge them not such, we will thank you to tell us
what a Papist is in your own sense.

18. His saying p. 225. that [ John Comes that gives a sad account of the
Council is much to be suspected, etc. does but tell us that he would have your
belief of History guided by the Interest of his Cause.

19. As to his scorn against my translating the words [ the Scripture and
Sacred] which mean that imperial Scripture, I did think a litteral Translation
could not have been judged a misunderstanding or mistranslation: Why may they
not be called in English what they are called in Greek? And he had a strong
imagination if he thought that Haumers Translation of Eusebius, etc. afforded
me such materials as these.

20. His conclusion of some that scorn to preach by the License of the
Government I before mentioned. The Truth and ministerial Honesty of it, is much
like as if Thousands should petition the Bishop, that their sick families may
have licensed Physicians, and he rejects all their Petitions, and prevails
with the Parliament to do the like: At last the King pittieth them, and
licenseth the Physicians, and the Bishop and his Clergy are offended, and get
it revoked, and the Physicians practice at their peril without license: And our
credible Historian should record it, that they scorned to practice as licensed
by the Government, even while still they make all the Friends they can to the
Clergy to be licensed, and are not able to prevail. But the ages that knew not
them and us, that are to come, may possibly believe these men as they believe
their Predecessors.

21. To conclude, Reader, if now thou have any sense of Christian Interest,
Unity and Love, judge of the whole case impartially, and begin with notorious
matter of fact.

1. We find at this day a great Body of Christians, called Nestorians,
inhabiting the Countries of Babylon, Assyria, Mesopotamia, Partbia, and Media,
yea, spread Northerly to Cataya, and Southerly to India; abundance of them even
in Tartary, says Paulus Venet. See Brierwood p. 139. And we find that they are
by the Western Churches, if not the Greeks, called Heretics, and at the
easiest Schismatics. And yet as those very Friars that have lived among them
say, they are commonly free from any such Opinions as are charged on them, but
only honor the name of Nestoriaus, and condemned the Councils that condemned
him. This Mr. M. nor no Prelate will deny that retains humanity.

2. We find that this woeful fraction has continued about one Thousand two
Hundred and thirty Years.

3. We are put to enquire what was and is the cause; and we find that on both
sides it is the Bishops and their Clergy that now continue it, and it was
Patriarchs and their Bishops that at first caused it.

4. We enquire how they did it: And Mr. Morris confesses that it began in a
dispute between the two Patriarchs (whether the Virgin Mary was to be called
The Mother of God, or rather The Mother of Jesus Christ who is God and Man: and
that on this occasion Cyril charged Nestorius, as making Christ to be two
Persons, and he himself said Christ incarnate had but one Nature, but had no
more skill in speaking, than by one Nature to mean one Person, (though Derodon
labor to prove that he meant worse,) that Nestorius professed two Natures in
one Person. And Mr. M. says, Nestorius when he spoke well meant ill, and Cyril
when he spoke ill meant well. And upon this a General Council itself is first
divided about them, even to blows: and after by the importunity of Cyril's
party, Nestorius is banished, and the Bishops divided, some for one, and some
for another to this day. Another Council is called at Calcedon, and confirms
the Condemnation, and the Nestorian Bishops condemn that Council, and for many
Ages the Bishops were divided also about that, one part condemning it, and the
other subscribing to it, and honoring it. Judge now what these Bishops have
done to Christian Religion and the Church of Christ, and continue to do: And if
you dare join with our Canoneers in making the guilt your own, by justifying
such dismal work; the further you go, the more of it you have to justify, till
your Souls have guilt and load enough.

Honest Dr. Moore charged with Nestorianism, is fain to accuse Nestorius out of
his Enemies words to clear himself. That he owned not a [ Physical Union of
Natures] is an ambiguous, unsafe word: A Physical Union seems to signify one
(...) which is not to be said. He never denied a personal or Hypostatical
Union. And if he had (as he did not) opposed the word Hypostasis, so did Hierom
that was no Heretic, and many more for a long time.

I suppose Mr. M. is not more zealous against Nestorianism than the
Hereticating Church of Rome is: And how great they really thought the Nestorian
Heresy, the story which I mention of P. Hormisda tells you, which I will
repeat. [There arose a controversy whether it might be said that [ One of the
Trinity was crucified,] Pope Hormisda said [ No] because they that were for it
were suspected to be Eutychians: The Nestorians laid hold on this, and said, [
Then we may not say that Mary was the Parent of one of the Trinity.] This was a
hard case: Justinian sent to Pope John about it. His infallibility and
Hormisda's were contrary: he and his Council say that we may say, that [ One of
the Trinity was crucified.] Hereupon Baronius and Binnius give us a useful
note, [ Ita mutatis hostibus arma mutari necesse suit.] What should the World
do if we had not had such a Judge of Controversies. I hope Mr. M. will not be
so heretical, or schismatical, as to say that either of these Popes erred
against an Article of Faith: But will rather recant his Accusation of
Nestorius, and number this with Things Indifferent, which the Church has power
to change at her pleasure.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Council of Ephesus 2d.
1. THat our Historian may justify the Dividers he makes himself a Party, and
by downright mistake against both says, 1. That Nestorius fell into Blasphemy,
denying Christ to be true God. 2. And that Eutyches denied Christ to be true
Man.] This is our Reformer of History; when both of them professed Christ to be
true God, and true man. I doubt not but the Man can write another Book to
justify this; for what is it that some cannot talk for? Yea, he is at if
again, p. 230. that Eutyches held Christ not to be true Man.

2. He confesses again that Cyril affirms but one Nature, and meant but one
Person, and that Eutyches used the same words, but says, sure they cannot be
so mad as to fall out so violently when they say the same thing and words.
Flavian could not be so foolish or so wicked, etc. Ans. I justify not the
words of Eutyches or Cyril; but if I have great reason to believe, that as he
confesses Cyril so gross as to use (...) for (...) so Eutyches who had far
less Learning than Cyril, did word amiss the conceptions, which were the same
with Cyrils, I leave it to this mild Censurer to call them Fools, and mad, and
wicked. It Is taken for railing in me to blame them.

3. He says [ Cyril never said there were two Natures in Christ before the
Union. Ans. I have twice cited his words: Find a true difference between them
and those of Eutyches if you can. I believe they both meant better than they
spoke.

4. But the Spirit of detraction uses to fetch Accusations from Hearts, and
Thoughts, and secret Actions, and so does he against Eutyches; and he says
this has been done of late times, To deliver that in select Meetings, which
they will not in public promiscuous Assemblies: as evil Spirits are under
restraint in consecrated places.

Ans. Therefore it is that the Nonconformists have 20 or 19 years so earnestly
begged for leave to preach in public consecrated places to promiscuous
Assemblies, that they might be out of suspicion, but could never obtain it of
this sort of Masters. Ex ore tuo -- Thus they that cast the stone at others often
find it hit themselves. Mr. Edwards Gangrena is here commended to those that
are for Toleration. As if all differences were equally intolerable or
tolerable: And he that says [ Tolerate not those that preach Blasphemy or
intolerable error,] said no worse than he that says [ Silence Two Thousand
Preachers, unless they will Profess, Promise, and Swear, and do all that is
(often described) imposed on them.

5. In his Narrative he is no more tender of the honor of Bishops it seems
than I am, nor so much of Emperors; for when he had said the Emperor [ was
too much addicted to this kind of Vermin (Eunuchs) and shows his bitterness
against Flavian, he says that the Letters which called this Council suggested
sufficiently what it was to do, and that their business was to condemn a Bishop
the Emperor did not care for, though without any just ground, nay, for his
honesty.

I deny none of this: But were the Bishops of the Catholic Church in a good
case then, that, when they knew before that they were called to such a work as
this, would meet in a General Council and do it? No; he accuses them himself,
I need not do it.

The Emperor, he says, knew how to choose Bishops, (and yet his Summons was
general to all to come,) and the President, if half be true that is said of
him, (and if that be a doubt, how credible are your Historians?) was one of the
most wicked, profligate Wretches in the World,] yet he was one of the
Patriarchs, and all the Council Bishops, and till they met, were not thus
accused. You see the man is a far greater railer than I even against Bishops:
But it is but against those that are against his Interest and side.

6. He describes those Bishops as using violence, forgetting that it is it his
Party trusts to continually: just with the front as Baronius and Binnius, and
many other Papists, justify Martin for being against putting Heretics to
death, and condemn Ithacius, while their Kingdom is upheld by that which they
condemn, and worse, even the burning of true Christians as Heretics, and it is
Heretical with them to imitate Martin, just as those Matthew. 23. Your Fathers
killed the Prophets, and you build their Sepulchers, and say if we had lived in
the days of our Fathers, we would not, etc.

7. But in the passage I find our Historian in a more charitable mood to this
Ephesine Council of Bishops than his Brethren, [ How bad soever Dioscorus and
this Council were, yet they are in my judgment to be looked on rather as
favorers of Heresy than Heretics, they followed the meaning I believe as
well as the Words of Cyril.] Ans. And now I may hope I am Orthodox and
Charitable when I have no less than his Judgment to justify mine. And
Anatolius justifies us both.

8. But Sir, now you are in a good Mood, will you consider,

1. Whether those Bishops and Councils that set the Christian World in that
Flame that burns dreadfully to this day, after above 1200 Years, were not
guilty at least of a peccadillo or venial sin.

2. Whether they are imitable.

3. Whether this General Council had a supreme Legislative and Judicial power
over all the Church on Earth, which all must obey and none must appeal from.

No: says Bishop Gunning, It was a meeting of violent Robbers.

Ans. But it was a General Council: which it seems then may be such.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the 4th General Council at Calcedon.
1. HE begins his Chapter comically, and notably derideth me for saying
Pulcheria was the same that before at Ephesus had set the Bishops against
Nestorius. Is this so ridiculous? It Is well known that Historians make her very
powerful with her Brother: she chose his Wife Eudocia, (They were long of two
minds.) It Is no wonder that she that got him condemned at Ephesus, got the same
further done at Calcedon, when she was Empress her self, having made Martian
Emperor, and her nominal Husband, (for they were not conjugally to know each
other.) Is there any thing in this that deserves the stage? Though Theodosius
be reproached by Popish Historians as an Eutychian, or a favourer of them, if
credible honest Socrates may be believed, there have been few such Princes in
the World, (for Piety, his House was a Church; for Patience, never seen angry;
for Compassion, would never let a man die for Treason-against himself.) But his
Sister (a Woman eminent for Wit and Piety) was thought to govern him very much,
and specially in the severities against Nestorius. Evagrius who bitterly
reproacheth Nestorius, tells us of some writings of his that fell into his
hand, in which he says, that the Emperor was his friend, and would not sign
his banishment, and lays the cruelties that he underwent on his Officer: and
considering the case of a suffering man, I see nothing unseemly in the Letter
to him, which Evagrius charge with contempt.

2. My wish for the Churches Peace, that the unskilful words of Nestorius and
Eutyches had been silenced by neglect, rather than the flame blown up by
honoring them with two General Councils disputation, does with this Gentleman
deserve this Replication, [ He cannot be more violent and outrageous, more
bitter and malicious under all the provocations imaginable, than he is under
that neglect which himself prescribes for the cure.] Ans. If this be a true
accuser, he can prove what he says: It Is easy to say this of any man: But if
a man that has a choleric Stomach shall swear that there was Aloes in his
Physic, his word is no proof. These are the men into whose hands we are by
Gods permission falln, while we are cast out, judged to silence, prisons, and
beggary, if we do but repeat the words of the Laws and Canons, and in 17 Years
time when most that they turned out are dead, if the rest at their own urgent
demand do but tell them what they judge unlawful, and answer those that accuse
them, they are outrageous, violent, bitter, and malicious. As if one that
wounds me should sue me for saying, You hurt me. It Is violence and an
unpeaceableness to feel, but none at all in them to strike or to destroy. We
will give you many thanks if you will hurt us no more than we do you.

3. I said that one skilful healing man that could explicate ambiguous words,
and persuade men to Love and Peace, till they understood each other, had more
befriended Truth, Piety, and the Church, than the hereticating Councils did.]
And why, says he, may not that skilful man show his skill in Councils, as well
as else where?

Ans. Who denies it? But the question is, how he shall be heard and prevail? I
told you that here One man in one sentence did so, by differencing between
mental distinguishing and dividing; even Basil of Seleucia, saying, [
Cognoscimus duas naturas, non dividimus; neque divisas, neque confusas
dicimus.] This was true and plain enough, to have ended all the quarrel: But
who laid hold on it, or did improve it? What the better was Nazianzen for
speaking well in the Council at Constantinople? Or Chrysostom for any thing he
could say to the Bishops for himself? I hope few of all that great number of
Councils that were Arian, Semiarian, Eutychian, Monothelites, for Images, etc.
were so bad as to have never a Bishop among them that could or would speak
right: But did they prevail? In the very Council at Trent were more good
Speeches than did prevail; and if Luther, Melanchthon, Zuinglius, and such
others, had not done more good singly by Writing and Preaching, than Dudithius
could do at Trent, or any of them at Worms, or Ratisbone, etc. there had been
little done. What good did Philpot do in the Convocation? Some say one
Paphnutius turned the Inclination of the first Nicene Council for good; But
that hearing temper was too short or rare.

4. Next he tells us, that [ in many late Disputes of Justification, etc. we
find not that any of these healing men were able to reconcile Parties any more
than the Councils of old.]

Answ. 1. If that were true, it is also true, that they have not made so great
and many Parties as Councils did. We have not cast the world into so many
Nations of Jacobites, Nestorians, and other Sects.

Answ. 2. Through God's mercy it is much better than such Historians would make
men believe. Dr. Heylin tells us what work the Arminian Controversy made
between Bishop Laud's Party, and the Parliaments and Abbots Party, as if it had
set us all by the Ears. It is not so now: One of your Brethren lately tells us,
how that Controversy is quieted: What Contention do you hear of among the
Nonconformists about it? No man has so much as writ a line, that I know of,
against my Conciliation in my Cathol. Theology. How little stir does the
Antinomian Controversy make? If one or two men do vent their displeasure about
any of these, we neglect it, and it is presently forgotten. I hear sometime
that called Arminianism hotly preached in the Parish Churches: It provokes not
me, and I take no notice of it. I (rarely) hear some preach against the
Arminians: I take no notice of it, and there it dies: Whereas if one should
write Challenges and Accusations to the Preachers, we might make work enough
for all the Country. I never yet met with many such, but if you make not a War
of it, and engage them by opposition, they grow weary themselves, and grow into
unobserved neglect or contempt. Most of the spreading Errors and Contentions
among us have come by the Bellows of too strong or imprudent Opposition or
Disputes. I hear of no considerable Doctrinal Strivings among all the
Nonconformists now in England. One Ignorant Uncalled Fellow is lately crept
into London, and wrote proud Challenges for Antinomianism, and none answered
him, and he is contemned, and has no Second that I hear of.

5. Though he say [ he is weary, yet he must not pass by, that when I mention
Socrates his most high praise of Theodosius (living under him) and the miracles
which he says God wrought for him; I say, if this be true, God owned his
Moderation by Miracles, notwithstanding his favoring the Eutychians, more than
he did any ways of violence.] And here the man has found me in Contradiction,
and says, [ Those miracles could not countenance the Eutychian cause that was
after. 2. That the Eutychians were the most violent men. Such Contradictions he
and L'Estrange find in my Writings.

Ans. But, 1. Is it true that I said those miracles countenanced the Eutychian
Cause? I said only that God owned the Moderation (not the Eutychian Opinion) of
a man called an Eutychian by the Hereticators, notwithstanding his favoring
the Eutychians. He was a man that studied the reconciliation of the contending
Bishops, and was moderate toward all, but persuaded that the major Vote of the
Bishops being against Nestorius, and for Cyril, and Dioscorus, it tended to
peace to take that side. His Moderation was the same before the stir with
Eutyches as after. I only said that God by miracles owned that man's moderation,
who is charged with after favoring the Eutychians.

2. And what I spoke of Moderation opposite to violence, in way of suppressing
Heretics, he feigneth me to speak it as opposite to violence in the Persons
suppressed: I spoke of Violence in the Prince as agent, and he feigneth me to
speak of Violence in the parties that he dealt with. He may find matter at this
rate to write greater Volums against any man. I read of none of the Heresies
then contended about, Nestorian or Eutychian, but the accused Bishops were
violent for them: But though they were all violent, yet if the question were,
whether the Emperor should use violence or Moderation against them, I may say,
that God owneth more the way of Moderation.

6. P. 246. he says [ At Ephesus Eustathius was kikt to death, and all those
that durst desend him were threatened to be served in like manner.] Ans. Of this
before: His memory failed him: It was not Eustathius but Flavianus. 2. Yet he
after excuses Dioscorus from Heresy; more Bishops than were Heretics were
violent.

7. As to his Reflection, [ It may be he thinks the Emperor took a particular
Delight in that kind of cruelty, and that he had rather one should be kicked to
death, than that he should be hanged or beheaded; which would not be much to
the credit of his Moderation: And to say the truth, his Letter to Valentinian
discovers a strange kind of Spirit; for there he justifies the proceedings of
the Eutychians at Ephesus, and says that all things were carried on with much
freedom and perfect Truth, and Flavian found guilty of Innovating in Religion.
This is but an ill sign that Mr. B. is a hater of false History, when he lets
this pass unreproved.

Ans. 1. Had I reproved such an Emperor, I might have expected that some of
you would have published me an Enemy to Kings.

Ans. 2. Rather Sir, you and I should hence gather, that all men must have
pardon and forbearance, and that for want of that, the names of Nestorians,
Jacobites, Melchites, Greeks, Papists, Protestants, Lutheranes, Calvinists,
Prelatists, and Presbyterians, etc. have almost swallowed up the Name, much
more the Love of Christians.

Ans. 3. May it not consist with modesty and the hatred of false History, to
believe the high praises of this Emperor, published by one that knew him in so
pious and credible words as Socrates speaks, as I before told you, giving him
(to me) a more credible Canonization than the Pope could have done, as a man of
eminent holiness, wonderful Clemency, that would not let a Traitor go out of
the Gates toward the place of Execution; and when he was moved to any
Execution, answered, he had rather, were he able, restore the Dead to Life:
excelling all the Clergy in meekness, and never seen angry. May not I who am
branded for a railer by meek Prelatists, be tolerated to think charitably of
such an Emperor, and to wish that the world had many more such.

Ans. 4. Judges are taken for unjust if they will not hear both sides speak.
And why should not I regard the words of such an Emperor, as well as of one
half the Bishops against the other?

Ans. 5. Surely Modesty requires me to think that the Emperor was much more
capable of knowing the truth of the acts of his own Subjects, when his Servants
present gave him an account of them, than I am 1200 Years after: And so good a
man would not willingly lie.

Ans. 6. Therefore my own Conclusion is, God is true and all men are Liars,
that is, untrusty: and that Eudocia and his Courtiers had much power with him
for Dioscorus against Flavian, as Pulcheria had against Nestorius; but that it
was the Peace and Concord of the Bishops which he most studied, and thought
that it lay in going with the major part. And I believe things were bad on both
sides, and worse than the Emperor thought with the Eutychian Bishops, and
worse than others say with their Adversaries; and that the Emperor, though
fallible, was as Socrates says, beyond all the Clergy.

But here I see that I am blamed for not railing against a meek and pious
Emperor, and as a Railer for lamenting the sins of the Clergy.

8. About the Council of Calcedon he accuses me in general, as [
disingeniously mincing the Acts, and using all the soul play possible.

Easily said: And what is the proof? Why, 1. Leave out that they were violently
beaten to it.

Ans. The Reader may see that this is false: I mention it often, page 101. [ The
Bishops answered, that they did it against their Wills, being under fear:
Condemnation and banishment was threatened, Soldiers were there with Clubs and
Swords.] Shall I believe this man against such as Socrates, of things done 1200
Years ago, that will face me down with such untruths about my own yet visible
Writings?

2. But is it falsehood to omit what is said in such and so many Volumns? May
not the Reader there see it? Do I contradict it? Must I write many Folio's or
nothing? I refer all Readers to the Acts.

9. But he says, [ It would go near to excuse their Compliance with a merciful
man.]

Ans. I confess such are not so bad as the Clergymen, that will sin for mere
Preferment, and will write against, and revile, and call for Execution on those
that will not do as they. But if Nonconformists after 19 Years Ejection and
Reproach, and Sufferings by more than Threats, should at last surrender to
heinous sin, can he think it would excuse their Compliance, when Christ says,
Luke 14 33. He that forsakes not all that he has cannot be my Disciple? If he
think Martyrdom a work of Supererogation, he is dangerously mistaken. And he
that to day thinks Threatening and Danger an Excuse for his sin, may to morrow
think Poverty, and the next day the desire of Preferment an excuse.

10. Dioscorus and the Eutychians holding close to the Council of Nice, as
sufficient, as a Test of the Orthodox, to which nothing was to be added, in
reciting this he has found my Ignorance in translating [ retractat] by [
retract.] Is not the English word of the same sense with the Latin? If not,
and I be ignorant in English too, what wrong is that to any Bishop?

11. When he had charged Nonsense and Confusion on that which he understood
not, and mentioned Eusib. Doril. giving the Lie to Eutyches, he confesses that
the thing was true.

12. P. 253. He says, When the giddy rabble of Monks with Swords and staves,
like Bedlams broke loose, run upon them -- I should rather pity them than
insult.

Ans. If the History be an insulting, his own credited Historians insult by
recording it. If noting it as a fault be insulting, then a motion to Repentance
is insulting, and if he would have us pity them for their sin, and not only for
their suffering, that is insulting too: But to own their sin, and draw men to
imitate them, shall be none of my Compassion.

He minds me of Peter's Denial, and the Disciples forsaking Christ. Alas! he is
not a man that is not sensible of Humane frailty? But is it not therefore to be
blamed? Why does Scripture mention it, but that we may avoid the like? Is it to
tempt others to the like? Did Christ insult when he said to Peter, Get thee
behind me Satan, etc.

13. He next falls into his familiar strain, to carry that ex Cathedra, by
sentence, which he cannot do by proof, and says, [ When I venture on
Observations it is an even lay that I am out.] Ans. That is, I am out of the way
of his Magistry, Preconceipt and Interest.

It is my Conciliatory words that the peaceable man is angry at, viz. [ That
this doleful, Contentious, Anathematizing, and ruining of each other, was about
the sense of ambiguous words, and they were both of one mind in the matter and
knew it not.] He cannot but confess, that my judgment of them is softer than
theirs that hereticate each other. And Derodon has fully proved that this
Council when they condemned Nestorius, were of his Judgment in the whole
matter, and said but the same as he.

14. As to his telling me, that Eutyches denied Christ to be truly and properly
man, I will no more believe him, than if he had said Cyril did so.

15. But he says, the Monothelites were the genuine Disciples of Eutyches.
They were of his mind in that Consequence: And such another Controversy it
was. And how much greater error against our Belief of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, have I proved e. g. to be, in your Dr. Sherloks Book; And yet I
hope he meant better than he spoke.

16. P. 255. He confesses of one Party what I said, viz. [ Of Dioscorus and
Flavian, I am apt to believe they were much of the same Opinion as to the point
in controversy, and knew it well enough; which was the only cause why
Dioscorus with his party of Bishops and Monks, would not endure to come to any
Debate of the matter, for fear it would appear that they all agreed, and then
there would have been no pretense to condemn Flavian, which was the Design, if
not of the Emperor, yet at least of those that governed him.]

Ans. Fie Dr. will you thus abuse so many Orthodox Bishops? And almost condemn
your vindicating Book? And harden me in my Error? But I am much of your mind,
and if one of us err, so does the other.

17. And I like his Ingenuity, saying Anatolius confesses in Council, that
Dioscorus was not condemned for Heresy but Tyranny, and no man contradicted
him. Ans. Not in answer to those words, but the Accusations of many
contradicted him before.

18. That they mean one thing by their various expressions I have fully proved,
and he no whit confuteth: That the Eutychians acknowledged no distinct
Properties, and Nestorius owned an Unity but in Dignity and Title only, are his
flat slanders, to be no way proved but by their Adversaries accusations. The
very words I named even now, [ Divino, mirabili, sublimi nexu.] and many
clearer, show it of Nestorius. And I wish him to take heed himself how he
defines the Hypostatical Union, lest the next General Council (if ever there
be one) make him an Heretic.

Can he believe that the great number of Eutychian Bishops were so mad, as not
to know that Christ's Mortality, possibility, material Quantity, Shape, etc.
were the properties of Christ's Humanity and not his Deity? But some Men can
believe any thing well or ill, reasonable or unreasonable, as Interest and
affection lead them.

19. He says, that [ If it were a faction that denied this, it was a strong
one, and never was opposed by any Person before Mr. Baxter.

Ans. I heard you were a young man; but if you be not above one Hundred Years
old, your reading cannot be great enough to excuse this confidence from such
temerity as rendereth you the less credible. How many Thousand Books be they
which you or I never read? How know you that none of them all oppose it? But
would you persuade the Reader that I call it a Faction, to believe your sense
of these Councils? Factious men are forwardest to judge others Heretics
without cause; and all that I say is, that Though such deny my Assertion it is
true: Does it follow that I take all for factious that deny it? If I had said,
[ Though Papists deny it,] that had not been all one as to say, [ All are
Papists that deny it.]

2. But did never any person oppose it? 1. I named you David Derodon before,
who though he largely labor to prove Cyril an Eutychian in words and sense,
and that by (...) he did mean Natura, and not Persona, yet as to Nestorius he
copiously proves, that the Council of Calcedon was just of his Mind, and
condemned him for want of Understanding him. Though you have not seen that Book
of Derodons, I have, and you should not judge of what you never saw.

2. Luther de Conciliis first accuses Nestorius as a Heretic, denying
Christ's Godhead, or holding two Persons; And presently retracts it, and
confesses he was seduced by believing the Papists, but (though he had not read
much of the Councils, but what he had gathered out of the Tripartite and such
Historians) yet he gathered from the Passages of the History, that the
difference lay only in words, which he opens at large, and yet turns it
sharply against Nestorius, for thinking that we may not speak of Christ's
Godhead or Manhood by communicated names or Attributes, and greatly rejoiceth
that this serves his turn in his Opinion about Consubstantiation and
Sacramental words.

Because I will leave nothing in doubt with you, but whether Luther was before
my days, and lest you say again that I cite Books which I see not, I will give
you some of his words, beginning earlier, (not translating lest I have not
skill enough) but they are so like mine, that I doubt you will be no Lutherane.

De Council. page 175. Ecclesiae Romana and C. P. ambitiose rixatae sunt de re
nihili, vanissimis and nugasissimis naeniis donec tandem utraque horribiliter
vastata and deleta est. -- Illa omnia libentius recito, ut videat prudens
Lector quomodo ex tam celebri Synodo Constant inopolitana, seu ex sonte
manaverint semina maximarum Confusionum propterea quod ibi Episcopus Ecclesiae
ut Patriarcha fuerat Praefectus. -- p. 178. Quam horribilia certamina and
contentiones moverunt hi duo Episcopi de primatu: ut facile judicari posset
Spiritum sanctum non esse authorem hujus Instituti: Alia habet Episcopus long
potiora quae agat, quam sunt hi pueriles and inepti ludi -- Praemonemur quod
Concilia prorsus nihil novi debent comminisci vel tradere.

De Council. Ephesians. p. 180, 181. Excesserant jam e vivis sancti Patres, and illi
optimi Episcopi, S. Ambrosius, S. Martinus, S. Hieronymus, S. Augustinus (qui
eo ipso anno quo Synodus coacta est mortuus est) S. Hilarious, S. Eusebius and
similes; eorumque loco prorsus dissimiles patres suborti fuerant. Ita ut
Imperator Theodosius amplius eligi Episcopum C. P. ex Sacerdotibus vel Clericis
Civitatis C. P. nollet: hanc ob causam quod plerumque essent superbi,
ambitiosi, morosi, qui movere certamina, and tumultus in Ecclesiis plerumque
tolerent. -- p. 182. Cumjam videret Nestorius tantas turbas ortas ex corruptela
multiplici, gemens prorupit in haec verba, Tollamus e medio omnes ambiguitates
quae primum praebuerunt occasiones istis certaminibus, and fateamur palam
Mariam recte vocari Matrem Dei. Sed nihil profecit Nestorius, ne tunc quidem
eum revocaret suum errorem; sed voce publica conde m^atus, ex orb Imperii
universo ejectus and explosus est: Quanquam illi duo Episcopi Antiochenus and
Alexandrinus, etiam post Concilium cum rediissent in suas Ecclesias, se ipsi
mutuis convitiis lacerabant, and omnibus diris devovebant: Etsi postea res ad
placidum exitum deducta est: Quanquam tamen dolendum hoc, and effusis lachrymis
deplorandum in Ecclesia est, tam praestantes viros adeo indulsisse suis
affectibus, ut instar mulierum aut puerorum ineptissime inter se rixarentur.
Omnino suisset eis opus aliquo Constantino, qui ipsorum jurgia and contentiosa
scripta etiam conjecisset in ignem. -- p. 184. Mentioning the false accusations
of Nestorius, making two Persons, etc. [Atque adeo intricata and confusa sunt
quae scribunt, ut existimem ne quidem ipsos scire in hunc usque diem, quid and
propter quas causas damnaverint Nestorium. Hoc inde conjicito. Fatentur
credidisse Nestorium quod Christus sit Deus and Homo -- exhis certum est quod
Nestorius non crediderit Christum esse purum hominem. -- Constat Nestorium non
duos sed unum Christum credidisse, id quod ipsorum verba testantur -- ideoque
non potuit credere esse duas personas. Nec ullibi reperitur in historiis quod
Nestorius unum Christum crediderit habere duas personas, nisi quod Pontifices
and little historiae it a argutantur. Apparet Papam and scriptores Pontificios
haec verba contra Nestorium calumniose and veteratorie finxisse, quod Christum
pro puro homine and non pro Deo, and quod unum Christum pro duabus personis vel
gemino Christo habuerit. -- Nestorius fuit homo inflatus tumens Pharisaico
fastu, and indoctus; Et cum subito esset evectus ad supremum fastigium
Ecclesiae, adeo ut haberetur pro summo Pontifice, Patriarcha, somniabat se unum
antecellere doctrina and eruditione omnes homines in toto genere humano, nec
sibi opus esse lectione librorum qui erant scripti a Majoribus aut aliis, nec
in explicatione magnaram rerum retinendos esse modos loquendi antiquitus
receptos in Ecclesia puriore; sed quia and voce valebat, and ex temporali
sacundia volebat esse (...), Doctor vel Magister, and sormas loquendi quibus
ipse uteretur tantum recipiendas esse in Ecclesia, non alias. Et tali sastu
armatus adoriebatur illum articulum. Maria est matter Dei, aut genetrix Dei; Ibi
vicissim Episcopos in adversa part invenit perinde inflatos, quibus vehementer
displicebat. Nestorii sastus, in primis Cyrillum Alexandrinum: quia tunc nullus
erat Augustinus aut Ambresius. -- p. 189. Hinc manifestum est, quod Nestorius
ut homo imprudens and vanissima persu^sione adductus, loquatur quidem bono zelo
de Christo: sed ex mera inscitia non intelligat quid and quomodo loquatur. --
p. 192. Non est Nestorii error quod Christum credit tantum esse purum hominem,
nec in duas personas eum dirimi; sed duas naturas Deum and hominem in una
persona uniri satetur: sed communicationem idiomatum non vult concedere.
Objiciat autem hic aliquis, Nestorium insidiose confessum esse, quod Christus
Deus sit and una persona. Resp. Quod non: Tam ingeniosus enim and industrius
non suit, sed serio ita judicavit. -- Ad haec accessit aliorum Episcoporum
insolentia, qui non cogitaverunt quomodo sananda essent talia vulnera, sed
multo magis irritandis and refricandis causam dederunt. Vide caetera.

P. 202. De Council. Calcedon. Adeo indulgebant sancti Patres mutuis odiis and
dissensionibus ut alter non facile vellet alteri cedere -- showing the
uncertainty of the Histories of this Council, and the Lies of the Papists not
to be trusted. Iam divina qua ratione ego ero salvandus, qui nec ipsum
Concilium assequor, nec causam Concilii satis perspicio. p. 205. Quod Eutyches
non tantum unam in Christo naturam esse statuat, ostendunt Papistarum Verba,
qui dicunt Eutychen concessisse in Christo duas naturas, viz. Divinitatem and
Humanitatem, quae a Divinitate est assumpta -- Sed quid Eutyches voluerit quod
postea in Christo tantum Divina natura manserit, deserta humana, ibi prorsus
sunt muti; and re nondum certo cognitd dicunt, statuisse Eutychen quod in
Christo duae naturae, and tamen non duae sed una natura sit: Ita postea
historiae fiunt incertae and obscurae, ut nemo possit intelligere quid Eutyches
senserit, aut quid Pontificiae historiae sentiant. Amittimus hisce ambagibus
concilium una cum causis propter quas convocatum est. -- Ego meas conjecturas
recitabo: si rem assequor, been; si non, non propterea labesactabitur fides
Christiana. Eutychis opinio (sicut and Nestorii) errat circa idiomata, quamvis
alio modo. Nestorius non vult idiomata humanitatis tribuere Divinitati in
Christo: -- Contra Eutyches non vult idiomata divinitatis tribuere humanitati,
etiamsi and ipse firmiter and mordicus retineat Christum esse verum Deum and
hominem. Ut si dicerem in Concione publica, Verbum filium Dei esse conditorem
Coeli and Terrae aequalem Patri ab aeterno -- Et hoc Verbum, illum filium Dei
esse verum hominem: Hoc concedit mihi Eutyches nihil dubitans. Iam si porro
dicam, Quod ille homo Christus sit conditor coeli and terra, hoc offendit
Eutychen, qui putat prorsus esse absurdum dicere, Homo creat coelum and terram.
-- P. 210. Ibi vides quod idiomata facili occasion homines non praemonitos
offendant and perturbent. Hic erat subveniendum teneris Conscientiis ^raterna,
amica and salutari admonitione, nec superbissimi errantes abjiciendi essent.
Utinam meo judicio non respondeat eventus: sed vereor profecto aliquos
haereticos in novissimo die fieri judices; and illos ipsos Episcopos penes quos
suit judicandi potestas, in aeternum damnatos, ni Deus est mirabilis and
incomprehensibilis in suis judiciis; nisi quod scimus eum esse propitium
humilibus and infensissimum superbis. Et praesertim in Conciliis and Ecclesiis
nihil erat agendum zelo vel invidia, vel superbia, quia Deus non potest far.

20. Readers, you see what tedious work some men can make us: Many are
scandalized, as if we gave them false History, if we do not thus confute them;
and if we do, we tire our selves and you. If I should cite you many more thus
to confute his falsehood, that never person before me opposed that Faction, you
would be weary of it.

21. Yet now my hand is in, you shall see further how much Luther was for the
same that I have written. [ Qui volet poterit ulterius legere acta Concilii,
privata opera. Ego ad taedium and nauseam usque legi ista; ejusmodi Chaos
ceremoniarum and confusionum est ibi, ut videatur recte judicasse Greg. Naz.
qui Synodis eruditioribas and sedatioribus interfuit, -- and scribit [Sic
affectus sum si dicenda est veritas. ut malim omnes Episcoporum conventus
vitare, quia nullius Synodi finem vidi bonum, aut qui magis tolleret mala quam
augeret. Nam cupiditas contentionis and principatus, and aemulatio vincunt
rationem. Ut profecto miror quod propter haec verba non dudum eum
excommunicaverunt ut atrocissimum haereticum. Sed quid sit quod dicit in
Synodis Episcopos certasse ambitione, superbia, (...), habes in hac Synodo
clarissimum exempium. Quod autem certum sit quod hic dicit se nullius Synodi
vidisse finem bonum, docent nos historiae: Nam Ariana haeresis jocus fuit ante
Nicaenum Concilium prae illa confusione quam ipsi post Concilium excitaverunt,
(that was not long of the Synod.) Talis etiam suit Macedonici and Nestoriani
Concilii. Nam illa pars quae est condemnat a eo suit conjunctior, ut tali
specie concordiae. and unitatis suas praestigias pingerent quasi nulli justa
ratione damnari possent. Subinde excitarunt major a certamina contra Concilia
quae ipsi non recte intelligebant. -- P. 247. Illud possum facillime probare
quod miser ille Pastor in Hippone S. Augustinus plus docuit quam omnia Concilia
-- Dicam and quiddam amplius: Majus Lumen accedit Doctrinae Christianae ex
Catechismo puerili quam ex omnibus Conciliis, and oration Dominica and december
praecepta plus continent doctrinae and eruditionis quam omnia Concilia.

2. Because I recite the words of the Bishops crying Peccavimus, he exclaimeth
against me, as making Repentance and Reoantation a derision, and this by the
Spirit of Schism which is nice in point of honor, no Conviction shall be able
to reclaim it, though in the most indefensible thing in the World.]

Ans. Add but with the Inquisitors, [ Therefore burn them as hopeless.] and you
are come to the end of your Lesson. The penetrating Wits of some men are
admirable. This man whose face I never saw, knows my heart so much better
than my self and my acquaintance, that he can tell that it is to avoid
dishonor that I avoid Repentance, when I offer him my Oath, that if I have any
knowledge of my own desire, I would thank him as my dearest Friend, who will by
Evidence show me any necessary truth that I deny, or Falsehood that I hold, and
will joyfully publish my recantation.

2. And he can see Schism in my forbearing known and heinous sin in the
satisfaction of my Conscience, while I write, and preach, and practice
Communion with their Church, and can see none in silencing Thousands, and ipso
facto excommunicating many more Thousands of godly Christians, and denying
Baptism and the Lords Supper to such as think it is sinful to do -- he knows
what.

3. And he can see those things to be most indefensible, which after our best
study we take to be clear, and can get no rational Reply to our defense.

4. And (for want of memory or tenderness of his partners veracity) when their
Advocates have so often and scornfully charged me with Retractations, and also
told the World how much my own party (as they call them) speak against me, and
my many large and free oppositions to the faults of Nonconformists that run
into any extreme, do all proclaim how little I have set by such honor; yea,
when himself says that I have fiercely contended against all Sects and
Parties, and they call me Ishmael, whose hand is against every man: After all
this to proclaim as aforesaid, such obstinate Impenitence for the love of
Honor, I confess does no more further my conviction than the Oath of an Irish
Witness would have done: For if he had sworn it, I would have showed my Books
and their contrary testimony, and have asked him, whose honoring of me is it
that I buy so dearly? It is not the Rulers, nor the Prelates, nor their Clergy,
nor their adherents, noble or ignoble: And if I have willingly and laboriously
displeased and lost the Sectaries too, whose honor is it that I sell my Soul
for?

23. But did the man think that Unconstancy and compliance with powerful
Heresy, is the same thing with Repentance for it? Or is it well done to
persuade the Reader that it is Repentance or Retractation of Heresy I write
against, when I recite the words of the Council and their own? Do I say that
peccavimus was their sin?

24. And I would humbly desire him in time to consider, 1. Whether it was a
venial sin not to be named by me, when the most zealous Papists and Historians
name it, for so great a number of Bishops to turn and turn again so often, and
that with Anathematizing one year of what they voted for before with Anathema
to the contrary. I crave your impartial consideration but of two Instances: How
often did they with Anathema's vote for and against the Council of Calcedon as
the Emperors changed? Yea in the same Usurpers time, Basiliscus, when he
changed himself. 2. In the case of Images: How often did they change in Councils,
for them and against them, as the Princes changed? Sir, we mind this with
lamentation and not insultingly: But if you take these for venial little sins,
and our not swearing and covenanting all that you bid us for a mortal sin, are
you not partial?

2. And I would wish you to think on it again, before you make this guilt your
own, by mincing and excusing it; and lest you make all other men's sin your own,
whom hereby you encourage in the imitation of them. These are not things
indifferent.

3. And do not so dishonor Prelacy, and your Church and Discipline, as to tell
the World that these in Bishops are little things; what then is left for you to
stick at? No man should make light of such Beams in the Eyes of those that
should be the most pure, while they are pulling the mote of scrupling a
Ceremony, yea an Oath. etc. from their Brothers Eye, and that by such Iron
Instruments as they use.

25. Next comes his Logical terms, [ throwing dirt, outrageous, bitter,
malicious, etc.] And what is the matter? [ I give not one loose at Emperors and
Courts: scorning to change the game; charging the Bishops with the faults of
the Magistrate, and laying all the blame on them.] In what words? I say, [ so
far could fierce, and factious Prelates prevail with a pious and peaceable
Prince, by the pretenses of opposing Heresy and Schism.

Ans. 1. Was he not a most pious and peaceable Prince? Then Socrates that knew
him, and protests against flattery, and many others, are not to be believed?
yea, if he excelled not the Bishops?

2. Do I say that none but the Bishops persuaded him? Where do I lay all the
fault on them? Do I not after name the Emperess Eudocia, as the Agent to
persuade him for the Eutychians, and Pulcheria to persuade him against
Nestorius: My words are visible.

3. What Bishops were they that persuaded him to make a Law to confirm the
Ephesine, Eutychian Council? Was it not Dioscorus and the Eutychians? Were they
not Bishops? Did they not do it? Yea, does not this man often revile them far
more bitterly than ever I did, and revile me for speaking so charitably of
them? Would you ever have expected that the same man should have so reviled me,
for saying that these Eutychian Bishops prevailed with a good Emperor to
confirm that Council of Eutychians?

4. Is it a sin not to speak hardlier of so good a Prince, who after repented
and punished his Wife and Eunuch for persuading him? It was a blaming him to
tell to what he was persuaded.

Truly the man's anger here for my blaming the Eutychian Bishops, in
condemnation of whom he has poured out so much more than I, does make me think
that there is somewhat in the sound of some words, that turns his wrath this
way or that: When he hears the name of an Eutychian, away with them, speak not
easily of them. When the same men are called Bishops, it is malice, outrageous
bitterness to blame them for getting a Law to confirm that called an Heretical,
Murdering, Latroci^ian Council. His words are, p. 146. [ Were there ever
greater violences committed than in that infamous Conventicle at Ephesus?]

26. P. 263. He confesses that the Debate between the Council and the Egyptian
Bishops was something too warm: but says that heat was not altogether without
reason. Ans. This is his way to confess their faults, and then rail at me for
bare reciting the words of the Debate or History. But it was not without
reason: He confesses not so much as this of the silencing and ruining
Ministers now. It shall not be the use of my reason to make Figleaves to cloth
and cover the sins which God abhors.

Men will be men he says, wherever they are placed, whether in a Council or in
the Church, or even at the Altar.

Ans. By Men I suppose he means Sinners: and it is true. But of all Sinners Oh
that God would save his Church from those who hate reproof, and cherish the
worst that will be for them, and excommunicate and prosecute the most
conscionable that will not obey them in things which they call indifferent, for
fear of sinning against God.

27. His trifling words about Leo and Rome are not worthy of an Answer.

28. He has, P. 268. hit again on the oversight which I before confessed, even
the effect of my necessitated haste, that in translating Theodoret's words I
put ( truly) in the wrong place: I ask him forgiveness, and the Bishops, if
that be any slander against them; which is nothing to them.

29. He says, P. 269. [ There is no truth in what our Author says, that Ibas
Epistle was acquit.] Ans. There is no truth in saying that I said it was, when
my words were disjunctive, [ The Epistle was acquit, or at least the Bishop
upon the reading of it.] He says, Ibas was not acquit on the reading the
Epistle, but on the defense he made, that he communicated with Cyril. Ans. His
Accusations of Falsehood are commonly Boyish Quibbles. His Defense and the
Reading of his Letter go together, and in Binnius the Letter, and the Letters
of the Clergy of Edessa are the last things done before he is discharged.

30. P. 270. He says, [ The truth is, the Eastern Bishops were not so
ingenuous and fair after their reconciliation with Cyril, etc.] Thus he becomes
himself still an accuser of the Bishops.

31. Because I say that the Judges past sentence to cast out both Stephen and
Bassian from Ephesus, and all consented, he says, [ One would think here the
Judges passed sentence against the consent or Inclination of the Bishops.] Ans.
There is no end of answering your thinkings. I did not say that the Judges
passed the Councils Sentence but their own: And whether it were against the
Fore-inclination of the Council let any Reader judge, when the Judges asking
the Council their sense, [ Res. Episcopi clamaverunt, justi^ia Bassianum vocat:
Regulae valiant. The Judges answered them that their judgment was that both
were to be cast out, and a third chosen, and the Council suddenly consented. If
he would be believed contradicting this he must deny the Acts.

32. He has found matter for a quibble against tasting Poterius Flesh with
their Teeth. Teeth taste not: Dangerous false History, or want of Learning is
learnedly here discovered. When he cannot deny the most woeful, calamitous
dissentions which followed the Calcedon Council, he says, [ Was it the
misfortune or the fault of these only not to be able to heal the differences of
the Church? Or was the defect in the Councils, or the blame to be imputed to
those obstinate men that opposed the Rule established by them?]

Ans. No: They were neither the first nor the last that have miscarried. Nor
are we the first that suffer under such miscarriage. It was the misfortune of
the Churches to have such Physicians: But as it is the honor of some
Physicians to show how many Patients they have cured, so is it of some others,
when most die under their hands, to be able to say, that it was long of the
Patients that would not be ruled, or that they killed them secundum artem. It
was a Proverb in Sutton-Coldfield, [ Who begun?] A poor man had but one Ass and
he loaded him too hard, and the Ass being in pain bit his Master a little on
the Buttock; and his Master knocked him down, and killed him; and when he saw
him dying,, [ Well, (says he) But who begun?] But who had the loss? There be
Clergymen that can impenitently see the Strages, the divisions, the swarms of
sin that are the consequents of their needless masterly Impositions, and wipe
their mouths and say. It was the obstinacy of those that would not be ruled by
us! They kill a Flea on a man's Forehead with a Beetle, and say they meant not
to kill the man.

But if that Councils Acts were a fit means to cure the Churches Divisions, how
came they to be presently and through many Ages, yea, ever since to this day,
thereby increased so many fold? Though the Assembly at Jerusalem cured not all
the Jewish Teachers of their blind Zeal for Moses Law, it was so far from
increasing the Dissentions and number of Dissenters, that it satisfied the
Gentile Christians for the most part, and many of the Jewish, and greatly
diminished the Discord. It Is one thing not wholly to cure, and another to make
far worse.

33. He instanceth also in the Dort Synod that made things worse.

Ans. 1. The Synod of Dort made things the worse in their own Country, not by
their Doctrinal Decisions, but by too much of the Masterly Spirit, engaging the
Magistrates against the Arminians in the use of the Sword. Whether it be true
that they say, that they were necessitated to do what they did against
Barnevolt and Grotius for the safety of their State, I am no Judge: But I am
sure it is of an ill sound to those that read it: And so is it to read in
Episcopius and others, what violence the People have used against the
Arminians, and they were fain to tolerate them when all was done.

And it is no wonder that the Dissension increased in England, when the Clergy
would not long stand to the decrees that by our own six Delegates were
moderated: Dr. Heylin tells you how Bishop Laua's Zeal was the cause of our
following Contentions: And how? By bearing down all that were against him.

2. But the mere Doctrinal Decrees of the Synod of Dort are so moderate and
healing, that where Violence has been forborne, and Reason used, many have been
pacified by them. And

3. What that Synod did not, a few private Peacemakers have much done: The
Writings of Camero Amyraldus, Capellus, Placeus, Testardus, Lud. Crocius, Mat.
Martinius, Conr. Bergius, Joh. Bergius, Blondel, Daile, and above all, Le
Blank's have for ought I hear, half ended the controversy. And having my self
written one Book ( Cathol. Theology) for Reconciliation, I have not to this
day had a word of Contradiction, but the Consent of very many. And as I before
noted, Is not even in London where other differences might exasperate, yet this
Controversy almost laid to sleep? But if our Arminians will but get as severe
Laws and Canons made against them that are not of their Opinions, as be against
them that dare not conform to the Diocesane Model and the rest, they shall
quickly see this quarrel revived. The Articles of the Church of England
determine not these Controversies, and that is our Peace. Put in but one
determining Article against either side, and it will break us more in pieces.
Does not our own Case and Experience then confute those over-doing Councils?

34. His next Instance is that of the Westminster Assembly, -- So far from
reconciling the People, that after this they were distracted into innumerable
Schisms: Never was there so lamentable a face of things, never such variety of
Heresy, and such Wantonness, and Extravagancy, in blaspheming God under
pretense of Religion and Conscience: And this is the State whither the same
manner of men are driving again.

Ans. 1. I say again I knew so many of that Assembly, as that I do not think
that the Christian World had ever an Assembly of more able and truly pious
Clergymen, these 1300 Years at least. But these Upstarts that knew them not
can tell us any thing that Faction has taught them to believe concerning them
and others. The Parliament was by seeming necessity drawn to gratify the
Scots: The Assembly, though Conformists, all, save Eight or Nine, were as
sensible as the Nonconformists of the mischiefs of silencing worthy Ministers,
and forbidding Afternoon Sermons, and such like; and they were as much against
Arminianism and Popery as the Church of England was in A. Bp. Abbat's days, and
as much as he against the Doctrine of Mainwaring and Sibthorp: And the
Parliament absolutely restrained them from debating any thing but what they
proposed to them; so that they that were for the Primitive Episcopacy had no
liberty to debate it, or speak for it, but on the by. But when the Covenant was
offered them against Prelacy, they were about to enter a Protestation against
it, and were stopped only by limiting the renunciation to the English frame
described in an explicatory Parenthesis. But for my part I think them much to
be blamed, that they did not, though against that prohibition, resolve to
propose such moderate healing terms to the Parliament as were agreeable to
their judgments, or at least have testified against the limiting of Church
Concord to such narrow terms, as must exclude such men as were for the English
Episcopacy: They might easily have known, that the number of such in England
was so great, as that an excluding Law must needs be an Engine of great
Division; and that Conquest will not change men's Judgments.

And as I doubt not but the five Dissenting Independents were greatly to blame,
for making such a stir for leave to gather their Churches, when nothing was
imposed on them which they could accuse; So I doubt not but the Assembly were
to be blamed for making a greater noise against errors than they had cause
for. Their desire of Concord, which was good itself, did raise them to too
great Expectations of it, and too great impatience of little differences. They
published their Testimony against the errors of the times, in which they took
in Dr. Hammond, and made many differences worse than they were, too like the
old Hereticators. And they wanted that skill to compose their differences with
the Independents, as was needful to that end, and might have been attained. And
will the faults of that Assembly justify the far greater faults of others? But

2. This sort of Historians do much more differ from us about the matters of
Fact, which our Eyes have dayly-seen, yea, about our own Thoughts and Minds,
than about the History of the ancient Church. The case was very far different
from that which he describes. Mr. Lawson, a Conformist, says, [There was
never better Preaching, Piety encouraged and increased, etc. than at that time.
In all the Counties where I was acquainted, there were many young Orthodox
faithful Preachers, that gave themselves wholly to do good, for one that was
ten Years before, and not any considerable number noted for any immorality: We
were in the County where I lived almost all of one mind; for Episcopal,
Presbyterians and Independents uniting in that which they agreed in, and
leaving all to Liberty in the rest, we lived in constant Brotherly Love and
Peace without Dissension. I never knew of any of a diverse Religion in all the
County, save at the end, in one or two corners about Twenty Quakers: And near
me were about Twenty otherwise. Orthodox, that denied Infant Baptism, (and
perhaps as many more in the whole County,) and Two or Three ignorant Socinians.
In the next County I heard not of so many Heterodox: Never did I see, before or
since, so much Love and Concord among Ministers, and all religious People, nor
read of any Age that had so much for 1300 Years. And whereas the common cry is,
Oh, but they were all Rebels against the King! I have named abundance of the
Ministers in mine Apology to Dr. Good, (who being Episcopal was a Guide in our
Meetings, and after so accused the Nonconformists) and challenged him to name
one of them that ever meddled with Wars. I knew none in all the County that was
in any Army save the King's, save Mr. Hopkins of Evesham (dead) and my self,
and one that is a Conformist, and one Independent (dead.)

But it is true, that they were then so set upon Parish Reformation and Concord,
that they were more troubled at any one that did turn Quaker, or against Infant
Baptism, than some indifferent Persons are at Multitudes. And I was one that
disputed most against them, and wrote against some distant Antinomians, mostly
Soldiers; But our Disputes satisfied and confirmed all our Neighbors more
than Prisons would have done. We punished none of them, and none of our People
there turned to them. But I confess we were commonly too little sensible, how
much hurtful Violence hinders Concord, more than loving forbearance of
tolerable differences. As too many were how much for Peace they should have
abated of the Zeal for their private Opinions, which they thought to be better
than they were. We were much like the days that followed the Apostles, which
had some troublesome Sectaries, but the main Body of Christians did cleave
together in Love, till success had puffed up a rebellious Army to make themselves
Rulers, to the Confusion of themselves and others.

35. At last mentioning the common Dissentions of the Churches, he seems to
resolve the Question, What then must be done? But he puts us off only with the
Negative Answer, that [ the Rule, i. e. of our Uniformity is not to be altered.
And why? [ We have no assurance that we shall find any Conformity to it more
than we have now.]

Ans. I must not call this Answer as it deserves.

1. You were about dealing otherwise with the Papists: Dr. Heylin tells us how
much they were to have altered for Concord: Mr. Thorndike threatens the Land,
if you alter not the Oath of Supremacy for them: The name of the Pope and
Antichrist has been expunged for them; yet you said not, We know not that
they will come any nearer us.

2. By these measures a Rag or a Ceremony should never be abated for the Peace
and Concord of any Church or Kingdom: You may still say we are not sure that
this will serve them. The Pope may say so, where he refuses to abate the
shaving of the Priests Beards, or the least of his Impositions; yea he knows
that would not serve. They said so to the Bohemians four Demands: They
concluded so at first against Luther. This very Argument has kept them from
all Reformation.

3. Can you find nothing in your Impositions that in the nature of the thing is
worthy to be altered? If not, you have more or less Wisdom than Bishop Morton,
and the rest of the Church Doctors who at Westminster motioned so many
Alterations. ^^ one should but then move you to correct your known false Rule
for finding Easterday, or to give Parents leave to be the first Promisers for
their own Children, and Godfathers but their seconds, or not to deny
Christendom and Communion for that or a Ceremony: No, come on it what will,
nothing must be altered, lest men ask more. And yet you preach against Clergy
Infallibility, (or subscribe at least.)

4 But if you are so much against altering, why did you alter to our greater
suffering, and add as much more (yea five times more) to the former Task and
Burden? You can no doubt say somewhat for all this.

5. And when it is the same things that the old Nonconformists still asked, and
we since 1660 asked yet less, what reason had you to raise that suspicion that
we will not be satisfied with what we ask? Have we given you any cause? If you
mean that perhaps there be some still that may be unsatisfied, will you deny
Peace to so many that beg it of you, because others will not accept it on their
Terms? Or will you never agree with any lest some disagreement should arise
hereafter.

Some Travelers were assaulted by the high way by a Captain of Soldiers, who
took all their Money, Swords and Horses, and swore he would kill them if they
would not take an Oath to conceal him: One took the Oath to save his Life,
another scrupled it: They begged his Mercy to restore so much as would bring
them home: He asked them what would satisfy them: One would have his Horse,
another his Sword, another part of his Money. He told them, You are a Company
of Rogues, that can neither agree what to ask, nor give me assurance if I give
you this you will ask no more. I compare not the Authority but the Reasons of
the Denial.

36. But seeing no abatement of their Canons, etc. must be granted, what is it
that must cause our Concord? He would not tell you; but it is discernible what is
left: It must be no Concord but what Punishment can procure: And what
punishment? Sharper than is yet tried; for that has not done it: Such Concord
as Tertullian names, Solitudinem faciunt and pacem vocant: The Concord in
Spain is worse than the Amsterdam toleration.

Again I remember the great Fish Pond mentioned by Judge Hale, that had
multitudes of Fish and fry; and at last two small Pikes put in; when the Pond
was drawn there was never a Fish but the two Tyrants (as he calls them) grown
to a huge bigness. The fear least Popery and Prelacy should be the two Pikes,
tempted men irregularly to covenant against them. To have such variety as Roch,
Dace, Pierch, Tench, Carp, made it a Schismatical Pond; The two Pikes were
against Schism and Toleration, and for ending the Division by reducing all to
unity of Species.

37. As to his Question of Qu. Elizabeth's days, the Intimation may seduce the
ignorant, but none else. 1. If he know not that it was the Subscription
required in the Canons, (that nothing in the Books is contrary to the Word of
God, scrupled, which broke the Peace and Concord of England, he is unfit by his
Ignorance to be an Informer of others. I have known many that would have
yielded to come into the Conforming Church, if that one word had been but
forborne: For when any practice against their Consciences about baptizing,
Communion, or Burials had fallen in their way, they would have silently shifted
it off, or been from home, and have ventured to answer it, so they could but
conscionably have got in. But our Canoneers are for all or nothing.

2. He is sure no English Clergyman, if he know not how much is laid on us,
that was not known in the days of Qu. Elizabeth. Is it to inform men, or
deceive them, that he makes the difference to be between 36 and 39 Articles,
and says nothing of all the new Covenants, Declaration^, Oaths, Subscriptions,
Doctrine and Practices?

38. Many make use of Mr. Edwards Gangrena, and the London Ministers Testimony
against errors, to prove the Heresies and Confusions of the late times. No
doubt all sin is odious: But few men living are more competent Witnesses of
those things than I. The Errors that sprung up were much more tenderly
resented then than now. You now have many called Wits and Persons of Quality,
who at a Club dispute against the Providence of God, the immortality of the
Soul, and a future Life; and there is neither Church-Admonition,
Excommunication, nor any great matter made of it, but they are Members of the
Church of England, the purest Church in all the World: Whereas in those
licentious times, if one Soldier had spoken such a Word, it would have rung
out through the Land, and perhaps his Tongue would have been bored with an hot
Iron. It was the errors of the proud rebellious Soldiers that made most of the
noise, that had no considerable number of Ministers left with them. I had a
hand in Mr. Edwards Book thus: An Assembly of Ministers after Naseby Fight sent
me into the Army to try if I could reduce them. Daily disputing with them, a
few proud selfconceited Fellows vented some gross words. At Amersham a few
Country Sectaries had set up a Meeting in Dr. Crooks Church, to dispute and
deceive the People: A few of Major Bethel's Troop (that afterward turned
Levellers and were ruined) joined with them: I met them, and almost all day
disputed against them, and shamed them, and they met there no more. I gathered
up all the gross words which they uttered and wrote them in a Letter to Francis
Tyton, and after I found them cited in Mr. Edwards Gangrena. And what is the
absurd Speeches of a few ignorant Soldiers, that are dead with them, to the
Heresies and Schisms that these 1000 or 1200 Years continue in all the Roman
Communion, and they say in all the rest of the Christian World. One cheating
Papist as a converted Jew got into an Anabaptists Meeting, one Maxwell a Scot,
and all England rung of it. But when Bishops have made and keep France, Spain,
Italy, etc. in the same Errors, Dr. Heylin, and Bp. Bromhall, and such others,
took them for such, with whom a Coalition on the terms by them described was
very desirable.

CHAP. XXIV. His 7th Chapter considered.
1. THE Man had not the courage to defend the surgent Prelacy in its Manhood
and Maturity, but only in its Infant and Juvenile State; nor to defend the many
hundred Councils which I mentioned after the Council of Calcedon, in which
either his Modesty or Cautelousness comes short of his Rd. Fathers, who some of
them own the six first General Councils, and some of them eight, and some would
unite with the Church of Rome, if they will abate but the last 400 Years
additions.

2. In his Gleanings in this 7th Chap. he over, and over, and over persuadeth
his Reader, that I make or affirm that [ the Bps. were the cause of all the
Heresies in the world, and of all the Heresies, Schisms, and Evils that have
afflicted the Church. And has this Historian any proof of this? Or is it the
melancholy fiction of his Brain? Yes, this is his proof contrary to my manifold
Instances, because I say in one age, [ We have a strange thing, a Heresy
raised by one that was no Bishop: which I have answered before. To be then
strange, and never to be at all; are not words of the same sense? But his
Answers throughout do mind me of Seneca's Words, that a man that is sore
complains (or cries Oh) when he does but think you touch him.

3. He thus himself accuses the Bishops, p. 276 [ There have been wicked men
and wicked Bishops in all times.] And p. 277. [ That some Bishops have abused
their Authority and Office, and been the cause of Heresy and Schism cannot be
denied.] But yet [ He has showed sufficiently, that most of my particular
Accusations are void of all truth and Ingenuity.] Ans. Or else those words are
so.

4. He says All Ecclesiastical Writers agree, that Simon Magus was Author of
the first Heresy in Christian Religion.] Ans. All confess that Judas was
before him: And if it be a Heresy to buy the Spirit for Money, it is a Heresy
to sell Christ for Money. But I confess some tell us of his after pranks at
Rome, and imitating Icarus, at Peter's Prayers: If you would see why Dr. More
takes this for a toyish Legend, see his Mystery of Iniquity, Lib. 2. C. 19. 6,
7. p. 447, 448.

5. P. 286, 287. Baronius first, and Philastrius after, are made guilty of
Forgery and disregardable History, so that I may well bear some of his Censures.

6. P. 290. To confute me effectually he says much what the same which is much
of the sum of all my Book: And yet it is false and malicious in me, and true and
charitable in him: viz. [ Praising the first 300 years, (when the Bishops were
such as we offer to submit to:) he adds [ The following Ages were not so happy;
but as Christians generally degenerated so did the Bishops too.]

Ans. What! Before the Council of Nice! That Is a sad Confession. I was ready to
say as a Roman Emperor said to a flatterer, that still said all that he said,
[ Dic aliud aliquid ut duo simus,] But his next words allay it, [ But yet not
so much as our Author would make it appear.] As the Dominicans and Oratorians
must say some falsehood of Calvine, lest they be thought Calvinists.

And yet he adds, [ The beginning of the 4th Century was very unhappy to the
Church, for Persecution without, and Heresy and Schism within. Meletius an
Egyytian began a Schism, forsook the Communion of the Church, etc. Next the
Donatists, Arians, etc.]

Ans. It seems that the Emperors Constantius and Valens were without the
Church, and yet the Arian Priests and Bishops were within it. When he defines
the Church we may understand this. But is it not this 4th Century that is made
the Churches more flourishing state by others?

7. Even the great Historian of Heresies, Epiphanius, is said p. 292. to be [
unaccountably mistaken in several things relating to that History.] And 293.
has [ a strange unaccountable mistake in diverse other things relating to that
matter.] If I had at any time erred with such a Bishop and Father, I might have
been excusable for reciting his History.

8. Page 295. He opens the very Heart of his Parties Principles, and says, [
The Church is never distracted more by any thing than Projects of Moderation.]

Ans. Experience proves that you speak your Heart. The words are no wilful Lie
which agree with a man's Mind, be they never so false as disagreeable to the
matter. No man was more of that Opinion than Hildebrand, that would not yield
the Emperors the Investiture, nor as I before said, abate the Prince of
Calaris the shaving of his Bishops Beard to save his Kingdom. Victor began with
that Opinion too soon, but his Successors have these Thousand Years been as
much for it as you can wish.

2. But to whom is it that you intend this? Sure not to all: Was Bishop Laud of
that mind toward the Papists if Dr. Heylin say true? Was Grotius of that mind
toward them? Was Archbishop Bromhall, Forbes, Beziar, Thorndike (and many more
such) of that mind? No: I Will excuse you, that you meant not them and their
Projects of Moderation: Nor I believe neither Cassander's, Erasmus's,
Wicelius's, Sancta Clara's, Leander's, etc.

But toward such as I am, you have been as firm to that Principle as any one
of our Enemies could wish. In 1660, 1661. it was most effectually improved; and
you have attained much of the fruits then foretold: and ever since have been
unmoveably and prevailingly true to it.

3. But this makes some men the Distracters of the Church, if not the
greatest, which truly I have better thoughts of: Such as Junius, Paraeus,
Amyraldus, Le Blanke, Davenant, Ward, Usher, Holdsworth, Morton, Hall, etc. And
lately when we were preparing for the Kings Return, Bp. Brownrig, and after his
death Dr. Gawden, Dr. Gulston, Dr. Allen, Dr. Bernard, and diverse such did
offer themselves to a Treaty for Moderation: And since then Dr. Wilkins, Dr.
Burton, Dr. Tillotson, and in diebus illis Dr. Stilling fleet have been guilty
of this crime, of distracting the Church by projects of Moderation: But I can
name the Bps. that were not guilty of it.

To abate or forsake the necessary points of Faith and Practice on pretense of
Moderation, is to destroy Christianity on pretense of Humanity or Peace. But to
make Laws that men shall preach with Horns on their Heads, to signify the
Victory of Truth, and to ruin all that will not keep these Laws (much more if
men should command worse) and to say a Project for Moderation would distract
the Church, would be as far from Wisdom as it is from Moderation: And some
Prelates have done as bad as this.

9. He confesses p. 296. that by force and Fraud [ the whole World in a manner
was turned Arian.] And did I ever say worse of the Bishops than this?

10. He makes Aerius to speak against Bishops because he could not be a
Bishop, so that he was of a Prelatical Judgment and Spirit, and calls him [
The Cartwright of the times,] by which if he mean that Cartwright would have
been a Bishop, it does but tell us that he deserves little belief in his
History.

11. He is a most singular Historian, p. 303. in telling us, that after the
Monothelites in following Ages of the Church the Devil started up but few
Heresies till these Ages, -- Swenk feldians, Anabaptists, etc.

By this I perceive he believes neither Papists nor Protestants: For the
Papists name many Heresies since, and the Protestants say that Popery is but a
Composition of many Heresies, and name us many that concurred thereto.

12. He there gives me this serious Admonition, [ It is a much greater wonder
that any man that makes Conscience of what he says, should against all truth
of History, and against his own knowledge, charge the Bishops with all the
Heresies in the World: that a person that seems so sensible of approaching
Judgment, as frequently to put himself in mind of it -- should yet advance so
malicious and groundless an Accusation. There is no dallying with the allseeing
God -- What Plea shall be made for whole Books full of Calumny and Detraction,
etc.]

Ans. This is not the least acceptable passage to me in his Book; I love the
man the better for seeming serious in the belief of Judgment; and I hope his
Warning shall make me search my Heart with some more jealousy and care. He
seems here to believe himself; but being my self far more concerned than he is
to know how far I am guilty of what I am accused, as far as I can know my Heart
and Writings, I Will tell the Reader what to judge of his words and me.

1. That I charge the Bishops with all the Heresies in the World, never was in
my mind, nor can I find it in any of my Writings: Yet this he very often
repeateth: And should a man so often write a falsehood about a thing visible,
and never cite the place where I say it, and this while he is thus seriously
mentioning Calumny and Judgment.

2. Can he make men believe at once that I do persuade men that Bishops or
Diocesanes came not up till about 150 years after Christ, and yet that I make
them the Authors of the Heresies that were in those times? Non entis non est
actio: Could Bishops be Heretics when there were no Bishops?

3. If I had charged the Bishops with all the Heresies, it follows not that I
had charged no one else with them, and made the Bishops the sole Authors, and
acquit People, Priests, and Princes; why then does he name many Monks and
Priests that were Heretics? Or Emperors that promoted them, as if this
crossed what I say? Did he think that I excluded the Army if I blame the
General, or the Prelatical Priests when I blame the Prelates? If I took the
Bishops of England to be the chief cause of our Church-Schisms, and Calamities,
does it follow that I acquit such as you, and all the Clergy like you?

4. That I have done this [ against all Truth of History] which I transcribed
out of the Councils and Historians most partial for the highest Prelacie, is
either a great untruth, and unproved by him, or I know not what I read or write.

5. That I do this against my own Knowledge I am certain is an untruth.

6. That my Accusations are malicious I am certain is untruth, as being able to
say that I speak in pity to the Church, and to save Souls from deceit, and
malice no man; but pray with the Liturgy, that God will forgive our Enemies,
Persecutors, and Slanderers, and turn their Hearts.

7. That I have brought any Groundless Accusation I must take for an untruth,
till my Grounds produced are better confuted.

8. Much more that I write whole Books full of Calumny and Detraction.

All these and more untruths being heapt up with the mention of Death and
Judgment, tells us whither Faction and Prepossession may carry men.

2. But what is the truth I shall again briefly tell the Reader: 1. About 2000
of such Ministers as I confidently take for the most spiritual, and
conscionable and devoted to God and the good of Souls are silenced, and in Law
imprisoned and ruined; and all the People of their mind are ipso facto (if they
confess it) excommunicated, besides their other penalties. I accuse not the Law
but mention only the matter of Fact, which the K. once commissioned Bps. to
have prevented.

2. The Kingdom is dolefully divided, and alas, the sad consequents are not to
be named.

3. Besides all our Penalties the Bishops accuse us as the causes of all, and
as wilful Schismatics, and call for the Execution of the Laws against us.

4. We say, we dare not do that, which when ever they will give us leave, we
are ready to give our reasons why we take it for heinous sin against God, and
tending to the ruin of the Church: nor dare we forsake our Ministry while the
Churches necessities are to us past doubt.

5. We beg of them but to abate us some needless Oaths, and Covenants, and
Professions, and a few things called indifferent by the Imposers, that we may
all live in Christian Love and Peace, and we offer them as unquestionable
security for our Peaceableness, Loyalty, and Orthodoxness, as the said Oaths,
Promises, or Professions can be.

6. They tell us, Nothing is to be abated us, and we must cease preaching, the
Rule must not be altered; we will do more harm in the Church than out; Projects
for Moderation most distract the Church; There is no Concord or Liberty to be
expected, but by our total obedience to the Bishops; It is obeying the Church,
yea the Universal Church of Bishops, that is the only way to Concord.

7. To confute this Supposition, which is the root of our Calamities, I
transcribe out of History and the Acts of Councils, how great a hand in the
Schisms, and Heresies, and Confusions of Christians, those Bishops have had,
who have swelled up above the primitive species, by vast Diocesses, Wealth, and
claim of Government over other Churches and Bishops; and that it is notorious
that this Grandeur and exorbitant power of Bishops, singly or in Councils, has
been so far from keeping the Church from Schisms, that it has been one of the
greatest causes of the Schisms of most Ages, since such a sort of Prelacy
sprung up, and that Popery came not up in a day, but rose from that Juniority
to its present Maturity. This was my work.

13. He truly tells you, that the Original of all mischiefs is the Lusts that
war in our Members, and not this or that Order of Men.]

When the World had a good Pope, if God would bless that Order of men, some
think he might do more good than any other man. But he has touched the Core of
the Churches Malady. Verily, the grand Strife is between the Flesh and Spirit,
the seed of the Serpent and of the Woman: And if Patriarchs and Diocesans were
but as much set on the promoting of a holy and heavenly Life, as those
Ministers are whom they silence and imprison, they might do much good, though
the largeness of their Diocese render them incapable of performing the 40th
part of a true Bishops Work. No doubt but Bishop Hall, and Potter, and Usher,
etc. did much good, by such preaching, writing, and good living, as others use
that are no Bishops.

But will fire burn without fuel? And will it not burn if combustible fuel be
contiguous? Do not the Lusts that war in our Members live upon that food which
we are forbidden to provide? Do you think that the Lust of the Flesh does not
more desire Riches than Poverty, Honor than a low Estate, Domination over
others, to have our Will on all, than humble Subjection? Where the Carcass is
there will the Eagles be gathered. Do not you your self say, that the Bishops
and Church grew more corrupt after the third Century? Do you believe that when
a Bishops Power was made equal to a great Lords, or more, and all his Pomp and
Riches answerable, that the Lust of the Flesh would not more greedily desire
it, than it would desire a mere mediocrity? Or that a worldly proud man would
not seek more for Lordship and Greatness, than a Synesius, and such others as
you say fled from it? If the poor retired Monks were as bad as you make them,
what wonder if great Lordly Bishops were much worse? Will not the fire of Lust
grow greater as the fuel is greater?

I am satisfied that Riches and Power well used, may greatly serve the Interest
of Religion: But two things must be considered.

1. That the greatest Power and Wealth being far more desired by carnal
Worldlings, (that is, by bad men) than by mortified heavenly minded men, the
more men desire them, the more eagerly they will seek them by Friends,
Flattery, or any means: and therefore the liker they are to attain them, except
when the choosers are some resolved godly men. And so which way can a
Succession of the worst men be avoided? But a mediocrity that does not to the
Flesh overweigh the labors and difficulties of the sacred Office, will
encourage the good, and not much tempt the bad: Or if good men will be never so
bountiful to pious uses, their bounty and Church Lands may better maintain
Laborers enough for the work, than be made a snare to one.

2. And that Power which depopulateth and destroys its end, is unlawful in its
very state, as well as in its use. The Power of one man to be sole Physician to
the City, and to have none but Apothecaries under him; or of one man to be the
only Schoolmaster in the County, and have none but Ushers under him, is rather
to be called Destruction than Power. It is Bishops casting out Power that I am
against, that is, the necessary Power of the Keys in the Parish Ministers, or
putting down necessary Bishops; and also a Power to silence Christ's faithful
Ministers, and deprive Souls of the necessary means, by imposing things
needless in themselves, and sinful in the receiver, that after his best search
believes them such.

Seeing then that we are agreed, that it is the Lust that warreth in men, that
is the corrupter of the Church, let but the face of the whole Roman Clergy
these 1000 Years at least tell us, whether it be not the swelling of the Power
and Wealth of Bishops, that has caused so long a Succession of a worldly,
lustful, tyranical Clergy.

14. And he truly says, [ p. 306. that the generality of men when they have
gained Wealth and Honor, are commonly willing to secure the enjoyment of those
Possessions, by letting things run in their ordinary course.

(The Spanish Proverb is, The World is a Carryon, and they are Dogs that love
it, and they will snarle at any that would take it from them, and if it lie in
the Ditch, Dogs rather than Men will gather about it: and its pity such men
should by such a Bait be tempted into the sacred Chair.) And he truly adds,
that Repulse and Disappointment will end such men's Patience. For really as the
man is, such are his desires: It is not only turgent Prelacy but a Prelatical
Spirit that troublerh the Church: And If Novatianus or Arius would fain be a
Prelate, it is in his heart; and no wonder if he be a Schismatic; Trahit sua
quemque voluptas. Appetite is the Spring of Action. All the Popes Clergy are
much of his mind; for they participate of his worldly Interest, and depend on
him, and therefore participate of the Papal Spirit. The Interest of the General
and Army are conjunct.

15. And its true that he says, that the Bishops Interest obliges him to
maintain Peace and Unity. And so no doubt from that sense of Interest it is
endeavored, in Italy, Spain, France, Germany, etc. when a strong man armed
keeps his house, the things which he possesses are in Peace. But whether
therefore the People did ill that forsook the Bishops and followed Luther, or
are all bound to cleave to the Bishops Unity, is the doubt.

16. Whether it be true, p. 310 that very few if any one were Bishops when they
turned Heretics, I have enquired in the Preface; though if they ascended from
Heresy to Prelacy it is all one to me. But by this I conjecture that he takes
fewer for Heretics than others do, and that he pretends acquaintance with
their minds, in that antecedent part of their Lives which no History
mentions. I confess I think that for the most part men are Papists before
they are Popes or Papist Bishops: And yet I think that it is first the desire
of Papal and Prelatical Grandeur, and next the Exercise of it, which is the
cause of Schism and Persecution.

17. I verily believe as he does, that Platonic Philosophy, and a willingness
to win the Heathens by compliance, had a great hand in corrupting many
Doctrines; and not only Monks but others of the most religious Christians, had
a great hand in many of the ancient Superstitions, especially those that tended
to the over-honouring of their Martyrs, and too much advancement of their
Bishops, when they came newly from under the Persecution of the Heathens. But
it came not to be universal, nor the Engine of great Corruption and cruelty,
till the Bishops turned all into a Law. Who could make any of all this
necessary, but Pope, Prelates, or Princes, who pretended a Legislative Power
hereto? Even Luther and Melancthon were indifferent to diverse Ceremonies, so
they were made to be indifferently used. But when they are made necessary by a
Law (specially more necessary to a Minister than his Ministry, and to a private
Christian, than his Church Communion, who does more vehemently condemn them
than they?

18. That Paschasius Radbertus was the first that broached the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, is a doubtful expression. Either he means the Name or
only the Thing under another Name. If the latter, he will do more than Edm.
Albertinus, or Bp. Consius have done, if he prove it: If it be the name that he
means, I think (by my Memory, for I will not for that go read him all over)
that he will not find the name in Radbertus, nor any where before Stephanus
Eduensis, about 130 years after him: and that all that he can truly say, is but
as Bellarmine does, [ Hic Author primus suit qui serio and copiose scripsit de
veritate Corporis and Sanguinis Domini in Eucharistia contra Bertramum
Presbyterum.

19. That the Bishops charged by me with these Corruptions, were the only
Opposers of them that we find in antiquity, as we may see in the Canons of
Africa and Spain,] is a saying very near kin to much of his History: I confess
that so few Presbyters in comparison of Bishops were public Actors, whose
Judgments were notified to the World, that it is no wonder (after Constantine's
time) if there be more proofs of their words and deeds than of other men's: But
there are a great number of excellent men here slandered against the credit of
all Church History, and their own Writings yet in our hands. Would it be worth
the Readers Price and Labor, I could swell my Book with the proof that what he
speaks is untrue. Did he think that I could not prove that Justin Martyr,
Athenagoras, Tatianus, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origene, Arnobius,
Lactantius, Macarius, Maternus Firmicus, Ephrem Syrus, Faustinus, Hierome,
Ruffinus, Prudentius, Sulpitius Severus, Sedulius, Mammertus, Cassianus,
Vincent. Lirinensis, Socrates, Sozomen, Isodore Pelusiota, etc. did something
in opposition to some Church-Corruptions? Though some of them promoted some
others: Yea, Antonie and abundance of Monks that furthered some, opposed others
no less dangerous: Though many of them may be accused as Bellarmine does
Sulpit. Severus, for saying, Ecclesiam auro non strui sed destrui.

Judge of time past by what we see; Is it only the Bishops that are against the
Popes Church-Corrupting Usurpation in Italy, Spain, France, etc. Is it only the
Bishops that are against the Mass Corruptions, and against all their corrupt
Doctrines of Indulgences, Purgatory, Images, etc. and against all their
Ceremonies, and profane abuse of holy things? Was it only the Bishops at
Constance and Basil, that were against suppressing the Bohemian and Moravian
Reformation? In the end of Lydius upon Prateolus you may read a Letter
subscribed by so great a number of Lords and great men, for John Hus, and
Hierome, and the Reformation, which yet prevailed not with the Bishops, as will
tell you who was then the greatest Opposers of Church-Corruption. And I think
Princes and Drs. opposed it more than Bps. in Luther's time. Is it only the
Bishops that have opposed warping toward Rome for Church-Unity? Have none but
Bishops been against corrupting the Churches, by silencing good Ministers and
ordaining bad ones? The things that are, have been. I confess our difference is
great on the case, what is to be accounted Church-Corruption. For that which in
one Country goes for Corruption, in another (yea the same) goes for
Church-Glory, Strength, and Beauty; Our main difference is about what is good,
and what is bad; what is Virtue, and what is Vice.

20. He next comes to Sedition, and asks [ What Reign have they disturbed
here with their Sedition?] And because he knows that I can refer him to the
large Volume of their Treasons written by Prin, and abroad to the many Volumes
in Goldastus, and the many Histories of the Wars of Popes and Councils against
Emperors,] he prevents all my Proof with a downright Untruth, that [ If a man
be not blind he may see that my History is only designed against Protestant
Bishops under a general name.

Ans. Was it not enough so grossly to write this Untruth of me, but he must also
reproach all the Readers as blind that will not judge falsely of what they read?
Does he know my meaning better than my self? He knows that I plead for the
Primitive Episcopacy, and that I profess to intend this History most to
discover the Rise, Growth, and Maturity of the Popish destructive sort of
Prelacy. Readers, can you believe this man, that I wrote the case of the
Bishops before and under Popery, and of the Popes, and of above Five hundred
Councils, and all these before the name of a Protestant Bishop was known in the
World, and as he says, gathered their faults, and all this only against the
Protestant Bishops, and not against Popes or Prelates, or any of the Councils
that I named?

Perhaps he would tempt me to refer him to the History of Bishop Laua's Trial,
or to what Bishop Abbot, George and Robert, Bishop Hall and others said against
him: Or to tell him of A. Bp. Williams Arms for the Parliament. But these are
not Subjects fit for our Debates.

21. P. 318. When I say, that where Prelacy with the Papists is at the highest,
Princes are at the lowest. He asks, Is it the Bishop or the Papist that is
here to blame? Is this the effect of their Order?

Ans. 1. I thought the Pope of Rome and the Bishop of Rome had been the same.
2. But this Corrector of History taking Untruths not only* into the Completion,
but the Stamina and Scope of his Book, among all the rest supposes me to speak
against a Bishop as a Bishop, when I have troubled him with my repeating so
often that I am for Bishops, and that it is not the Office but the tumor, and
that tumor that makes another species which I oppose. Does he not think that
the Popes Bishopric is faulty (yea, as a corrupt species?) And as it is more
tumid than the Patriarchs, is not the Patriarchs more tumid than the
Metropolitanes, and that than the Diocesanes? And if Dr. Hammond were not
deceived, who thought that there were no stated worshipping Assemblies in
Scripture times without a present Bishop, is not the sole Bishop of a Thousand
or a Hundred such Assemblies different from a Bishop of One only? And if many
Canons speak truly, that say a Bishop should be in every City that has a
Church, and every great Town like our Corporations and Market Towns was called
a City, does not a Bishop of one City, and a Bishop of 50, or 40, or 10, differ
so far, that a man may be against one without being against the other? Does he
speak against Patriarchs that speaks against the Pope? Or against Diocesanes
that speaks against Patriarchs? Or against the Primitive Bishops that speaks
only against such Diocesanes as put them all down, and all their Churches, and
almost all true Discipline of such Churches, like Erastians.

22. P. 319. 322. His Charge on Socrates and Sozomene (shaking the credit of
Church History) as writing that [ which no reasonable man can believe as it is
related by them, without loving a malicious Lie.] I spoke to before: If such
Historians believed not what they write or loved a malicious Lie; alas, whom
shall we believe? Is he better than they?

And his note that Valesius judged Eusebius Nicomed no Heretic, I before noted.

But I will follow that case no further, lest he should draw me to seem to
charge the ancient Bishops with sedition, whom I never intended so to charge;
but only to desire those that can excuse the Language e. g. of Gregory the
great to Ph^cas, of Ambrose to Eugenius, of the Bishops to Maximus, and many
such like, not implacably to reproach and hunt those that did no more or not so
much.

23. His full Stomach discharges itself against me three times over with one
charge, P. 314, 320, 352. [Oliver Cromwell and his Son, the David and Absalom
of Mr. B.] And [ He compares the most barbarous villain in the World to King
David, in his Epistle to his Son.

Ans. Reader if there be no such word in any of my Writings, after all these
Accusations of this man and many such other, I must leave it to thy self how
thou will name these men, their History, and their dealings; for if I name them
they will say I rail.

Yea, what if this very man (it is easy to know why and whence) does even here,
p. 352. etc. reprint the very Epistle which he thus accuses, and cite no such
word, to tell us that he knew there was no such word there, and yet thus
affirms it, what will you call this?

The words cited by himself are these, [ Many observe that you have been
strangly kept from participating in any of our late bloody Contentions, that
God might make you a Healer of our Had I said what is this Week published, as
one of their chief Dr's Elegy upon Oliver Cromwell, (with two others) what
should I have heard? What abundance of Conformists flattered Oliver, while I
openly disow^nd him as a Usurper; but now their malice has got the handle.
Breaches, and employ you in that Temple Work, which David himself might not be
honored with, though it was in his mind, because he had shed blood abundantly,
and made great Wars. 1 Chr. 22. 7, 8.]

Is here ever a word of Oliver? Is he here called David? Did I not purposely
say, [ David himself] and cite the Text, lest any should feign the same that he
does? Any man may see that he has nothing to say, but to accuse my Thoughts,
and suspect that I had such a meaning. And who made him acquainted with
Thoughts that were never uttered? Or made him a Judge of them? If his and other
men's thoughts may be thus by conjecture accused, no Enemy need to want matter
of Accusation.

It Is like he will appeal to my Conscience whether it were not my thought? And
1. By what authority will he so do? 2. But I will shrive my self to him this
once. It is so long since, that truly I remember not what was in my Thoughts,
any further than my words express: But I well remember my former Actions, and
what was then my judgment of Oliver and his Actions, and I use not to speak
against my judgment. Many knew that he being acquainted the first day that I
went into the Army, (which was after Naseby Fight) that I was sent by an
Assembly of Divines, to try whether I could turn the Soldiers against his
subverting Designs, (then first discovered to me,) he would never once speak to
me while I was in the Army; and that ever after I was driven away, I openly in
Pulpit, Press and Conference disowned, and warned men to disown his Actions
against King and Parliament, and his Usurpation; and that I wrote against the
Engagement: And therefore I do not think that ever I meant to call him David,
and I am sure I never did it. But they say old Men can see better afar off than
near at hand; and so all these notorious Untruths about visible present things,
may yet consist with such men's credibility about things said and done 1300
Years ago.

24. And now I am here, I must not pass by his friendly Admonition, p. 357.
after his reciting my Epistles, [ If I were as worthy to advise Mr. B. as he
was to advise Cromwell, I would say, It were much more advisable for a
Christian, specially for one that thinks he is so near his eternal State, to
repent and cry peccavimas, than to stand on Justification of the fact, etc.]

Ans. 1. Is was usual for men to choose their own Confessors: But it being the
Custom of the times for Pastors and Confessors to be forced on Dissenters, I
will submit now to your way, though my former Confessions and my Communion with
you have been turned to Reproach and Scorn.

1. I do daily beg earnestly of God, to let none of my sins be unknown to me,
and taken for no sin, and be unrepented of; and that he would forgive that
which I would fain know, and do not.

2. I do not repent of owning Oliver's Actions against King and Parliament, or
his Usurpation; for I never owned them, nor the Actions of them that set up his
Son.

3. I do not repent that I loved the Peace of the Church, and that I desired
the Governor, though a Usurper, should do good and not evil.

4. I do not repent that seeing the Armies Rebellions and Confusions, I stirred
up Rulers and People to take heed of favoring so great Sin.

5. But I do now by experience of other ways perceive that I was sometimes too
eager in aggravating men's Errors, and repent that I used not more forbearance
of some of my Accusations of some of them.

6. I did think that Richard Cromwell was an Usurper: But when we had been
twelve Years at least without a rightful Governor, I then thought as Thomas
White, alias Blacklow, the moderate Papist, wrote, that the Land could not
subsist in Society without some Government, and that No-Government is worse to
the People than a Usurped one: And that it is sometime lawful to submit and use
an Usurper, when it is not lawful to approve his Entrance. And wherein I was
deceived I am willing to be better informed.

7. But I do unfeignedly repent that I wrote those two Epistles, though it was
to put a man on to do good, whom I never saw, ^or ^^^^ had the least to do with.

8. And I do more repent of the cause of all, viz. that I appointed God a time,
and limited his Providence; and thought that because so many Armies and
Endeavors had failed Twelve or Fourteen Years, that had attempted the
restoring of the King, therefore there was no probability of accomplishing it:
I do not repent that I was not a Prophet, to know before what God would do; for
it was not in my power; nor do I repent that I preached Christ's Gospel under
Usurpers; but I repent that I waited not Gods time, and did not better consider
that want of humane Power is no hinderance to Omnipotency, and nothing is
difficult to him.

9. I was drawn too far by Mr. Harringtons Scorn, and the dislike of Sir Henry
Vane's Attempts for a Commonwealth, to meddle with matters of Government, and
to write my Political Aphorisms, called, A Holy Commonwealth: And I do
unfeignedly repent that ever I wrote and published it, and had not more
confined my self to the matters proper to my Calling, and let those meddle with
forms of Government who were fitter for it.

All these, besides what is formerly said to Mr. Bagshaw, I declare my unfeigned
Repentance of. And though it pleases you to feign me a Schismatic, and hater
of Repentance, (for speaking against the fault^ that needed it) I shall thank
you to be a real helper of me in so necessary a work as Repentance is.

And that I may do the like by you, I shall now only requite you with this
Advice, that before you write next, you will set before your Eyes the Ninth
Commandment, Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor: And that
when you say your Prayers, you would be serious when you say, Lord have Mercy
upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

25. A Roman Zeal tells us, that Faction and Schism, when animated by worldly
Interest, and grown up to a malignant hatred of the things and persons that are
averse to it, is hardly bounded, but is thriving up toward destructive
Persecution, as swelling Prelacy did toward the Papacy and the Inquisition. It
is not one or two Fishes that will satisfy the stomach of a Pike: Nor is it
the slandering or ruining of one or two men, or silencing of one or two of the
Ministers of Christ, that will satisfy a malignant Spirit. One Meal will not
make a lean Man fat. Whether there be a Legion in those that would destroy a
Legion of Christ's Servants, or one have so much Power I know not; but the
effects tell us what manner of Spirit they are of. But let the Papists pass.

26. When I read p. 337, and 358, 359. and such passages, it makes me think of
them that cried, [ His Blood be on us, and our Children,] together with our
Judge's words, [ In as much as you did it or did it not to one of the least of
these my Brethren, you did it or did it not to me.] P. 337. he says, [ There
is great reason to value the peaceable Resignation of the Nonconformists, when
we consider by what Usurpation and Violence they were brought in, and what a
number of worthy learned Ministers were turned out to make vacancies for these
men, who were to instruct the People in new Mysteries of Religion, which their
old Pastors had not the Conscience or Ability to teach them, that is, of the
lawfulness of Rebellion. -- And p. 358, etc. There were many of those Ministers
Usurpers, and had intruded into the Churches of other men, who had been
silenced and cast out. -- There were many others that were intruders into the
Ministry, and such not a few of them as Mr. B. himself would not have thought
fit to have continued. All the rest were such as would not submit to the Rule
that was then established in the Church, but chose rather to leave their
Livings, and the Bishops could not help it, any otherwise than as they were
Members of Parliament; for it was the Law that tied them to their choice, and
not the Bishops. If Mr. B. means what happened before the last Civil Wars, as
it is likely he may, then these ancient Teachers were the instruments of an
Antimonarchical, Antiepiscopal Faction: They would preach but they would not
conform to the Established Religion: Nay many of them would preach against it,
and against their Governors too. These were such Incend^^ries as no Government
would endure, etc.]

Ans. When you have noted this part of his History, it will not be hard to
judge of his credibility.

I. The things that he defends is the silencing and prosecuting of three
sorts of Ministers. 1. Many Hundreds of Nonconformists in the days of Qu. Eliz.
K. James, and some few in the time of K. Charles 1. 2. Many Conformists in the
time of K. Charles 1. under Bishop Laud. 3. About 2000 that conform not to the
New Laws of Uniformity in the time of K. Chapter 2. What these Ministers were or
are, and what the fruits of their silencing have been, and what it has done to
the Church of England, and to many Thousands of Godly Christians, I will not be
judge: Nor will I dispute that which all England sees or feels. But it seems so
well done to our Historian, as that he is willing deliberately to justify or
defend it, which as I understand is to make it his own, and to undertake to be
one of those that shall answer for it. What if another had done as much against
him, as he has done against himself? And for how small a prize?

II. As he before would insinuate, that what is said of the great number of
Drunkards, and ignorant men turned out, was false, though so judged upon the
Oaths of men accounted the greatest lovers of Religion in their Parishes; so he
seems here to intimate that it was only or chiefly into the places of learned
worthy men, that the silenced Ministers succeeded; whereas it was not one of
many that came into any such men's places of them that were silenced at the
fatal Bartholomew day.

III. He seems to intimate, that when the Parliament (suppose by wrong) put
out either such as he or I describe, the Land must be under an Interdict till
the Bishops and King were restored, and that Christ's Gospel was no more to be
preached in England, till Diocesanes returned, but all Souls be given up to
Damnation, unless Christ would save them without the preaching of his Gospel,
and the Land was to be left to the Devil and Paganism. And who can deny now but
the Diocesane Species is essential to the Church?

IV. When I spoke only of the silencing and ejecting Act, of Aug. 24. 1662. he
would make the Reader believe, that this Change was to restore the Churches to
their ejected Pastors, or cast out Usurpers; whereas unless Ignorance or worse
hinder him, he knows that all that were cast out and were alive, laid claim
to their Benefices, and were restored before that, and their Livings resigned
quietly to them, to say nothing of the rest that were supposed to be at the
Lord Chancellors disposal. Those that were put out that the sequestered might
re-enter, were none of them silenced, nor made incapable of other Livings till
August 24. 1662.

V. He would insinuate that it was only the Nonconformists that were cast out
of such sequestrations: Whereas in the Countries that I either lived in or
heard of, it was as many or more of the Conformists, that had sequestered
Livings and were cast out, and took new presentations.

VI. And this is evident by his Intimation, as if it were a very great number
of the Church Livings that were so possessed: Whereas of Nine Thousand or Ten
Thousand Ministers then in Possession, Seven or Eight Thousand Conformed:
Therefore it is likely that the Conformists had most of the Sequestrations.

VII. He tells you that the Ejected Ministers were brought in to instruct the
People in the Lawfulness of Rebellion: Does not this intimate that this was the
case only or chiefly of the silenced Nonconformists? But I have often cited Jewel
defending the French Protestants; Was not he a Bishop? I have often cited Bilson,
affirming it no Rebellion if the Nobles and People defend their Legal
Constitution against one that will -- (I will not recite the rest.) -- I have
often cited Ri. Hooker whose popular Principles I have con^ured, and goes higher
against absolute Monarchy, than I or any of my Correspendency did in all the
Wars. Heylin is for Conciliation with the Papists: He knows not their
Writings who knows not that the Papists are more for popular Election, and
Power toward Princes, far than ever such as I were. And had he not put his
Head and Eyes into a Bag, he could hardly have denied but that they were
Episcopal Conformists on both sides that began the War: But being got into the
dark he loudly denies it.

VIII. He says, There were many others that himself would not have thought fit
to have continued. Ans. I thought I was more likely to know them than he. I
remember not one such of an hundred that did not conform. I confess that when
the Prelatical party entreated me no longer to refuse the Westminster
Commissioners Letters, deputing me with others to try and judge of some
Episcopal Conformists that stood then for Livings, to avoid all seeming
opposition to that way I did stretch as far as I durst, to approve and keep in
some Conformists, of very low parts who knew not a quarter so much as some Lay
People did: But none of these were Nonconformists.

IX. He says, [ All the rest were such as would not submit to the Rule then
established in the Church. This is true: And what was that Rule? Did Peter or
Paul make it, or submit to it? Did they refuse any thing that God commanded in
Nature or Scripture? Or any Circumstantials necessary in genere left in specie
to the Magistrates determination? They were guilty of believing that God is
above man, and that there is no Power but of God, and none against him; and
that we must please him whoever be displeased. They were guilty of so much
Self-love as to be unwilling to be damned for a Benefice, or for a Bishops
Will. They did not consent to profess Assent and Consent to all things
contained in and prescribed by three Books, written by such as declare
themselves to be fallible; and such as not one of Forty ever saw before they
declared the said Assent and Consent to them. They did not consent to cast out
all Infants from Christendom, whose Parents durst not offer them to Baptism,
under the Sacramental Symbol of the Cross; nor unless they might have
themselves been Covenanters, Undertakers, or Promisers for them, as well as the
Godfathers: Or that scrupled getting Strangers to undertake that perfidiously
for their Children which they never intended to perform. They durst not read
Excommunications against Christ's true Servants, nor repel those from Christian
Communion, who scruple kneeling in the reception of the Sacrament: They durst
not swear that many Thousands whom they never knew are not obliged by the
Covenant, when they know not in what sense they took it: For they are not
willing to believe that the compounding Lords and Knights did not put a good
sense on it before they took it. They durst not say that all is so well in our
Church Government by Diocesanes, Lay-Chancellours Power of the Keys,
Archdeacons, Officials, Commissaries, etc. that we may swear against all
endeavors to amend it by any alteration; They do believe that the Law of
Nature is Gods Law, and that as it allows a single Person only private
desence, so it allows every Nation public defense against Enemies notorious
destroying assaults: And they dare not swear or covenant, that if any should
from the Lord Chancellor, etc. get a Commission to seize on the Kings Navy,
Treasures, Forts, Guards, Person, and to seize on the Lives and Estates of all
his Innocent Subjects, that it is unlawful to resist any that execute such a
Commission. They find it so hard a Controversy, what God does with the dying
Infants of Atheists, Infidels, Mahometanes, and Persecutors, that they dare not
declare, that if any of their Children be baptized and die, it is certain by
the word of God that they are undoubtedly saved. We say not that the Law binds
us to any of the evil which we fear: But we dare not take Oaths and Promises
which we understand not.

Abundance I pre^erm^t.

He is extremely censorious if he think that Mr. R. Hooker* Bp. Bilson, Bp.
Grindal, A. Bp. Abbot, Bp. Rob. Abbot, Bp. Jewel, etc. would have been
Conformists had they been now alive.

X. He says, [ They chose rather to leave their Livings.] Ans. They chose not
to conform, but submitted only to leave their Livings; Eligere est agere. They
were passive in this, they refused to conform as supposed by them a heinous
Sin, but they chose not to be silenced or cast out; but they chose to endure it
when the Bishops chose it for them.

XI. He says, that [ the Bishops could not help it any otherwise than as they
were Members of Parliament.

Ans. 1. I confess Scripture uses the like Phrase, Can the Leopard change his
Spots, etc. or they that are accustomed to do evil learn to do well? And Romans
8. 6, 7. The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to his
Law, nor can be.] I will not here too much contradict him, 2. But is it nothing
that they could have done in Parliament, had they been willing? 3. Is it
unlawful for us to know if he know it not, or deny it, how much the Bishops and
Clergy did with the Parliament Men? 4. He should at least have stayed till Dr.
Bates, Dr. Jacomb, and I are dead, who wrote and disputed with the Bishops by
the Kings Commission, before he had talked at this rate to the World. Did not
the King make his Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs? And did he not
under the broad Seal commission those Bishops and Doctors to treat with us for
the making such alterations as were necessary to tender Consciences? Did they
not maintain that no alterations were thereto necessary, and so end the treaty.
5. Did they not in their next Convocation lay aside the Kings Indulgent
Declaration, and make the Additions to the Liturgy? And yet could they not help
it? Nor was it none of their doings? 6. Does not England know that Parliaments
since have by experience perceived their Mistake, and would have suspended our
Prosecution, and restored us to Unity, and the Bishops and Clergy will not
consent but rage against it, and preach and write to have us executed according
to the Laws, and no abatement to be made, and as this man, think that the
Churches Distraction is from Projects of Moderation. What name should one give
to such Histories as these? The guilty cannot bear their names.

XII. He says, [ It was the Law that tied them to their choice and not the
Bishops.

Ans. 1. Suppose the word choice were proper here, [Is it any justification of
the Executioners?] It was the Emperor Charles the 5th's Edict that tied all
the Protestant Ministers to conform to the Interim, or be gone: It was the Law
that tied the Martyrs in Qu. Mary's days to profess what they believed not, or
to be burnt. Alas! How could Bonner and Gardener help it? 2. But how many
Bishops were against the passing of that Bill? And who persuaded the Laymen to
it? Must we not know when it is night if you deny it?

XIII. He tells you, that [ the ancient silenced Teachers before the Civil
Wars, were the Instruments of Antimonarchical and Antiepiscopal Faction.

Ans. 1. Which of them all said so much as Mr. Hooker, Bp. Bilson, Bp. Jewel,
etc. have done? 2. If you make any Conscience of the 9th Commandment, prove the
Truth of what you say of those that were suspended and driven out of the
Kingdom in the times of A. Bp. Laud, Bp. Wren, Bp. Piercy, etc. for not reading
the Book for Lords-days Dancing and Sports, and that were prosecuted for
Preaching twice on the Lord's Day, and for not turning the Table Altar-wise, and
railing it in, which even Bp. Montague as well as Williams was against. Was
Bishop Miles Smyth of Gloucester, were A. Bp. Abbot or Grindall Antimonarchical
or Antiepifcopal? 3. Prove if you are able any Antimonarchical Principles,
Words, or Deeds by Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Brinsley, Mr. Paul Baine, Mr. Dod, Mr.
Knewstubs, and hundreds of such I might name. The most malicious are fain to
talk of one Knox, or one Goodman, or one Junius Brutus, (that is, Hubertus
Languetus Melancthous friend) or somewhat in Buchanan, not the tenth part so
much as is commonly said by the Papists, with whom our A. Bp. Bromhall and his
Companions so much plead for Concord. 4. Does not Al. Cope, and Sanders, and
Pateson in the Image of both Churches, and lately the nominal Bellamy in his
Philanax Anglicus, and many more such, say all the same of the Bishops and
Church of England, and all that they deride as [ Protestants of Sincerity] as
guilty of far more rebellious Principles and Practices, th^n ever you can prove
by the mere Nonconformists old or new? And is it enough to accuse?

XIV. He says, They would preach but they would not conform to the established
Religion.

Ans. 1. But why should they be forbidden to preach (which was good and they
were devoted to?) If a man will not do all that you would have him to do, shall
he do nothing?

2. What was that which he calls the Established Religion? It was the
Ceremonies and Subscription, that there is nothing in the Liturgy contrary to
the Word of God.] And was this a Crime worthy the forbidding men to preach the
Gospel? Or why should the Souls of Thousands of the Innocent People be so
heavily punished for another man's omission, even because the Teachers fear
Conformity.

3. But still we see what these men's Religion is: Had their Religion been the
Scripture, or any Doctrine or Worship common to the Christian or Protestant
Churches, the old Nonconformists willingly consented to it. But here they show
that their Ceremonies and proper Liturgy forms are their Religion. But then 1.
Why do Dr. Burges and all that plead for your Ceremonies and Invention, build
all on this, that you make them not any parts of Worship or Religion, (which
they confess man may not invent) but mere accidents? 2. How old then is your
Religion? Your Liturgy was made since Luther began his Reformation. 3. It seems
then that you are not of the same Religion with the Protestants that have none
of your Ceremonies, Liturgy or Subscriptions. 4. Is not then your Church of a
singular Religion from all the World, and consequently a singular Church? And
is it the whole Catholic Church then, or a Schismatical Church?

I confess that you show more evidently than by such words, that your self made
Rules and Circumstances are your Religion: For 1. You make Conformity to them
to be de facto more necessary than our Preaching the Gospel, or our Church
Communion, or any public Church Worship of God. 2. And you excommunicate by
your Rule or Canon every Member of Christ in England, that does but think and
say, that any thing of your Imposition, Liturgy, Ceremonies, or Government are
sinful. 3. And yet when you have done you call all your Impositions things
indifferent. 4. And thereby you declare that your Religion in part is a thing
indifferent. 5. And no Man or Woman shall be of your Church that cannot know
all the indifferent things in the World which may be imposed on them, to be
Indifferent and not Unlawful; when you know (or you know not whom you dwell
among) that we have much ado to get one half your Church to know things
necessary. 6. The Papists that put a greater necessity on their Inventions will
deride you for an Indifferent Religion.

There was a poor Puritan Nonconformist that feared Lying, that went about the
Streets with Ink to fell, and was wont truly to cry, [ Very good Ink, very good
Ink;] but once his Ink a little miscarried, and he durst not call it [ Very
good,] but cried, Pretty good Ink, Pretty good Ink,] and no body would buy of
him, and he lost his Ink. And if you cry up [ An indifferent Religion,]
whatever you have for numbers, you will have for quality but an Indifferent
Church, (save our Rulers.)

XV. But he adds, [ Many of them would preach against it and their Governors
too.]

Ans. 1. You tempt them toward it. If I ask the Butcher [ Is your Meat sweet?]
and he say it is indifferent, I am excusable if I think it stinks. 2. They
judge by the effects: They thought that when an indifferent thing casts out a
necessary thing, it becomes naught. 3. But yet your Accusation is unfaithful:
Why did you not say then, that it was not for Nonconformity that men were cast
out, but for preaching against your Religion? Who were those? Was it proved? If
so, what was that to the rest? Do you punish many learned moderate men for the
fault of a few others that they were not concerned with? You now allege Mr.
Hildersham, Ball, Bradshaw, Baine, Knewstubs, and abundance such, for being
against Separation, and persuading men to come to the Common Prayer, (and many
of them to kneel at the Sacrament,) and yet when you plead for their Silencing,
even other men's words may serve against them.

XVI. To conclude, in all he lays the cause of their silence on themselves
for not conforming, and yet will not tell us what we should do to help it.
Would they have us Conform while we judge it as sinful as I have mentioned in
my first Plea for Peace? No; they profess the contrary. Would they have us
believe all to be lawful? We cannot: Our Judgments are not at our Command: What
would they have us do to change? Worldly Interest maks us too willing! We study
as hard as they! We earnestly beg Gods Illumination to save us from Er rour We
read all that they write to convince us: And the more we read, study, and pray,
the more heinous the Sin of Conformity seems to some. I asked Bp. Morley the
same question when he forbad my preaching, before the ejecting Act; and he bid
me read Bilson and Hooker: I told him that was not now to do: and in both of
them I found the Principles which are made the cause of my Silencing, my
greatest Crimes, and in one of them worse. He then told me, If God would not
give me his Grace he could not help it: And yet most of these men are against
fatal, reprobating, necessitating Decrees.

The imposing Papists use men worse: Of whom will you pardon a Fable.

A Be and a Fly were caught together in a Spiders Web: The Spider when they
were tired with striving, claimed them both for her Food, as a punishment for
breaking into and troubling her Web: And against the Be she pleaded that she
was a hurtful Militant Animal, that had a Sting; and against the Fly that she
was noisome and good for nothing. The Be answered that her mellifying Nature
and work was profitable, and Nature had armed her with a Sting to defend it.
And the Fly said, as she did little good so she did little harm, and could
make her self no better than Nature had made her. And as to the Crime alleged
against them, they both said, that the Net was made by a venomous Animal, spun
out of the Air and the Venom of her own Bowels, made for no use but to catch
and destroy the Innocent, and they came not into it by malice, but by ignorance
and mistake, and that it was more against their Will than against the Spiders,
for they contrived not to fall into it; but she contrived to catch them; and
that it was not to break the Net that they strove, but to save their Lives. The
Master of the House overheard the Debate, but resolved to see how the Spider
would judge, which was quickly done without more words; the took them for
Malefactors, and killed them both. The Master of the House so disliked the
Judgment, that he ordered that for the time to come, 1. The Bees should be
safely hived and cherished. 2. And the Flies, if not very noisome, should be
tolerated. 3. And all Spiders Webs swept down.

I need to give you no more of the Exposition of it, than by the Spider I mean
the Papal noxious Canon-makers, and that by the Net I mean their unnecessary
and ensnaring Laws and Canons, which are made to catch and destroy good men,
and are the way to the Inquisition, or Bonner's Coal-house, or Smithfield
Bonefires. But I must desire you not to imagine that I speak against the Laws
of the Land.

27. As to the Conclusion of his last Chapter, I shall now add no more but
this: If what I said before and to Mr. Hinkley satisfy him not, of what
Religion and Party both sides were that began the War, and Mr. Rushworths
Collections, and other Histories of former Parliaments be not herein useful to
him, let him but secure me from burning my Fingers with Subjects so red hot, by
men's misinterpreting and impatience, and I will (God willing) give him so full
proof, that (to say nothing of latent Instigators and consequent auxiliaries on
either side, nor of the King himself, whose Religion is beyond dispute,) the
parties else that begun the War in England did differ in Religion; but as A.
Bps. Laud, and Neal, and Bromhal, and such others, and A. Bps. Abbot and
Williams, and Bp. Bilson, on the other side; and as Dr. Mainwaring, Sibthorp,
etc. on one side, and Mr. Ri. Hooker and such on the other side differed. And
if my proof be confutable I will not hereafter undertake to prove that English
is the language of England.

But my Bargain must be thus limited. 1. I will not undertake that from the
beginning there was no one Papist on the Kings side, or no one Presbyterian on
the Parliaments: I could never yet learn of more than one in the House of
Commons, and a very few Independents, but I cannot prove that there was no more.

2. You must not put me upon searching men's hearts: I undertake not to prove
what any man's heart in England was; but what their Profession was, and what
Church they joined with in Communion.

3. And you must not equivocate in the use of the name [ Presbyterian,] or [
Nonconformist,] and tell me that you take some A. Bps. and Bps. and such
Divines as Ri. Hooker, and Bilson, and Bp. Downame, the Pillars of Episcopacy
and Conformity, for Presbyterians.

And if it may be I would beg that of you, that you will not take the long
Parliament for Presbyterians and Nonconformists, who made the Acts of
Uniformity, the Corporation Act, the Militia Act, and those against
conventicles, and for banishment from Corporations, etc. Notwithstanding their
high Votes about the Succession and Jealousies of Popery, and that which they
said and did hereupon: For I confess if it be such Nonconformists or
Presbyterians as those that you mean, I Will give you the better. And I must also
desire that you call not the next Parliament, which consisted most of the same
Men, Presbyterians or Nonconformists; nor the other since them? Or at least
that hereafter before we dispute we may better agree of the meaning of our
terms.

And I declare to the Reader, that nothing in all this Book is intended against
the Primitive Church Government or Episcopacy, nor against the good Bishops,
Clergy, Councils, or Canons, which were many; nor against King, Parliament,
Magistracy, the Laws, or Liturgy, or Church Communion; nor against our
peaceable and patient submission where we dare not practically obey: But only
against the diseases and degeneracy of Bishops, Clergy, Councils, and Canons,
and those dividing practices, by which they have for 1200 Years and more been
tearing the Christian World into the Sects of which it now consists; and
against the whole ascendent Change from the Primitive Episcopacy to Papal
maturity: and against our swearing. Subscribing, declaring, covenanting,
professing, and practicing, where we understand not the Imposers sense, and are
unwilling by our private Interpretations to deceive them, and where we are
persuaded that it would be heinous sin to us, not meddling with the case of
Lawmakers or Conformists, who have no such fears, but think all good.

Chrysostom (before cited) in Act. 1. Hom. 3. p. ( mihi) 472. speaks harder
than I ever did: [(...) etc. which Erasmus translateth, Non temere a^co, sed ut
affectus sum and sentio; Non arbitrer inter Sac^rdotes multos esse qui salvi
fiant, sed multo ^l^^es qui p^reant. His reason is the same which some give why
they think most Physicians kill more than they cure, because there is so much
Wisdom, Goodness, Watchfulness, and Diligence required to their Calling, which
few of them have.

Luther is much sharper than I ever was, when he says, [ Hieronymus and alii
Patres vixerant in temporali Successione Ecclesiae, expertes Cr^^^s and
persecutionis. Episcopi enim jam tum coeperant cr^s^^re and (...) ^pib^s,
existimatione and gloria in mundo: Et plerique etiam tyrannidem exercebant in
populum cui praeerant, ut testatur historia Ecclesiastica: Pauci faciebant sua
Officia, etc. Loc. Com. 4. Class. p. 79, 80.

Et Cap. 27. p. 48. de Synodis. In posterioribus Conciliis nunquam de fide, sed
semper de opinionibus and quaestionibus disputatum (after the first) ut mihi
Conciliorum nomen pene tam suspectum and invisum sit, quam nomen Liberi
arbitrii.

What Melancthon thought of the Papal design of magnifying Councils, and
pleading the necessity of uninterrupted Succession of Episcopal Ordination, see
in his Epistles, especially of the Conference at Ratisbone.

Dr. Henry Moore in his Mystery of Iniquity says, p. 1^2. [ That Principle
tends to the ruining of Faith, which supposes that without right Succession of
Bishops and Priests, there is no true Church, and therefore no true Faith: and
that this Succession may be interrupted by the Misordination or Misconsecration
of a Priest or Bishop, the Persons thus ordained being Atheists or Jews, or
ordained by them that are so -- As if a man could not feel in his own
Conscience whether he believed or not the truths of holy Scripture, without he
were first assured that he was a Member of that Church, that had an
uninterrupted lawful Succession of the Priesthood from the Apostles times till
now.

Perhaps Episcopius and Curcellaeus will be more regarded. Read that notable
Preface of Curcellaeus to Episcopius Works, p. 12, 13. [ Resp. Experientiam
docere nullas unquam Controversias de Religione inter Christianos exortas
auctoritate synodali faeliciter terminatas fuisse -- and certiorem multo pacis
viam esse -- Next he shows how little good even the Nicene Council did, and how
much worse things were after: Hierome saying, that the whole World was Arian,
And Constantius reproaching Liberius for being with one man against all the
World: The Vulgar Dicterium being, Omne Concilium parit Bellum. Whence he
gathers that Councils, such as the World has hitherto had, non esse idoneum
componendis Religionis dissidiis Remedium: Et quamdiu illud usur pabitur
perpetuas in Ecclesia and Republica turbas fore.

Episcopii and praecipuorum emiouit fides and animi magnitudo, quod ne promisso
quidem solutionis ejusdem quo antea fruebantur stipendii, induci potuerint ut
se ad silentium quod imperabatur servandum obstringerent, etiamsi nonnulli in
magna rei familiaris augusti^ versarentur.

So copious and sharp is Episcopius, Qu. 52. p. 56. b. in maintaining that the
Magistrate has no Authority to forbid sacred Assemblies to tolerable
Dissenters, and that Ministers and People forbidden them must hold on to the
death, that I will not recite the words, but desire his Admirers to read them.

An Account to Edward Lord Bishop of Cork and Rosse in Ireland, of the success
of his Censure of Richard Baxter in England: Detecting his manifold Untruths in
matter of Fact.
1. TO give my Character of you whom I know not, as you do of me, is none of my
work: But 1. Your Style allows me to say, that by it you seem to me to be a
man of Conscience, fearing God. 2. And yet your Matter assures me, that you
speak abundance of Untruths confidently; I suppose, partly by not knowing the
persons and things of which you speak, and partly by thinking that you ought to
believe the false Reporters, with whom you are better acquainted.

2. The strait which you cast us into is unavoidable: Either we must seem to
own all the false Accusations brought against us, which will hurt others far
more than us; or else we must deny and contradict them, and that will pass for
an intolerable addition to our guilt, and we shall be supposed such
intemperate, fierce abusive Persons as you describe me, while you think we give
you the Lie, or make you Slanderers. But we cannot cure your Misresentments,
but must be content to bear your Censures, while we call you not Liars, but
only acquaint you with the truth.

3. For my own part my final Judgment is so near, and I am conscious of so much
evil in my self, that I have no reason to be hasty in my own Vindication, but
much reason to take all hints and helps for deeper search, and will not
justify my Style. And God knows I am afraid lest selfishness or partiality
should hinder me from finding out my sin: and I daily and earnestly beg of God
to make it known to me, that I may not be impenitent: But either Prejudice,
Converse, or somewhat else, makes a very great difference between your Judgment
and mine, of Good and Evil: And I cannot help it: If I err it is not for want
of willingness to see my Error, and openly retract it; nor for want of an
ordinary Diligence to know the Truth.

The Sum of our difference, as far as I can understand you, is in these
particulars.

I. Whether there be no sin imposed by the Laws or Canons on Ministers and
People here?

II. Whether it was well done by the Bishops and other Clergymen to do what
they did to cause those Laws, which silenced the whole Ministry of England,
unless they would conform to all things so imposed in the Act of Uniformity;
and actually silenced about 2000, and made those other Laws against their
Preaching to more than Four, and against coming within Five Miles of
Corporations, and such others, as adjudge Nonconformists to Gaols and Ruin;
and whether the Clergy do well still to urge the Execution of those Laws, and
are guiltless of the doleful Divisions of this Land, and danger of its Relapse
to Popery?

III. Whether it be unpeaceable for a Nonconformist after 17 years silent
suffering, to tell his Superiors why he dare not conform, when he is by them
importuned to it? And to write a Confutation of a multitude of Volumns of false
Accusations brought to justify the Executions?

4. If you think you have proved all those Impositions sinless which I have
mentioned in my first Plea for Peace, I think you might as well have shortly
said, [ We Bishops are of so much Wisdom and Authority, that you must hold them
lawful, because we say so.] And must all be ruined that would not be so
convinced? But if any of those Impositions prove to be sin, and so great sin as
we cannot choose but think they are, is it a greater fault to name them (when
importuned) than to impose them? And a greater fault to feel, and say we feel,
than to strike or wound men?

If we had taken it to be our Duty to have called those Clergymen to
Repentance, which we think are ignorantly undoing themselves and the Land, how
should we do it without naming their Sin? Yea, and the greatness of it? And if
we think it our Duty to deprecate our Destruction, and beg of you to spare our
Lives or Consciences, how can we do it without telling what we suffer? If it be
well done of you, and be no persecution, but your Duty for the Churches good,
(as no doubt the Executioners think) the History is your praise, and you need
not extenuate the Fact: Valiant Soldiers glory in the multitudes they kill:
Had you silenced the other 7000 that conformed, when you silenced but 2000,
your Victory had been the more famous. Some think those that are here against
your ways, are not half the Land; were it murdering of one man, that another is
judged for, it were not unpeaceableness to say, that he deserves to be hanged:
But the judge deserves praise if he condemn an hundred such. But when those
men who should be the tenderest Peacemakers, and skilfullest therein, shall be
the men that bring such a Land as this into the Case that we are in, and will
not be entreated, nor by any Experience be persuaded to consent to its Relief,
I know not how to show mercy to the Land or them, but by persuading them to
repent. And if all sin were made a matter of Controversy, and many learned men
were for it, this would not alter the Case with me. If I may compare great
things with small, who sinned more? The Irish for murdering 200000, or Sir John
Temple, Dr. Henry Jones, the E. of Orery, for recording and reporting what they
did? Was it the sin of the Savoyards and others to kill and ruin the
Protestants in Piedmont? Or of Perrin, and Sir Sam. Mooreland to write the
story? Did Thuanus, Davilah, etc. sin in recording the French Massacre? Or the
French in doing it? Is it the French Protestants now that are criminal for
describing and complaining of their Sufferings? Was John Fox the Malefactor
for writing the Sufferings of the Protestants under a lawful Queen? This day
came out ( Mar. 10.) a Narrative from Bristol how they are crowded in the Gaol
on the cold ground, etc. Is the Report the Crime? Do you find a Justification
in humane nature of such terms as these, [ You shall suffer whatever we will
inflict on you, but shall not tell any that you are hurt, or who did it, or
why?]

5. I have told the World so often over and over, that it is not all the
Conformists, no nor all the Bishops that I impute our Sufferings to, that I
must suppose you to understand it, specially when the Prefatory Epistle of the
Book which you fall upon tells it you of many Bishops by name. Therefore when
p. 68. you say, [ I apply to you more than once, 1 These. 2. 15. They please not
God, etc.] and add, [ I believe in my Conscience he is mistaken.] Either by [
to us] you mean, all the Conformists or Bishops, and that is not true, as the
words tell you: Or you mean, [ Us that procured or own, and execute the
aforesaid silencing, afflicting Acts:] which your words seem to mean. And then
I do but say, Oh! What may temptation bring even good men's Judgment to? Is the
silencing of 2000, the afflicting of many times more of the Laity, the
Jealousies, Distractions, and Dangers of this Land, so small a matter, or so
good, that God is not displeased with it? And can you in your Conscience own
what the Bishops did toward it? No wonder then if Ceremonies be called things
Indifferent. Certainly this cannot be Indifferent? It is a most meritorious or
excellent work, or else a heinous Crime: It is either such a Cure as the
cutting off a Cancerous Breast, or else if it be a sin, it must be as great as
contributing to the endangering of as many score Thousand Souls as 2000
Ministers were likely to have helped to save, and to the corrupting of the
Church, and the Introduction of Popery. And few Christians think that Nathan
sinned by unpeaceableness more than David by Murder and Adultery, though but
once; or Samuel more than Saul; or the Prophet that reproved him more than
Jeroboam; or Christ Matthew. 23. more than the Pharisees; yea, or than Peter,
Mat. 16. when he said, Get behind me Satan, thou savourest not the things that
be of God; or Paul more than Peter, Gal 2. or than the Jewish Teachers, whom he
called the Concision and Dogs; or John than Diotrephes, etc.

Guilt is tender, and they that think God is of their Mind when he is silent,
Psalm. 50. 21. will think men should be so too. And man dare not bid defiance to
God, and openly proclaim a War against him, and therefore has no way to sin in
peace, but by a conceited bringing the Mind and Law of God to his. What sin is
there that Learned Men father not on God: And then they must be praised and not
reproved, and then it is worse than unpeaceable to aggravate that which they say
God owneth; such men as I, would think it scarce credible that the Spanish
Inquisition, the French Massacre, the Powder Plot, the Murder of 200000 in
Ireland, the Perjuring of a Nation, the silencing of Thousands of faithful
Ministers, should have one word of Justification ever spoken for it. But we are
mistaken: No doubt men can write learned Volumes to defend any of these; and if
one do but say, They please not God, men may be found that can say, [ I believe
in my Conscience that you are mistaken, and speak unpeaceably: God is pleased
with it all.] Sure the day of Judgment will be much to justify God himself,
who is thus slandered as the Friend of every man's Sin. What wonder is it if
there be numerous Religions in the World, when every selfish man makes a God
and a Religion of his own, fitted to his Interest and Mind? But when all men
center only in one God, and bring their Minds to his, and not conceitedly his
to theirs, we may yet be One.

And if we could make men know, that God is not for them, and accepts not of
a Sacrifice of Innocent Blood, however men think that they do him good Service,
yet they would not have this known: It Is long since unhumbled Sinners turned
Church-Confession into Auricular; If Saul do say at last, I have sinned, he
would yet be honored before the People. But the time is near when those that
honor God he will honor, and those that despise him shall be lightly esteemed.

Few men living can easier bear with others for different forms and Ceremonies
than I; but I take not the silencing and ruining of 2000 Ministers for
Ceremonies (were that the worst of it) to be a Ceremony.

6. Page 69. You say, We are not all of one mind yet: A sad word from a Bishop.
Do you think that any two Men on Earth are of one mind in all things? Were
those agreed whom Paul persuadeth, Romans 14. to receive each other, but not to
doubtful Disputations, and not to judge or despise each other, (much less to
silence, imprison, and destroy.) We are agreed in all that is constitutive of
Christianity, and agreed that all Christians should love others as themselves,
and do as they would be done by. I confess if you have such eminent
Self-denial, as to be willing, if ever you differ from the public Impositions,
about the lawfulness of any one thing, to be not only cast out of your Lordship
and Bishopric, but to be silenced, imprisoned and destroyed, I cannot accuse
you of Partiality but of Error. I have known too many Conformists who needed
no Bishop to silence them, (they never preached.) But that will not justify
their desires that others be silenced.

I have often enough told you in how many things the Conformists are disagreed: I
now say the Bishops themselves are not agreed of the very Species of the Church
of England: To say nothing of their disagreement of the Constitutive, national
Head or Governor; they are not agreed, whether it be only a part of an
universal, humane, political Church, subject to an universal humane supreme
Power, who has the right of Legislation and judgment over them, or whether it
be a complete national Church of it self, a part only of the universal as
Headed by Christ, but not as by Man, or as humane Polity, having no foreign
Governor, Monarchical or Aristocratical, (Pope or Council.)

Overdoing is illdoing and undoing. He that would make such a Law of Concord,
as that none shall live out of Prison who are not of the same Age, Complexion,
Appetite, and Opinion, would depose the King, by leaving him no Subjects. The
Inquisition is set up in Love of Unity: But we know that we shall differ while
we know but in part: Only the perfect World has perfect Concord. I greatly
rejoice in that Concord which is among all that truly love God. They love one
another, and agree in all that is necessary to Salvation: The Church of the
Conformists is all agreed for Crossing and the Surplice, and for the Imposed
Oaths, Professions and Covenants: Oh that all our Parishioners who plead for
the Church were agreed that the Gospel is true, and that Christ is not a
Deceiver, and that Man dies not as Dogs, but has a Life of future Retribution.

7. P. 69. Asking, [ Were not almost all the Westminster Assembly Episcopal
Conformable men when they came thither?] He can say, [ No, not in their hearts,
as appeared by their fruits.] And he cites some words of the sense of the
Parliament, Jun. 12. 1643.

Ans. 1. See here a Bishop that knew the hearts of hundreds of men, whom he
never saw, to be contrary to their Profession and constant Practice.

2. And he can prove by their reporting the Parliaments words what was these
Ministers own Judgment.

3. And he can prove by those words in Jun. 1643. what was their Judgment a
Year or two before, and is sure that the Scots Arguments did not change them.

4. And he can prove that those are no Episcopal Conformists who are for the
ancient Episcopacy only (described by Bishop Usher,) and take the English frame
to be only lawful, but not unalterable, or best. And if really he do take him
to be no Episcopal Conformist, who is for enduring any way but their own, it is
he and not I that gave them so bad a Character: It is he and not I that
intimates, that those moderate Conformists who had rather Church Government
were reformed, than such Confusion made by silencing and hunting Christians,
are at the Heart no Episcopal Conformists: Their Hearts I confess much differ
from the Silencers and Hunters.

8. He makes me a false Historian for fixing the War on the Erastian Party in
Parliament. Ans. Did I lay it only on the Erastians? Have I not undeniably
proved that the War here began between two Episcopal Parties? Of which one part
were of A. Bp. Abbots, Mr. Hookers, and the generality of the Bishops and
Parliaments mind, and the other of Bp. Lauds, Sibthorps, Maynwarings, Heylins,
A. Bp. Bromhalls, etc. mind: And the first sort some of them thought Episcopacy
Jure Divino; but the English Frame not unreformable: And the other sort thought
it was but Jure humano, and these were called by some Erastians. Let him give
me leave to produce my Historical proofs, even to single men by name, that the
English War began between these two Parties, and I defy all his false
Contradiction: Only supposing, 1. That I speak not of the King, nor of the War
in Ireland or Scotland. 2. That I grant that the Nonconformists were most for
the Parliament, and the Papists most against them.

But when I have said so much to Mr. Hinkley already to prove this, did this
Lord Bishop think to be believed without confuting it?

9. But it transcendeth all bounds of Historical credibility, that he answers
this by saying, [ He and all his Abettors must know the Catalogues of that
Parliament, and that Assembly are still in our hands, the Copies of their
Speeches, and Journals of their Votes, etc.] Ans. They are so to the Shame of
such Historians. You have many of them in Whitlocks Memorials; I knew so great
a number my self of the Parliament, Assembly, and Army, as makes me pity the
Ignorant World, which is abused by such Historians as you and yours.

10. As for your assuring me that you look one day to answer for all you say,
it minds me of the words of your Dr. Ash^ton, Chaplain to the Duke of Ormond,
who (as going to the Bar of God) undertakes to prove, that it is through Pride
and Covetousness that we conform not. The Inquisitors also believe a day of
Judgment. And what is it that some men do not confidently ascribe to the most
holy God?

11. Your praises of me are above my desert: I am worse than you are aware of:
But men's sins against Christ's Church and Servants in England, Scotland, and
Ireland are never the less for that.

12. You show us that you are deceived before you deceive: You do but lead
others into the way of falsehood which you were led into your self, when you
say, I am [ said to have asserted, that a man might live without any actual
Sin.] A Lord Bishop ( Morley p. 13.) told it you, and you a Lord Bishop tell it
others, and thus the poor World has been long used; so that of such Historians
men at last may grow to take it for a valid Consequence, [ It is written by
them: Ergo it is incredible.] I tell you first in general, that I have seen few
Books in all my Life, which in so few Sheets have so many Falsehoods in matters
of Fact done before many, as that Letter of Bishop Morley's; which upon your
Provocation I would manifest, by Printing my Answer to him, were it not for the
charges of the Press.

2. And as to your Instance, the case was this: Dr. Lany impertinently talked of
our being justified only by the Act of Faith, and not the Habit: I asked him
whether we are unjustified in our sleep? which led us further, and occasioned
me to say to some Objection of his, that men were not always doing moral Acts
good or evil: and thence, [ that a man is not always actually sinning, viz. In
a man's sleep, he may live sometimes and not actually sin; as also in an
Apoplexy and other loss of Reason.] Hence the credible Bishop Morley printed
that I said, A man may live without any actual Sin: Yea, and such other Reasons
are given for his forbidding me to preach the Gospel. And now another pious L.
Bp. going to answer it at Judgment, publishes it as from him. O what a World
is this, and by what hands are we cast down? Is my Assertion false or doubtful?
Dr. Bates and Dr. Jacombe who were present are yet both living. By such men and
means is the Church as it is: Arise O Lord and save it from them.

13. You tell me, as Bp. Morley, of being the top of a faction of my own
making, neither Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, or Erastian. Ans. So, to
be against all Faction is to be the top of a Faction: I am neither an Arian,
nor a Sabellian, nor an Apollinarian, nor a Macedonian, nor a Nestorian, or
Eutychian, or Monothelite, or a Papist, etc. Conclude ergo I am the top of a
new Heresy, and silence and imprison me for it, and your Diocesane Conformity
will be past all suspicion (even at the heart.) But you will one day know, that
to be against all Faction, and yet to bear with the Infirmities of the weak,
and love all Christians as such, is a way that had a better Author.

14. P. 73, 74. As to your extolled Friend a Nonconformist, who you say, told
you that [ I am not able to bear being gainsaid in any thing, for want of
Academick Disputes, etc.

Ans. 1. Was your great Friend so excellent a man, and was it a good work to
silence him, with which in your Conscience you think God is pleased?

2. Now you name him not, he cannot contradict you: Mr. Bagshaw said something
like it of Mr. Herle, Prolocutor of the Assembly, which his Acquaintance
contradict.

3. I justify not my Patience; it is too little: But verily if you had
silenced me alone, and Gods Church and Thousands of Souls had been spared, I
think you had never heard me twice complain. Judge you whether I can endure to
be gainsaid, when I think there are Forty Books written against me by Infidels,
Socinians, Papists, Prelatists, Quakers, Seekers, Antinomians, Anabaptists,
Sabbatarians, Separatists, and some Presbyterians, Independents, Erastians,
Politicians, etc. which for the far greatest part I never answered, though some
of them written by Prelatists and Papists have spoken fire and Sword: Nor to my
Remembrance did any or all these Books by troubling me ever break one hour of
my sleep, nor ever grieve me so much as my own sin and pain (which yet was
never extreme) have grieved me one day. Alas Sir! How light a thing is the
contradiction or reproach of man who is speaking and dying almost at once?

15. P. 75. As to my Political Aphorisms I have often told you I wish they had
never been written: But all in them is not wrong which Bishops are against. The
first passage challenged by your Bishop Morley is, My calling a pretense to
unlimited Monarchy by the name of Tyranny, adding my reason, because they are
limited by God who is over all. Ministers were never under Turks thought worthy
of punishment for such an Assertion: But Bishop Morley is no Turk. If Monarchs
be not limited by God, they may command all their Subjects to deny God, or
blaspheme him, to take Perjury, Murder, and Adultery, for Duties: and they are
unwise if ever they will be sick, die, or come to Judgment.

16. You say, [ I was told by a Reverend Prelate, that at the Conference at the
Savoy, Mr. Baxter being demanded what would satisfy him, replied, All or
Nothing: On this I reflected on what that gave Divine told me.]

Ans. Alas good man! if for all other your historical notices you are fallen into
such hands, what a mass of Untruths is in your Brain? But why will you
dishonor Reverend Prelates so much as to father them on such? I never heard
the question put [ What will satisfy you?] nor any such answer as All or
Nothing: When the King commissioned us to treat of such Alterations as were
necessary to tender Consciences, the Bishops, 1. Would not treat till we would
give them in writing all that we blamed in the Liturgy, and all the Alterations
we would have, and all the additional Forms we desired. 2. When thus
constrained, we offered these on supposition, that on Debate much of it would
be denied us, or altered; but they would not vouchsafe us any Debate on what we
offered, nor a word against our additional Forms, Reply, or Petition for Peace.
3. To the last hour they maintained, that No alteration at all was necessary to
tender Consciences.] And so they ended, and the Convocation doubled and trebled
our Burden, and the Bishops in Parliament together.

Once Bishop Cousins desired us to lay by Inconveniences, and name only what we
took for downright Sin. I gave him a Paper describing Eight such: We did but
begin to debate one of them, ( Casting such from the Communion of Christ's
Church that dare not take the Sacrament kneeling, though they be mistaken) and
our time ended.

Dr. Pierce undertook to prove it a Mercy to them to deny them the Sacrament;
and he made a motion to me, that he and I might go about the Land to preach men
into satisfaction and Conformity: I asked him how I could do that when they
intended to silence me? For though I scrupled not kneeling at the Sacrament, if
they made any one Sin the condition of my Ministry, I should be silenced,
though they abated all the rest. It may be this went for [ All or Nothing.] And
I am sorry that the Bishops be not of the same mind: St. James was, that said;
He that breaks one is guilty of all: And Christ was, who said, He that
breaks one of the least of these commands, and teaches men so, shall be
called least in the Kingdom of God.

So that it was not All Inconveniences, but All flat Sins that we craved in
vain to have been exempted from: Much less was it the Establishment of all that
we proposed to have been treated of, openly professing our selves ready to
alter any thing amiss or needless upon treaty, and supposing there would be
many such words: But they would not touch our offered additions, nor entertain
any treaty about them.

And now pity your self who have been drawn to believe such Reverend Prelates
as you say, and pity such as your Writings will deceive.

17. That you take it to be contrary to a Christian temper to be sensible of
the Sufferings of the Church, and to name and describe the sin that causes
them, and that but in a necessitated Apology for the Sufferers, is no wonder,
the Reasons and your Answer I gave you before 4. and 5. I think it no breach of
Peace with Persecutors or Silencers, to tell them what they do, especially when
the Sufferers are feigned to deserve it all; and not to sin and that
deliberately, is made a sin deserving all that we suffer and the Nation by it.

18. But p. 77. tells us yet more whence your Errors come, even by believing
false Reports, and then reporting what you believe. You say, [ Some People have
talked of a Combination or Pact amongst themselves, that except they might have
their own Will throughout, they would make the World know what a breach they
could make, and how considerable they were.]

Ans. 1. Do you not think that Rogers, Bradford, Philpot, and the rest, did so
in Qu. Mary's days, and that it was they that made the Breach by being burnt?
What is it that such Historians may not say? So Luther was taught by the Devil,
Bucer was killed by the Devil, so was Oeclampadius, Calvin was a stigmatized
Sodomite, and what not: And even the most public things are yet: uncertain
before our Eyes: Godfrey killed himself: The Papists had no Plot: The
Presbyterians have a Plot against the King: The Nonconformists silenced
themselves: And did not the Citizens of London burn their own Houses? When you
that are a Bishop cite other great Bishops for such things as you do, may it
not come in time to be the Faith of the Church, and thence to be necessary to
all.

2. But how do you think all these that were scattered all over England, and
knew not one another by name or Dwelling, should so confederate?

3. Do but think of it as a man. There were Nine or Ten Thousand Ministers that
had conformed to the Parliaments way in possession: They were all to conform or
be cast out. The Book and Act of Uniformity came not out of the Press till
about that very day Aug. 24 Neither Conformists, nor (after) Nonconformists
could see it, but those in or near London: What time was there to tell them all
over England in one day? How knew we who would conform and who would not, when
Nine Thousand were equally in Possession? If we had written to them all, would
not One Thousand of our Letters have detected it? Or at least some of those
that conformed, with whom we prevailed not?

4. What was it that moved them all to this Confederacy? To suffer Ruin in the
World? To make themselves considerable you say, and show what a Breach they
could make? And for what? Unless they might have all their own Wills? And what
was their Will? Was it to be Lord Bishops? Or domineer over any? Or to get
great Benefices? I think no highway Robbers do any Villainies merely to show
what mischief they can do, much less ruin themselves to show that they can do
Mischief by Suffering. Some such thing is said of some odd Circumcellians that
they killed themselves to make others thought their Persecutors: But
Persecution was more hated then than now. Did the former Life and Doctrine of
these Two Thousand men signify a Spirit so much worse than the rest?

5. And do you think that the other Seven Thousand or Eight Thousand that
conformed did confederate beforehand to conform? How could they do it who
declared Assent and Consent to every thing contained and prescribed in and by
the Book which they never saw, unless they confederated at a venture, to do
whatever was imposed? And if Seven Thousand could agree without confederating,
why not Two Thousand? I could not then have my Post Letters pass without
Interception: And it is a wonder that no Letter of this Confederacy was taken.

And I Will tell (not you, but those that believe me) how far we were from it.
When we were all cast out and some new motion was made for our service, one
weak man moved here, that we might draw up a consenting Judgment to how much we
could yield, that we might not differ. I answered that it was not our business
to make a Faction, or to strengthen a Party; nor were we all of one judgment
about every Ceremony, and therefore no man must go against his judgment for a
Combination with the rest: If they would abate but so much as any one man's
Conscience would be satisfied in, that one man must serve the Church
accordingly. And if any were taken in, the rest would rejoice.] This Answer
silenced that motion, and I never heard any move it more: And I am fully
assured there was never such a Combination.

But with this exception: How far any thought the Covenant bound them against
our Prelacy I cannot tell. Those that I conversed with said, it bound them to
no more than they were bound to before. But I confess we did all confederate in
our Baptism, against willful sin: And I know of no other Confederacies but
these: which indeed was enough to make all men forbear what they judged to be
sinful.

19. You add, [ But yet it is not fair to over-reckon knowingly, and in
ordinary course Two Hundred in the sum, as Mr. Baxter and others do, p. 155,
210. thereby to swell the account to the greater odium, by complaining roundly
Two Thousand: This I must conclude to be done knowingly, for sometimes he only
mentions One Thousand Eight Hundred, p. 151, etc.]

Ans. I am persuaded that it is not knowingly that you speak so much besides
the truth; but for want of knowing what and whom you talk of. I never meddled
with gathering the number, Mr. Calamy did, and showed us a List of 1800, upon
which I long mentioned no more, and seldom saw him afterward: But Mr. Ennis who
was more with him, assuring me that they had after an account of at least 200
more, who were omitted; I sometime to speak the least mention the 1800, and
sometime say about 2000, and by his last account that was the least. Yet with a
Lord Bishop that knows nothing of all this, I knowingly over reckon: But if
God be pleased with their silencing, why do you take this ill?

20. The next and great Accusation is my extenuating the Bishops Clemency, and
aggravating our Sufferings, and that against my Conscience I impute to the
Bishops that bloodiness which they never intended but abhor. And he will not
believe what I say of the death of any by Imprisonment or want.

Ans. The good Lady that pitied the Beggars when she came in out of the Frost
and Snow, when she had warmed her self, chid them away, and said, it was warm
enough. I could name you those in London, that traveled out of the North in
great want, and took up with such cold Lodgings here in great want of all
things, that they were past cure before their misery was known. How many poor
Quakers have dyed in Prison many know: It Is like you never heard of the death
of Mr. Field, a worthy Minister, in the Gate House; nor of Mr. Thompson in the
noisome Prison at Bristol, nor of Reverend Mr. Hughes of Plimouth's Death,
caused by his Prison sickness; perhaps you never read the Life, Sufferings, and
Death of excellent Joseph Allen of Taunton: I will not be the gatherer of a
larger Catalogue, But I believe some others will. But these you know not of.

21. The words in my Book which I speak argumentatively, showing clearly
whither their cause will lead them, if they trust to bring us to Unity by
force, you unworthily feign that I speak as accusing the Bishops Inclinations.
My Argument was, If you think by violence to effect your ends, it must be
either by changing men's judgments, or by forcing them as Hypocrites to go
against their judgments, or else by utter destroying them till there are no
Dissenters: But none of these three ways will do it: Ergo Violence will not do
it. 1. I prove that force will not change their Judgments. 2. I prove they are
such men as will rather suffer death than sin against their Consciences; and so
less Sufferings which cure not do but exasperate the Disease. 3. I prove that
if, when less does no good, you would destroy them, that would not do your work
but cross it. And does this signify that I charge the Bishops with bloody
purposes? They openly tell us that it is punishing us that must bring us to
Concord. I tell them, Lesser will not do it, and greater will but hurt
themselves. A man would think that I hereby rather infer that Bishops will not
be bloody, than that they will, when I argue ab incommodo. Truly Sir, I see
nothing in your Book which tempted me to lament, that I mist the happiness of
your Academical Education or Disputes: Nor do I envy those that now enjoy it.
God save his Church from the worser part of them.

21. You say, P. 79. You must needs look on my aggravating my own and the
Dissenters Sufferings beyond Truth, you are sure beyond Probability, to have
proceeded from want of temper. As for saying that some have lived on brown
Bread and Water.

Ans. I find still that our difference lies in matter of Fact, done in the
open sight of the World: And if it were whether we are Englishmen, I have no
hope of ending it! O what is History! My own Sufferings by them are very small,
save the hindering of my Labor: Leave to work is all the Preferment that ever
I desired of them: What I have had has been against their Wills, who have
called out for my greater restraint. God has enabled me by the Charity of
others to send some small relief to a few of those whose Case he will not
believe. Some of them have Seven or Eight Children, and nothing at all of their
own to maintain them, and live in Countries where scarce two Gentlemen of
Estates within their reach do befriend them; and the People are generally poor;
and many of these have none to preach to, being not permitted, And when they
attempted to meet with some few secretly, to fast and pray in some case of
need, have had their few Goods carried away by Distress. Good Alderman
Ashhurst, now with Christ, took care of many, and has showed me Letters and
Certificates of undoubted credit, in the very words which I named. One is now
near us, that was put to get his Living by Spinning. Mr. Chadwick was the last
of whom I read those words in a just certificate, that he and his Children had
long lived on mere brown Rye Bread and Water. It is now above a dozen Years
since Dr. Vermuxden told me that Mr. Matthew Hill was his Patient, with
Hydropical swelled Legs, with drinking Water and using answerable Food through
mere Poverty: But God turned it to good; for necessity drove him (when a little
strengthened) to Maryland, where he has been almost the only able Minister
they have. We that know them our selves, and beg Money to relieve them, are
supposed to be Liars: for telling that which all their Neighbors know. Through
Gods Mercy few in London suffer so much, (though diverse are in great
streights.) But great numbers in the Countries who live among the poor, had not
some of them now and then a little Relief from London, were like to beg for
Bread, or fall into mortal Diseases by Food unfit for Nature. Even in London
they that knew Mr. Farnworth, Mr. Spinach, and some others, and how they lived
and dyed, understand me, I Will name Mr. Martin formerly of Weedon, Diad since
the writing of this.
very poor in London, to tell you of your impartiality; though he lost one Arm
in the Kings Army, he had not a day abated him in Warwick Gaol for preaching.

22. As to his repeating all my mention of their dealings, and my blaming the
Bishops at the Savoy for our present divisions, and my aggravating the evils
which Violence will produce if they trust to that way, I judge it all necessary
to be spoken: Unknown sin will not be repented of nor forborne; nor unknown
danger prevented; nor the unknown needs of the Peoples Souls relieved.

He asks, Is this the way to be at Peace with us? I answer, There is no other
way: What Peace can we have with them that think they are bound to silence us,
and keep us six Months in Gaol for every Sermon, and so on for the next, and
for the next? Or to pay 40 l. a Sermon, and to banish us five Miles from
Corporations, and must not be told of any such thing? He was not unpeaceable
that said, He that sees his Brother have need and shuts up the Bowels of
Compassion from him, how dwells the Love of God in him? Nor for saying, He
that hates his Brother is a Murderer: Nor Christ for telling us how he will
judge them that did not relieve and visit him in his little ones; and how he
will use him that beat his Fellow Servants. It is with you and not with your
sins that we would have peace. Not only Massonius and Platina, but even
Genebrard, and Baronius speak far sharplier of the faults of many Popes
themselves, and all Historians of their Prelates, and yet are taken to be
peaceable men. Either those that I mentioned will repent here or hereafter, and
then will say far worse of themselves than I do* And may I not foretell it them,
when it is but in necessitated deprecation of the miseries of the Land?

23. One of their Champions wrote that he was not bound to deny his own
Liberty, because others would pievishly take scandal at it. I showed the
sinfulness of that Conclusion, and that a man's Liberty often lay in as small a
matter as a game at Chess, a Pipe of Tobacco, or a Cup of Sack: and most
scandal is taken by pievish persons: and yet even a pievish man's Soul is not to
be set as light by as such things. Christ and Paul made more of Scandal: And
this very arguing of mine is numbered with my unpeaceable distempered words.

24. As to his talk about our Controversies of passages in Conformity, he
confesses that he has not read my Plea for Peace, in which I have partly
opened them: And much less what I have said since of them to diverse others; and
I consess I have neither mind or leisure to say all over again in Print, upon
the occasions of such words as his, which have been often answered.

25. I named the Martyr-Bishops Hooper, Ridley, etc. as Nonconformists to the
Laws of their Persecutors, to show that such Sufferers leave a sweeter name
than their Persecutors; and he feigneth me to have made them Nonconformists to
our Laws, and says, [ Ingenuity and Christian Veracity would blush to own this
Art.] Thus still false History is that which assaulteth us.

But I humbly ask his Lordship, 1. Whether he think that Cranmer, Ridley, and
Latimer, were more for Conformity than Jewel, Bilson, and Hooker, and Abbot?
And 2. Whether he will so far reproach these men as to say, that Jewel, Bilson,
and Hooker would have conformed by approving that which they most expressly
wrote against? I have often enough transcribed their words.

26. To show that since my explusion I drew not the People of Kiderminster from
the Bishops, I said that I [ never since came near them, nor except very rarely
sent them one Line; which he pretends I contradict, by saying, I sent them all
the Books I wrote. One might have found historical errors enough in his words
without a Rack or Quibble. 1. Sure Books are somewhat rarelier written than
Letters. 2. An ordinary Wit would have understood that I spoke of one Line of
Manuscript, or one Letter, and not of Printed Books, I delivered them to Mr
Simmons, or their Neighbors to send them without Letters. And few of those
Books were written before this Apology.

27. As a Self-contradicter he says of me, sometime I am against all
Subscribing, as p. 60, 113. etc. and sometimes not.

Ans. Still untruth! p. 60. The words are [ If men were not driven so much to
subscribe and swear as they are at this day.] Reader, is it true that this is
against All Subscribing?

Page 113. The words are, [ If we had learned the trick of speaking, writing,
and swearing in universal terms, and meaning not universally but particularly,
as many do, we could say, or subscribe, orswear as far as you desire us.] And [
Take off the penalty of subscribing, declaring, crossing, etc. what good does
subscribing a Sentence which he believes not?] Is this against All Subscribing?

28. Whether to profess our tenderness of other men's Reputation, and yet to
name the nature and aggravations of the sin which we fear our selves, when we
are importuned to it, be contradictory, let the impartial judge.

29. P. 92. He says, as my judgment, [ To subscribe and declare, that it is
not lawful on any pretense whatsoever to take Arms against the King, or that an
unlawful Oath cannot bind men to unlawful Actions, is Perjury, some of the
greatest that Hell suggesteth.] Ans. Not one true word? I believe all this to
be as he says: Both in my first and second Plea for Peace, I have largly told
him what it is, and what it is not which I own; but he has seen neither. and
yet feigneth me to say or hold what I have so often renounced.

30. P. 94. He might have known how often in Print I have retracted the Book
called, The Holy Commonwealth, wishing the Reader to take it as Non-scriptum:
Yet he says, [ as far as is generally known I have not done it.] And how
should I make it generally known more than by often Printing it?

31. P. 95. He pittieth me for calling the Author of the friendly Debate, the
Debate maker: And I pity England for such pittiers.

32. P. 96. Whereas the Convocation has imposed on all Ministers a Profession
of undoubted certainty of the Salvation of dying baptized Infants, without
excepting those of Atheists or Infidels, I ask whether all the young, unstudied
sort of Ministers have arrived at this certainty any more than I, and how they
came by it? and crave their Communication of the ascertaining Evidence. And
what does his Lordship but pretend that I call the Convocation these young,
unstudied men, as if they had made this Rubric for none but themselves?

33. And he has found another fault which exceeds all, and that is, the
Title and Dedication of my Methodus Theologiae, where I say, that I dedicate it
not to the slothful, hasty, tired Sectaries, etc. but to studious, ingenious,
humble, etc. young men, as being the persons that are above all others born,
disposed, consecrated to Truth, Holiness, and the Churches Peace, etc.]
Exceeding bad!

Will you hear the proof that this is excessive Pride? 1. The Book in the
frront indirectly and slily calls the Reader, slothful, rash, foolish, etc.
Ans. Is this true? 1. It is only those that I would not have to be the Readers.
Yea, 2. Only those that I say it is not dedicated to.

And do you think there are none such in the world? Will not his foresaid
Debater, and Dr. Parker, and Dr. Sherlock, and abundance more, tell you that
the Nonconformists are many of them such, and will you now deny it? If not, am
I bound to dedicate my Book to such? By what Obligation?

But he says so voluminous and embost a Title will deter the Readers. But do
you not know the Dedication from the Title, only because it is printed on the
Title Page? Is that unusual?

But the odious Arrogance follows, [ Could any thing easily be said with more
(appearance of) Arrogance; in the very Title Page too, than that his Book is
above all others of the same Subject, (I know not how otherwise to interpret
his supra omnes, viz. Methodus Theologiae Christianae,] etc. framed, disposed
and hallowed to the propagation and growth of Holiness, to the Peace and Honor
of the Church.] I will now for ever acquit him of hypocritical Modesty.

Ans. I desire Mr. Morris to compare this Ld. Bp's Translation with that
oversight of Theodoret's words which he fasteneth on in me. What if I had said
that this Bishop knows not how to interpret a plain Latin Sentence, as he
says it of himself? That which I most expressly say of pious, ingenious Youth,
he feigneth me to say of my Book. Reader, look on the Book and judge whether
Methodus, the Nominative Case singular, agree with natae, dispositae,
consecratae, the Dative Case, when Juventutis Parti studiosae, sedulae, with
many other Datives, went before it: There are no less than Twelve Adjectives
joined to Parti in the Dative Case, and yet he construeth the three last a
agreeing with the very first Title-name in the Nominative Case. And is this the
way to make me lament my want of his Academical Education? Is it any wonder if
these men prove us Liars and proud, and if they sentence us for lesser Crimes?

Yea, here he concludes that I write [ so pievishly, so variously and
unconstantly to my self, so blindly, as if wilfully blind and not penitent of
my own guilt, and so arrogantly, and disdainfully, etc.] You have heard the
proof.

34. Page 99. He proves my unpeaceableness from the Petition for Peace, and
Additions to the Liturgy: The Crime here is, [ There Is not one Office, no not
one Prayer of the old Liturgy, and is styled A Reformation of the Liturgy, and
little more than a Directory.

Ans. O miserable World! What cure is there for thy Deceits? This good man
talks as he has heard, and so all goes on.

But 1. he knows not it seems what Title our Copy had, but judges by that
which some body printed.

2. It seems he knows not that this Draught was only offered to debate,
expecting abundance of Alterations: We openly declared that it was done on
supposition of obliterating and altering all that they had any just exception
against, were it but as needless. And for the clauses, [ These or the like
words] we professed, that we expected an Obliteration of them, but had rather the
Bishops did the imposing part, if it must be done, than we.

3. He knew not it seems that ours were offered but as additional Forms, that
such of them as both sides agreed on, might be mixed as Alias's with the old
Liturgy. And does his Lordship then exclaim with reason, that [ Not one Office,
not one Prayer of the old was in, when all (after correction) was to be in, and
none left out. Oh what is History! and what men are its corrupters?

And (that his work may be homogeneal) p. 100, 101. having recited my
Commendation of their Liturgy as better than any in the Biblioth. Patrum, he
adds as an Accusation, [Yet p. 219. he complains of such failings in it, that
IT IS A WORSHIP which we cannot in faith be assured God accepts.]

Reader, This is one of the lesser sort of deceiving Accusations. I said that
(among greater sins which we fear in our Conformity) we fear least by Assent
and Consent to all things contained and prescribed. etc. we should be guilty of
justifying all the failings in that worship, and also of offering to God a
Worship that we cannot in faith be assured that he accepts. This Lord so
wordeth it, that the Reader who peruseth not my words would verily think that I
had said this of the Liturgy in the substance of Worship there prescribed,
which I said only as to the things which we dare not conform to: And I
explained it by saying, [ We dare not justify the best Prayer we put up to God
in all things.] E. g. To dedicate Infants to God without their Parents expressed
Dedication, or consent, or their promise to educate them as Christians, and
this upon the false covenanting of Godfathers that never owned them, nor ever
mean to educate them as promised, (as is known by constant experience, neither
they nor the Parents intending any such trust in the undertakers) and to
dedicate them by the sacramental Sign of the Cross, or a badge of Christianity,
and to refuse all that will not be thus baptized. This we fear is a worship
that God will not accept. But is this therefore said of the substance of the
Liturgy?

And if the Lord Bp. be wiser or bolder than we, and be beyond all such fears,
should he not suffer Fools gladly, seeing he himself is wise? And if he like
not our fearing an Oath, Subscription, Declaration, Covenant, or Practice,
which he thinks to be true and good, and we think to be false and evil, why may
he not endure our timorousness while he may rush on himself and venture; should
he not rather pity us, while St. Paul says, He that doubts is damned if he
eat, because he eats not in Faith.

35. P. 108. He questions whether their communion be my practice: and p. 110.
gives me two friendly Councils. 1. To peruse my Books, and retract what is
amiss. 2. To tell the World now my sober Thoughts, what I could and would do
were I to begin the World again.

I heartily thank him for his Counsel, for it is good and honest. But alas,
what a thing is it to write of things which men know not! 1. He knows not
that I have retracted much already; partly by disowning, and partly by large
Obliterations: Of the first sort are my Aphor. of Justification, and my Polit.
Aphorisms (though not all that is in them.) Of the 2d he may see many and large
Obliterations in my Saints Rest, my Key for Catholics, etc.

2. He seems not to know what bloody Books, to prove me one of the worst men
living, their Church Advocates have written against me, fetched mainly from
these retracted Books and Words. Nor how they that commend Augustine, reproach
me as mutable for those Retractations.

3. It seems he knows not that I have already performed his second Advice,
in my Cure for Church-Divisions, my Second Plea for Peace, (about Government)
Yea, Bishop Morley before the King, Lords, and Bishops at Worcester-house,
speaking of Ceremonies and Forms, caused my Disputations of Church Government,
produced and said, No man has written better than Mr. Baxter, (as if it were
against my self.) And in Doctrinals, my Cathol. Theol. and Methodus Theol. and
Christian Directory have expressed my maturest, calmest thoughts. But he that
counsels me to it knows not that it is already done. And more for Revising and
Retractation I would do, if necessity did not divert me, even the want of time
and strength.

36. P. 115. You say. [ That Reverend and great man Bp. Morley tells us [The
generality of Nonconforming Divines showed themselves unwilling to enter on
Dispute, and seemed to like much better another way, tending to an amicable and
fair compliance, which was wholly frustrated by -- a certain persons furious
eagerness to engage in a Disputation.] This was it seems the sense of both
sides at that time.]

Ans. How far from Truth? It was the sense and Resolution of the reconciling
Party, called by them Presbyterians: We all desired nothing but an amicable
Treaty -- We were promised by -- they should meet us half way. When we met,
Bishop Sheldon declared the Agreement of his Party, that till we had brought in
all our Exceptions against the Liturgies, and our additional Forms, they would
not treat with us. Mr. Calamy, Mr. Clark, and others, would have taken that as
a final Refusal, and meddled no more, lest Dispute should do more harm than
good: I was against such an untimely end, and said, They will report that we
had nothing to say: It Is better let the case be seen in writing, than so break
off. The rest wrote the Exceptions about the Liturgies: some Agent of the
Bishops answered them without the least concession for alteration at all. I
wrote a Reply, and the Additional Forms, and a Petition to the Bishops, and
they would treat of never a one of them: But at the end, put us to dispute to
prove any Alteration necessary, they maintaining that none at all was necessary
to the ease of tender Consciences. (Of which before.)

37. I had thought to have proceeded, but truly the work which the Bishop
makes me is so unpleasant, almost all about the truth or Falsehood of notorious
matter of Fact, that I have more Patience to bear his Accusations (whatever his
learned Friend said of my impatience) than to follow him any further at this
rate. But whereas he says, that [ some will think that many things in his Book
want truth.] I am one of those, and leave it to the Readers Judgment whether
they judge not truly: And whereas he lays so much stress on Bp. Morley's words,
if any Printer shall be at the charge of Printing it, I purpose while he and
the Witneesss are yet alive, to publish the Answer to his Letter, which I cast
by to avoid Displeasure. And if they will still be deceived, let them be
deceived. I cannot help it.

It is no wonder that he that is described, Joh. 8. 44. should carry on his
Kingdom accordingly in the World: But must his Dial be set on the Steeple of
Christ's Church, and have a consecrated Finger for its Index? O lamentable Case!

FINIS.

