WHET^ER Parish C^^gregations BE TRUE Christian Churches, ^^d the Capable
Consenting Incumbents, be truly their Pastors, or Bishops over their Flocks.

(...) Whether the old Protestants, Conformists, and Noncon^^rmists, or the
Brownists, were in the right herein. And how (...) our present Case is the same.

(...) by Richard Baxter, as an Explication of some Passages in his For^^^
Writings, especially, his Treatise of Episcopacy, misunderstood and misapplied
by some; and answering the strongest Objections of some of them, especially a
Book called, R. Baxters Judgment and Reasons against Communicating with the
Parish Assemblies, as by Law required. And another called, A Theological
Dialogue.

CATHOLIC COMMUNION once more Defended, upon ^^ns necessitating importunity.

By RICHARD BAXTER

LONDON: (...) in Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three-(...), near Mercers
Chapel. 1684.

Communion with Parish Churches vindicated, In Answer to a Book entitled, The
Judgment of Mr. Baxter, against Communicating, etc. Mistaking my writings.
A Church is not formally, quid Physi^um, but quid morale politicum Relativum,
a political Relative being.

II. The same name signifies both the Genus and Species, that are diverse by
use.

III. The same is true of the name [ Pastor.]

IV. Diocesan Churches are of three sorts. 1. Such as have at present but one
fixed Assembly, but design to gather more hereafter: Such, Dr. Hammond thought
they were in Scripture times. 2. Such as have one Diocesan Governor, or
Superintendent over many inferior Churches, and their Pastors. 3. Such as have
one only Bishop or Pastor, having no other true Pastor, Elder, Church-Ruler, or
Presbyter of Christ's Institution under him; but Chapels which have no such
Ruler or Pastor.

V. The first sort of Diocesans we have now nothing to do with.

The second sort is controverible, some holding it sinful, some lawful, and
some (and very many) to be of Divine Institution, as Successors of the
Apostles, not in the extraordinaries, but in the ordinary parts of their
Office: Christ having made an imparity (or a superiority of some over others)
they think that to say without proof, that he changed that order in one Age, is
1. to charge him with mutability and levity. 2. And to diminish from his Law
(which has a Curse.)

The third sort of Diocesans, is either 1. of a Diocese (like a great Parish
with Chapels) so small that one Pastor may possibly oversee it. (This is
tolerable, when more cannot be had; and when they can, it hurts only ^he
well-being of the Church): Or 2. it is of a Diocese so great as that one man
cannot do what is essential to a Pastor, and so it is undone: This nullifieth
that Species of Churches which is of Christ's Institution.

VI. A particular Church of Christ's Institution of the lowest political order,
is, [ A competent number of Neighbor-christians, who by Christ's appointment,
and their own expressed consent, are associated with one or more Past^^ for the
right worshipping of God in public, and the Edification of the Members, by the
exercise of the said Pastoral Office, and their mutual Duties to God, to their
Pastors, and each others, for the welfare of the Society, and the pleasing and
glorifying of God.]

VII. The Pastoral Office as over this first or lowest Church, and as it is in
unfixed Ministers, related yet to no one Church more than another, differs
but as the subject matter (or object) of their charge does differ, and not in
the fundamental Power or Order.

VIII. This Pastoral Office is essentially Ministerial to Christ as the
Prophet, Priest, and King of his Church. 1. A Power to Teach. 2. To Lead in
Worship. 3. To Guide by the Keys of Reception, Admonition, Exclusion and
Restoration.

IX. It is not Inconsistent with this Pastoral Office to be Governed by
Superiors, whether Magistrates, or Ecclesiastics (as others were by Apostles,
and by Timothy, Titus, etc.) Therefore every limitation, restraint, rebuke, or
punishment, for Mal-administration, nullifieth not the Office, nor yet allowing
an appeal to Superiors.

X. To hinder a Pastor from forcible excluding men from Church or Sacrament,
and allow him only to do it by Application of Gods word, is agreeable to his
Office.

XI. It is Power and Obligation to exercise, and not the present actual
Exercise, that is essential to the Office in the fundamental Relation: But
should the Non-exercise be total and stated, it would not make up a Church in
act; No more than a mere Power to Teach, will make a School in act.

XII. He that has the entire Power, and statedly exercises but one part of
it, statedly omitting an essential part, may be in Order an empowred Minister;
but his Society is but a half Church: But if it be only an Integral part that
he omits, it may be a true Church, tho faulty; or if it be an essential part,
and not statedly, but only by some present impedition.

XIII. The name of Church Pastor and Diocesan, being formally Relative in
signification, are really diverse things, as the Fundamentum, Relate, Correlate,
and Terminus, are diverse. They are therefore considerable. I. As instituted and
described by Christ. II. As understood, described and consented to by sound
Orthodox Pastors and People. III. As described by laws and Canons. IV. As
esteemed and described by many mistaking Bishops, Clergy and People, some
Super-Conformists, and some Misjudging, that the Law says as they: The word as
to these senses is equivocal.

XIV. Christ's Institution went before men's Corruption; and is to be held to by
all Christians, who own him to be the Maker and Ruler of his own Church: And no
man has Power to null his Institution, nor to warrant (...) to make his Church
another thing.

XV. By Christ's Institution every Ministerial Elder and Pastor has Power. 1.
To Teach the People. 2. To Lead them in Worship. 3. To Receive by Baptism, and
to Communion, or to refuse on just cause (tho under Government) as aforesaid:
(The whole Office I have copiously described in my Universal Concord, 24. years
ago.)

XVI. The Parishes that have capable Christians and Ministers consented to by
their sumbmission, are such true Churches; their Neighborhood and Christianity
making them capable matter. Not that a man is of the Church, because he is in
the Parish (Atheists, Infidels, Sadduces, Heretics and Refusers, may dwell
there, (Its thought that of 60000. that dwell in one London Parish, 10000
Communicate not, and so 40000 or 50000, are not of that Church) but those that
are capable Consenters, and Communicants.

XVII. This sort of Churches we were in Possession of 166^, and till August 24.
1662. And of 9000 Ministers, then 2000 only were put out, the other 7000
continuing in. And of those that were put out, some few gathered part of their
old Flock into private Churches, renouncing, and dissuading them from the
public: Most gathered no such Churches, but help their old People as they
could, not drawing them from the Parish Churches, till the time of the Kings
Licenses for more open Ministry. Many led them to the Parish Churches, and took
themselves for fellow Pastors, with the public Ministers, and lived in Love
and Communion with them. The People were not by the new Law cast out with the
Ministers. Most of the people in the 2000 Parishes of the ejected, and almost
all in the other 7000* who before communicated, or were ca^able of it,
continuing the Parish Communion. And so are Churches, if they were so before.

XVIII. The generality of the former Protestant Bishops, and Clergy, took the
Parish Rectors to be true Pastors of the Parish Churche^, as Bishop Usher
proved them: The Church of England is confessed to be of this mind, before the
Wars. It is not certain that Archbishop Laud thought otherwise: If he did,
Hey^n names but five that joined with him in his main cause, of whom Mountague,
if not more, were for the contrary cause in this point.

XIX. They then took a Curate to be a Pastor, and to have all that is essential
to the Presbyters Office; And to be a Presbyter and no Pastor, is a
Contradi^tion in the sense of Protestants and Papists, except what is said for
Lay-E^ders. In France they call all their Parish-Pastors, Curates; the word
sig^ifieth the Curam animarum.

XX. No Law since 166^. has changed any essentials of the Parish-Pastors
O^^nce (and so none has nulled it) from what it was in 1640. They that affirm
the contrary, must prove it.

The Law before, subjected Parish-Pastors to Diocesans: It imposed the Oath of
Canonical Obedience, and a promise of the same in Ordination; It was the same
to the Ecclesiastical Courts as now. If any pretend to such singular skill in
Law, as to say that there was no Law for the Book of Ordination, which made the
ordained to Covenant to obey their Ordinaries, nor any Law for the Canons, I
hope he will have more reason than to lay the controversy about Separation on
his odd conceit, when all the People in England have in the days of the four
last Sovereigns, been forced to submit to these as Legal; and no such pretender
could at any time deliver them. Books have been written, and Pleas used against
submitting to the Courts that declared not that they held their Authority from
the King; but the Judges still overruled it against them And they that professed
to hold it from the King, did many, if not most, mean but the Liberty of
public exercising it, as the Ministry is held under him, or the adjunct Cogent
Power, or the Circa sacra.

XXI. The Law enableth the Parish-Minister to receive into the Church by
Baptism, (tho under canonical Prescripts, which Dissenters much dislike), and
to Catechize Youth, and certify their fi^ness for Confirmation, before they
Communicate: It binds them to reject all from Communion, who are not
confirmed, or at least are not ready and desirous of it; it tells us who is to
be taken for ready, Those that have learnt the Catechism, and solemnly own
their Baptismal Covenant. The Pastor hereby has Power to try all the
unconfirmed, whether they are thus ready or not. The Canon requires him to
deny Communion to all that live in any scandalous Sin: The Law and Canon bid
him to instruct the Congregation, to lead them in public Worship, and in the
Name of Christ to Reprove, Admonish, Comfort, Administer the Lord Supper, Visit
the Sick with Instruction and Prayers. All which, with the aforesaid Power of
judging who shall be Communicants, is full as much as is Essential to a
Parish-Pastor. Solemnly to pronounce them Excommunicate, beside refusing
Communion, is not Essential. If it were, they have Power to do it, after the
Bishops Sentence. If it were Essential to do it as ungoverned, or finally, or
without appeal, then Apostolic, yea and Magistrates Government would null the
Pastors Office.

XXII. The altering some words in Ordination, and putting out the name [
Pastors] from most places in the Litturgy, where they were applied to
Parish-Ministers, is no change at all of the Office, much less of its essence.
It takes no Power from them, which they had: But it was done by the interest of
some men, who thought that Presbyters, who swore the three Kingdoms against
Bishops, had taken too much upon them, and in opposition they endeavored to
keep them under, and so would diminish their pretenses for Parity. But this
changes not the Species of the Office. And its known who these men were: And
tho some of them are of Opinion, that Diocesan Bishops only may regularly
confer Ordination, and exercise Jurisdiction over the Clergy, and that mere
Presbyter Ordination with us is null. 1. These same men had a chief hand in
debating and wording the Kings Declarations October, 1661. Concerning
Ecclesiastical Affairs, and therein the King after debates with Lords and
Bishops, distinguishes the mere Pastoral preswasive Power, from the Episcopal
(which is Cogent) and allows the Rural Deans with the Presbyters of his
Deanery, to exercise the said Pastoral persuasive Power, and the other Pastors
also to join with the Bishops. And the Law still calls them Rectors: The
Liturgy yet calls them Past^rs; the word Pastors, being a Metaphor, they take
to be general, Bish^ps and Priests being with them two Orders of Pastors.
Therefore because it does not distinguish them, they usually leave it out, and
put sometime Bishops and Curates, and sometime Bishops, Priests and Deacons:
The common description of a Bishop by them, is, that he has the sole Power of
presiding and determining in Ordination, and Jurisdiction, s^ne quo non, often
alleging Jeroms, Quid facit Episcopus, quod non facit Presbyter excepta
Ordinatione. And yet the Law still binds them, not to ordain without Presbyters
Imposition of hands with them. And Archdeacons and Presbyters, Surrogates,
etc. Excommunicate. And in the Ember-week, they are every day to pray by the
Liturgy. [ So guide and govern the minds of thy Servants, the Bishops and
Pastors of thy Fl^ck, that they may lay hands suddenly on no man.] Where
Bishops and Pastors cannot be taken for Synonyma, whilst they speak of all that
lay on hands. And they distinguish not [ Pastors and Curates] where they change
the words, but [ Bishops and Curates.]

But nothing more proves what I say, than that the Law yet binds all Priests
to all that is essential to an Episcopus Gregis, a Pastor of a particular
Church; see the Exhort. in Ord. of Priests, [ We exhort you in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that you have in remembrance, into how high a dignity, and
to how weighty an office and charge ye are called; that is to say, to be
Messengers, Watchmen, and Stewards of the Lord, to teach and to premonish, to
feed and provide for the Lords Family, to seek for Christ's Sheep, that are
dispersed abroad, and for his Children, who are in the midst of this naughty
world, that they may be saved by Christ for ever; have always therefore printed
in your remembrance, how great a treasure is committed to your charge, for they
are the sheep of Christ, which he bought, etc. The Church and Congregation whom
you must serve is his Spouse and his Body; and if it shall happen, the same
Church, or any member thereof to take any hurt or hindrance by reason of your
negligence, ye know the greatness of the fault, and the h^rrible punishment
that will ensue: Wherefore consider with your selves the end of your ministry
toward the children of God, toward the Spouse and body of Christ, and see
that you never cease your labor, your care and dilig^nce, till you have done
all that lies in you according to your bounden duty, to bring all such as are
or shall be committed to your charge, to that agreement in the faith and
knowledge of God, and that ripeness and perfectness of age in Christ, that there
be no place left among you, either for error in Religion, or viciousness of
life: Forasmuch then as your office is both of so great excellency, and of so
great difficulty, ye see with how great care and study ye ought to a^ply your
selves, as well that ye may show your selves dutiful and thankful to the Lord,
who has placed you in so high a dignity, as also to beware that neither you
your selves offend, nor be occasions that others offend.

And after their Covenant to preach according to the Scripture, they promise
[to give faithful diligence, to administer the Doctrine, Sacraments, and
Discipline of Christ as the Lord has commanded, and as this Church and Realm
has received the same, according to the Commandments of God: So that you may
teach the people committed to your care and charge with all diligence to keep
and observe the same.

Here Doctrine, Sacraments, and Discipline, are their Office-works: Gods
Commandments are their Rule, tho on supposition that this Realm has received
them according to his Commandments.

Next they covenant with all faithful diligence to banish all erroneous and
strange doctrines contrary to Gods word, and to use both PUBLIC and PRIVATE
Monitions and Exhortations, as well to the sick as to the whole, within your
cures, as need shall require, and occasion shall be given: And [ to keep
quietness, Peace and Love among all Christian people, and especially among them
that are or shall be committed to their charge.

All this is settled by Law, and all Ministers subscribe to it: And is not this
enough to the essence of a Pastors office? What is the Reason? The next promise
is [Reverently to obey their Ordinary, and other chief Ministers, to whom is
committed the charge and government of them, following with a glad mind and
will, their godly admonitions, and submitting themselves to their godly
judgments.

This shows that, 1. It is not a strict Divine Right that is meant over them;
for all Ordinaries, and other chief Ministers, pretend not to such right. 2. If
others superiority null their office, then none is in office but the King: Was
Di^trep^es no Minister, because John threatened him as his superior? It Is liker
he had been none for resisting John, of the two: Were all degraded that obeyed
the Apostles? If it should be an error, that a Parochial Bishop is a Governor
over his junior-Presbyters, or a Diocesan over both; that nulleth not the
Presbyters office: The Presbyterians give a Classis or Synod as much power over
particular Churches, as the Episcopal give to Diocesans; (or near): And yet few
Separatists have thence concluded that they have no particular Churches, or
that this nulleth them; contrarily, ab est tertii adjecti ad est secundi valet
argumentum; Parish Churches are governed Churches subject to superiors; ergo,
they are Churches.

And the Law calls them Churches, (...), it takes them for Churches, (while it
takes no essential from them).

XXIII. There are some particular Drs. in England indeed, who say that There is
no Church without a Bishop of its own, and (...) Epi^c^pus, ibi Ecclesia, and
that Ecclesia est pl^^s Ep^s^ ^^ adu^ata, and that our Parish Ministers are no
Bishops, and that their sole Ordinations are nullities; and consequently it
would follow, that their Parish Churches are truly but parts of a Church
infimae specie^: And because these men speak against Reordination, and yet
require those to be ordained again, who were here ordained by mere Presbyters,
therefore it seems plain, that they take the former for no true Ordination:
These men I have often confuted, especially in my Treatise of Episcopacy: And
hence some gather, that I charge this error on all the Church of England, and
take the Law and Clergy to nullify the Parish-Ministry and Churches: Therefore
I am specially obliged to answer such misconcluders, lest they make my writings
a means of deceit against my sense, and against my will: for so unhappy is the
controversal world, even of men of Worth and Name, that if I do but say that
two is less than three, and that four is more than three, they fear not to say,
that I contradict my self, and R. is against B. and sometimes I speak for, and
sometimes against the same cause; and these being ordinary Disputers and
Church-guides, What hope have the Christian Flocks of Unity and Peace, but by
such men's ceasing their disputes?

Here therefore it must be noted, 1. That the men of this opinion are not to be
called, The Church of England. The most of the Bishops and Clergy formerly were
against them, Dr. Hammond, and Bishop Gunning, and a few more, were almost the
first that seemed to go so far. 2. And yet even these few do usually except the
case of necessity, and of the foreign churches, (as Dr. Sherlock has lately
done at large) so that then they cannot take their Episcopal ordination
received, to be essential to the Priesthood. 3. And these men themselves call
our Parish societies, Parish Churches, and deny not the Presbyters to be
Episcopi Gregis, and to have a pastoral care of the peoples souls, for they own
the Liturgy, Ordination, and other writings of the Church, which assert it. 4.
Their opposition to Presbytery has carried them to appropriate the name Bis^op
to the Diocesans, but by it they mean only a Bishop over Presbyters, having the
power to ordain and depose them, and to ^^ be chief in governing all the
flocks; But the controversy de nomine, and de re are not the same: This
denies not all Pastoral Episcopacy in Presbyters over the flocks under them:
That these men by running into extremes do ill, many have written to prove: But
maiming the Parish Ministry, or too much limiting it, is not nullifying it. 5.
Let it be considered, that even the Separatists say not that the Power of
Ordination is essential to Pastors: Some of them take Pastors unordained, only
elected and received with prayer: Some take men ordained by n^ighbour Pastors,
that have no power over them: Some take men ordained by Bishops, some by
Magistrates: And Jurisdiction over n^ighbour Pastors I am sure the Separatists
will say belongs neither to the being or well being of a Pastor. If then it be
the Power of Ordaining, and of Jurisdiction over other Pastors, which the
Diocesans deny the Parish Pastors, the^ deny them nothing hereby essential to
their office.

All that can with any color be said, is, that the Law now seems to be on
these men's side, by requiring Reordination. But, 1. The Lawmakers profess to
establish the Church, and not to change it to another thing. 2. The Lawmakers
were not all of one mind in the Reasons of their Laws; nor had all studied
these kind of controversies: Many of them, and of the Clergy to this day, say
that it is not a proper ordination that they require, but the giving them
Authority to exercise their Ministry in England, and the decision of a doubtful
case: Part of the Church takes them for true Ministers that were ordained by
Presbyters, and part do not; and that the Congregations may not divide, they
say they require this like Baptizing after a doubtful Baptism [ If thou art not
baptized, I baptize thee.] I am against this: But this proves not that they
take a Presbyter for no Pastor: Yea tho they should take his ordaining others
to be a nullity; Ordaining not being essential to him.

XXIV. The Act of Uniformity, or the like Law, cannot make the Church no
Church, or of another species, than 1. As it is esteemed by God and his Law. 2.
Or as it is esteemed by the greater part of the Christian Clergy and Laity: Tho
the Law should speak as the foresaid odd innovators do. For,

1. All Christians profess that Christ is the only just Institutor of the
essentials of his own Churches: All Christians profess Communion with them as
Churches of Christ's making by his Law: The present Church of England professes
this in many books; it binds all Ministers to hold to Scripture sufficiency,
and use Discipiine as well as Doctrine and Worship, as Christ commands: It
openly holds all Laws and Canons about Church essentials, yea and integrals,
to be void and null that are against the Sacred Scriptures, and Law of God:
There is no Power but of God: God has given no power to nullify his
institutions.

2. All true Christians who consent to a Parish Minister, and attend on his
Ministry, and join in the Assemblies, openly profess to own him first as a
Minister of Christ, and to join in Worship and Communion of the church as
prescibed by Christ, which no man has power to overthrow.

3. The Parliament and Convocations, and Bishops and Clergy, all confess that
they have no power to overthrow the Church essentials or offices of Christ's
Institution: They have not revoked the Church Writings in which all this is often
professed: They confess that if their Laws mistake and do contrary, they bind
us not: They never openly professed a war against God or Jesus Christ: What if
one Dr. S. Parker, make Christ subject to the King in his Kingdom; he is not
the Kingdom, nor the Church of England: For all his words they never made any
Law to command Christ, or to punish him: They never cited him to appear before
them, nor did any penal execution on his Person, which Government implies.
They bow at his name, and profess subjection to him.

Therefore if the law had by error said any thing inconsistent with the essence
of Churches and Ministry, it had not been obligatory to Pastors or people* but
they ought still to take Churches and Pastors to be what Christ has made them,
and described them to be.

XXV. Suppose a Law should say, All families shall be so under Diocesans as to
have no power but from them, and all shall subscribe to this. This does not
null family-power and society as instituted by God, nor make it a sin to live
in Families, nor dissolve them all; But all must continue in Families as
inst^tuted by God: And if any subscribe to this, it will not make it a sin in
all Wives, Children and Servants to live in those families.

If the Law had said, All Schools in England shall be essentially subject to
Diocesans, must we therefore have had no more Schools? Or if the Schoolmaster
subscribe to them, is it a sin to be his Scholar?

If the Law should say, All Christians shall choose their own Pastors, and meet
and pray and preach as they please, but only in essential subjection to
Diocesans, must all therefore give over Church Communion?

If the Law had said, All the Parish-Assemblies in England shall henceforth be
essentially subject to the Pope, or a foreign Council, We must not therefore
have forborne all such Assembling, but have kept to the state and duty appointed
us by Christ.

XXVI. Here the mistaking Opponents say, 1. That indeed de jure none can change
the Essence of Christ's Ministry and Churches, but de facto they may, and have
done.

Ans. What is meant by [changing it, de facto?] Have they de facto, nulled
Christ's Power, Law* or Offices and Churches? What? Nulled it by a Nullity of
pretended Authority, and overcome his Power without Power? De jure and de
facto, to be a true Church or Pastor, is all one Christ made true ones: De
facto they cannot unmake them, but by destroying matter or form, because they
cannot do it de jure: They have destroyed neither matter or form of such parish
churches as I plead for, and which Christ instituted; for they had not power to
do it: Indeed they may de facto make other sort of Churches and Ministers to
themselves, (tho not de jure) but not to us* who stick to Christ's institutions.

XXVII. But say they, We confess, if the Law did bid all assemblies in England
meet in dependence on Diocesans, private and public; this would not alter the
species of our separate Churches, because man has not power, and we consent
not.

Ans. Very good. And I pray you what alters the case, as to the
Parish-Churches? Is it that they have Steeples and Bells, or that they have
Tithes? It Is the Calamity of Dissenters, that they either cannot consider, or
can feel no strength in the plainest truth that is said against them; but
thoughts and sense run all one way, which they think right.

XXVIII. Obj. But say they, Constitutive and Declaritive Laws must be
distinguished. They can but declare our Meetings to be Diocesan, which is
false* (...) the Parish-Meetings such.

Ans. 1. Remember that declaring the Parish-Churches to be such, does no more
constitute them such, than yours: Why then talk you so much of the words of
Bishops, and Clergy, and Books, as if their declarations made them such? 2. But
how does a Law constitute one (the Parochial) to be Diocesan, (or null), more
than your separate meetings, if by a Law of toleration it should say the same
of them? The truth is, They are such to consenters that judge them such: But
they constitute them not such to any that consent not to such a constitution,
but hold to Christ's.

XXIX. But it is said, that our thoughts alter not constitutions, they are our
own immanent acts, that nihil ponunt in esse; and therefore the Pastors and
Churches will be what Law makes them, whatever we think.

Ans. Are not Churches formally relative societies; what makes them such, but
thoughts and wills of men expressed? Gods mind expressed in his Institutions is
his premised consent; our consequent obedient consent makes Christians,
Pastors, and Churches: If a Law cannot make the Parish consent to null Christ's
Officers and Churches, it does not null them to them. If a Law say, All
marriages shall be void unless the Bishop remarry them: This makes them not
void to any that consent not, but say, we stand to the valid marriage we had
What does another man's consent do to constitute me a Christian or Churchmember
(except Parents for Infants)? And if my thoughts and consent put nothng in
esse, then the thoughts and consents of the conforming Clergy alters not their
Churches; and what then is that constituting cause you talk of? Is it only the
law? for shame say not so; Gods own Law as commanding us to be Christians,
Pastors or Churches, makes us not such, without consent: And can man's Law both
null Gods Law, and make us of what species it does but bid us be, without our
consent?

XXX. But here our Disputants think they expose me to derision: What? Do I
intimate that one and the same Congregation, may be two Churches of different
species?

Ans. I think to be such by open profession, is disorderly and unusual: But I
think he that denies this, is unfit to deride the ignorance of another.

1. If the people in one Kingdom may be, in specie, two Kingdoms, the people of
one Assembly may be two Churches; but Bishop Bedle in his printed Letter said,
that Ireland was then two Kingdoms, the King being Sovereign to some, and the
Pope to other: And I think Hungary is so now, between the Emperor and Turks.

2. When Paul ordinarily held his assemblies in the Jewish Synagogues, where
half were Infidels, and half Christians, (before he separated his Christians
from them) I think they were two Churches.

3. If Independents had leave to meet in the Parish churches, where the Parish
Minister, and their own Minister should preach by turns, and the Parish only
heard theirs as a lay preacher, or none of their Pastor, and so they heard the
Parish Preachers; I doubt not, but they would be distinct church*

If one Parish church have two Pastors, and one of them be professedly for an
essential subjection to the Pope, and the other against it, and half the people
of one mind, and half of the other, I think they are two Churches in one place.

If those Anabaptists who take none but the rebaptized for Church Members,
should with their Pastors join with Independents in worship, tho esteeming them
no churches, I suppose you think they would be distinct churches in one place.

But I think none of this is the case of the churches that I join with; for I
suppose they null not Christ's species of Ministers to themselves or me. But if
they did it to themselves, that would not do it to me.

XXXI. Obj. But one and the same Minister cannot be of two species, and
therefore relation to him cannot constitute distinct Churches.

Ans. 1. One and the same man cannot be a Minister of Christ, and no Minister
of Christ; so much is true, nor of any two inconsistent species: But if you
will call any circumstantial difference a distinct species, that will no^
hinder the consistence: The same man may be Christ's Minister, and the Kings
Chaplain, or a Dean, or Pre^endary, or a Diocesan Bishop, or Subject to a
Diocesan, such Bishops as Chrysostom, Augustine, Ambrose, (...), Parke^,
Grindal, Ush^r, Davenant, etc and their Chaplains did not cease to be Christ's
Ministers.

2 Relation to one of these men may make two sorts of consistent churche^, if
the same man have a Parish and a Diocese, as the German superintendents have,
and many other Bishops; the warrantableness we are not now disputing.

3. Yea, one and the same Parish Minister may be Pastor of two Churches in one
Assembly: If he openly profess himself Orthodox, the people that so own him are
a church; and if he secretly to a party of them profess himself an Anabaptist,
or a Papist, and they unite with him as such, they are another church, such as
it is; Vespae habent favos, and marcionitae ecclesias: Tertul.

XXXII. Obj. But the grand Objection is, No man can be a Pastor of Christ
against his will: The Parish Ministers have all by conforming, renounced the
essence of the Christian Ministry, and subscribed and sworn this renunciat^^ by
subjecting themselves to Diocesans, and swearing never to endeavor any
alteration of the Diocesan Government, and the Vestries who represent the
churches, have sworn the same; and you have often said that the Diocesan form
of Government, 1. Deposes the Parish Bishops, and maimeth the Ministry. 2.
Dep^seth the Parish Churches. 3. And makes Parish Discipline impossible.

Ans. It is impossible to write that, which no man can misunderstand, and make
an ill use of. I have often told you,

1. That I am in doubt, whether Archbishops as Successors of the Apostles,
only in the ordinary continued part of their Office, be jure divino, or not.

2. That Congrational Bishops over Presbyters, being ejusdem ordinis, are an
old venerable and lawful humane Institution.

3. That Congregational Bishops, only over the Laity, are all Presbyters as
such, and of Christ's Institution.

4. Hereupon I have often distinguished Diocesans into two sorts. 1. Those that
are but the Governors of true particular Churches, that depose them not, but
Rule them by the word perswasively: These are called Bishops, being really
Archbishops: These I never charged of the Consequents forenamed: And if the
King make them Cogent Magistrates also, I will obey them. I take the judgment
of the Church of England manifest in Ordination, Liturgy, Articles, etc. to be
for such Diocesans only, tho I vastly dissent from many things in the Canons by
which, and the Mode in which some exercise their Government.

2. The other sort is the Innovators form of Diocesan Government, which hold
that there is no Church without a Bishop, and no Bishop but Diocesans, (either
Bishop of Laity or Presbyters) and so that the Parish Churches are no Churches,
but part of the lowest sort of true Political Churches: These I take to be
Super-conformists, yea Nonconformists, and Dissenters from the Church of
England, tho they may strive to get the name of the Church to themselves. Now,
what I say of these Innovating Nonconformists, and their designs and attempts,
our mistaking Separatists say, I speak of the Laegal Church frame, and so of
all the Bishops and Parish-Churches. And I see no hope of delivering the Church
of God from the trouble of incogitant confident erroneous Dissenters, that are
not able to distinguish.

XXXIII. I further answer this great Objection (being concerned in Consc^ence
to do it, when men father their mistakes and Separation on me.) 1. The
Parish-Ministers that I join with, (and I think the most that ever I knew) have
not (that I know of) renounced any thing essential to a Parish-Pastor: I before
said, Ordination and Jurisdiction over Presbyters or other Churches, is no part
of its essence. To be obedient to a Diocesan, is no such Renunciation.
Therefore it is no such Renunciation to promise to obey them in lawful things,
subordinate to obeying Christ. If it prove a mistake in them, and that they owe
no such Obedience, every such mistake does not degrade them. He that said, that
( he that will be greatest, shall be servant of all) thought not that to obey
an equal, did null the Ministry. Nor he that said, Be su^ject one to another.
Christ and Peter paid tribute to avoid offense, tho the Children be free.

But what if a man be in doubt, whether such Obedience be not his Duty: Is it
not the safer side much more if he verily think it his Duty?

2. To take Diocesans to be Jure Divino, is said by some to be destructive of
the Pastoral Office, and Churches, and a change of the English
Church Government. But it is error. For 1. It is not the Destructive Diocesan
Government, which acknowledge no Church and Pastor under them, that those in
question consent to; but the Governing Diocesan, who rules subject Pastors and
Churches.

2. This Question of Divine right, is threefold. 1. Of that which by D^^ire
right is necessary, ad esse. 2. Of that which is by Divine right, best and m^st
elegible, or needful, ad melius esse. 3. That which is by right of Divine
Concession lawful, but not necessary. The Church of England never determined,
which of these was the Diocesans Case: All Conformists judged it Lawful;
multitudes judged it Better than other forms: Many judged it necessary when it
might be had. But no Law determined for any of these alone. Unless you will
say, the Preface to the Book of Ordination does it, by saying [ It is evident
to all men diligently reading holy Scripture, and Ancient Authors, that from
the Apostles time, there have been these Orders of Ministers in Christ's Church,
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Which Offices were evermore had in such Reverend
Estimation, etc.]

Here some say, That the Church of England took not these for three distinct
Orders before 1640, but now: Therefore by the word [ these Orders] is meant
only two.

Ans. At this rate, he must have the bette^, whom the hearer best trusts,
whatever he say: If [ these Orders of Ministers, Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons,] speak not three Orders, I cannot understand them. Here note
partiality; the same that refuse to subscribe them, because they speak three
Orders; yet say, they speak but two] when they argue that Church Government is
changed 1662, from what it was 1640.

Indeed Aelfricks Laws in Spelman, make Bishops and Priests the same Order, and
so do a great part of Schoolmen and other Papists; but the English Bishops and
Clergy were some of one mind, and some of another about it, and determined it
not. Unless this Preface be a Determination, the Name [ Order and Office] being
both used.

And (to instance in no other) Saravia (tho no English man, yet of the Church
of England) wrote more strongly almost than any that I ever read, for Diocesan
Episcopacy (against Beza, etc.) and that upon this ground of Divine right, that
they succeeded the Apostles, and such as Timothy, Titus, etc. in the Government
of many Churches. (And the Kings Divines at the Isle of White went all on that
Ground).

To say then, that to plead a Divine right for them, is new, is to contradict
large Historical Evidences. And were it true, that this had been never before
Imposed or Subscribed; surely it is not an Opinion of the Divine right of
governing of many Churches, that renounceth the being of those Churches; it
asserteth them to be by Divine right. For that which is not, is not governable.
Non entis, non sunt accidentia.

But where and how has the Law or Church altered the case since 1640. These
words were in the Book of Ordination before, and I know of none plainer that
way since. Its destructive Diocesan Government, which renounceth the Government
of any subject Churches, but of one only, and of any Pastors that I argue
against, and not Governors of such Churches.

XXXIV. But it is objected, That they swear [ not to endeavor any alteration of
Church Government; therefore they renounce the Pastoral Office, because the
present Government excludes it.

Ans. 1. This is to dictate, and not to prove: The Diocesan Government hampered
and fettered it by the Canons in the time of Whitgift and Bancroft, but nulled
it not: He that reads the Canons, or knows the Church, and thinks that it is
Government has no need of Amendment, is far from my mind: But governing is not
nullifying.

2. It is not true (that ever I heard) that they swear what this Objection
says: The Ministers do not swear, but subscribe it, and swear Obedience in
licitis and honestis: (And I could never learn what Law commands that Oath).
And if it should extend to obey all the Canons, it is that which I would be full
loath to swear; but I know no Canon that utterly nulleth the Parish-Churches
and Ministers* And a Justice that swears to execute the Laws, is not supposed
thereby to justify every Law, nor to execute any, if it should be against Gods
Law, that exception being still supposed.

3. Their Subscription never to endeavor alteration, engages them never to
endeavor to destroy the Parish Churches and Ministry, and so is for them: For
that would be a great alteration indeed.

4. If you should think otherwise; yet if the Subscriber, or Swearer think
himself, that it is not destructive, but governing Diocesans, that he
subscribeth to; it is not your Opinion or Exposition, that binds him against
his own; No, tho you were in the right, as to the Imposers sense: For,
Ignorantis non est consensus. It Is unjust to face them down that they mean what
they profess they do not. Ask forty Conformists, whether they think the
Government which they promise not to alter, be that Diocesan form which rules
Parish Churches and Pastors, or that which denies their being, and I think few
will profess the latter sense.

5. And suppose the worst, that any Parish Priest were of that mind; yea, and
were really no true Pastor, as to his own acceptance with God; he may yet be a
Pastor so far true, as is necessary to the Essence of the Church, if the People
know it not: For the Innocent suffer not for the guilties sin. If a man be a
secret Atheist, or Heretic, or do counter^eit Ordination and Election, and
really had none, and the People be deceived by him, and know it not while he
possesses the place, and does the work; his Baptisms and Administrations are
valid to the Church, as a Church, tho not to himself and his Ministry. The Jews
Church was not null, when the high Priests had no lawful call, but bought the
Office of R^man Heathens.

XXXV. Obj. But the Vestry swears never to endeavor any alteration.

Ans. 1. The Vestry was never empowred to give the sense of the Church herein.
2. I never lived where any such things as Vestries were, but in London; unless
you will call the Ministers and Churchwardens the Vestry. And what is London to
all England? 3. If they are so sworn, it is as a new thing since 1661. But then
they are sworn, (whoever is for it) never to end (...) in Popery, nor
destroying Dioce^ans, but only not to alter (...) I doubt with m^re Officers
than we wish continued)

4. And whereas those that I now deal with, say, That indeed before 1640. (...)
Churches and Pastors, but now it does by (...); Let it be considered, that the
Lawmakers are so far from professing any (...) al^^rat^n, that it is only the
Long-Parliament, and the (...) Alterati^^, that they complained of; and
therefore swea^ Corporations, Vestries, Militia, Nonconformists (by the Oxford
Oath) and engage all Conformists never to endeavor any alteration So that they
thought that it was the old Government that they settled. And now all this great
part of the whole Kingdom is sworn, as I said, against Popery and foreign
Jurisdiction, against Patriarchs, and against putting down parish churches and
pastors, that they will never endeavor it (by consent or execution of any men's
commands). The alterations made before these oaths, were not essential.

XXXI. I add one more argument, That owning subjection to governing Diocesans,
as such, nulleth not the su^ject Churches and Pastors; else by parity of
Reason, Subjection^ to Archbishops would null the Diocesan Churches and
Bishops, which it does not do; nor do you think it does; yea, tho all Diocesans
solemnly promise to obey their Archbishops in their Consecration.

XXXII. If you do know of any Minister that is for destructive Diocesans, that
will not nullify the Offices of all the rest, that never were of that mind or
consent: Yea, if the Law so meant (as you say, but prove not) you know how
commonly Conformists say, that the meaning of the Subscription and Oaths, is
only against [ Seditious or unlawful sorts of endeavor to alter.] Be this true
or false, it proves that those men consent not contrary to their sense of the
Subscription, and so renounce not their Churches.

XXXIII. Indeed the new Laws have made Ministerial Conformity much harder than
it was before 164^. And also Lay Conformity with u^ the Church-do^rs, by the
aforesaid Oaths; and also Lay Conformity within the Church seems very hard in
some particular Offices, especially Baptismal Circumstances. But I think the
ordinary Communion in the Liturgy, is better than it was before: For 1. The
^pistles and Gospels are used after the new Translation, which were used after
the old. 2. Diverse Collects have some mistakes changed [ As on this day] at
Easter, Whitsuntide, when it was not on that day. 3. The Minister is newly
enabled and required to keep all from the Sacrament, who are not ready to be
confirmed, (that is, that are not Catechized, and ready understandingly, to
renew their baptismal Covenant) which is a very great addition of power: And if
any practice it not, that is his fault, and a neglect of execution of his power;
and when he puts scandalous Sinners from the Sacrament, he may say, [ As a
Minister of Christ and Rector of this Church, I judge you unmeet for its
Communion, and forbid it you.] And no more is essential to his Church
Discipline in Excommunication. It Is too true, that the Exercise of this it
clogged with further Prosecution by him, in the Chancellors Court, which I think
few will undertake. And it is true, that such Ministers are required to publish
the Excommunications of Laymen, past in the Bishops names, tho it be according
to such Canons, as the 6 th, 7 th, 8 th, etc. But a man in Fetters, is a man:
It changed not the Pastoral Office, when Heathen Emperors persecuted it, and
when such Christian Emperors, as Anastasius, Zeno, Basilicus, Theodosius 2d.
Constantius, Valens, etc. vexed or cast out those that were not of their
Opinions. It nulleth not the Office in Switzerland to have none but the
Magistrates Discipline.

XXXIV. The Objectors grant, that, If any Parish Church shall by Minister and
People consenting, be formed according to the Rules of the Gospel, they are
true Churches, tho the Law should be against them, or command the contrary.

Ans. 1. Much more then, if the Law be for all that is essential. 2. And does
not this say as much as I am pleading for? Name me, if you can, any thing
essential, which all Ministers promise not at Ordination? If any after renounce
it, the crime is personal: Prove it before you say it, and forsake him, and
charge not his fault on others.

I think you are not of their minds, that say, [ The Law binds every
Subscriber and Swearer to the sense of the Imposers, when he took it through
mistake in another sense, because they refused to explain it; especially, if he
declared his sense: Much less does it bind him to your sense, against his own.

XXXV. But then (say the Objectors) such Churches are Dissenters; as such you
join with them, and not as settled by Law, and so it is but a Conventicle, and
is excommunicated by the Canon, or you excommunicated for saying it is a
Church, and joining with it.

Ans. 1. What if all this be true? Does it follow, that I must separate from
it? Are not your private Churches more unquestionably Excommunicate, etc. by
the Canon, and yet you separate not from them? Can you see but on one side?

2. But your Affirmation proves not that the Law nulleth such Ministers, or
Churches, as use the Liturgy, and subscribe in the favorable sense, tho it
should prove a mistake. It must first be tried and judged to be a mistaken
sense, and even where they (strangely) Excommunicate, ipso facto, the fact must
be proved and declared by the Judge, before Priest and people are bound to
Execution, (tho the Law be loco sententiae; the (...) being proved and
declared), no man is bound to do Execution on himself.

3. I would seriously advise these Brethren to think, Whether all good
Christian Men and Women are bound to study the Laws of England, before they may
resolve what Church to ^^mmuni^ate with? yea, whether they must be all so well
skilled in Law, as to decide these Law-controversies, that you and I are not
agreed in, and Lawyers themselves do ordinarily differ in; that is, Whether by
Law the Parish-Churches and Pastors be changed and n^lled, and Diocesses be
made the only Churches, ^^simae species? Must all forbear Communion till they
are so good Lawyers? Why may it not suffice to know Christ's Law, and to profess
to obey it, and to do nothing against it willingly? He that will promise to
Communicate with the Church, but as it is established by Law, should have more
skill in the Law than I have to know, how it is established; and every
Communicant has not so much more than I.

XXXVI. But (say they) then you are bound to av^^d s^andal, by professing
openly that you Communicate (...) a Dissenter, and not with the Church as
established by Law.

Ans. 1. Then I should falsely say that which I either think is otherwise, or am
not resolved in. I tell you, Few can truly say this, if any.

2. What need this, when the open Profession of all Christians is, That it is a
Church and Worship of Christ's making, which they own and intend, and none that
is against them? And when the Articles of the Church of England, and the
Ordination covenant own Scripture-sufficiency, and disclaim all that is against
Gods word: Must we be supposed to renounce Religion, when we meet to profess
it? And surely for disowning any thing which the Nonconformists judge unlawful,
all the Books written by them, and all the notorious sufferings in twenty two
years, Ejection and Prosecution, are no obscure Notification of their
Judgments, without speaking it at the Church ^oors, or before the Assemblies:
Must I openly protest against Independency, Anabaptistry, or Presbytery, (if I
dissent) before the face of their Congregations, if I will Communicate with
them?

3. But to stop your demand before I Communicated in the Parish church, where I
now am; I went to the Incumbent, and told him that I would not draw him into
danger, or intrude against his will: I had been ^^iled by the Kings Commission,
and after by the Lord Keeper, to debate about Alteration in the Liturgy and
Worship, and Discipline; and I thought that thereby I wa^ by (...) 6, 7, 8.
ipso facto Excommunicate, but not bound to do Execution on my self; and
therefore if I were separated, it should not be my act; but I left it to his
will: He took time, and upon advice admitted me.

Obj. But you must tell them that the Parish Church has no dependence on the
Bishops, but as the Kings Officers; and that it is Independent, and then you
fall not under our opposition.

Ans. 1. How many Lawyers and Civilians do openly say (as Crompton before
Cosins Tables) that all Church Government flows from the King. And does that
satisfy you? 2. And why must the Parish Church and Pastor needs be
Independent? Will you have no Communion with Presbyterians? 3. And what if it
be dependent on the Diocesan, as governor (tho not as destroyer)? Is it any
more destructive of its Essence, than to be governed by a Classis or Council?

XXXVII. As for your telling us, W^^m the Canons e^c^mmunicate, or (...)
Lay-chancellors, Officials, Surrogates, Archdeac^ns, etc. exc^mmunicate, what
Oaths they imp^se, etc. tell them of it, and not us, who are not responsible
for other men's deeds. It no more concerns our cause of Parochial
Lay-communion, than to tell us how bad men some Ministers are, nor so much
neither: For I that willingly join in the Liturgy, will not willingly, if I
know it, so much as seem to own the Ministry of any man that is notoriously
Insufficient, Atheistical, Heretical, or so Malignant, or Wicked, as to do more
hurt than good* Avoid such, and spare not.

XXXVIII. Obj. They want the Peoples c^nsent, and so are no Past^rs.

Ans. The People show their consent by ordinary Submission and Communion.

Obj. The People must be supposed to consent to the Law, which makes them no
Pastors, but the Bishops Curates.

Ans. Both the Suppositions are before confuted; both that the People are
supposed to consent to any Law against Gods, and that the Law makes Curates to
be no Pastors.

XXXIX. To conclude the Objections about the Essence of Parish Churches. 1. The
question is not. Whether there be not a sort of Diocesan Prelacy, which nulleth
them? 2. Nor whither there be not some men in England that write and plead for
such Diocesan Churches as have no true Episcop^s pregis, much less Episcopus
(...) under them, but are (...) Bishops in that Diocese? Nor of what number,
power, or interest these men are of (against whom I have often written)? 3. But
whether the Law be on their side, or against them? for the old Diocesan
Government of subordinate Pastors and Churches, is to me n^w uncertain: I did
once incline most to the fi^^t sense of the Law; but on sec^nd thoughts hope
better of it, and am not Lawyer good enough to be certain 4. But if it should
be so, I verily think ^^e main (...), of the (...), and therefore (...) not to
renounce their P^rish ^overnment, ^ut only to use it in subordination to the
Bishop. 5. And I am p^st doubt that all the Communicants of England, are
neither ^ound to decide this Law-doubt, nor to understand it, nor to believe
that the Law has altered the Government. 6. And if they did believe it, they
ought to keep on in Church Assemblies* according to Christ's Law, taking all
that is against it, as void, as long as they are put ^n no sin themselves, nor
the Church notoriously renounceth its ^ssentials. 7. And if they were stated
Members of other Churches ( e.g. the Gre^k, the Dutch, the French); they might
^ccasionally Communicate in our Parishes transiently (without examining the
Pastors call and discipline, but judging by possession and practice). 8. And if
they should prove no lawfully called Ministers, their Office would be valid to
those that blamelesly were deceived and knew it not. 9. And if they were sure
that they were no true Ministers, they may join with them in all Worship
belonging to Lay-Christians. 10. But if they prove able, godly Ministers of
Christ (tho faulty) settled by Law to the advantage of Religion in a Christian
Kingdom, where all are commanded thus to maintain national Concord; and the
upholding those Churches, is the very National possession of the Protestant
Religion, and it goes for public Disobedience and Scandal to forsake them,
and that at a time when many forsake them too for unjust grounds, and by
suffering for it, stand to unwarrantable Accusations of them, and sharply
Censure those that do not as they, and oppugn Peacemakers, and all this after
the old Nonconformists full Confutation of the Separatists unwarrantable way,
and the doleful experience of Subversion of all sorts of Government; by the
Prosecution of such mistakes, I say, If all this should be the case, it is
deeply to be considered.

XL. But the most effectual hindrance, is the opinion of unlawfulness in
j^yning in the Liturgy; yet my last Objectors confess that [ It is lawful to
some, and that it is not Communion in it, much less in all forms, which they
call unlawful t^ all: And the sober sort are loath to say that the Millions of
Christians in England, and Scotland, who live where they can be in no other
Churches, should rather like Atheists live without all Church-Worship and local
Communion.

And in gaining this, I have gained the better half of what I pleaded for. And
they confess, and so do I, that public Communion may be one men's duty, and
anot^^rs sin, as circumstances vary. I confess one man may possibly live under
so intolerable a Minister, as is not to be owned. And even some of the high
adversaries of Nonconformists seem of this mind, and break the Canon; and
having Pastors, who they think do not heartily conf^rm, ^ut plead for Peace and
Moderation; they revile them as Trimmers, and will not Communicate wi^h them,
but go out of their own Parishes (and thousands seldom any where. Other
circumstances also may vary men's cases.

^ut some Objectors at last t^ll us, that the great difference which they mean,
is different light: The ^ld Martyrs, Reformers and Nonconformists, had not so
much light as we, and so it was not th^^r sin; but greater light being now m^r^
common, it will be a common sin to j^yn in the Liturgy*

Ans. 1. It is ordinary and easy for men to magnify their own understandings;
but Gods Law was then the same as now; and they were bound to know it; Their
ignorance might make sin less (and stripes fewer) but could not make it none.

2. I have many Reasons to think that it is your light that is l^ss, and the
old Nonconformists and Conformists (in this) that was greater.

1. That is the greater light that most agrees with Gods Word, and the
universal churches practice accordingly.

2. The writings of the old Nonconformists yet extant, give better reas^ns than
the seperatists did, and therefore had clearer light. What vast difference is
there in the writings of Ball, Hildersham, Am^sius, (Manuductions) Gifford,
Paget, Bradshaw, etc. on that part, and Johnsons, Cans, Penrys, etc. on the
other?

3. The Theological writings and labors of the Nonconformists in all other
points showed, that they were men of incomparable more light than the
Separatists; and is it like that God would give men such rare light only in
church * communion, that had so little comparatively in the rest of Divinity;
except Ainsworth's skill in Hebrew, (in other things by Paget laid too naked)
how few old Separatists have left any considerable fruits of great light unto
the church? Read the writings of Cartwright, Dudley Fenner, Hildersham, John
Reignolds, Dod, Perkins, Bai^, Parker, Ames, Bradshaw, etc. Besides Scots* and
all Foreigners, such as Calvin, Beza, Zanchy, Sadeel, and hundreds more; and
compare these with the Writings of the Separatists, and judge who had greater
light.

4. Since 1660. all the London Ministers, and others with them that offered the
King to set up in the parish churches the old Liturgy with some alterations,
were men (except my self) who showed in their Writings and preaching* as much
light as the Separatists have showed, even Brown, or John Goodwin himself,
(that wrote Prelatical Preachers are no Teachers of Christ): Where do they now
show greater light than others? this boast to me deserves pity more than
confutation: Anabaptists, and others say the same, but I find much less light
in them both, when I read and hear them; tho I truly love and honor all that
is good in them: If you have so much more light than we and all the Reformed
churches, show it us in other excellencies.

XLI. But I must more particularly consider of this Authors Allegation of my
own words against me, especially my Treatise of Episcopacy: And I do heartily
thank him for calling me to review it. For, 1. I profess to write nothing which
may not be amended. And 2. If men's misunderstanding turn my writings to a snare
and scandal, it greatly concerns me to remove it by explication, or by
retractation of any thing that needs it.

And 1. I do find that I have incautelously given some occasion to the mistake;
for thol entitled my Book, not against Diocesan episcopacy, but against that
sort of Diocesan churches, Prelacy and Government, which casts out the
Primitive church sp^cies of ^piscopacy, Ministry, and Discipline]; and tho to
avoi^ mistake, I said in the Preface, I ^ere give notice to the Reader, that
whenever (...) me speak as against the English Diocesan Prelacy, I mean it as
described by Cosins and Dr. Zouch, and as relating to the Et c^tera Oaths and
(...)* and not in opposition to the laws of the Land; Yet all this was not
enough to avoid misunderstanding! Indeed I took the church Government to be
described and judged of by the churches own sentence, more than by the ^^w; and
I had read the said Et cetera oath and canons with the words that so it ^ught
to stand, which I think could mean nothing less, than that so by Gods Law it
ought to stand; and I had read the old canons, 6 th, 7 th, and 8 th. Which
ex^ommunicate, ipso facto, all men, without excepting L^rds or Parliament M^n,
who affirm that any thing in the church Government, by ArchBishops, Bishops,
Deans, Archdeacons, and THE REST that bear office therein, is repugnant to the
Word of God: And I read the canons that forbid Ordained Ministers to preach
till they are further licensed by Bishops; yea, and in the church or elsewhere
so much as to expound any Doctrine or Matter, but only to r^ad Scripture and
Homilies, etc. with much more like this. 3. And then I took the stated
restraint of the Ministry, with Lay-chancellors, and officials decre^ive power
of Excommunication, and absolution, and the foresaid Civilians denying all
G^venment to Presbyters, to have been quoad exercitium quantum (...); at least
an overthrow of parish churches, Rectors and discipline. 4. And I thought that
the Bishops and Chancellors could never have so long done all this, and ruled
by these canons, if the Law had not been on their side. 5. And I thought that
the Authors of the canons of 1640 being a c^nvo^a^i^n, it was to be called the
Church of England: and specially when I found the most highly honored Doctors
pleading, there was no Bishop but D^^cesan, and no church without its proper
Bishop.

By all these inducements (with long sad experience) I often speak so
incautelously calling this, the English d^^^^san frame, that the Reader might
easily think that I meant it was that frame that was settled by law; whereas
having read ^ryn, H^ntley, Leigh^^^, and others that deny the law to be for it,
and being my self a stranger to that case of Law, I should have more fully
separated the Law case from the new convocation case, and much more from the
destructive Innovators case, who nullified the foreign churches, with whom it
was that I disputed; and specially considering that the canons and oath of
1640. were after cashiered by Parliament, and never since restored, no not by
the Parliament of 1662.

Upon all this, 1. I retract all words that seem to determine the case in Law,
(if any such be there) or that by darkness tend so to the Readers error. 2. And
all words that make the writings of superconformists and subver^ers, or
chang^rs of the church government, or the canons of the convocation 1640 to be
the sense of the Church of England, when it is said, that before its sense was
otherwise and alteration is now abjured, or disowned by most of the Land; and
conformists usually profess another sense: Upon this very reason I write this
short Debate to avoid the injuring of the Re^ders of my Writings, about the
English Diocesan frame.

XLII. The Book I animadvert on, is called, Mr. Baxters Judgment and Reasons
against c^mmunicating with the Parish Assemblies as by Law r^qu^red.

Ans. I am for communicating with them in the essentials of Christianity, and
Communion, as the Law requires, if I understand it, because the Law of Christ
requires it: But in whatever circumstances any law shall ^e against Christ's
Law, I communicate not according to such a Law.

XLIII. All that he cites out of my writings, p. 2, 3* is against his cause,
which he thought was for it, as I have proved. What he cites ^. the first is
unproved, the second I own, and is nothing for him.

XLIV. P. 5. And often throughout, he alleges, that I make the Par^shes not
complete particular Churches.

Ans. No wonder; those may be true churches, that are not complete in integrity
or degree; will you separate from all churches that are not so complete? I know
not of any strictly complete on earth: many true churches are incomplete as to
integrals, much more as to ornament, order, and strength: And all particular
churches are less complete than the universal; and that on earth, alas how far
from complete: Believe him not Reader, that R.B. is against your joining with
all churches, which he proves to be not complete, yea, or to be very faulty
and defective in point of ^oliness, Love, or Order of Ministers or people: But
they are true churches in essentiality, tho parts of a Diocese, as that is of a
Nation; not mere parts of the lowest single Church. P. 6. 2. What I say of
suspending the power, is not nulling it in the office; and what I say of
practice by canons, and visitation Articles, is not said of Law; much less of
all the Churches and Pastors consent to them; and what I say of misgoverning in
exercise, is not said of a national profession, that so it ought to b^.

P. 7. He cites my words further against restraint of the Ministers power. But
1. That nulleth not Christ's Institution of it. 2. More Power is given. As 1. To
deny the Sacrament, as is said, to all that are not ready to be confirmed. 2.
To deny absolution to all the sick, who do not humbly and earnestly desire it,
etc. And the Power of doing it by Ministerial Application of Gods Word, is all
that is properly ministerial, though they take all cogent power from us: Man's
taking away our power, is but hindering the exercise quantum in se, but the
Power is of Christ, which they cannot take away.

P. 8. They cannot suspend our commanded act, (but only our doing it with
liberty and advantage): I can refuse the Sacrament to the unfit, tho it be to
my trouble.

P. 9. I say there are many additions to the old conformity* that make the case
harder to Clergy and Laity than of old: But I there maintain that none of these
additions do make Parochial Communion now pleaded for, unl^wful.

XLV. P. 10. He says, If we might not endeavor to restore the old Prelacy,
then not to give strength to it being restored: And (say others), lest we be
perjured, having sworn and covenanted against it.

Ans. This needs impartial Consideration: They say, That our covenant
engagement makes that unlawful to us, which was lawful to the old
Nonconformists.

But 1. Did not Gods Law make it unlawful to them, or to us before? Then you
think we covenanted to do somewhat that ^ods law bound us not to; if so, it was
superstition; and is not adding our self-made vows and duties, as bad as adding
Ceremonies?

2. Yea, they then thought Brownism a sin; and if they mistook not, we cannot
by covenanting turn sin into duty.

3. Ad hominem, the Author professes Independency: And I suppose he knows,
that the chief of that way, did some write, to prove that the Covenant bound
not (at last), and some likened it to an Almanac out of date; and some said,
it was a League which was dissolved, and so bound not; and how great a party
thought that it bound them not from pulling down both King, and many
Parliaments, and conquering Scotland, res ips^ loqunta ^st: And even King and
Parliament, Lord Spiritual, Temporal and Commons, have declared it their
judgment in the Corporation Act and Declaration, which binds all the
Corporation Officers to declare without exception, that there is no obligation
on them, or any other from the Oath, called the solemn League and Covenant:
It Is true indeed, that the Presbyterian Ministers, and Soldiers* and People,
thought that this Covenant bound them to restore the King; and said, Let us
keep our covenant, and trust God with the issue; and G. Monks Army Officers in
their address to him, glory in it, not doubting but the King would find such
his best subjects; but the Law that binds men to declare that there is no
obligation on them or any other, tells them they did err when they thought it
bound them to restore the King: Whether this be true or not, I meddle not with;
but by this you see, that there are few in the land of any party, save
Presbyterians, that can charge us with Covenant breaking (herein) for going to
the Parish Churches, without contradicting themselves or guides; but this is
but ad Hominem.

4. But what words be they in the Covenant that we violate? did it mean, If
power restore the Liturgy, and Bishops, and will suffer no other Churches, we
will rather all give over all worship of God in churches, than we will join
with them? This were a wicked Oath, and could no more oblige us, than to give
over all family worship; I hope few sober men ever so swear.

5. I so little consent to the corporation declaration, that I do believe that
I was bound by that vow to do as I have done in going to the Parish Churches.
For 1. I am bound by it against Profaneness, and all that is c^ntrary to sound
Doctrine and Godliness: But to forsake all public Worship of God without
necessity, is profaneness, and c^ntrary to Godliness. 2. I am bound in my
place and calling to oppose Popery; But to tell all the Protestants in England,
that they sin if they forsake not all the Parish Churches, is to pre^are them
for the reception of Popery, seeing that will be the National Religion which
possesses those Parish Churches: By deserting our Garrisons we shall deliver
them up. 3. I am bound by it against Schism; and I am not able to excuse it
from being Schism, if under all the obligations that now lie upon us, I should
by my constant avoiding the Parish Churches, even unto sufferings declare, that
I take their Communion for absolutely unlawful, and so slander so many Churches
of Christ, and seduce others with me into the same error and sin: This would be
Schism and Covenant Breaking in me; whatever it is in others.

XLVI. Obj. But you swore against Prelacy and Liturgy, and now you strengthen
them.

Ans. 1. As the Covenant was made the terms or test of national Church Union,
excluding all the Episcopal, who were half the Kingdom and more, I think it was
a rash sinful Engine of unavoidable division: But when I took it, it was not so
imposed, but offered to them that were of that mind, and I saw not then that
snare.

2. I never swore against the Common Prayer, nor against the Englsh frame of
Prelacy, (much less, all Episcopacy (any further, than in my place and calling
to endeavor Reformation according to the word of God, and the example of the
best reformed churches: And this I have endeavored to the utmost of my power,
perhaps more than my accusers.

And 3. There is much good in the Liturgy, Parish Order, and Government: I
never did covenant against that; and therefore the Ministers who labored for
Reformation and Concord 1660 and 1661, thought they kept their covenant by
craving some amendments, and not an abolition; and if we did think any thing to
be bad that was good, we must not be obstinate in that error; forsaking the
good which is our duty, is not the way to amend any sin or error; avoiding Gods
public Worship, and living like Atheists (save in private) is not the way to
amend the faults of public Worship or Government: Praying to God for what we
want, and owning the Scriptures, and Christian Religion, and communicating with
Christians on lawful terms, is not encouraging any sin in church Priests or
Prelates, unless men by our duty will be encouraged to sin; and we must not
forsake duty to avoid such men's encouragement: the sons of the Coal are most
angry with those that come nearest to them in all things save their sin and
error; and say, those that stand afar off cannot hurt them: I do not just^fie
all that is in every Assembly that I join with; must I needs renounce Local
communion with every Independent, Presbyterian, or Anabaptist church, that I
dissent from, for fear of strengthening them: I covenanted as much against
Schism as faulty Prelacy; and yet if I must join with no church that is guilty
of Schism, alas whither shall I go?

4. I humbly desire you to examine, whether your way be not a breach of the
covenant you plead; not only as it advantageth Profaneness, Popery, and
Schism, but as it strengthens that which you say I strengthen; he knows not
England, who knows not that perceiving the error of unwarrantable separation,
and the unjust accusations of the Liturgy and churches, used by very many
(besides some failings in some private churches) has been, and is a grand
cause of encouraging too great a number, even to superconformity, and to the
fierce opposition of us, and to the utmost confidence in their own way: and as
you charge me more than others as drawing more to the communion of Godly
Protestant Parish Ministers (that is, to christian catholic love, peace, and
communion): So do the Sons of the Coal, the superconformists more fiercely
revile me as stopping more, than you have done from their extremities.

Gods Word is a sufficient rule, keep to that, and fear not breaking any
self-made laws.

XLVII. Obj. But by this latitude you may join with Papists, and say, you judge
of them according to Christ's description.

Ans. I answered this in the former book: When I join with any church as a
church, I join with them as meeting to profess and practice christian faith and
worship, their by faults I own not: But if they openly profess Idolatry or
Heresy, instead of Worship and Faith, or if they meet to practice any sin
which renders the whole church or worship rejected by God, I must not assemble
with them, but avoid them; which I must not do for tolerable failings, lest I
avoid all the world: I say again, I will cast away my Wine or Broth for Poison
in it, which I will not do for a fly: If the church renounce Christ's
description in the essentials, notoriously, I will not call it a church against
their own consent: But if they do it only in some Accident or Integrals, I will
only disown those faults.

XLVIII. Obj. But, say they, ( p. 13.14.) It is impossible there should be two
national churches, at least in one nation; therefore by joining with a Parish
you can be no part of the national church; tho we confess that if you join with
a Parish Assembly that forms it self into a complete single church, and the
people ^onsent to take the Parish Minister for their Pastor, and the Minister
should exercise the whole power of a Pastor in this Parish church, Mr. B. may
hold communion with this Parish church, and not own the Diocesan constitution.

Ans. Of two churches in one assembly I spoke before. 1. Does this Author think
that exercise of power is as essential to a Minister as Power: Yea, that it
must be the whole power that is exercised; and so that no one is a true Pastor
among the Presbyterians, when the Classis exercises the highest part of the
Power; nor in Helvetia, where Discipline is unexercised; nor in England from
the first Reformation: Were all the Conformists that submitted to Diocesans no
Church-Pastors? nor no Independents, whose Churches having many Pastors and
Elders, no one exercises (no nor has) more than part of the power? Integrity
and essentiality, office and exercise, are not all one.

2. All good Ministers that I know in the Parish Assemblies, do consent to the
Pastoral Office, and the people love them, and show their consent by ordinary
Communion; and they exercise all essential to the office, tho under the
restraints of Government, not owning (in consent) destructive, but governing
Diocesans, some as de jure divino, lawful; some as best, some as necessary,
many as merely empowered to a cogent Government by the King; and does not your
concession imply, that these are true Churches? of intolerable men I speak not.

3. What you confidently deny, is certainly true: There may be two national
churches in one nation, if not three; that is, the word is equivocal, and has
diverse senses; and it is not called national, because all persons in the nation
are of it, but because that the diffused parts of the Nation own it formally in
a public national relation.

1. A Christian Kingdom as such, is by many called a national Church; thus
England is such.

2. A coalition of the most, or all the public Ministers in a Nation in
Synodical Agreements for Communion as such, is called a National Church; such
also is England.

3. The subjection of the most of the Clergy in a nation by consent to some
Ecclesiastical Primate, Patriarch, or other constitutive, governing Head (as a
Bishop is in his Diocese) may make a national Church in another sense.

The same men may be of diverse of these equivocal Churches; or if part be for
one form, and part for another, yet agreeing in the same ordinary, external
Communion; one part may be called national as well as the other. The question
is de ^omine, the name equivocal from diversity of relations: I own, 1. A
Christian Kingdom. 2. I own a national association of Parish Churches and
Pastors. 3. Tho these submit to Diocesan superiority, and be parts of a
Diocese, but true single Churches, I do not therefore separate from them. 4* A
national Church, headed by one constitutive, pastoral Head, I disown; call
which you will the national Church.

But (says he of his approved parish Church), P. 14. Such a Church a^^i^meth
to it self all that past^ral power that in pursuance of Canon and Statute Law,
is fixed in the Bishop.

Ans. Incogitantly spoken; Do all Independents assume the power of Ordination,
Jurisdiction over others, Citations, Licencing, Subspendings, Degradings,
silencings, instituting, inducting, etc. which are so fixed on the Bishop: If
none of this be pastoral power, then the appropriating it is no depriving
parish Ministers of pastoral power; and to be under Magistrates power nulls not
the pastors.

XLIX. What he says about unlawful terms of Communion, p 21. etc. in the
instances of kneeling, putting off the hat, standing up, etc. I answer, 1. The
Author all along seems to forget, that I am not accusing him, not telling
every man his duty, but only giving the Reasons of my own and such others
practice: so they make a long ado, to vindicate him whose Manuscript I
answered, and say, His question was only, whether it be lawful to communicate
with the churches as settled by Law, and not in other respects? When I ever told
them, I meddle with none of their Questions, but my own, viz, 1. Whether I and
such other do well or ill in that communion we hold with the Parish Churches?
2. Whether all Protestants in England are bound in conscience to renounce and
avoid Communion in the Liturgy with all Parish Churches and Chapels, and
rather to give over all church worship?

I only gave my Reasons, why that Manuscript (divulged and boasted of as
unanswerable) changed not my Judgment; and I answered that in his Arguments,
which went further than the question put by them, and assaulted my own
assertions; having before in my Christian Directory, and cure of Church
divisions (without naming him) fully answered his printed Reasons, to prove it
unlawful to use an imposed form or Liturgy, especially because Ministers must
use their own gifts.

But if any man believe that it is a sin to communicate kneeling, or standing,
or sitting, unless he lie down as Christ did; or at any time, save at a feast
or supper; or any where save in an Inn or an upper room, or with any women, or
more than twelve, or if they think it sin to kneel at prayer, or be uncovered,
or to sing Psalms in our Meter and Tunes, whether these men should separate
from all the Churches that will not receive them in their own way, or how far
they do well or ill that will not let every man do what he will, is none of the
case that I have before me: It will not follow, that I must separate from a
Church that bids me kneel, and be uncovered, etc. because you take it to be
sin: put not your measures on all others.

And here because same makes Mr. Faldo the Author of the Vindication, which I
answered, that I may so far vindicate him, as to show, that it is ^earce likely;
I ask, whether if Mr. Faldo did well as a pastor to keep up a church at Barn^^
many years, which would not endure the singing of a psalm of praise to God, but
constantly forbore it, tho his Judgment was against them* (besides that many of
them were not only against Infant Baptism, but f^rther differed in other
things)? was this communion more lawful or laudable than with honest parish
Ministers in the Liturgy? Did he the whole office of a pastor: What if the
Bishop had forbid him to sing ^salms? Is not the Church State more concerned in
the whole congregation* than in an absent Bishop? what greater omission or
defect is there in many Parish-Churches?

I again say, that I am so far of the Judgment of Hildersham, John Ball, etc.
that I had rather join ( caeteris paribus) in a Church that uses the Psalms,
Chapters, and all the Lord's Day Prayers in the Liturgy, before Sermon, than one
that only gives us one Psalm (or none) and a Pulpit-prayer and a Sermon
without all the rest of Church Worship.

L. I will conclude all with repeating a little of the Explication of my
misused writings*

I. The pastoral Oversight of the Laity by the Elders, or Bishops of the
several Flocks, is of Christ's Institution, and belongs to all true Presbyters:
And tho in necessity it may be done by diverse transient Ministers, pro tempore,
most regularly, every Church should have its stated Pastors.

II. Where such Churches are large, the work requires many Ministers, where
each one has but part of the Charge.

III. Reason and Church-consent among these, made one a President over the
rest, and called him the Bishop pecularly, (if it were in Marks days, as Hierom
says, it was in John's). And tho this be not essential to a Church, it is
lawful, and fit; and at last it grew to so great a Reputation and Opinion of
necessity, that all Churches had such Bishops, and gave them a Negative voice,
and ordained not without them, and defined Churches as essentiated by Relation
to them, Ecclesia est plebs Episcopo adunata. If now such men as J.O. Mr. Nigh,
Dr. Goodwin, etc. should have in one Church six or seven young men of their own
training up to be their Assistant-presbyters, I do not think an Independent
Church would take it for any crime that he should have a Negative voice in acts
of Order and Discipline, or that they should ordain Ministers therein without
his Consent.

IV. By degrees single Congregations increased to as many as our great Parishes
that have Chapels, and tho still they communicated in the chief Church at some
special times of the year; they ordinarily met in diverse places, and the
Presbyters officiated some in one meeting, and some in another; at first,
whosoever the Bishop daily sent; but after their particular Tyths or Chapels
were assigned to each; yet all together were esteemed but one Church, governed
by one Bishop, and his College of Presbyters.

V. When they increased yet more and more, fixed Chapels were assigned to
fixed Presbyters; but not as distinct Churches, but parts of the Diocesan
Church, tho at last they were larger than one Bishop and College could guide,
according to the first Institution.

VI. Yet long every Christian City had a Bishop and Church, and every
incorporate big Town, like our Corporations or Market Towns, was called a City
(not because it had a Market, as a reverend Slanderer seigneth me to lay, but
because Custom the master of Language, called all Corporations and great Towns
by that name^: But at last the Bishops being loath to diminish their
Jurisdiction, decreed that very small Cities should have no Bishops, ne
vi^c^eat nomen Episc^pi. And in process of time in some Countries, the name
(...) or City, was appropriated at the Princes pleasure to some very few
Corporations, peculiarly privileged above the rest: So that a King that would
have had but one Bishop in his Kingdom (as it is said that all the Aba^^ian
Empire has had but one) might have done it by calling but one Town a City.

VII. Yet the People and Bishops being sensible that there was more work For a
Bishop in a City-Diocess, than one could do; in many Countries they had Rural
Bishops set over P^pul^ns country Churches: And tho these were subject to the
Diocesans, yet hereby the Churches were multiplied: But the Bishops soon grew
jealous and weary of these Rural-Bishops, and most places put them down, and
set up instead of them a kind of Itinerant visiting Presbyters, empowring all
Archbishops and Ach*Deacons, till at last to save themselves the labor, and
yet not diminish their Dominion, they set up the Courts of Lay-Chancellors,
Officials, and many such Offices, besides the Archdeacons, Surrogates, etc.

VIII,* In England (as is agreed by most Historians*) at first one Bishop had
but one Church or Temple. (And at Luindisfarne says Bid, It was so po^^ a
thing, that it was a house thatcht with reeds.) The Pastor of this one Church
was to convert as many as he could in all the Country about him. The Heathen
Country might be his Diocese, but not his Church. The converted Christians got
into several Monasteries, and not into Parish-Churches. These Monasteries were
partly for Society in Religious Exercise, and partly for Studies, like Schools
to Educate Youth for the Ministry* So that long a Diocese was only the Bishops
Church with diverse Monasteries. At last, Gentlemen for their convenience built
and endowed Parish-Churches; the Bishops old single Churches being called the
Cathedrals: And finally, by the help of Princes, all the Land was divided into
Parishes, subject to the Cathedral-Bishops, to whom Deans and Chapters were
added in imitation of the old Bishops College of Presbyters in every single
Church.

IX. When the Rural-Bishops were put down, the Presbyters power in their
several Parishes was somewhat enlarged: And the Diocesses at last became so
great, that the Bishops were sain to commit more of the oversight to the
Presbyters: Tho they kept them under by severe Canons, Lay-Deputies, and the
Cogent Sword.

X. It grew then a controversy among the Papists themselves, whether the
Parish Incumbents were proper Pastors, and had any Power of Government, and how
much. And my Objectors confess, that they were reputed Pastors among the
Papists, and that Linwood calls them Pastors, and the Laity Oves: I have
cited in Treat of Epis. ^ilesa^us, and many more that prove it. Ant. de Dom.
Spalatensis, is large and full in it. Sp^lman in R. A^l^ricks Law, shows that
the Bishop and Presbyter made but one of their seven Orders: A great sort of
the Schoolmen say the same. Most Drs. say, That the Presbyters essentially as
Sacredetes, have the power of the Keys, inf^ro interi^re; by which they mean
not, a power that must be kept secret, but that which consists in the
perswas^v^ use of Gods word on C^nfer^n^e, privately or publicly, as distinct
from Magisterial and C^gent Power. And if they ^e of one Order, then if one be
a Past^r, the other is so also. That they are taken, but in partem curae, is
nothing against it, but for it. For equal Presbyters in one Church, have each
but partem curae.

The Reformation finding things in this case, determined none of the disputes,
de nomine, Whether Parish Rectors shall be called ^pis^op^s Gregis, or Pastors,
or Rectors, or I^cumb^nts; but use these names promiscuously. Nor did they
dispute whether the Parishes are Political Churches. But the Definition, and
not the Name, is the thing now before us in debate. God has given every such
Minister the essence of a Pastoral oversight of his Flock: Men may hinder the
Exercise, but can no more alter the Christian Office Power, than they can
deprive a Husband of the power over his Wife. And the Diocesans at last have
been necessitated to permit the essential Pastoral power (by the word) to the
Incumbents, having none else to use it by. But Lawyers have taught many to call
nothing Government, that is not Cogent on the unwilling; and so to say, that
Government is not in the Presbyters, but the Bishops; and that all is derived
from the King; which is all true, of Cogent Government by the Sword, in f^ro
exteriore; but not as to Pastoral Government of the Flock by Gods w^rd. As
Bishop Bilson of Obedience has distinguished, and applied well at large.

XI. Now to come nearer our Case, Diocesan Bishops have put down the ranks of
Bishops which of old was settled as Presidents over the Presbyters in every
Church, in Cities, and of the lowest Order (described by Ignatius, and Cyprian,
and others): Every lowest Church has not now a Bishop over the Presbyters, as
it had for diverse hundred years. And by this they have unchurched all the old
sort of Churches in the sense of them that say, There is no Church where there
is no Bishop over Pre^byters: And they have set up a Diocesan Church and
Bishop, only w^^re should be many Churches and Bishops; and thus, (...)
hom^^^m, I argued with them, etc.

But indeed this Parochial Episcopacy, or Pr^sid^ncy being wrongfully said to
be Essential to the Church (being at most b^t useful to peace, ad melius esse)
and the Epicopacy or Pastoral care of the Laity without any power over the
Clergy; being it that is essential to single Church Pastors, In truth no man
can alter this. In Consent and ^^putati^n, it is altered by those that think
Parish Curates no Pastors, and deny any Essential power over their Flocks. But
it is not in Consent and Reputation destroyed by them that acknowledge their
Essential power, and subject only themselves as Pastors to the oversight of
Diocesans and Magistrates. They do but destroy the (...) of Episcopacy of
humane Institution (which was over Presbyters in (...) Ch^rch^^* but not the
Episcopacy over the Flock which is of Christ's Ins^i^utio^*

XII. (...) whether most in England are of this Opinion, or of that, for (...)
or for mere g^verning Episcopacy, and which way the Laws go, and (...) may be
called the sense of the Church, when Convocations and Bishops seem to differ,
and men change their Opinions with the Age and Interest, it is impossible for
me to be sure.

But I know how they govern, by what Canons, and by what Courts; and as all
their Cogent power is from the King, it is no wonder if they be chosen by him:
But the old sort of Bishops that had no forcing power, was so constantly
otherwise chosen, that their Canons nulled the Magistrates choice. And our
present Canons since 1604, tho they null not the Parochial Pastorship, do so
far restrain it, as I hope my Conscience shall never approve. But yet, for that
I will not forsake what is of God, nor make man's failings a pretense against my
duty to God and Man, to the Violation of Love, Unity and Peace.

Yet I will try by distinct speaking to make both the Case and my meaining
plainer, if I can: And thereby to show, that our case differs but gradually
from the old Nonconformists, as to Laymens Parochial Communion, where there
are honest Ministers. And that the old Nonconformists had better Evidence,
Scripture and Reason on their side, than either those Innovators, who make
Parish-Pastors to be but de specie, of humane Institution, made by Bishops, and
changeable by them, having just so much power as they please to give them; or
the Brownists, that are so much of the same Principles, as to think that men's
Laws or Canons can change the form of the Office, or that judge it nullified by
tolerable Imperfections, and Communion made unlawful by such faults, as are
found in almost all the Churches on Earth.

Qu. Whether according to the description of the Scripture, and the exposition
of Dr. Hammond himself, all qualified Parish Ministers be not true Pastors and
Bishops of the Flocks, and with their consenting Christian Communicants, true
particular Churches; and de facto all be not in the power given them by God,
which is essential hereto, and in the power generally acknowledged by the legal
Church?

Ans. I have spoken to this so largely in my Treatise of Episcopacy, (and there
added the testimonies of Writers, old and new, Protestants and Papists (that I
will give but a breviate of it here.

The essence of the Church Ministry consists in POWER and OBLIGATION FROM
CHRIST, to teach, to guide in Worship, and to oversee and guide the
Conversation and Communion of the Flocks; If it were not of Christ, they were
but officers of men, de specie, even of an office of man's making.

Dr. Hammond says, that Christ gave the Keys only to the Apostles, and they
only to their Successors: That there is no evidence that there were any of a
second order of Presbyters in Scripture time; that this order was after made by
Man, Mr. Dodwell shows how and why; and more fully than Dr. Hammond,
asserteth, that such Presbyters have no more power than the ordaining Bishops
intended to give them: Or says Dr. H. If they have a first power, it is such
as may not be exercised without a second; so that it is indeed no true power to
act: And the Dr. plainly tells the London Ministers p. 80, 81. There is no
manner of incongruity in assigning of one Bishop to one Church, and so one
Bishop in the Church of Jerusalem, because it is A. CHURCH, not Churches: being
forced to acknowledge that where there were more Churches, there were more
Bishops.

And he denied our Presbyters, that were not Diocesans, to be Bishops (both
City and Country Presbyters): And consequently that our Parishes were no
Churches.

And on these grounds he and Bishop Gunning, and such others, judged Presbyters
Ordination null, because they were no Bishops.

And the said Dr. (tho I thought he had been next Petavius, one of the first
that had expounded the new Testament Elders, to be all Bishops of several
Diocesses) yet tells us that he thought most of his brethren were of his mind
herein:

And when we in Worcestershire formed a Pacificatory Association of the
Epicopal, Presbyterians, Indep^ndents, and Peacemakers, agreeing lovingly to
practice so much in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline as we were for, according
to our several principles, forbearing each other in the rest, and Dr.
Warmst^^^, and Dr. Tho. Good, being for Bishops, subscribed to it, Dr. Peter
Gunn^^g wro^e largely against so doing to Dr. Warmstrie, and took him off, upon
these aforesaid principles; and they then called their Judgment, the Judgment
of the Church of England, and wrote as if the Church had been of their mind,
and gone their way.

I wrote ^large Answer to Dr Gunning's Paper, (not printed) and proved that the
old Protestant Bishops and Doctors were of another mind, largely citing their
testimonies in my Christian C^nc^rd, and plainly warned English Protest^nts to
take heed of these Innovators, and that the name of the Church and Episcopacy
deceive them not against the Church and Protestant Cause; many ^ose against me
for this with great indign^tion, especially Archbishop Bramhall, and two or
three learned Writers, and would make the world believe, that it was the Church
of England which I sought to defame and bring under suspicion, and which owned
Gr^tius and his way of Reconciliation with Rome, when as it was for departing
from the professed principles of the reformed Bishops and Doctors, and from the
book of Ordination, and other writings of the Church that I blamed them: Yet
would they needs claim the name of the Church of England.

And it is not here seasonable for me to tell, how many and how great men in
1661, and 1662 seemed by their w^rds and doings to be full (at least) as high
as they, nor how they expressed it, nor how many strongly conceited by the Act
th^^ requires reordination of men ordained by Presbyters, and by the number
rejected who refused it, That the Parliament had been of their mind, and much
more the ^^nv^cation called the church-repr^sentative; especi^lly when they
heard men call the old Bishops and Archbishops (such as ^sher, Downame, (...),
etc. in I^eland, and G. Abbot, Rob. A^b^t, Grindal, and many such in England)
Puritans and Presbyterians: And when P^^. H^l^^ makes Arch bishop Abbot. and
the Bishops and Clergy in his days to ^e of one mind (vilified by him) and
Archbishop Laud and his Clergy after, of another: In this case I gave the name
of the present Diocesans, to those that thus claimed it, and pretended so
confidently to the present possession of it; but I thought not their claim
just: And when I sometimes used the name of English Di^cesans, for this sort
who nullify the Parish Churches and Pastorship, it was but to notify them
that so claimed it, supposing I had often sufficiently opened my sense, and
usually added that they nullify them not effectively, but quantum in se, and
by their consequences.

But I again now tell the Reader, that I think the Judgment of the church of
England, considered as humanely constituted by public professions, and by Law,
(much less as divinely constituted) is not to be measured or named from any
innovators, or any that most confidently claim it, or think they are uppermost
at the present, and thereby have that right; but (as Divine) by Gods word,
whose sufficiency we all profess; and as humane, by the published Church
professions; that is, the Liturgy, the book of Ordination, the 39 Articles of
Religion, the Apology of the Church of England, the Defense of that Apology set
in all Churches, the book of H^milies, Nowels Catechism, the R^f^rmatio Legum
Ec^les* the Canons, and the licenced books of the Protestant Bishops and
Doctors, such as Arch-bp. Cranmers, Bp. H^^pers, Arch-bp. ^arkers, Arch-bp.
Grin^als, Arch-bp. Abbots, Arch-bp. Edward Sandys, Arch-bp. Whitgift, Bp.
Pilk^nton, Bp. Jewel, Bp. Ally, Bp. Babingt^n, Bp. M^rt^n, ^p. Hall, Bp.
Davenant, Bp. ^rideaux, Bp. Br^wn^ig, B. ^otter, Bp. Miles Smith, Bp. Carl^on,
Bp Bailey, Bp. Parry, Bp. C^wper, and many more such, (besides those in Ir^land
aforesaid): And such ^rs as Dr. Wh^taker, Dr Field, Dr. Crakenth^^pe, Dr.
Sutlive, Dr. Mas^n, Dr. White, Dr. ^i^y, Dr. Chaloner, Dr. Ward, Dr. Willet,
Dr. Holland* and abundance more; besides all other old licenced Writers: I
think that all these do fitlier notify and denominate the Church of Englands
Judgment, than the Writings of one Irish Arch-Bp. and Dr. Hammond, and Dr.
Gunning (since Bp.) and a few more such in the points wherein they differ from
the rest, (tho Grotius and their Chaplains be added to the number.)

And now I will add this further evidence in the conclusion, (besides that as I
said before) the present Laws put us to abjure alterations, and therefore sure
they never thought that they so altered the Government themselves, that even
while they say that the Parishes are no Churches, but parcels of Churches, and
the Priests are no Bps. of the Flock, most really acknowledge them the thing,
that deny the Name. And the argument from the definition is stronger than from
the Name.

And here I will but name first, the Scripture descriptions of a Bp. and 2. Dr.
Hammonds exposition of those Texts. 3. And the matter of fact among us.

The first part of the Bps. office is teaching the flock.

Under this teaching part, 1. the Bishops office is to preach to them, 1 Pet.
5.2, 3. Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight (Or
Episcopacy) thereof, etc.

Dr. Hammond: The Bps. of your several Churches I exhort. -- Take care of your
several Churches, and Govern them, etc.

Qust. Whom does the Law require to do more in feeding and guiding the flock?
The Incubment that preaches daily, or the Bp. that never sees the most, nor
ever preaches to one Flock of many? Who are they [that are among the Flock]
the Incumbent that dwells with them, or the Bp. that is a stranger to them?

1 These. 5.12. We beseech you brethren to know them that labor among you, and
are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to esteem them very highly in
love for their work sake, and be at peace among your selves.

Dr. Hammond. Pay your Bps. as great a respect as is possible, for the pains
they have taken among you.

Qust. Who Labors among them most in the several parishes, publicly and
privately? The Bp. that never saw them, or the Incumbent that lays out all
his Study and Time on them? Who are most among them? Who most admonishes them?
What is meant by [ among themselves?] Is it that Lincoln shire,
Leichestershire, Northamton-shire, Buckingham-shire, be at peace among
themselves, from Gainsborough to Oxfordshire? or is it not rather that
neighbor Christians that see each other, so live in peace?

1 Timothy 5.17. The elders that rule well, are worthy of double honor;
especially they tha^ labor in the word and doctrine.

Dr. Hammond: Let the Bps. that have discharged that function well, receive for
their reward twice as much as others have; especially those that preach the
Gospel, to whom it was news, and continue to instruct congregatons of
Christians in settled Churches.

Quest. On whom does the law impose most preaching? On Bps. or on parish
Priests? And who does most of that work? Heb. 13. Remember them who have the
rule over you, who have spoken to you the word of God.

Dr. Hammond: Set before your eyes the Bps. and governors, who have been in
your Church, and preached the Gospel to you.

Quest. Ask the parishes who those be?

2 Timothy 4.2. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
judge the qui^k and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom, preach the word,
be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long
suffering and d^^^rine.

Not only Dr. Hammond, but all that are for Prelacy expound this of a Bps
office.

Quest. Ask the people who most performs it.

2. The Bps Office is also to watch over all the Flock, personally, by
conference, instruction* counsel, admonition, exhortation, reproof, comfort, as
every one shall need Says Bp. Jer. Tayl^r Pref. to Treat of Rep. No man can
give account of th^se that he knows not.

Acts 20.10, 28, 31. I taught you publicly, and from house to house. -- Take
heed t^ your selves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made
you Bps, to ^eed the Church of God which he has purchased with his own Blood.
-- Therefore watch, and remember that by the space of three years I ceased not
to warn every one night and day with tears.

Dr. Hammond. Instructing both in the Synagogues, and the private Schools, and
in your several houses whither I also came. -- Wherefore ye that are Bps. or
governors of the several Churches. -- Look to your selves, and the Churches
committed to your trust, to Rule and order all the faithful under you.

Quest. Is this done more by the Diocesans, or by the Incumbents? Do Diocesans
teach from house to house, from Southwark to Christ-Church, from N^wark to
Alesbury or Tame? Who does the law appoint to warn every one in the Church,
from house to house, and night and day, etc.?

Col. 1.28. Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus; Heb. 13.17. Obey
them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for
your souls, as those that must give account.

Dr. Hamm^nd: Obey those that are set to rule over your several Churches, the
Bps. whose whole care is spent among you, as being to give account of your
proficiency in the Gospel.

Q^st. Is it the Diocesan or the Incumbent that the law requires to preach to,
and warn every man, etc.? And that watch for their Souls as those that must
give account? Is not the incumbent of this or that parish fitter to watch and
give account of each Soul, than the Diocesan for a whole Country, or many
Counties, who never saw them? Can he do as Ignatius's Bishops, that must take
notice of all the Church, even Servants and Maids?

3. The bishops office is to be a visible example to all the flock, of
Humility, Meekness, Patience, Holiness, Charity and good Works. Heb. 13.7.
Remember them who have the rule over you, who have spoken to you the word of
God, whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversations.

Dr. Hammond: Set before your eyes the Bishops -- observe their manner of
living.

Quest. Who can observe his example whom he never saw nor know? Or who can
make an unknown man his pattern? Do the fl^cks see more the Incumbents example,
or the Diocesans? It is their example that sak to them thword of God, that the
Apostle sets before them: And who be those?

Perhaps it will be said, that Fame may tell the Di^cess of the example of
their Diocesan, tho they see him not. I answer, 1. But the Text speaks of
those that preach to them. Fame may as well tell us of the good works of any
other bishop, as of the Diocesan: Many bishops in London live near us; it may
tell us of any other good man's life. What is this to the Text?

1 Pet. 5.3. Neither as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being examples to
the flock.

Dr. Hammond: VValking Christianly and exemplary before them.

Q. What? Before them that never knew them, nor could do? Does the Diocesan or
the Incumbent more walk as a known example before the Parish flock, for their
imitation?

4. It is part of a bishops office as a general Minister, not only to teach the
Church, but to preach to those that are yet no Members of the Church, Matthew
28.19. Go and disciple me all nations. 1 Timothy 5.17. They that (...) in the word
and doctrine.

Dr. Hammond: To preach the Gospel to whom it was n^ws.

Acts 26.17, 18. To whom I send thee, to ^p^n their eyes, and turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, etc. Not that fixed
Pastors must wander to do this, as un^ixed Missionaries; but within their reach.

Hence Dr. Hammond notes out of Clemens R^m. That they are made Bishops over
the Infidels that should after believe^: And bishop D^wname says, that the
City and Territories are their Diocesses, when the Christians were but few; and
as Dr. H. says, But one Congregation, which one bishop only with a Deacon or
two served: So that either a Diocese was no Church, or it was a Diocesan Church
of Heathens save that Congregation.

Our great Parishes, that have 70000, or 60000, or 40000, or 20000 souls, have
not the sixth part (that I say not the tenth) so many Communicants. Who is it
that preaches most for the Conversion of the rest, Atheists, Sadduces,
Infidels, Heretics, Bruitists, and impious ones? Is it the Diocesan or the
Incumbent? Who does the Law most require it of?

5. It is part of the Boshops office to Catechize or Teach the Novices that
have need of milk, and are as Children in danger of being tossed up and down and
carried to and fro with every wind of Doctrine. See Ephesians 4.14, 15, 16* Heb.
5.11, 12. With Dr. Hammonds Paraphrase.

Quest. Does the Law and Church lay more of this on Diocesans* or parish
Pastors?

6. It is the Bishops work to defend the truth against gainsayers, and confute
adversaries, and stop the mouths of Heretics, Infidels, and other enemies; as
is confessed by Dr. Hammond, on many Texts to Timothy and Titus, as 2 Timothy 2.24,
25, etc. Not by force, but by evidence of truth. And does not the Law and
Church lay more of this on the Incumbents, than the Diocesans (who are not
U^iquitaries)?

II. The Second part of the Bps. office, is Guidance, and officiating before
the Church in public worship; in subordination to Christ's Priesthood. 1. By
confessing sin, and to be the subintercessor, or the mouth of the Church in
public prayer, thanksgiving, and praise to God. 2. In Consecrating, and
Distributing, and giving in Christ's Name, the Sacrament of Communion. 3. To
bless the Congregation in the name of the Lord, etc. All these Dr. Hammond
makes the Bps. office, and so does the Scripture, and so did Justin Martyr,
Tertullian, etc. Citations in a confessed case would but be tedious.

Quest. And who does this most in all the Churches? Who confesses sin, prays
for mercy, praises God, administreth the Lords Supper, blesses the people,
etc. The Bp* to many hundred Churches, or each Incumbent to each Church? And on
whom does the Law most impose it? And what does the Diocesan in it, more than
any one of the rest?

2. Dr Hanmond, on Acts 2. And Acts 4.33, 34, 35. Shows that it was the Bps.
part, to receive all the offerings of the Communicants, and all the tithes and
first fruits, etc. Who does this most? The Diocesan in all the Parishes of his
Diocese, or the Incumbents?

3. Dr Hammond, (and many old Canons before him) tells us, that the Bp. was out
of the Church flock, to take care of all the poor, orphans, widows, strangers;
Deacons were herein but servants under them* Dr. Hammond, on 1 Cor 12.28. The
supreme trust and charge was reserved to the Apostles and Bps. of the Church.
But the poor will starve if the Incumbent with his assistance do not more in
this than the Diocesan.

4. It is the Bps. office to visit the sick. Jam* 5. Call for the elders of the
Church, and let them pray over him, etc. Dr. Hammond, in v. 14. Because there
is no evidence, whereby these may appear to have been so early brought into the
Church (that is Subpresbyters) and because (...) in the plural does as way
conclude that th^re were m^re of these elders than one in each particular
Church, and because elders of the Church was both in the Scriptures style, and
in the first writers the title of Bps. and lastly, because the visiting of the
sick is anciently mentioned as one branch of the office of Bps. therefore it
may very reasonably be resolved that the Bps. of the Church, one in each
particular Church, are here meant.

Quest. Is it the Diocesan (perhaps 50 Miles off) that the sick must send for,
or that the Law and Church impose this on, (to visit the sick, and pray over
them, etc.)? or is it the Incumbents?

III. But the great doubt is, who has the Power of Government, and who
actually governs, (not by the sword) but with the Ministerial Pastoral
Government?

And here it must still be remembered. 1. That this particular power of the Keys
or Government, is only by the word of God opened and applied; as Bp. Bilson
has proved, and is commonly confessed; some call it Persuasive, some
Directive, some Doctrinial; But it is not such mere direction or persuasion as
any man may use to another; but such as is the part of one commissioned to it
as his office; An Authoritative persuasion, and a Judicial decision, as by an
entrusted steward of Christ: but only on Conscience, and on Volunteers, and not
by any power to exercise force on body or purse. 2. That Governing, and unjust
restraining this power, is not taking it away from the Pastor; and laying
penalties on men for exercising some part of that which Christ has given, does
but bind men to bear that penalty when the exercise is necessary. Now let us
consider wherein the Governing Power does consist.

1. It primarily consists in judging who is capable of Baptism and so
Baptizing them. This is the first and great exercise of the Keys, and that
(...) foro exteriore. To judge who shall be taken publ^ckly for a Christian,
and in Christ's Name to invest him solemnly in the number of the faithful,
delivering him a sealed pardon of all his sins, and a grant of right to grace
and glory. Can there be a higher exercise of the Keys?

Matthew. 28.19, 20. It is the Apostles work [ Disciple me all nations, baptizing
them, etc.] And Dr. Hamm^nd thinks that in Scripture-time there were no
Baptizing Presbyters, but Bishops; and indeed it is so great a use of the Keys,
that this chiefly condemns Laymens and women's Baptizing; at least the trying
the Catechized, and judging of their capacities must needs be the prime great
act of Church Power, whatever be said of the execut^^n.

Now Papists and Protestants generally place this Power in Parochial
Incumbents, yea, and in all other ^resbyters: Even those that convert Countries
of Infidels, and are under no particular Bishop, must baptize and judge of the
Catechumens capacity for baptism; and are Parish Incumbents denied this
Office*power of the Keys? and is it the Diocesan or they that use it by
baptizing?

Obj. The Canon requires them to baptize all Infants brought according to law,
and so not to be the Judges.

Ans. You should say, and so command^ them how to judge. The Magistrate may
command men how to do their office-work, and yet neither be the maker nor
unmaker of the office, (tho he mistake:) If Rulers misgovern, that is their sin,
but the office of Pastors is still the same, and we must not misobey, but
suffer, and as Bishop Bilson says, Go on with our work as long as we can. 2.
And to bid them do more than they would, is not to null their power of doing
less. And to punish a man for his duty, is not to di^oblige him from it, till
it truly disable him.

2. A second great exercise of the Church Keys, is Ministerially as from Christ
to declare his Laws* and charge men to obey them, both the Church together, and
particular persons singly. As Legislation is the first and great part of
Christ's Government [before Judicature] so the Ministerial declaring Christ's
commands, and demanding obedience, is the great act of Government.

The same word therefore comprehends feeding and ruling, 1 Pet 5.2, 3. etc.
Matthew. 24.45, 46. Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord has
made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due sea^^n? It is ruling by
seasonable feeding. 1 These. 5.12. To be over them, is exercised by laboring
amongst them, and admonishing them, 1 Timothy 5.17. Ruling well, is nothing
greater than laboring in the word and doctrine, 1 Timothy 3.2. A Bish^p must be
apt to teach: Dr. Hammond, One that is able and ready to communicate to others
the knowledge that he himself has. Heb. 13.7, ^7, 24. Ruling the fl^ck is by
teaching and watching over them. To be the greatest is to be most serviceable
to all; to be ruled by them, is to know them, to esteem them highly in love for
their works sake, to obey Gods word delivered by them, and their conduct in
mutable circumstances, Heb. 13.7. 1 These. 5.12 And to imitate their good
examples, 1 Pet. 5.3.

And what law forbids Incumbents to promulgate Christ's commands, and charge men
to obey them? Or to go to any negligent person of his Flock with the same
charge? or to go to any Drunkard, Fornicator, Railer, and to tell him from God
of h^s sin and danger, and exhort and command him to repent and amend? And who
most does this work among us?

3. Another part of Government is to judge professing Christians capable of
Sacramental Communi^^, and admit them, and deliver it them as Christ's
Ministers, b^ his com^^^si^^, an^ from him; And therein to renew their public
abso^ution, and the^r Co^enant p^i^^ledg, and their delivered part in Christ,
and right to life: No^e dare d^^y that this is a high part of the power of the
Keys, and proper Government, to judge who is capable of Church Communion, and
receive them, and deliver them from Christ, the pledge of life.

And all Papists and Protestants almost, judge this power essential to the
Priesthood, and common to all Parochial Incumbents: And the Church of England
(as I said before), 1. Delivers it to them in Ordination. 2. Requires them
to catechize and cert^fie for such as shall be confi^med; and methinks the
Diocesan here uses less of the judicial power than the Incumbent, for he does
but lay his hands on them and say a prayer over such as come to him; for no man
can dream that he can examine all the people in his Diocese so far as to judge
whether they are fit for Communion: Therefore he is supposed but to execute the
judgment of the certifying Incumbent (If he take all at a venture, without a
certificate, or knowledge, or if the Incumbent be unfaithful, I cannot help or
excuse that). 3. They are required to keep away all that be not confirmed, or
ready, and desirous of it. 4. They may hear any just accusation of the
scandalous. 5. They may admonish him, (if he will speak with them). 6. They may
refuse him if obstinate and impenitent. 7. They may declare the reason why they
do so, as Christ's Ministers by his Authority, and tell the Church their duty to
avoid the Communion of such. 8. They may bind him over to answer his contumacy
at the Bar of God; and what of this is denied by the Church, to belong to the
Incumbents Office? and who else is capable of doing this in Parishes that have
multitudes of ungodly persons?

If all this should be made so difficult by the multitude and badness of
delinquents, or by bad Canons, or bad Government of the Church by Diocesans,
Officials, etc. and thereby be almost all left undone, I cannot help that, nor
excuse it; but what I have said against such doing is too little: And if
Priests be so bad, that they will (any where) sooner scorn it than practice it,
at the rate that it must cost them, I am as much against such Priests as others
are: But I will not therefore make the Office of Christ^ Ministers, the
creature of man, and mutable at his will* nor will I forsake faithful Ministers
for the sake of the perfidious; no nor for their own tolerable faults or
imperfections.

And now consider seriously, 1. Whether there be any essential part of the
office of a Pastor, denied by that which may justly be called the Church of
England, to the Parish Incumbents. 2. And whether incomparably more of it, even
of the government of the flocks, by the K^ys of Christ's Institution, be not by
Law and Canon required, and in fact performed by the said Incumbents, than by
the Diocesans. And whether any use it, if they do not.

If it be alleged, that I have in my Treatise of Episcopacy, named many
instances in which they are deprived of the exercise of the very essentials; I
still answer, that if any shall by misgoverning Canons or practice lay
penalties on them that will perform their office, these do their part to
destroy it; but their sin may consist with the true office that is hindered: If
we cannot pray without penalty, we are yet bound to pray: And if any such
penalties should prevail with any Ministers to cast off so much of Discipline
as is indeed their duty, their office is so far destroyed as to its exercise:
But it is not every ill Council, Canon, Bishop or Priest of old when they began
to be corrupted, that changed and nullified the Pastoral Power and Office as
from Christ. I have repeated things over and over here, because I would not be
misunderstood, nor leave a snare behind me to mislead men.

The sum again is, 1. The Pastoral Office in specie is instituted by Christ and
his Spirit, therefore the essence of it is unchangeably fixed by him; and no
Bishops or Churches may change it, by pretending they may give Presbyters as
their servants what degree or kind of power they please; or make the office
another thing.

II. The said office in mutable accidents or circumstances may be altered by
Princes Laws, or the several Churches Agreements, and thus far it is humane.

Of the Divine sort was the Apostolic and other extraordinary Prophetic
offices: And the ordinary Presbytery, commonly called Priesthood, and Elders
settled over particular Churches, were Episc^pi Gregis; Bishops, over the flock.

And of the humane sort is the Presidency of one in every single Church over
the rest of the Presbyters, who was the Episcopus Presbyterorum, a Bishop over
the Presbyters of one single Church as well as over the people: This was the
old Episcopacy of the first three Centuries; this is it which I say our
Diocesans have put down; and we that would have them restored, and would have
such a Bishop and Assistant, Elders in every Church, are by the height of
impudency, said to be against Bishops, because we would have them restored to
each Church (tho not as essential to it, as has been thought of old) yet as a
way of peace, to comply with Ant^quity, and avoid singularity; and they that
put down many score or hundred Bishops and instead of them would have but one,
call themselves Episcopal.

III. Whether Arch-bps. (Diocesans.) as successors of the Apostles in the
ministerial care of many Churches (by the word and not the sword) be of Divine
or Human Institution, I am in doubt.

IV. The cogent Power by the Sword is only the Magistrates; and if Diocesans
appropriate this only, they are Magistrates; and thereby take none of our
office from us.

V. The ^ssence of the Parish ministerial oversight being of God, de specie,
and the accidents that are mutable from man, the existence of the office in
individual persons, is not without consent of the Pastors; so that no man can
be a Pastor against or without his will; (nor yet without a capacity in
qualifi^ati^n; so that if you prove any person to be uncapabl^, or else to have
truly disclaimed and renounced the essentials of his office: I am not about to
persuade you, that such a man is a true Pastor.

VI. But then we must know, that indeed it is such an incapacity, or
renunciation, and not a tolerable defect; nor subscriptions and Oaths, which
by unseen consequences may seem to renounce it, when the man took them in a
sense which renounced it not: For tho such a man may greatly sin by taking
Oaths or subscriptions in a forced sense, which plainly taken would infer
worse, yet his sin is not a renunciation of the office, if he declare that he
meant it in a better sense, and took it on such mistake; for we must not for
bare words against men's meaning, quibble or dispute our selves into
unwarrantable separations out of Christian Communion, especially when it is
specially necessary.

VII. And if any laymen, or men unauthorized will usurp the Keys, or any
Councils will make hurtful Canons, and hinder men in the work appointed by God,
we must be faithful and patient, and God in due time will judge and decide all
causes justly.

VIII. The office-power is essentially related to the work; so far as Parochial
Incumbents are allowed the work as of Christ, they are acknowledged to be
Pastors and Bishops of the flocks, tho the name were denied them; and so far as
the Bishops office may be delegated to Laymen, or to Clergymen of another
Order; so far it is Humane, and not proper to them by Gods Institution. They
therefore that say, All Diocesans Jurisdiction may be so delegated to them that
are no Bishops, but that the Pastoral Rectorship by Word, Sacraments and Keys
cannot be delegated to any men that are not of the same office; do thereby say
as much, as that the Diocesan government is of men (and may be changed by men)
but the Pastoral Incumbency is of Christ, and cannot be changed.

The Lord that instituted it, protect it; and save it from Satan's most
dangerous assault, which is by getting his own servants into it by error, and
malignity, and strife, and cruelty, to do his work as the Ministers of
Righteousness, and as by Christ's Authority, and in his name.

London Aug. 13. 1684.

POSTSCRIPT Aug. 25. 1684.
HE that gave me notice of this Book which I answer, did withal send me a
Manuscript to be privately answered, containing the very same things, but
somewhat enlarged: His displeasure against my former mention of his private
Writings to me, and the Contents, made me confident that he would not have any
thing Published which I should answer to his last: By which I found my self in
a notable strait: For if he at once privately sent me his reasons, and also in
another Book Printed them, if I should answer his private papers (which reason
forbad me doing in my condition, for his use alone) I should judge my self
forestalled from answering the Printed Book, because the matter being the very
same (and it is likely by the same man) I should be supposed to have broken the
Laws of Civility, to have answered his private papers. But (having no
Amanuensis, or Scribe to take any Copy of his papers, or my own) I thought it
the best way to return his unanswered (they being Written for my use, which
Reading will as fully serve as answering them) but supposing the Printed papers
must be answered, I inserted also an answer to the strength of all his
additionals in the Manuscript.

And at last he gives me some notice of his thoughts of publishing the
Manuscript, or a vindication of it. Which falls well for the Readers use, that
I have answered that Manuscript before it is Published, without taking notice
of it, and s^ avoiding wordy altercations.

The Author professes himself my great acquaintance. Who he is, I know not;
but he seems to be a very rational sober man. God forbid that I should ever
contribute (unless duty do it accidentally) to the grievance of such men. I
doubt not but he speaks as he thinks. And I doubt I have given him
occasions by some uncautelous words in my writings. I truly thank God and him,
that I am called to review them, and to clear my sense before I die. And I
adjure the tearing persecuting sect, to think no more strangely and odiously of
our differences in this case, than of the sharp contention of Paul and
Barnabas; or that men should scramble if Gold and Pearls were scattered in the
streets, where dogs and swine would never strive about them. Gods servants
would please him: we are all of weak understandings: The Wisest best know their
weakness: The rest are nearest the state of the Fool, who rages and is
confident. It is impossible but offense must come, Luke 17.1. But woe, woe, woe,
to any who will make canons so extreme hard for men to agree in as terms of
their Union and Communion, and excommunicate all that say a word against any
word, ceremony, circumstances or office of their train; and when they have
done, cry out against men for not agreeing to every syllable, which a thousand
to one are incapable of understanding, and the better men understand them, the
more they dislike them.

A Short Answer to the Chief Objections in a Book ENTITLED: A Theological
Dialogue, etc.
1.
THE chief matter of this Book is already answered by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor.
1.10. 1 Cor. 3. Romans 16.16, 17. Ephesians. 4.4. to the 17. Phil. 2.1, 2, 3. 1 These.
5.12, 13. John 17.22, 23, 24. And 1 Cor. 12. And Acts 20.30.

The Spirit and Style of it is answered in the third Chapter of James
throughout.

I have nothing then to do but to answer the pretended argumentation of it: For
the Author shall not draw me from my Defensive part, to play the part of a
plaintiff against others, or to wast my time in altercations, and spend many
sheets to tell the world that another man has not skill to speak sense, and
that he seduceth others by ambiguous words, and by confusions.

Obj. 1. To prove us sinful for being members of the Church of England, he
says Page 15. [ Is he not by Communion in the Sacarment of Baptism made a
member? Page 13. Is not Baptism (according to the Liturgy) a symbol of
incorporation into the Church of England? Confirmation another? receiving the
Lords Supper another symbol? etc.

Ans. 1. Baptism as such incorporateth no man into any particular Church, but
only into the universal, as it did the Eunuch, Acts 8.

2. The ceremonies or circumstantials of Baptism, only show what men submit to,
rather than to be unbaptized, and not what particular Church they are of.

3. This objection would insinuate that all that are Baptized in the public
manner in England, were thereby incorporated into an unlawful Church, which
they must by being rebaptized, or by open renunciation disclaim, And so that it
is not Lawful to Communicate with any that were Baptized in the Parish Church,
till they have repented it, or are Rebaptized, or Penitent openly. And if you
must have all in England renounce their Baptism before you will take their
Communion for lawful, the same reason will hold against your Communion with all
the rest of the Churches on Earth. And when you cut off your self from all,
saving a shred, are you a Member of the undivided Body of Christ?

4. If our Baptism in England does incorporate into their Church (which you
suppose is no Church, being a false Church), does not Baptism into your Church
incorporate Persons into yours? And what then, if your Schism prove a Sin? What
if Rebaptizing prove a Sin? What if the Covenant descri^ed by your Client, (to
obey none but Christ, in matters belonging to Worship) prove a Sin? are they
all guilty of all these, and such others?

Obj. II. All that are liable to a Church Excommunication when they have
offended, are declared Members of the Church. But all Communicants and Native
Inhabitants are so. Therefore the Law has excepted none. -- How comes it to
pass, that the Church has power of excommunicating any Person, but by virtue
of Incorporation, which she has by the same Law? He that is not in the Church,
how comes he to be cast out? -- Is he not by Communion in the Sacrament of
baptism made a Member?

Ans. 1. Does their esteeming you a Member, prove that you are so?

2. You know that they excommunicate Papists, and Atheists, who deride them for
it and say, It Is a strange Church that will cast us out, because they cannot
compel us to come in.

3. If this be a good*argument, that all are of their Church that are
excommunicate, then you are either safe from Excommunication; or of their
Church, whether you will or not: If to make good your argument, you will aver
that no Separatist, Independent, Presbyterian, Anabaptist, or Quaker, was
ever*excommunicate, or imprisoned as such, you will change the Current of
Intelligence, and comfort many that can believe you, and teach them how to
escape a Prison for the time to come. But if not, you make your self and all
these parties, incorporate Members of the Church of England, as well as me.

4. Do you think a Lay Civilian by Excommunicating, can prove or make a man a
member of any Church against his will? Then men's Argument against Parish
Churches, for want of consent, is void. They may be made such against their
wills.

5. But tho few men d^sl^ke the Lay-Excommunicators and Absolvers more than I
do (nor grudge more at the Bishops and Deans who use them, and let them put
their names to the Excommunications; especially of the poor Churchwardens for
not swearing, etc.) yet let us not render them causelessly ridiculou^. I imagine
that they excommunicate not known Papists, Anabaptists, and such like, out of
their Church (who they know were never in it) but out of the Universal Church:
If this be not their sense, let them give it you themselves, for I am not bound
to be their Interpreter.

And yet to moderate our Censures of them, I Will tell you a wonder: Within this
hour I received a Letter of credible Intelligence, of a Chancellor who hearing
of a Conventicle not presented by the Churchwardens, and being told that they
met to repeat the public Sermon, said, God forbid that they should be hindered.

Obj. III. Page 8. A Church in a sense is a Christian Kingdom, that is, a Royal
Nation under Christ their King. But there is no such Gospel Church in your
sense; for there was neither Christian Kingdom nor King in the Ap^stl^s days.

Ans. The Institution may be in the Gospel before the existence: Christian
Kings and Kingdoms are neither unlawful, nor needless, because there were none
then. The Prophets not only foretell that Nations shall come in to Christ and
serve him, but that all Nations that do it not, shall perish. And Christ's
Commission to his Apostles was, To go and Disciple all Nations (as much as in
them lay) baptizing them. Nations as such, were, first to be discipled, and
then baptized, (Infants are part of Nations). And Matthew. 23. Christ would have
gathered Jerusalems Children (all the Jewish Nation) into his Church, as a Hen
gathers her Chickens under her Wings. And Romans 11. Only their own unbelief
broke them off from being a National Church, (including Infants). And it is
part of the Saints triumph, that the Kingdoms of the World are become the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. If you will read Mr. Beverlys Book,
called The whole duty of Nations, it will give you full proof of this.

Where has the Gospel extensively much prospered where Princes and Rulers were
not Christians? The Turks give liberty of Religion. And yet the sometime famous
Greek Churches, ( Corinth, Philippi, Coloss, Ephesus, Laodicea, Philadelphia,
and more than all the West, are Apostatized, or withered to a few ignorant
vicious scandalous Christians.

Obj. IV. 8. If such a confederation in lawful Circumstantials, as well as
Integrals, will make a Church, I know not why we may not have a Catholic
Visible Church organized, if this be a due acception of a Church.

Ans. This is as much as to say, If the name Church may be used equivocally (as
all words must) of several sorts, then all those sorts may be the same. I deny
it. If you dislike the use of the name, you have your liberty as a Grammarian
to forbear it. But sure the Name and the Thing are not all one, nor the
Controversies about them. 2. But we have a Catholic Visible Church Organized,
as I have often proved against the Papists, viz. under one, Christ the Head, and
his Ministers as his subordinate Officers.

Obj. V. Page 3. If you touch a man's finger, you touch the man: we have
communion with an integrum perpartes; and with a Genus by the Species; and with
both by individuals: Nay as every part of the Scripture, one verse or sentence
of it makes up sense; so every part of the Liturgy as in form and manner
therein contrived, is Liturgy; and worship thereafter is according to the
Liturgy, tho it be but part of the w^rship.

Page 20. As for the falseness in Integrals, it gives the denomination to the
whole; for an Integral part is an essential part of the whole. Much more there
is to the same purpose, making him guilty of all that uses a part.

Ans. 1. You have the freedom of using words at your pleasure, but not imposing
them on mankind; when necessity has taught the World to distinguish essential
and integral parts, you have no authority to confound their Language, by the
quibble of calling Integrals essential causes of the whole: A totum per
aggregationem* as a heap of Sand, or a field of Grass, is not constituted of a
proper essentiating form, and so homogeneous matter aggregate is all the being
it has. And if you make contiguity an essential cause, or how else you will,
you have liberty of speech: But we will not be cheated by it to believe that it
causes any more than Totality or Integrality, and the absence of it is a
privation of no more. And all men's Graces, Obedience, and Worship, are
defective in point of Integrality and degree, and I hope you will not say that
they need no favor, or pardon, or amendment.

2. All human actions have their faults: must we therefore do nothing, or
converse with no men? England is one Kingdom; If there be one or many faults in
its Laws or officers, may we therefore obey none that are faultless? The Laws
are the Rule of National Justice; may a Judge, Justice, Officer or subject use
none of them, because some are faulty? Does that make him guilty of all? Bonum
est ex causis integris: The fault of a part may indeed denominate the whole
faulty so far. But the whole Law or Liturgy may be called faulty for a part,
and yet he that uses either, not be guilty of any of the bad part, for using
the good. The Law and Liturgy are one thing, and the use is another: Its faults
are no further his, than he owneth them; your Bread or Meat may be called bad,
if part only be bad, and yet if you eat none but the good part, it will not
hurt you.

2. But if it must be otherwise, no man may hear you, or join with your
Churches: And do you think (as aforesaid) that Mr. Faldo, and all his Church at
Barnet, lived not in a sinful communion very many years, that omitted at least
an integral part of public worship, the singing of Gods praise? Christ with
his Disciples sung a Hymn after the Sacrament. The Jews Church made it the
chief part of their Worship. James prescribes it us in all our Holy Mirth,
such as the Lords Day is appointed for, 1 Cor. 14.26. Every one had a Psalm,
and with them no one had a Psalm, tho his Judgment was for it; the question
was, Whether he should forsake them for refusing it: I thought not, because it
was better that they had something that was good, than nothing. But your
argument would not only unchurch them, but make all sinners that communicated
with them: for omissions of great duties are faults, and greater faults than
tolerable failings in performance: He that prays not at all, does worse than
he that prays by a Book; and he that preaches or teaches not at all, does
worse than he that reads a Sermon; so that their total stated omission and
opposition to singing, by your false rule, denominated them no worshippers of
God, if the whole must be denominated from a part.

How many private Meetings in London, never sing a Psalm for fear of being
discovered? Yea, how many seldom read a Chapter, but only preach and pray, and
sometime administer the Sacrament? Must we needs say therefore that they omit
all Worship?

VI. On such occasions I argued, That if we must not communicate with any
Parish Church because of the faults of the Liturgy, it will follow, that we
must not communicate with any Church on Earth that has as great faults; and
that by this we must renounce Communion with all Christ's Body on Earth: All the
Armenians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Copties, Abassines, Georgians, Greeks,
Russians, Papists, yea Lutherans, have a more faulty Liturgy, or manner of
worship, than the English. Yea the Churches called Calvinists have their
Liturgies and faults: And I instanced in Switzerland, because as God has of
late most preserved their peace, so they are taken to be the honestest sort of
Protestants, that in poverty serve God with soundest doctrine, and least
scandal of Life, but yet have no proper discipline but the Magistrates? Is it a
sin to have confederacy or Communion with their Churches?

To this he plainly says Page 11. It is: That is, all that confederate with
them, as Churches, are guilty of their error, called Erastian: For subjection
t^ such discipline is the condition of their Communion.

Ans. Subjection is an equivocal word: If it were by profession or subscription
of consent it were indeed to be guilty of that error (tho not by a fau^t of the
Part denominating the whole, to make their worship unlawful, or their Churches
none) but if by subjection you mean but joining in their Churches as Christian
and Protestant for doctrine and worship, notwithstanding the defect which they
cannot help, yea which they disclaim, bare accusation will not prove this a
sin; but by this we see how much of Christ's Church you are for separating from.

2. For my part I have often published, That it is not the least part of my
charge against Popery, that they unchurch almost all the Christian World save
themselves: But yet they are about a 4th or 3d part of professed Christians
themselves; and diverse of them do not unchurch the Greeks; But to unchurch or
forbid Communion with all that are as faulty, as the Helvetians and all other
Protestant Churches that have Liturgies or partial faults, is that which I dare
not be guilty of: I think that to say, That a thousand parts to one of Christ's
Church, are none of his Churches, is next to deposing him from his Kingdom:
Much like as it would be to say, no part of London is the Kings but Amen
Corner, nor any part of England but Barnet or Brentford.

3. And is it not one of our just accusations of the Papists, That they say all
the Protestant Churches are no true Churches, and the Ministers no true
Pastors; and that Communion with them is unlawful? and shall we now justify
them and say as they (tho not on the same Reason, but for a far smaller
difference)? Is this our running from Popery?

4. Yea, is it not the great thing that we accuse the superconformists for?
That they make us to be no true Ministers or Churches? and are we indeed of the
same mind? One side says, We are no true Ministers for want of Bps.
Ordination, etc. Another side says, You are no true Ministers for having
Communion with the Bishops and Churches, etc.

VII. I mentioned the Judgment and Practice of the old Nonconformists and
Presbyterians, not as a rule, but as a comparative example. To this he says,
p. 11. You and they might as well own the Church of England in the form and
constitution as it is established as the Parish churches to be particular
Gospel churches, etc. -- P. 12. To say you join with a quatenus, and own not
the very constitution and standing of the church, with which you join in the
sense the church asserts it, is the greatest equivocation in practice that is:
The old Nonconformists nor you are to be no presidents to us in this case -- So
far as the old Nonconformists, and the old reforming conformists went forward
with Reformation to bring the church out of the wilderness, we honor them; but
when they turn back again, and entice the people so to do, we are afraid to
tempt God in that manner -- P. 14. Those ^ld Nonconformists that did so, are no
presidents to (...); If they halted and were lame, must we be so? such
communicants are not acceptable to any Church, and I know what Church would
never admit them, were it not to punish and expose them and their profession,
as ridiculous and inconsistent with its self: And as for FRENCH and DUTCH, what
are they to us, etc. -- P. 16* He calls Mr. Fenns joining in the Liturgy with
exception of some part [ The sul^en practice of a half-paced doting
Nonc^nformist.

Ans. First to the Cause, and secondly to the Persons.

1. To call any practice, Equivocation, or by any ill name* is no proof that it
is so; nor is here a word of true proof given us: I ask the Considerate; Is it
in the power of a Lawmakers, to make all Worship and Duty to God unlawful by
commanding to do it for an unlawful end, or upon false principles? What if a
Law said, All people shall worship God, not because the Scripture commands
it, but because the State commands it? Would this make it unlawful to worship
God? I would disown the Principle, and go on.

What if the Law should say, The Pastoral Office is not of Divine Right, but
humane, must the office therefore be renounced? And why can such a Law any more
bind me to judge of Church-constitutions by the Lawmakers words, rather than by
Gods Word?

Suppose that the Anabaptists say, That rebaptizing is the true way of
Church-gathering: Is it a sin to communicate with them, if they will receive me
when I profess the contrary.

I am against the Covenant which you defend, as making an Independent Church:
Is it therefore a sin to communicate with them, because it is not as
constituted by that Covenant?

What do Parties more differ in of late, than Forms, Orders, Modes and
Circumstances of Church Government; and if they be of many contrary minds, were
it twenty, there can be but one of them in the right: And is it unlawful to
join with all the rest? Must we needs be sure which of these is in the right?

Almost all the Churches that I hear of in the world, have their agreed
professions published; the Protestants are gathered in the Corpus confessionum;
the English Church Principles and Orders are expressed in the Book of Canons,
the Liturgy, Ordination, the 39 Articles, the Homilies, the Apology, etc. Must
every one stay from their Churches, till he has read and understood all these
Books, and be sure that there is no fault or error in them? What if it be poor
men or women that cannot buy all these books? and what if they cannot read?
whom shall they get to read them all? and how shall they have time to study
them, or capacity to understand them, when we can hardly get them to learn a
Catechism and anderstand it?

You will say, That is their crime that make all these Confessions and Books:
They will answer, but that is none of our fault: We made them not, and yet must
we not communicate with any Church that makes such? The old Separatists,
called Brownists, published their confession, and therein owned many Parish
Churches in England, and Communion with them: I recited their words in my
Reasons, etc. But you are gone beyond them: The New* England churches printed
their confession, and all there agreed not to it: The English Independents
published their Principles and Confessions: And the Presbyterians and they
agreed in the Westminster Synods confession, catechism and Directory: Is every
poor Man and Woman bound to stay from all their churches, (when for 14 years
they had no other) till they understand all these, and know that they are
faultless? Or if there be any fault in any one of all these books, is every one
guilty of them that comes to the churches?

The Anabaptists published their confession: The Dutch have theirs: Many
churches agreed with them in the Synod of Dort. The French have theirs; the
Saxons, the Helvetians, Geneva, the Bohemians, the Protestants in general had
the Augustane, and many more have theirs. Reader, See with whom these Writers
will hold communion, who make it unlawful to join with any church that have any
fault in their constitutions, or agreed Doctrines or Orders.

Let us rise upward, till we come to the Apostles days: None of all these
churches named, dare profess all their agreements and confession to be without
fault, that ever I heard of, except the English, who bind Ministers to assent
and consent to all things commanded and prescribed in three Books and
excommunicate those that say their Books or Ceremonies and Government has any
thing contrary to the Word of God; but no Layman is bound to believe them;
Wickliffe, and John H^s, the Waldenses, and the Bohemians Confessions, are not
faultless: Of the Papist, and the S^cinians, we will make no question; the
forenamed churches of Greeks, Russians, Armenians, Abassines, Nestorians,
Jacobites, etc. are, alas, past question faulty: the general councils upward
from that of Trent, Basil, Constance, etc. to the six first, yea, the four
first, which some equal to the four Gospels, are far from* being faultless in
the Judgment of these Objectors, and of my self: the Arrian and other heretical
councils are past question; even that of Nice, the first and best, I suppose he
and I think did not well in settling church power as they did, and forbidding
all kneeling on the Lords days, in Adoration, and other the like: The Donatists
and the Novatians, called the Puritans of those times, had faulty agreements;
were it but for Bps. and Arch-Bps. ^e will think them so: this Writer can name
no one church on the face of the Earth Orthodox or heretical (tho Aerius called
Presbyters equal with Bps.) that was not for Bishops over Presbyters from the
year 100 after Christ, t^ll the Reformation, that ever I could read of: Yea,
consider whether they were not in the Apostles days, when Jerome, who most
depresseth this degree, says, That there were such at Alexandria chosen by the
Presbyters from the days of Mark: and Mark died long before John the Apostle:
But Episcopacy is not all: Not only Epiphanius but all Church History that
speaks of such matters, agrees, that (besides the crowd of latter
Ceremonies) there were certain ceremonies called the customs of the Universal
Church, which all the known Churches agreed in, (even those that differed about
Easter Day, and other such) that is, 1. Clothing the Baptized in white
Garments. 2. Giving them milk and honey to taste. 3. Anointing them with Oil. 4.
Not kneeling in adoration on any Lords day, or any other day between Easter and
Whitsunday. There is no notice when these began, so ancient were they, nor of
any one Church or Christian that refused them; but they were commonly called
the Traditions Apostolical, or customs of the Universal Church.

Now I agree with this Author, that these things were indeed a deviation from
the Apostles practice, and ought not to have been thus used: But the question
is, whether every Christian was guilty of the fault that had communion with any
of these churches? and whether had he then lived, he should have separated from
all the Churches on earth?

By this you see, that this opinion must needs make men seekers, who say, that
the church was in the wilderness, and lost all true Ministry, (and, say they,
particular churches, and Scripture) after the first (or at most the second)
century: and so that for fourteen hundred years Christ had no visible Kingdom
on earth: And consequently, that we have no wiser answer to the Papist [ where
was your church before Luther] than to say that it was Invisible; that is, that
we cannot prove that there was any such thing on Earth; and consequently, that
we cannot prove that Christ had any Kingdom on earth, and was its King; that
is, whether there was any Christ in actual church-administration? And does
separating from the whole visible church communion agree with the prophecies
and precepts of union? Was this church like a grain of Mustard seed in its
growth? Was all the wonderful works of redemption wrought for no visible
society after one or two hundred years, in which a few persecuted ones were
visible? Is not this the next step (and a temptation) to utter infidelity? If
Christ have now no visible church on earth, but the people called Brownists or
Separatists, does it answer the Scripture description of him and his church?
And is it not exposing christianity to the scorn of infidels, so to say? Would
not almost all rather turn Papists, than believe this? And be rather of their
church, than of none.

2. But let us next speak of the persons. I may speak my thoughts without
imposing on you. I think that the Major vote is no rule to the Minor, nor
always is in the right. If a hundred men that understand not Greek or Hebrew,
Translate a Text one way, and a good Linguist another way, I will more suspect
their judgment than his. And so in the like case. But if I hear a few odd
persons condemn the judgment of the generality that are far better acquainted
with matters of the same nature, [as if Schoolboys that are but in their
Accidence, should oppose all the upper Forms in expounding Horace, or Hesiod,
or Homer], which, think you, should I most suspect? -- I say again to you,
compare the writings of Bucer, Peter Martyr, Calvin, Beza, Melancthon, Chami^r,
Blondel, Dailee, and a bundance such; and also Greenhams, Perkins, Dr. J^^n
R^ignolds, Cartwrights* Dods, Hildershams, Hieroms Amesius's, Payne^, R^l^e^ks,
and many such, yea with such conformists as Jewels, Bp. Downames, John
Downames, Davenants, Bp. Halls, Arch-Bp. Ushers, Bp. Rob. Abbots, Dr Field^,
Dr. Challoners, Dr. Airys, etc. I say, compare these with the Theological
writings, of Mr. Penry, Mr. Can, and all other called separat^sts or Brownists
in their times, and tell me whether these later did manifest more Holy Wisdom
in Heavenly things, more skill in all other points of Divinity, than the
former: If their writings (giving Mr. Ainsworth his due honor in Hebrew and
Piety) were as far below the other, as the lower forms of Schoolboys are
beneath the highest, which should we most suspect to have had the greater or
the lesser light, specially when the lower condemn and cut off themselves from
communion with all Christ's known Churches on earth for thirteen hundread years.
When Mr. Smith (and lately a very good man here) thought none fit to Baptize
him again, but Baptized himself; was not that singularity a just cause of
suspicion? Yet I make not the old Nonconformists your rule.

VIII. I argued also, from the common frailties of us all, that it will be
unlawful to communicate with any Church on earth, even with those of the
objectors mind, if we are guilty of the sins in Doctrine, worship and
discipline, of all Churches that we communicate with. I will aggravate none,
nor render that odious which God accepts: My work is to confute those that do
so. But I say, that 1. we have all many errors; And men use to put their errors
into their prayers and preaching 2. Do not men use to deliberate more, and
study what to write, than what to preach? And have men reason to be confident
that our preaching will be more sounder than our writing? This Author exclaims
against me, as Popish, Arminian, for Justification by works, for merit, etc.
May it not be expected that I preach as bad as I write? And is it not then a
sin to be my hearer? Can I think that he will not preach as ill as he writes
in this book? And are all sinners therefore for hearing him? I promise him that
if I know of any Parish Minister that will usually preach with as much error,
reflection and gall as he here writes, I will be none of that man's hearers, or
usual Communicants.

But to this he says, P. 19. We distinguish between the rule of worship, and
the administration and performance: -- 1. It is not sins of ordinary infirmity.
2. Nor sins not foreknown, so as to prevent joining with them, but them that
worship God by a false rule, etc.

Ans. 1. This is the great strength of all his Book, That we sin by a false
rule, but they sin only against a true rule; but I think nothing is sin indeed,
but that which is against a true rule, even Gods word; making and using a false
rule, is therefore sin, because it is against the true rule. Most hypocrites
are supposed to own a true rule while they are false to it, and sin against it.
To sin against knowledge, and an acknowledged rule, is an aggravation of the
sin, and such shall be beaten with many stripes: Paul opens it to the Jews,
Romans 2. at large, therefore this will not excuse our communion with such.

2. This Reason crosses the business of the opponent; for whereas the greatest
reason against Communion with Parish Churches is the badness of the
Communicants, and Ministers lives; these are not the obeying of the Law or
Canons, but disobeying them: The Law, called the Rule, bids no man swear
rashly, lie, be drunk, unclean, slander, rail, etc. Nay it commands the
Minister to deny the Sacrament to such: Ignorance, unbelief, hypocrisy, are
not commanded, but forbidden by that Rule: Ministers break the rule, i^ they
preach error, or heresy, or against Love and Peace, and promote not Godliness,
and men's salvation, with all holy diligence, by Doctrine and Life; so that no
sins against this is cause of separation, if it be only using a false rule that
is, just cause.

3. But what is the false Rule? The word Rule makes all this excuse and
accusation of his a mere equivocation: In general, a rule is any thing to which
we purposely conform our actions, that they may be right: Of this there are
diverse sorts.

1. The Primary Rule is the absolute Law of God, to which all men's actions
should be conformed.

2. Subord^nate humane Rules: These are of diverse sorts. 1. The obliging
commands of Authority. 1. Of Magistrates. 2. Pastors. 3. Parents and Masters of
Families. 4. Schoolmasters and Tutors of Youth, etc. 2. Contracts or
Agreements of men for concord.

1. Gods Law is never a false rule, but an erring Expositor may make the words
the matter of a false rule by putting on them a false sense.

2. Just subordinate rules are not false, justly used. 1. Magistrates rule
either by common Laws, or temporary and particular Mandates, both being
obligatory to duty, and indeed but several sorts of Laws, while they use but
that authority which God gave them. Laws or Mandates are just rules.

2. Pastors can make duty by ruling-authority for none but the Flocks committed
to them: They may command what God authorizeth them to command; whether it be
by word or writing, is all one: And whether you will call it a Law or not, the
name alters not the case: Tho indeed in the general notion, all is true law,
which authoritatively by command makes a subjects duty. Its a true rule when
the Ruler goes not beyond his authority* Heb. 13.7, 17, 24. 1 These. 5.12, 17,
etc.

3. The same must be said of Parents, Masters, Tutors, etc.

4. Agreements or contracts are rules made for Concord by the self-governing
power that all men have over themselves: and they are just rules when justly
used.

5. Besides all these, most make a man's own reason, judgment or conscience, the
immediate subordinate rule of his actions. Indeed it is more fitly called the
discerner of his rule and duty, as the eye is to the body: For it makes not
duty, but discerns it made: But if any will call the Understanding a Rule to
the Will, instead of a Guide, we may bear with the impropriety. All this is
clear truth.

Now the question is, how any of these subordinate rules are just or false?

1. Two things God has not only allowed, but commanded them all to do about
Religion. 1. To command subjects as Gods officers to obey Gods Laws, and in
just cases to punish the breakers of them, in matters within their
jurisdiction. And to do this by Laws, Mandates, Judgment and Execution. 2. To
make subordinate Mandates or Laws for determining such Circumstances as God
has commanded them to determine, by the General Law of Governing or Ruling,
and of doing all to unity concord, edification, peace, order, and decency.
These things Christian-Magistrates may do Nationally. Pastors to their Flocks,
Masters to their Families and Scholars; and equals (Pastors and People) may
make fit agreements where they are free:

And these rules may be called false or true, in several degrees.

1. It Is gross falsood and usurpation, to set up an office forbidden of God,
and false in its very nature.

2. It Is next in degree false, for men of an office of Gods institution, to
command things utterly out of their calling and jurisdiction, in which they
have no power from God mediately or immediately. Conscience binds none to
formal obedience ( propter authoritatem imperantis) to either of these; tho
material obedience, and non-resistance, may be duties.

The lower degree, is when the office is of God, and the matter is in their
power, and not only belonging ad alienum forum; But they misdetermine it in the
manner, not usurping another office, but doing their own amiss: Tho herein
conscience is not bound to obedience; gratia materiae sub ratione indebiti
modi; yet if the matter be not forbidden of God, obedience may be a duty
herein, sub ratione medii, necessary to several ends; that is, to concord, to
honor the governor, to avoid off^nce, and to avoid greater hurt to the Church,
others, or our selves.

But if the thing commanded be forbidden of God, no man must do it. But diverse
things commanded unlawfully in the manner, may become duties by that command,
because they be made thereby needful means of Unity, Peace, Honor to Rulers,
etc. as aforesaid, which else would have been sin (as to meet at an
inconvenient time or place, to use a Translation, meter, etc. less fit.)

Now all these being subordinate rules, they bind only subordinately by virtue
of Gods supreme rule, who made them rulers (and he is no ruler that can give no
rule); even as corporation By Laws bind only by virtue of the Sovereigns higher
Law.

And tho this Author would be the Ruler of Language so far, as to say that all
sinful Worship is not false Worship, they that use words, as greater Masters
have long stated the sense, do know, that the falseness is the disconformity to
Gods supreme Rule, and that may be in all the degrees forementioned: And Rules
or Worship are both false so far as they are disconform to the Law of God.

And now wherein is our Rule, false and theirs true? 1. We own no Rule of
direct immediate obedience to God, nor of any universal or unchangeable duty to
God, but what his Law (of Nature, or supernatural) does make us. We hold that
no man has power to alter Gods word, to command any thing against it, nor any
thing which God has appropriated to himself, as to make new conditions of
salvation, new Sacraments, new Laws, as Gods, or new duties for themselves,
necessary to Salvation; no, nor any thing but what Gods own General Law does
command or allow them to determine, being left by him undetermined, to their
Power and Rule.

We hold that if any Ruler go contrary to, and beyond those Rules of God, it is
their sin, and not ours, and we openly disown it: And so do our Rulers in
general themselves most expressly in the Books of Articles, Ordination,
Homilies, Apology, etc. Binding all Ministers to the Scripture for the Rule of
their Preaching and Living, only infallible, sufficient in all things necessary
to Salvation; and that if Councils, or any men err or disagree with Scripture,
they are not to be followed.

We openly renounce all false Rules, and Canons; but if for such sin against
their own profession of Scripture-sufficiency, we must renounce Communion with
all that are guilty, we scarce know the Church on Earth which we must not
renounce. And the opponents in Particular.

2. For let us try now whether you have no Rule which you call False, as well
as false or sinful practice. But I will first take in his fuller explication,
left I mistake him.

IX. Page 37. I roundly assert against you, That tho every Church of Christ
has the liberty aad privilege to act prudentially, or make prudential
determinations concerning the present use of indifferent things pro hic and
nunc, yet to make any standing or binding determination and Laws for themselves
or other, is altogether unlawful, as highly derogatory to the Kingly office of
Christ, and robbing themselves or others of their granted privilege, and so a
forfeiture of their Charter: And so all your by-standing laws and subordinate
Laws for worship which you talk of, are unwarrantable additions to the word of
God.

Ans. 1. This indeed is round assreting; but your word is no proof, and here is
no better.

Contraily, 1. Those whom Christ makes Rulers of his Church, and commands to
do all things, not particularly determined by him, as shall conduce to peace,
concord, order, decency, and edification, may Rule accordingly by such
determinations.

But some such there are whom Christ makes Rulers of his Church etc. ergo, etc.

Maj. Prob. Matthew. 24. Who then is a faithful and wise Servant, whom the Lord
has made ruler over his household to give them meat in due season, etc.

1 These. 5.12. Know them who are among you, and are over you in the Lord, etc.

1 Cor. 4.12. Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the mysteries of God, etc.

Heb. 13.7, 17.24. Remember them who have the Rule over you, etc. Obey them
that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your
souls, as they that must give account, etc. Salute all that have the rule over
you, etc.

1 Timothy 5.17. The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor:

1 Cor. 14.26. Let all things be done to edifying. 4. Let all things be done
decently and in order. 33. God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as
in all the churches of the Saints.

By all this, it is evident that Church Rulers there must be; and such
successors of the Apostles in the ordinary parts of their office as Christ will
be with to the end of the World, Matthew. 28.20. And also in what their Rule
consists.

Now to the question of Imposing: (I premise, that tho this usurper of a
Magistry in Language will have Imposing taken still in an ill sense; I leave
that to him, it is enough for me to tell him that I take it according to the
prime signification [ to put a thing on others] without respect to well or ill
doing it.)

1. I know not whether by every Church, he intend a mere voting body of People
and Pastors by consent, or the Pastors alone as the Rulers of a voluntary
People.

2. I know not whether he take [ prudential determinations] as distinct from
Governing Obligations, or not.

3. I know not whether by [ present use] he mean it only for one present
meeting, or for more, and for how many and how long: And [ by standing] how
long he means.

I grant to him that no man may make universal or unchangeable Laws, but
temporal and mutable, and only for his own subjects. But I maintain,

1. That Pastors may by word or writing make binding commands or determinations
to their Flocks of the foresaid modes and circumstances of Religion and
Worship. For 1. They are such as are necessary in genere, and the determination
to this or that sort disjunctively necessary: Somebody must determine them (and
that for more than the present meeting, even statedly): And it belongs to the
Rulers office to do it: None else is fit or has any other power, than by
contract.

I have often enough instanced in particulars. It is not meet that every meeting
the People be put to Vote where to meet next: And there is no certainty that
they will agree; but some be for one place, and some for another: An ordinary
capacious place is necessary: It is the Rulers office to appoint it. It Is no
sin against Christ for him to require them to come to the same place, from year
to year, while it is fit.

2. The same I say for a commanding determination of the Lecturedays, or times
of meeting, which the Pastor may prescribe statedly by his office, without the
Peoples votes.

Or if all such things were imposed by a Major Vote on the Minor, their Vote
would be a Governing Rule to the Minor part.

3. While Praying with the Hatt on, is by the custom of the country a sign of
unreverence, the Pastors (or Elders that Rule well) may command the Flocks by
their authority, ordinarily, and not at the present only, to be uncovered at
Prayer and Sacrament in the assembly, without wronging Christ's Power, unless
obeying it be wronging it.

The same I say of usual kneeling at Prayer.

5. If the Congregation be called to confess their Faith, or renew their
Covenant with God, the Rulers may command all that consent, to signify it by
such a sign, as standing, or lifting up the hand, or subscribing, etc. And they
are bound to obey them.

6. I have often enough instanced in Translations, Metres, Tunes, Utensils,
Ornaments, and many such like.

Obj. The Pastors make no Laws. Ans. Dally not with names: Any thing is a Law
which ruling authority makes duty: If Writing it, makes a Law, they may write
it: But a verbal-Mandate is one species of a Law: And imposes and determines,
and obliges to obedience; and it is sin to disobey, because God commands
them to obey, Heb. 13.17. And even by the 5th Commandment.

It does as truly limit, and oblige when Pastors command, as when Magistrates
do it, tho they force not by the Sword.

Obj. But these are but natural circumstances, and belong no more to worship,
than to any other things.

Ans. It Is a sad thought to me to think how many seem satisfied with such an
answer as this. All substances have their accidents, quality, time, place, etc.
But yet the accident of one substance is not the accident of another; The
quantity and quality of a man is not the quantity and quality of a Toad, etc.
When these accidents are adjoined to worship, they be not accidents of other
things. Is Speaking no part nor accident of worship, because speaking is used
in common things?

Kneeling is used in other cases: But kneeling in prayer to express reverence,
is not common to other things.

Putting off the hat shows Reverence to a Prince: But to be uncovered at
Prayer or Sacrament is the Accident at least of that Worship, and not of other
things: Meter and Tunes belong to Ballads: But the Meter and Tune of Psalms
does not, but is appropriate to those Psalms.

Time and Place belong to all natural actions: But the Time and Place separated
to Gods Worship is an accident only of that.

It is not the natural specification of an act or circumstance, or the
generical nature that we speak of; but the individual accident or circumstance
as appropriate to a religious work.

Is love to God no worship, because love is a natural act? Is praying no act of
Religion, because we may pray to men? Is eating and drinking no part of the
Sacrament, because we use them as natural acts for our daily sustenance? Is
washing no part of Baptism, because we wash at other times: Thinking is a
natural act, but holy thinking is more: Were David's sorts of Music no part or
accident of Worship, because Music is natural or artificial?

It magnifieth these acts to be applied to worship, and it is a commendation of
Worship-Ordinances that they are suited to nature, and advance and sanctify it.

Now at last I come closer to my question: Have you no Church Rulers among you?
No Elders that rule well? Is it unlawful to communicate with you, if those
Elders by Mandates which are obligatory to the flock do prescribe Days, and
Hours, Temples, or public places for ordinary Worship, and if they command you
to use the new Translation rather than the Geneva, publicly, or prescribe the
same Meter and Tunes, rather than your Congregation shall sing, some one Psalm,
and some another: Or if they command them to be uncovered at Sacrament and
Prayer, or to kneel at prayer? etc. If you take this power from the Pastors,
and will separate from them for such obliging Laws or Mandates, you do that
very thing which you fiercely talk against; you destroy or resist Christ's
Kingly Government by his Officers

Oh what is Man! What are the best of Men! What does the Church and World
suffer by them! The same men that cry up Christ's Kingdom, call it rebellion
against him to obey his Officers: As if we must depose or disobey the King,
unless we disobey all his Judges, Justices and Officers.

All the obligatory decisions that the Apostles made about their Love Feasts,
anointing the sick, the Kiss of Love, long Hair, covering or uncovering, order
of prophesying, and of collections, etc. were not standing Laws to us; nor done
by uncommunicable power; but were temporary Laws, and local, and such as their
Successors, when fit, may make.

If you have no such Rulers in your Churches, you should queston whether your
Churches have the true order of Pastors, as well as you question the Parish
Ministers: Do they not want ruling power, as well as theirs; specially if you
deny the very power, and they be but hindered in the exercise.

Obj. But some may be forced to say, Our Pastors do nothing, but by the peoples
consent.

Ans. They are their Pastors by consent, and rule them as voluntary, and not by
force: But their rule and precepts are never less obligatory on Conscience by
virtue of Gods command to obey them: Must they prescribe none of the things
forementioned, till all have voted it, or consented? They must command them to
consent, and they sin if they disobey, tho they can force none to obey.

Object. But some may be driven to say, We allow such prescribing power to
Pastors, but not to Magistrates.

Ans. 1. What Power the Kings of Judah used in Worship, David, Solomon, Asa,
Jehosaphet, Hezekiah, Josiah, I need not tell.

2. Christ came not to put down Kings, but to sanctify their office: All power
is given him: By him Kings reign: The Kingdoms of the world are his by right:
Rulers are his Ministers for our good: They must punish evil doers, and promote
well doing: He commands us to honor and obey them; They are keepers of both
Tables: They may drive Ministers to their duty, and punish them for
mal-administration: Tho they may usurp nothing proper to the pastoral office,
nor forbid them any such thing, yet such circumstances as belong to the nation,
or to many Churches, and not to this or that in peculiar, the Magistrates may
determine: It is of great use, that all the approved Churches in a Nation,
signify their consent in the same Confession of Faith* the same anniversary
days of Humiliation and Thanksgiving (as is done about the Powder Plot) and the
same Translation of the Scripture, if not also the same Psalm Books; God
strictly commands Concord, and to serve him with one mind and mouth, and to
avoid confusion, and division, and discord: What reason can any man give why
Christ's Officers appointed to rule by the sword, may not thus discharge their
trust? Shall we sin if the Law impose a Translation, Psalm Book, or reverent
gesture, unless we separate? Is commanded obedience become a sin? And yet not
if a Pastor or a ruling Majority of people injoin it, or unless we leave all to
confusion?

X. Here therefore I utterly renounce the opinion that shall hold that such
things being lawful when uncommanded, become unlawful when commanded by such as
in Ministry, Magistracy, or Families, or Schools, are Rulers: Yea, if the Ruler
misdo his work, the sin is his; I must not separate from every Kingdom, Church,
or Family that is ill governed: Nor am I discharged from obedience in lawful
things by the addition of some unlawful commands that destroy not acceptable
Worship, and turn not our food to Poison: I tell those Ministers that publicly
charge this on Nonconformists, that they must not charge any Doctrine of
Seekers or Anabaptists, or such separatists, to be the Nonconformists Doctrine:
I know not one mere Nonconformist of that mind: What we of this Age thought of
Ep^scopacy, Liturgy, and Magistracy, all that would come in and own that cause
openly with us, have told the world in our published Proposals of 1660 and
1661: To which we refer them that would know their minds.

XI. But when I often alleged the example of Christ and the Apostles, this
Objector and Answerer says, p. 19. We make not Christ and his Apostles
Hypocrites; for we have proved, that Christ never joined with false worship, so
much as with his presence at the place of it, unless with this intent, to bear
witn^ss against it; nor did he ever advise his disciples so to d^: As for Moses
Chair, it was then Christ's own Institution, and he had th^n no other Church or
Institution on earth.

Ans. It was cautelously done to pass by the instances of the Apostles that
neither separated, nor commanded one man to separate from all the faulty
Churches, Rev. 2.3. Notwithstanding the Woman Jezab^^s Doctrine, and that of
the Nicolaitans, which God hated, and the evil practices; nor from the Church
of Corinth, where were carnal Schisms, Defraudings, Lawsuits before Heathens,
incest unlamented, Sacrament disorders, even to excess of drink, disorder in
Church Worship, etc. Nor from any other faulty Churches.

Meth^n^s they that are so strict against any additions in Modes of Worship,
should not so much add or alter Scripture, or accuse it of de^^ctiveness, as to
suppose the Apostles to have culpably communicated with such Churches, as
Co^inth, Coloss, Ephesus, Sardis, Laodicea, Smy^na, etc. yea and with the Jews,
who by falsifying the Rules, called it unlawful to eat with the Gentiles, or to
eat what Moses Law fo^bad, and not to keep their days: Paul's accomplishing of
his Vow in the T^mple, and becoming a Jew to the Jews, was fully contrary to
the opponents Doctrine.

And as to Christ's practice; we said before you, that he conformed not to any
evil, nor should you But did he not send the Lepers to a false ill-called
corrupt sort of Priests, to do by, and with them, what the Law required? Did he
not ord^narily join in the Synagogues in their worship? Could he have leave
constantly to teach there, if he had there used to cry down their ordinary
worship? Had the Ceremonious Pharisees no ill forms nor ceremonies in their
Worship? Again, I say, Their long Prayers which were the Cloak of their
oppression, were either ^xt^mporate, or forms of Liturgy. If extemporate, then
the worst of Hypocrites may constantly use long extemporate Prayers, and it had
been no injury to the Spirit in them, to have persuaded them to use Christ's
form instead of them.

If they were Liturgies* then Christ did not separate from such; no nor reprove
them at all, when he reproves the hypocritical abuse of them: Yea, seems to
commend them, while he names them, as a Cloak to cover evil, which nothing is
fit for, that is not good.

Obj. He had no other Church? Ans 1. Then most in England may go to the Parish
Churches, where they have no other Church to go to. 2. But Christ had twelve
Apostles, and 70, or 72 other Teachers, and many more Disciples; Were these no
Church, nor matter for a Church?

XII. Obj. Page 4. God has not left it in our power to communicate with any
society, when they make that the condition of my Communion, which I am
convinced of to be sin to me, that I question whether it be lawful or no, etc.

Ans. How often have I answered this, without any reply? 1. If they make your
consent to any sin, the condition of your Communion, you must avoid it: But if
they put no sin on you, to be present when they sin, is a condition to all
Church Communion, and to your own praying, who sin in all your self; you before
excepted sins of ordinary infirmity, as not warranting separation: And when did
you ever prove that the composing and imposing of the Liturgy, (much more the
Obedient use of the Lord's Day part) is not a sin of infirmity, as much as
slandering it and the Churches, and writing such Books as yours? Accusing is
not proving.

2. If your taking it for sin be true, you must forbear it: If you mistake it
for sin, which is duty, ( per se or per accidens) you sin against God, and
truth, by your mistake, and by your Omission. God binds you to alter your
Judgment; and so he does, if you take an indifferent thing for sin, tho here it
is safest to forbear. An erring Conscience is no Lawmaker (less then a
Magistrate), but a misconceiver, and does, ligare non obligare.

XIII. Obj. But none of the things are indeed Worship, which you say men may
command?

Ans. That man shall be none of my guide, that makes questions of bare names to
seem to the people, as if they were about the matter named. [They are such
accidents of the Worship, which God himself commands, as are done in the
outward expression of reverence and honor to God, and the more decent and
edifying performance of his own Institutions.] This is the description of them,
(Kneeling, being uncovered, swearing with outward signs, singing in Tunes,
Meter, etc.). Agree to the thing, and call these Worship or no Worship, as you
please. You say, False Worship is no Worship; If so, it is no bad Worship; but
all faulty Worship is not null.

XIV. As for his general talk of me, how much I have promoted Popery, and being
for Justification by works, and merit, etc. I give him leave to ease his
Stomach without an Answer, and all those to be deceived by him that will take
his word, and not read mine; especially, my Treatise of imputed Righteousness.

Page 9. He says, When the Scripture speaks of justification by faith: Does
any sound Divine or Christians understand it of the act of believing, but that
its the obj^ct of faith that justifies?

Ans. See how strictly these men stick to Scripture, that will have it the sole
Law of Circumstances, and yet can deny it, as Expositors, at their pleasure;
when Paul over and over so often says, That we are justified by faith, and
faith is imputed for righteousness; and Christ says, Thy faith has saved
thee. It is not faith that they mean, but Christ. It is faith in Christ. There
is no faith, but the act or habit of believing, Romans 3.21. The righteousness of
God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, on all that believe. 25. Through faith
in his blood. 26. The justifier of him which believes in Jesus: Many ways such
will be odiously perverted, if you put Christ instead of Faith; we are
justified by no meritorious cause, but Christ's righteousness: but that
righteousness justifies not Infidels, nor any but qualified Receivers; and
Faith is that qualification. Is not this true? And is it not enough? If you
would preach or write censurious disputes, whether it be the Physician, or the
Medicine, or the Patients taking it, that cures him; or the Meat, or the
Giver, or the eating it, that feeds men, take your course: I had rather
answer that, and most of your Books with groans and tears, than with disputing.

XV. As for his threatening to open my faults as fast as I discover them. I may
save him the labor, and lament them my self. Two I will confess now, besides
all heretofore.

1. I fear I did sometime by connivence, and by too often preaching against the
faults of the Bishops about 1640, encourage some that were set upon accusing
and separating, over much. Tho I ever disliked and opposed that Spirit, and
fore^^w what Divisions and Sins attended.

2. Tho, when I took the League and Cov^nant, it was not imposed, but offered
to Volunteers, (and I never gave i^ but to one, and kept the Country from
taking it); yet seeing now, what I saw not then, I repent that I took it. (Tho
being taken, I dare not say that it binds not as a secondary Self-Obligation
to that which God bound me to before.)

My reasons are; 1. Because, as after imposed, no knowing man can believe that
the thousands of ignorant people that took it, who never understood the
controversies of Prelacy, could take it in Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness,
and so must sin.

2. Because it cut the Nation in two parts, on pretense of Union, and engaged
us against such excellent Persons, as Usher, Davenant, and against the greatest
half of the Land, when we should have united on the terms of the B^ptismal
Covenant.

3. Because, being before by God and our Allegiance sufficiently ^lliged to the
King, by a further Vow of men's own making against his will, they entangled the
consciences of the people about the meaning and the obligation of it; some
thinking it bound them not to him; and other, that it bound them to fight for
him, and yet to oppose the Prelacy that he was for. And now the Law for
Corporations binds men to declare that there is no ob^igation at all from that
O^th (either for the King, or against any sin).

XVI. There are also more than one of my Opponents, who tell me, That because I
live in prosperity my self, and suffer not, therefore I am insensible of the
case of suffer^rs, and add affliction to the afflicted, and have not due
compassion on them.

Ans. If this be true, it is a great sin. But 1. why do the same men accuse me
for persuading men to avoid sufferings, as they think, by ill means? It is
indeed to save men from suffering by mistake for that which was their duty, to
the injury of others, and to reserve their patience for better uses, being like
enough to have need of it all.

2. I thank God I am so far from being insensible of the sufferings of the
church of Christ throughout the world, that I may say with Paul, Romans 9.1. I
have continual sorrow in my heart for the wars, blood, c^uelties exercised on
them, and much more for their own sin. And sure all the wrath that is against
me for laboring to save this Land from division, self-destroying and
suffering, 1661. and since, might have been avoided, had I been so self-saving
as the accusers feign me.

3. I thank God my suff^rings have been far less than I expected or deserved of
God, and not worthy to be called sufferings in comparison of thousands in
foreign Lands. And I humbly thank the King that they have been no greater; but
if they had, all had been now almost at an end. I am not willing to name them,
lest it seem to savor of impatience, but remembering Paul's example to such
accusers (to the Corinthians) I will briefly say, 1. From 1639. to 1660. I
suffered more assaults and oppositi^n than some of them, by diverse penalties
for diverse duties against iniquity.

2. I think I was the first silenced since the bishops return. And the hot
displeasure against me for my pac^ficatory labor 1660. and 1661. is not
unknown.

3. Enquire whether there be more virulent and voluminous accusations printed
against me, or any one of them.

4 I have had no P^storal maintenance these 23 years, and no Church to maintain
me, nor any stipendary Lecture; and for about 15. years I received no gift of
money from any, but one man, which I could not without incivility refuse.

5. When I went twice a day to their Church at Acton, I was sent to the common
Gaol (accused for a Sermon for meekness and obedience, and submission to
Government) and when I built a Chapel, it cost me about 20 l. to get a
Minister out of the prison (that had formerly been imprisoned for the Kings
service) for preaching but one Sermon there, when I was twenty miles off.

6. All that I had, was distrained on, and taken from me, all my books, and the
very bed I lay on, for preaching after (though, bona fide, they had been on
just considerations given, or made over to another, and were not mine, but the
present use of them only reserved to me) and this by many warrants, as convict
by the oaths of I know not whom, nor when, nor could ever know my accuser or
witness, nor was ever summoned to speak for my self, much less to examine the
witnesses.

7. I have been put in city and country to remove my habitation about twelve
times, and my person twenty, in the midst of my pains, to my great cost and
trouble.

8. How many thousand pounds my conscience has cost me in the loss of a
bishopric (by the Lord Chancellor offered) since 1661. besides all other
losses and charges, I leave you to compute, and ask you which of you has lost
more? tho I acknowledge with thankfulness to God that I never wanted food or
raiment.

9. And while I am now writing for Parochial churches and communion, and know
no Law of the land that I break, I am hated; and while I keep my bed in pain,
or my couch, there are new assaults which I think not fit to publish.

10. And all this is but as a flea-biting in comparison of the sufferings which
I carry about me by continual pain or langour through age and many uncurable
diseases: And under the expectations of death, how small a matter is it to me,
whether I dye in a Gaol for my duty to God, or in my hired house, out of which
I have very few times gone these two years, but it has been a prison to me.
What difference but conceit and consent? If our Rulers think it for the
interest of any cause or party that I dye in prison, I shall acknowledge Gods
will in the effect of theirs, and it shall not be in their power to make me
suffer for any thing but my duty to God (besides faults long ago pardoned, and
common humane infirmities). And it is not men's calling duty by the name of the
most odious sins, that depriveth Martyrs of their reward with God. The false
imputation of sin by men, was not the least part of the sufferings of Christ
and his Apostles, and the Martyrs in all ages.

XVII. And because others as well as I, have need of such admonition, I will
tell my Brethren, that our chief work is (the same with J^bs) to frustrate the
Tempter, and see that in all this we sin not, nor charge God foolishly: And he
that only triumphs in suffering in conscience of his innocence, and does not
know that suffering has its proper temptations, and studyeth not wisely how to
escape them, will suffer more by himself than by all his enemies.

I will therefore tell you what are the temptations here which I fear and watch
against.

1. Lest the injuries of men should destroy my due charity to them: Tho its
true that the settled Study and labor of some, for factious or carnal ends, be
to destroy Christian Love, and serious Godliness, and the Souls, Bodies, and
estates of the most innocent who they think stand in their way, ( and
falsehood, hatred and destruction are the Devils work and image) and no man
must extenuate such crimes, John 8.41, 42. Yet Diabolisme is not to be imputed
to all that men suffer by; much less to our Govornours, whom we must honor:
Paul himself persecuted in ignorance; and Christ said, they know not what they
do? Much less must we blame others, if truly the cause be only in our selves.

2. Much more must we watch against desires of revenge, or call for fire from
Heaven, or imitate any that injure us, by requiring evil with evil, but see
that we forgive as we would be forgiven. If they be impenitent, and God forgive
them not, their suffering will be heavy enough.

3. We must watch against blinding passions, that it carry us not into contrary
extremes, that we may be far enough from sin; and so lest we fall into sin on
the other side. Too few can keep to the line of truth; most reel like drunkards
from side to side.

4. We are much in danger of biassed study; never studying impartially what may
be said against us, and for our opposers, but only all that may be said for us
against them.

5. Men that have a good cause are too apt to betray and spoil it by an ill
manner of defending it, by mixed errors, ill arguments or passions, to the
hardening of the adversaries and afflictors.

6. We must take heed that we fear not suffering wrong, more than doing wrong.
He that does the wrong is a far greater sufferer or loser, than he that is
wronged. Our study must be, that we neither think, wish, speak, or do any wrong
to our adversaries and afflictors.

7. We must watch lest the great wickedness of any adversaries should be so
much in our eye, as to tempt us to make light of our own sin, because it is not
so great as theirs.

8. And we must watch lest the conscience of our good cause or innocence to
man, should make us foget our many sins against God, for which he may permit
men by injury to afflict us.

9. We must watch lest we judge of the Cause by the Person, and should take
truth to be falsehood, and good to be evil, because bad men or adversaries own
it; or lest we take falsehood to be truth, and evil to be good, because good men
hold it; and lest in Love or Pity we justify the s^n of any sufferers.

10 But we must specially take heed lest fleshly interest and love of r^ches,
liberty or life, should bias and blind our judgments, to take any thing to be
Lawful which we think is necessary to our quietness and safety, and to use
sinful means to avoid danger and sufferings.

These are my Studies, and I think them necessary to all.

And the rather when (it grieveth my heart to see, so) many carried by
suffering so far from unity, charity, and moderation, that they even join with
those whom they sharpliest accuse, (tho by other reasons) to do their very
work, and to destroy that which they think they are promoting. For instance,

1. They blame the Papists and such conformists for saying that the Ministers
of the Reformed Churches are no true Ministers: And they say the same.

2. They blame them for saying their Churches are no true Churches. And they
say the same.

3. They blame them for recusancy, and saying it is unlawful to communicate
with them; and they say the same.

4. They blame them that silence Ministers, and forbid and hinder them from
worshipping God. And they themselves dissuade all the land from all public
Church-worship, where none but with those that use the Liturgy can be had.

5. They justly blame Love-killing reproachful Sermons. And they write
Love-killing reproachful Books.

6. They justly blame false accusers of particular persons, and they ^^lsely
accuse almost all the Churches on Earth, as no true Churches.

7. They are justly for mutual forbearance, and against cruelty; and they
unjustly aggravate the faults of almost all Church-worshippers on earth, as so
odious that it must be separated from; and in a sort excommunicate them

8. They fear Popery is ready to take possession of the Land and Church, and
they exhort all Protestants to forsake all the public churches, which are the
Garrison of the Protestant cause, that so the gates may be set open, and the
Adversaries may find the houses ready swept and garnished, or the Garrison
emptied for their coming.

9. They are against the ejecting of the Ministers 1662. and yet crying down a
Comprehension, they would not have them restored, unless it were on terms that
will take in them also (and who knows whom?)

10. Yea, the very top of Popery is to appropriate all power of
church government and worship to the Clergy, and to make Magistrates therein
but the Clergies Executioners, saying they are only for civil government, for
the body, but the Pope and Clergy only for Religious government of the church,
and for the souls. And some called by dividing names among us, say, That Christ
only and his Ministers have power in such matter^, and that Princes sin if they
command but a Translation, a reverent gesture, a church-ornament, and such
circumstances; and that it is a sin to obey them.

When I see that exasperation by afflicters has cast some sufferers into such
self-contradicting ways, I will set on my heart and judgment a double watch in
sufferings and abuse.

And now Reader I again say, That tho I was dragged to this sort of work as
against my will, I thank God (and my sober sort of Opponents) for calling me to
it, that before I dye I might explain my Writings, and not by writing only
against one extreme, leave them behind me as snares to tempt men to the other
extreme.

And I here leave my testimony again against all malignity that would charge
these errors on the innocent for a cloak of hatred, and cruelty, and
oppression, that I know not one mere Nonconformist that holds any of these
errors; and I verily believe that the Independents that I am acquainted with,
are true servants of Christ; and many called Anabaptists, sober, godly
Christians; and that some called Separatists retain Christian charity, and
merely for fear of sinning, fly too far from others.

And as for all the rest, it is not men's calling them all Dissenters, nor their
suffering together, that can make the innocent responsible for the faulty, who
perhaps do more against their mistakes, than ever such Accusers did (to cure
them).

And I must tell the Abaddons, that the opposition that has been raised
against them among those that I was acquainted with before 1641, and 1642, was
caused chiefly by the badness of those that made it their trade to preach
against strict and serious obedience to God, as Puritanism, and Hypocrisy, and
made it the Ladder of their aspiring Ambition to make such odious, and to hunt
with jealous severity those that used for mutual help in the ways of Salvation,
to pray together (especially if they fasted) or consulted how to obey Gods Law:
Justacting over the part of the Bps that Martin separated from, described by
Sulpitius Severus, rendering all suspected of Priscillianism that were more
than others in reading the Scripture, Fasting and Praying) and clapping on the
back with encouragement the Drunkards and profane ignorant rabble, who in
every Town were the haters of the godly Conformists and Nonconformists; and
making these the instruments of their malice, and praising them, and the
multitude of ignorant, reading Priests, as more worthy Subjects, than men
fearing God. Ri. Hooker in his Preface describes these; and he that reads
his Europae Speculum, may know that it was no better Conformists that his most
beloved Pup^l, Sir Edwin Sandys was against, while he was one of the zealous
Parliamentarians.

It Is true that many were very hot against Bishop Laud and the Arminians, and
against Dr. Heylin, and Dr. Pockington, for proving Sunday no Sabbath, and
calling the Table an Altar, and the Ministers, Priests, and the Sacrament a
Sacrifice.

Blame not men that had read of their principles and practice, how Rome is a
Leech that must live on blood, and cannot stand without it, if they were afraid
of coming thither again, or drawing too near it. Upon my knowledge, the
debauchery and malignity of many that hunted them, and would not let them stay
at home in peace, and the terror of two hundred thousand murdered in Ireland,
was it that drove most that ever I knew into the Parliaments Army: And fear
does often drive men to seek for self-defence to that which seems next at
hand. Had those whom they feared been such as their functions obliged them to
be, men of Holiness, Love and Peace, they would have been less prejudiced
against the rest; they bore easily with Dr. Chapel, Mr. May^en, and some other
godly charitable men that were reputed Arminians.

I here adjoin it to my confessions: 1. That I thought worse of that called
Arminianism than I should have done: (and have proved in my Catholic Theology,
(not yet writ against by any that I know of) that the difference is not in any
great and intolerable error on either side). 2. That the practice of them that
profaned the Lords day, and the malignity of their abettors, made me too much
offended at the books that called the Lords day no Sabbath, and the Ministers,
Priests, and the Table, an Altar, and the Sacrament, a Sacrifice: For I now
know that these allegorical Names were usual with the best of the ancient
Churches without contradiction: And that the Lords Day is indeed never called
the Sabbath in the New Testament; and that the word Sabbath in the Bible
signifies a day of ceremonial Rest, which was a Jewish Ceremony; and that all
such are by Paul said to be put down, and that the Lords Day is a day of holy
Assemblies and rejoicing in spiritual, Evangelical Worship.

Ignorance and prejudice in these controversies prevailed, not from argument,
but from the experience of the quality of too many that opposed them: They
thought it a most improbable thing, that God should illuminate vicious, worldly
haters of Godliness, and desert those that most desired to please him.

And of late times, what abundance have been driven from the public Churches,
by those that rail at them when they come there, and would get the Birds into
their Net by throwing stones and bawling at them; and would get the fish to
take the bait, by beating the Waters.

The Bishop of Worcesters silencing me, and preaching as he did, and the
imprisonment of many of the people after, affected my old hearers with so much
distaste of that sort of men, that all the Writings and persuasions I could use,
would not reconcile them, nor scarce keep them from falling out with me for my
persuasions: And now they have a Worthy, Pious, preaching Bishop, a Man of Love
and Peace, and a good Minister, they all crowd the Church, and are like to fall
in love with such Bishops.

And I must testify, that with the generality of the Nonconforming Laity, I
never found, but it was good preaching and good living that won their Love: And
they will honor and follow such men, whether Bishops, Conformists, or
Nonconformists.

XV. Since the writing of this, I understand that some timorous persons have
been afraid to communicate in public, or join with the Liturgy, by hearing
that some that have done it, have been so troubled in Conscience, that they
have fallen into despair, and a doleful state of trouble.

To this I answer, 1. You shall never prove that I have persuaded any Minister,
to give Christ's body and blood as a Drench to the unwilling, or to make the
Sacrament of Love, the Instrument of Malice or Cruelty, or a snare to strangle
Souls. It must be that Offense must come, but woe to them by whom it comes. The
old Church made men beg for Church Communion; if any withdraw from it, and
excommunicate themselves, they did not send them to Goal for their Conversion,
to force them to say, that they repent, and to force them to Communion.

2. But I must say, that these Ministers or people that have so ill taught
these troubled Souls (by Doctrine or Example) as to tempt them to take their
Duty (or a lawful thing) for so deadly a sin, are far from being guiltless of
their Trouble, Distraction or Destruction. If any should make them believe that
it were such a dangerous thing to pray by a Book, to sing David's Psalms, to
Communicatie with Presbyterians, not to be rebaptized, not to keep the Saturday
Sabbath, etc. And then, when he has affrighted one to make away himself in
melancholy despair, should use this instance as an argument to affright away
others also from their duty; I should think that he were too blame: This were
not by good words and fair speeches, but by bad words and deeds, to deceive the
hearts of the simple, in causing divisions and offenses.

3. I believe I have had with me in my time many scores that have had such
melancholy terrors, without any such cause; and must the matter of their
trouble therefore be proved faulty? I have known those that for many years
could have no peace of mind, while they continued Orthodox and Religious; and
at last hearing Irreligious Sadduces, turned ^ilthy, and ranters, and were
never under trouble more (that could be perceived) but boasted of their peace.
Who knows not that Melancholy makes many of the most sound and blameless
persons, like Spira, a weary of their lives, thorough desparation.

4. I can tell these Objectors of eminent ancient godly men, that long forbore
public Communion, and at last used it, and have had more comfort and
edification, than ever they had before; and the more for breaking through all
the sharp Censures of their former company, in obedience to their Consciences
herein: And when they have seen a scandalous person with them at the Sacrament,
have gone with Humility, Love, and Tears, and told him of his sin and danger,
and had such success as has comforted them more than avoiding that Communion
ever did: yea, I know those that being threatened by violent Pastors, that use
Dissenters with rigor, have humbly and submissively so pleaded with them from
Scripture and experience, against that Spirit and Way, as has overcome them,
and melted them into a more tender and peaceable mind and course.

A Postscript on a Book of Mr. J.F's.
SINCE the Writing of all foregoing, I have received another Book sent me by
J.F. Whether he will be angry if I expound this J. Faldo, I cannot tell; I read
it over to see if there were any thing in it that should change my Judgment:
But I will not promise to do so by any more such. Nor will I so much as tell
the Reader what my Judgment said of it in the reading; much less write down the
Answers which readily offered themselves to my understanding as I went on; for
it would but more provoke him, I see, and do the Reader little good, unless by
helping him to lament the churches case through the infirmities of such as I
and he are; And the more patiently to bear all our present sufferings, by
considering how unable we are to agree what to choose for our selves, if we had
our wills, and how far we should be from desired concord.

I will not write a Book to contend on the question, Whether Mr. Faldo or I be
the wiser or better man: I am conscious of so much ignorance and badness, that
if it may edify the Reader, let him think of me as ill, as Mr. Faldo and all
such men would have him: If he have a good cause, I wish the Reader may be of
his mind: If not, I find not my self obliged to talk on against such Writers
any further, for his rescue; nor do I think I can say any thing herein, which
at his rate Mr. Faldo cannot answer.

I only say, that he and such other have satisfied me, That the
Liturgy-VVorship in the common Lords Day office is comparatively purer than the
Worship of many is like to be, who oppose it. His Counsel is good, to know
what the Worship is before I consent to it: I have tried what is in the
Liturgy; I concurred with many better men, 1661 in telling the World, how far
we could approve or use it. I find in it much good, and in the ordinary Lords
Day common service, no fault that should alienate me from conjunction with the
Church therein.

To talk of faults in Baptizing, Burial, Marrying, etc* is to say nothing to
this point; I never saw any of these used since I joined with the Church in the
Lord's Day Worship: But how to try Mr. F. his Worship beforehand, I know not
He says, that if we will be at the cost of it, we may have better worship. And
tho he seem displeased for being called a consenter to my catholic communion,
either he consented that the Parish-Church-Worship should rather be used than
none, or else (which I suspect*) when I have read his Book, I cannot understand
so much as what he is for or against; what he means by a Meeting of four,
whether he take it for a Church, I know not: I take it not for a Church, that
has no Minister or Sacrament: And if he know of so many score, or hundred
thousand Nonconformable Ministers as may guide all the People in England, as
such Churches of four, I do not: And if Communion in the Liturgy be simply
unlawful, it is so to all the Land. I think there are millions in the Kings
Dominions, that can have no other Church-Worship than with the Liturgy, at what
rate soever they would purchase it.

If his conceits of my self contradictions were as true as they are false, I
will tell him other reasons of what he counts unaccountable, than that I
wrote one Book in 1659, and another in 1684. I am now 25 years elder than I was
then; and its a shame to learn nothing in so many years: I am more above all
worldly hopes than he is: I am past all capacity of them. I have less cause of
fear than he: They will hardly confine me to a Prison narrower than my Bed and
Couch. My glass is almost run: If I be not more apprehensive of my speedy
account, and it awe me not to own nothing but the truth, without dawbing with
one extreme or other, I am much to blame. And I have seen some more of the
experience of both extremes (tho alas I saw too much before).

And after all, comparing all together, I leave posterity my thoughts.

1. That I had rather the Church had a Liturgy (to make all foreknow what
Worship they meet for) with free prayer also in its place, than to have either
alone.

2. If they must be separated when the Minister is of tried soundness and
ability; I had rather have his free prayer alone. But for many others, I had
rather have the Liturgy alone.

And for instance, Mr. Faldo has often told me, that his Church at Barnet (as I
twice said before) not only omitted, but renounced or opposed all singing of
Psalms for many years; that many of them were of such ill opinions, that he was
put to much work to save them from being Quakers (and at what cost they can now
have Church-Meetings when he has left them, I know not).

For Mr. Faldo to hold up such a Church even to suffering, and to write against
Communion with the Liturgy, where there are able godly Ministers, is either
erroneous partiality in him, or I am blind in my unwilling ignorance.

To which I further add again, that I cannot expect that men Preach sounder
Doctrine than they studiously Write; nor that they pray more soundly than they
preach; and if Mr. Faldo, and all such Writers, so pray, and so preach, and so
live, (much more if also their Churches have such Maimed Worship as aforesaid,
and some of them unordained Ministers, and many Churches men of many contrary
doctrines) I take the Common Prayer Book Worship and Communion, to be much
purer than theirs. The Lord make our successors wiser, better, and more
peaceable than we are.

FINIS

